What day is it? It's June 4th. Alright. And last week Austin got all the top plate
glued down and bolted on. Looks really good. We're gonna work on getting the
trusses set today. We got a few of them up there. We're getting ready to start
marking them out. This end truss here, the anchor bolts are touching it so we're
gonna have to notch it out where all the anchor bolts are about one inch or so on
the bottom plate. So we just got that marked. We're gonna pull it back down and
get those notched out. And we're gonna start laying it out.
Did you fart? Did you fart when you lifted that?
Alright. I'll push it your way. Yeah, come on.
Alright, so we got the end one on. One, two, three, four, five, so six trusses
all together. And we got six to fill in this gap right here.
Sorry, I fell on the ditch.
Alright, well we got one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten, eleven, twelve.
Is that right? One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten, eleven, twelve.
We got twelve of them in so far.
Just go on in there. I'm trying. Sometimes I feel like you're trying to push me.
Oh, man.
Okay.
Let's just set it down in the ground. Okay. And we'll get these two set and then come back up here.
Alright, we got all the long trusses in here. Yeah, it's just a matter of getting them all
screwed down and lined up like they're supposed to be. Get started on that.
Yeah, remember, we pulled all of our 16s starting here and going that way so when we do our decking,
when everything we do is going to be from this side that way. Okay.
You want it? Yeah. It's yours. Keep it.
Find a rock, Samuel. Whoa. I found a marble. Whoa.
Whoa. I found that rock.
What is it?
A rock. Yeah, I'm good.
I found that rock. I found that rock.
Mama, I'm hot out here.
You're hot.
You look like you're holding a cigarette.
Be careful. Don't let that get sucked in your lungs, okay?
Or in your throat.
Do you think I'm going to swallow this?
Well, you got that right there.
I think I'm going to swallow this.
Okay, say you're like tripping and you fall, okay?
Then what happens with the nail goes right down your gullet, okay?
I see you're so concerned.
Okay.
Man, what a day. We've been out here for 10 hours. We got here 7 a.m. It's 5 right now.
We went ahead and cleaned up.
We're getting ready to go home and shower and eat and all that good stuff.
But we got all the long trusses in today.
They are all in lined up.
He's got the rim board run around. I don't know if it's a rim board,
but it's got that 2x4 run around.
Line them all up. I put stiffeners down through the center
in between these two big spans.
And I'll be doing more over here after we get these center trusses in.
We got the bedroom or the man cave root walls all built.
We got the divider wall.
This is actually the other side. This is going to be the staircase.
This is going to be tomorrow. We'll build the rest of these walls.
They'll be the wall. This will be the bathroom in here.
You'll come in that door and there'll be a pantry
and a washer, dryer, hot water heater in here.
We got to get these walls built.
And we got to get an LVL beam for right here to hang these trusses from.
And that whole big opening is going to be a staircase with a place for the fireplace.
It looks pretty good.
Let's go look up top.
These basement walls aren't square, so I just had to line it up.
With this back wall, it was the straightest wall.
We got one spot right there where the 2x4 isn't sucked up about 10 foot down.
We're going to have to unscrew that, take it back out, and get it cinched up tighter than that.
That's perfectly straight.
Amazing that a couple of guys can do in 10 hours by themselves.
I think it looks good.
This is the north side.
What do you think?
We'll be back tomorrow, huh?
Alright, today we're going to be finishing up.
To get it all finished, I got one, two, three, four more walls to build here.
And then I can get them all straightened and lined up.
We can put these short trusses in through here.
We're going to be working on that.
We're going to be working on that.
We're going to be working on that.
We're going to be working on that.
We're going to be working on that.
We're going to be working on that.
We're going to be working on that.
We're going to be working on that.
Alright, what is it?
Is it June 5th today?
Right.
We got all the trusses except for five in.
And we need to get a LVL beam to go across this opening right here before we can put those in.
Got all the walls laid out and partially built.
This will be studs through here for the staircase that's going to go up.
This will be a door.
I need to get two by 12 for the headers.
This is a load bearing wall.
That will be a two foot eight door.
It should be big enough for washers and dryers to get through.
Here's the bathroom walls.
Two foot eight door.
Going to open to the right.
It will be a tub right there.
A toilet and a sink.
Looking pretty good.
Got all the runners in it.
There's stiff backs.
Austin's just going around putting a couple hundred and eight thousand screws in.
How many screws are you putting in each of those?
Six.
Six times what, 30 trusses?
Yeah.
And times two because you got to do it on both ends.
So technically eight to count the...
You put two out on the nose of it too.
So eight times three is what?
That's 240 screws per size.
480 screws just on the ends of the trusses.
I'm not counting all the stiff backs and stuff too that we already put in.
Time to go home.
Take a little break.
Get ready for work this week.
We'll be back out here next weekend.
Finish it up.
Hopefully we start laying decking next weekend.
