Humor is inherently multi-perspectival, multi-espectual,
and dialogical.
Same thing with tragedy, right?
So now here, again, like I did last time,
I want to do this sort of semi-provocative thing with you
because I can deeply trust you, right?
Cryptogard, to me, is great evidence of the capacity
to bring humor and tragedy into a disclosure of how one can
see the world the way Jesus did.
I'll use my language if that's OK.
Dang it.
Right.
And we see humor clearly in Socrates.
We see it clearly in Cryptogard.
We see it clearly in many great sages,
like Shwangza from the Taoist tradition
is just humor after humor after.
I don't see it in the Bible.
Welcome back to After Socrates, episode 18,
and we are continuing the series within the series, where
I am being joined and helped by my dear friend and collaborator,
Christopher Mastupecho, in which we
are trying to exemplify dialectic into Deologos,
well, especially Deologos and the Socratic orientation.
And we are also trying to bring this discussion about the logos
within Deologos from both the Socratic-Platonic
perspective and the Christian perspective
by putting Socrates and Cryptogard into deep dialogue.
And last time we had, I thought, well,
I think it really caught fire.
And for me, of the three we've done so far,
that one was the most dialogical.
And the logos was there.
It was in the other two, but almost completely last time.
And you're nodding in agreement.
And it was around, I think, a very important reflection
about irony and paradox and following the logos.
And so Chris is back.
And he is going to take us into something
that follows on that, that he's something he really wants
to bring into this conversation.
And I think it's really opportune.
So Chris, welcome.
All right, thanks, John.
So we've talked a lot about irony.
And we've made side-long gestures back and forth
to humor quite a lot when we've been talking about Socrates
and Cryptogard.
Both of them are very funny.
Whatever else they are, they're very, very funny.
The role of humor in Philea Sophia, I think,
is very underappreciated.
It's not an accessory.
It's not an affectation.
There's some necessity about it.
There's something actually important.
There's something we needed it.
This is a point that Anderson Todd has made to me previously
as well.
So please be careful.
Right, right.
And so I have with me, this is a really great book.
My dear friend Patrick Kelly put me on to this,
The Humor of Kierkegaard.
It's an anthology.
It's edited by Thomas Oden.
It's basically like a compendium, a compilation.
Show the audience.
The Humor of Kierkegaard.
And it's basically a compilation of excerpts
from Kierkegaard's body of work that, at least
in the estimation of Thomas Oden, are funny.
Either are about humor.
Most of them aren't about humor.
Most of them are just funny because he's very funny.
And in his irony, he's very funny because he's often
indirect.
He makes very clever veiled references.
He's very, one of the reasons that he was such a find.
He was such a fine polemicist.
Is polemicist the term?
Polemicist?
One of the reasons he was such a fine polemicist is that he
was, in fact, some people have remarked about him,
that his writing actually reached its absolute pinnacle
when he was immersed in a polemic,
and when he was trying to undress his opponent.
He was really quite, he had a wicked sense of humor
and an ironical one at that.
And anyway, so I wanted to read something I think
is quite apropos.
It's more, I think, insightful than it is funny.
But you see the traces of the humor, too.
And it has, we've been talking about this idea
of following the logos, how Kierkegaard ticks up the task.
He takes it up with a slightly different focus
in his crosshairs.
But fundamentally, he takes up the task of following
the logos from Socrates.
Right Road, Wrong Direction, that's
the title given to this excerpt.
And the question given to it by the editor
is, does it represent a bold advance in the spirit
to master arguments for the existence of God?
It's like, oh, God, God's existence.
What are we talking about?
Any qualification that claims to render the God
directly knowable is undoubtedly a milestone.
But a milestone on the way of approximation,
registering a retrogression rather than progress.
It marks a movement away from the paradox, not toward it,
missing the point of Socrates and Socratic ignorance.
Close attention should be paid to this,
lest the same thing happen in the spiritual world that
happened to the traveler, who asked an Englishman if the road
led to London, and was told, yes, it does.
But he never did arrive in London,
because the Englishman had omitted to mention
that he needed to turn about, in as much as he
was going away from London.
The metanoia, the right turning around, the reorientation.
I want to share a parable, and I think it's the right word,
because it's a story that undermines itself
as a narrative by Kierkegaard.
And I think it's telling that there's very few people,
Plato's clearly one, Jesus of Nazareth
is the maestro of the parable.
But Kierkegaard is capable of the parable.
He tells this story about a bunch of geese that
file into a beautiful building and sing and sing about flying.
But they've walked in, they sing and sing about flying,
and then they walk out and go home.
That's vintage.
That's vintage Kierkegaard.
And it's geese, and of course, there's
all kinds of stuff about geese.
But then you get this amazing, like the irony is coming through,
and the humor is coming through.
And you can see how that's part of his critique of Christendom.
The birds singing about flight who never ever arrived
And you laughed, which is the proper response.
And so I think it's very important that we explore this.
First of all, there is a deep connection.
Like there's a continuum, even, I would propose,
between, and Nagot says the same in his seminal essay,
The Absurd, between humor and the absurd.
And of course, Monty Pythons,
was excellent at really walking the place where they overlap.
So I just watched the scene again about the Trial of the Witch.
Oh, it's great.
Which is...
I'm duck.
I just always...
Who are you?
Or so why is it the Ways of Science?
And all that wonderful stuff.
And so it's important because there's a sense in which
a refusal to incorporate humor into the following of the logos
as a spiritual orientation actually innervates us
with an ability to have a human transcendence with respect to the absurd.
That's a proposal I'm offering.
So first of all, and I talked about this in Awakening from the Meeting Crisis,
but, you know, Nagel's beautiful article,
at least the first half of it, where he's talking about absurdity,
and he says, we give all of these arguments that are supposed to,
you know, justify...
No, no, no, sorry.
Both justify and generate our sense of absurdity.
But he takes each one of the arguments and he demolishes them.
They don't actually...
Well, what you're doing won't matter a million years from now.
But that's symmetrical.
What people are thinking a million years from now
shouldn't matter to you.
Exactly, exactly.
You know, I'm so small.
Well, if I made you really, really big,
would you somehow find a life more meaningful?
Right?
No.
Right?
And he says, okay, so the arguments are after the fact.
And then he goes into...
And he gives an example that's humorous.
I think you remember it.
Right?
So there's this...
And this is...
Is it the call?
The phone call?
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
From the dark before times, before we had smartphones.
Yeah.
Right?
And we actually had physics.
Right?
And we actually had physical phones.
Yeah.
Right?
And we actually had physical phones.
And we had these archaic devices called voice recorders
so people could leave you a message.
A what?
Yeah, yeah.
That's right.
And so it goes like this.
There's this fellow.
He's summoned up his courage and to call this woman he loves.
Let's say Susan.
And it's almost like a Bob Newhart routine.
And he...
Susan, hello, don't say anything.
Right?
I just...
I have to tell you, I love you.
I love you.
I love you.
Right?
And you laugh, right?
And then Nalisa says, why is that funny?
And it's because we've got two...
And this is...
This is the thing you were saying that was like...
You know, stepping into the traffic and I do start going into the...
Getting running over by the carriage.
Right, right.
And because what you have is from that guy's perspective, right?
Everything he's doing is so rich with meaning and he's in the first person perspective
and he's trying to set up an Aida relationship.
And then the machine suddenly introduces the impersonal third person perspective
that takes all of that away.
And we're reminded that we have these two perspectives and they can be...
Right?
They can be juxtaposed in a way in which one undermines the other.
Yep.
Now, what's interesting is, of course, he uses that example and it's humorous.
When I use that example in class, I first just tell it like that and everybody, right, laughs.
But then sometimes what I'll do is I'll go back and I'll get in...
Yeah, but really think...
I'll say it's John, right?
John went home and really reflected on that.
That all of these moments that are so first person perspective, meaningful to him,
are in this third person perspective and then you can see their faces change into,
oh my gosh, I've woken up at 3 a.m. and wondered, like, does this all mean anything?
And then they feel the family resemblance proximity between humor and absurdity
because both of them, and this is really important, right, both of them involve perspectival clash.
But here's a proposal I have for you.
And this is why we should talk about the two in relation.
I think humor involves perspectival clash that we resolve with a kind of insight.
I think absurdity involves a perspectival clash that drops us into participatory paradox
where our existence is fundamentally called into question.
And then I think the response there is something that, again, can overlap with humor, but it's different.
I think the response there, the proper response is wonder.
The proper response is to call both your world and yourself into deep question, right?
And so I put it to you that I think that humor bears the same relationship to the absurd
that irony does to the paradox in the sense not of being one-to-one maps,
but one is on the same continuum and affords us and prepares us.
If we do not develop the capacity of humor, of bringing perspectives,
and notice how I'm emphasizing perspectival and participatory knowing,
if we can't bring them into this and then look for an insight in humor,
then we are not properly educated, adduced to when we confront the absurdity,
not having a propositional, not even having a fully perspectival insight,
but something that requires a fundamental restructuring of our being, a metanoia, right?
So the humor prepares us within perspectival transformation
for a perspectival participatory transformation.
To restructure a fundamental relationship to that absurdity.
Exactly, that's my proposal.
Yes, okay.
I think that the proposal, at least, I think I'm in total agreement,
at least with the gist of it.
I think that we can talk about exactly what the relationship is between irony and humor.
I think that the idea that irony, I think what you said is humor is to the absurd,
what irony is to paradox.
Right, but I wasn't trying to draw an equivalence between irony and humor.
I was only, the proportion, the developmental relationship
was all I'm drawing into the analogy.
Yeah, yeah, and so I think that the crux of the move you're making is exactly right
and very Kierkegaardian, that humor is a kind of intercategorical response
that changes and reorders our fundamental stance in relation to the absurdity of existence.
Right, right.
And I think that's what you said in so many words.
Well, not all humor does that.
No.
But the humor that takes us towards wonder.
The humor that begins in irony.
Yes.
Not all humor begins in irony, but some humor begins in irony.
Humor, the irony that begins with the vis-à-vis of those two perspectives,
when they see one another and are aghast at one another, right?
That irony, that particular kind that turns into humor is the kind that we're talking about,
which is the preparation for, which is the receptivity to paradox
and the assumption of the paradox happens through humor.
We're going to have to do a little bit of qualification about what humor,
what we actually mean by this, right?
Because you're right.
There are different kinds of humor.
Yes.
And also, people kind of think of humor as just like, you know,
just like when we talk about irony, we're not talking about a kind of social affectation.
We're not talking about a temperamental accessory.
We're not talking about a reaction spontaneously to a situation.
Although cultivated irony can produce ironic reactions,
just as cultivated humor can produce moments of humor.
But we're talking about a fundamental attitude, right?
We're talking about a cultivated way of being, a life view,
a way of understanding and making sense of the world,
a way of ordering, right?
A kind of meta-meaningful way of putting things into right arrangement.
And we're not talking about that on a propositional level, right?
We're not talking about a posture in response to the absurdity of life.
So when we're talking about humor, we don't just mean,
I laugh at something that's funny.
We're talking about an attitude that we carry into a situation,
not simply something that we're foist with as a spontaneous moment of reactive, right?
So is this like, because Highland talks about this infinitude and transcendence,
of comedy and tragedy, where comedy is a particular way.
And they're not opposites, maybe, upon a processing.
Aspectualizations.
The aspectualizations of the absurd.
Yes.
Where what comedy does is it makes you laugh at the absurd
so we don't take ourselves too seriously.
Whereas tragedy makes you wonder at the absurd
so we realize that we should take ourselves seriously.
Right.
Right.
And you've got the playoff between those two.
Right, right.
Exactly.
So the comic actually kind of helps to almost to elasticize your relationship
by being able to multi-aspectualize.
Yes, yes.
Right?
It's like a cognitive flexibility.
Totally, totally.
That's totally what it is.
Those aspect shifts are at the core of insight.
Right, right.
And of course humor, when it's cultivated well, is productive of insight.
Right, right.
You hear good humor, what's sorry, the humor we're talking about,
I mean good in that sense, is there's not only an insight in the joke,
there's an insight beyond the joke.
Because the joke stands outside of itself.
Exactly.
It is ironic.
It stands in relation to what, the really good joke is actually not found
in the propositional content of the joke, though that too can be funny.
The joke, the really, the master ironist who is also a humorist
finds the source of his humor, or her humor, as the case may be,
in the way they stand in relation to the joke that they have made.
It is a characterological move that they're making.
Right.
Their position relative to what is uttered is actually where the humor is.
It's not simply within the semantic content of the joke.
That's why I did the story of the geese, because they're doing something absurd
and you get the juxtaposition and it's like the two perspectives
in the story of the person with the voice recorder.
And it's funny there, but you realize, but the joke's actually on us,
because we often are the geese that sing about flying and never fly.
Exactly, exactly.
So in Kierkegaard, Odin I think makes a, and I can't do it justice right now,
but I highly, highly recommend it, this book, The Humor of Kierkegaard.
He makes an argument that goes something like this,
that basically just as irony waking up inside the dream,
waking up within the mirage of ideality that has us extend ourselves infinitely,
but somehow within time.
That just as irony wakes us up within the aesthetic stage of life
and prepares us for transition to the ethical, for commitment,
for commitment to an either or instead of the impasse of either or,
because irony prepares us to live within the bounds of commitment
still somehow under the aspect of the eternal.
Humor, for Odin, he makes the argument that in Kierkegaard,
humor does something similar in the transition from the ethical to the religious.
That's the move he makes.
So that irony is to the aesthetic what humor is to the ethical.
A way of waking up inside of it and realizing that it is not ultimate.
Right, right, and of course a lot of Socratic humor is that way too.
You're corrupting the youth.
Actually, Socrates says, I think that you should be paying me for it.
Yes, exactly, exactly.
You're paying the apology, right? I can't remember exactly.
It's something like that.
What do you think your just punishment should be?
You should give me state sponsorship for the rest of my life.
That's right, yeah.
Right, exactly.
No, I like this proposal.
I just want to make sure I'm understanding it.
So irony sort of gives you the requisite cognitive flexibility
to get an insight out of the aesthetic into the ethical.
And then humor, at least the kind of humor we're talking about here,
gives you an insight out of the ethical into the religious.
That's right.
Could tragedy also do that?
Because what I just said, that pairing between comedy, right, in which...
I don't think you have one without the other.
No, no, of course, and Jonathan Miller made it famous
that when you're putting on, as she experienced tragedy, you emphasize...
You lean into the humor.
And we do the same.
That's right.
Because they're yin-yang with each other.
That's right.
And good drama, good dramatists know that.
Right.
In general.
Because what I'm proposing is like we've got the humor telling us don't...
They're saying to the ethical person,
don't take your ethical framework so seriously.
That's right.
But the tragic figure is saying,
you know what?
You need to take your life and your aspiration to virtue seriously.
That's right.
That's right.
And there is no algorithm for resolving that, right?
It's a point of processing.
That's right.
And so I just...
We were talking about this earlier.
I just want to bring it out because I think it's solely also appropriate to both Kierkegaard and Socrates
because I see them both as taking on this role.
So you've got somebody that's doing humor, right?
And what you just said about challenging the frameworks.
That's the gesture before the king.
Yeah, that's right.
You have all this authority and all the laws,
but here I am reminding you don't take yourself too seriously.
Because you are not what is ultimate.
Right.
But you also have the prophet.
Now, I don't mean prophet in the person who tells the future, the fortune teller.
I mean the biblical prophet, the person that's not foretelling.
They're telling forth.
They're trying to get people to see more deeply into what's happening.
And you have Nathan coming before the greatest king of the Old Testament, David.
And he's a prophet and he tells them this story.
He tells them the story about this guy, right?
Who has one sheep and there's this other guy who has all these sheep and he comes in and David's outraged.
And then he says, that's what you did with Bathsheba.
And David goes, right, right.
And that's he makes David see the tragedy of what he has done.
And that's also something that takes you out of the ethical into.
So they're both.
There's the prophet and the gesture.
And then here's my proposal.
Both Socrates and Kierkegaard are both.
Yes.
A hundred percent.
A hundred percent.
Absolutely.
I couldn't agree more.
So, okay.
So, okay.
So let's take that proposal.
Let's presuppose it for a moment.
And let's talk about maybe both aspects.
Totally.
Discretely.
And then we'll bring them back together.
Okay.
Okay.
Because each one, right, the tragedy reminds us of transcendence while we're finite.
And the humorous reminds us of the transcendence coming into the finite.
That's right.
Yes.
That's why humor, the good humorous.
One of the things that the good humorous does is show performative contradiction.
Yes.
Right.
The humorous actually.
The way that the humorous alerts.
Alerts.
Oh.
I just want to make clear what performative contradiction is.
Sure.
Right.
So, and it's important because performative contradiction is something that moves us outside
of the propositional.
Yes.
So a classic example of a performative contradiction is I am sleeping.
Yes.
Because that statement in so far is how it's referring objectively.
Of course I sleep, but when I utter that statement, I can't be asleep in order to utter it.
So there's a contradiction between the proposition and the perspectival and participant point.
That's right.
That's right.
Good.
Good.
Good.
And you see how that the performative contradiction, one of the things that it does is it deidolizes
the ethical of the religiosity with which it is often unduly invested.
What I mean by that is this.
It shows that we can be beholden to the custom of an ethic while at the same time depicting
and coming into awareness of the fact that we do not in fact live in accordance with
it.
We do not live in a way that presupposes it as the highest good and index of what is true.
So this is Jesus.
The Sabbath was made for human beings, not human beings for the Sabbath.
Right.
Right.
Right.
So my favorite example, so I had a great conversation a little while back with Sevilla King about
this.
My favorite current humorist who was also an ironist is Dave Chappelle.
And I don't think there's anybody around that does it better than him right now.
And he has this joke that I think basically sums it all up.
He says at one point, one of his specials, he goes, he's talking to an audience that is,
I would say politically speaking, kind of generally left leaning.
He, by all accounts, by his own admission.
But he's very hard to pin down when he does a stand up because he assumes different identities
and perspectives.
Right.
And he often leads you down a road thinking you're being set up for one thing, but the
joke comes in from the left side.
That's very quick of the audience.
Very.
Yeah.
So he says at one point, he's talking about a variety of political topics and he's talking
about gun control.
And he just sort of shakes his head and he goes, I hate guns.
I can't stand them.
And of course the audience, someone cheers.
Yeah, no guns.
And he goes, yeah, but I have several.
And that to me is one of the most well-crafted jokes imaginable because what it does is he
means it when he says he doesn't like guns.
He can't stand them.
And he means it when he says he has several.
Right.
Right.
Right.
And what he's doing is he's, so he's making, now there's sort of, there's an obvious
joke about two perspectives.
Clashing.
Right.
A very obvious performative contradiction.
So that's the first order of the joke is this is a performative contradiction.
He's woken up to it.
Right.
He goes, I am at quits with myself because I espouse an ideological position that is in
accordance with a prevailing ethical frame of framework.
Right.
And it's a framework that, you know, at least in our ethos, many people are aligned with.
Right.
And on the one hand, he realizes that there is something about him, about the way that
he lives, the way that he behaves, that there's that variance with that ethic, that he can't
comport himself.
He can, he can, he can kind of, he can, he can espouse it, he can espouse it.
But there's something in him that issues it, that eludes it, that bucks it.
Right.
So that's one level of the joke.
But the higher order of the joke, which is really the source of the joke, is that he's
looking at the performance of contradiction and going, Jesus.
Yeah, yeah.
And, and he's pointing implicitly at his audience and going, see, see, yes, yes.
See that?
See that, right?
Don't, do you see that?
Do you see how I am quite beside myself?
How I am quite not myself?
How I am quite at variance with myself.
Right.
And these are the Christian guardian themes you've been in.
He is, he is the source of the joke.
He is its object.
Right.
Right.
Right, right, right.
He's showing the performance of contradiction, but he's turning in the direction of the performance
of contradiction and wondering at it.
Okay, so let me.
And finding himself in a moment of absurdity allowed before an audience.
So I just want to slow this down because this is really brilliant.
So he does this first move, which is, as you properly described it, how, how humor gets
you to undermine, right, the, the sort of self-righteous absolutism of a particular
ethical framework.
But then you can't then defer to him as the authority that is now going to be made sacred
because he's also in the performative contradiction undermining himself.
Oh, that's very good.
That's very good.
That's very good.
Right.
He does something very similar.
He has a joke.
He picks these remarkably contentious topics.
He has a joke about, he talks about abortion, right?
And then immediately gets an audience on its, on the edge of its seat.
And they're really, you know, right?
Even someone who's watching this right now is like, oh God, what's going to happen?
What's he about to say?
And he says, um, and he, and he, and he goes, he stops.
And again, he's talking to a relatively left-leaning audience.
And he looks at the audience and he goes, I got to tell you, I'm not for abortion.
There's maybe a, you know, maybe two people laughing.
And he goes, I'm not for it and I'm not against it either.
It all depends on who I get pregnant.
Right.
The same thing is happening there.
Right.
The exact same dynamic is happening, right?
And, and then he takes it even further.
And he says, um, and he says, and he, he, and he takes up this, he sort of takes up
a kind of a, a, a caricature, caricature of a moralizing persona.
And he says, I honestly believe, and I think he means it.
I honestly believe that I believe in a woman's right to choose.
And I believe that right is unequivocal and unquestionable.
And she should not have to consult anybody except for a physician as to how she applies
that right.
Gentlemen, that is fair.
It's their choice.
And then he says, and ladies, to be fair to us, I also think that if you choose to have
the baby, the man should not have to penny.
If you can kill this kid, I can at least abandon him.
Right.
Right.
Now imagine, right?
Imagine the blood rushing to the face at hearing something like that.
But the fact of the matter is-
So what does the audience do?
Do they laugh or what do they do in that situation?
Well, they're, are they laughing nervously?
Yes.
I think so.
Right.
I can't remember exactly, but I, they're definitely laughing.
There's a little bit of, there's a little bit of, there's an intake of breath.
There's a nervous laughter.
There's a mixed reaction, but it's very uproarious.
So I want to get this.
First of all, he, he calls this up and everybody sees their commitment.
And he calls out a contradiction, right?
And then, and then he's also placed himself, right?
That this isn't an abstract thing.
It involves me and, and I'll be egocentric when it involves me.
Exactly.
Right.
And he's got all this going and you're going, wow, this.
So first of all, he is making us aware of all of these different perspective clashes
and how there's a complexity there that we are in many instances trying to avoid.
That's right.
And what he's showing is that this doesn't make sense.
Like when we put these pieces together, they don't fit.
Don't, do you see everybody?
I'm putting all the pieces together.
I'm fitting the perspectives.
I'm putting them face to face and they don't agree and they don't make for a coherent life view.
That means that something about the way that we've ethic now, I'm, I'm, I'm editorializing him a little bit.
And that in some ways I shouldn't be even be doing this much.
But, but for the sake of explanation, I think what he's doing is something like this is like, he's, he's trying to,
he's putting all of these perspectives together and he's gathering them into this.
He's trying to squish them into the ethical frame that we have decided to use as a way of arbitrating the norm.
And it doesn't all fit together.
And he's going, look everyone, we are full of performative contradictions when we try to, to absolutize this ethical frame.
And it doesn't fit.
So something is missing.
And that removes our capacity for empathy and understanding of people who have ethical position other than ours.
Like if we, if we, if we fail to grasp the humility of our humanity that we are caught up in performative contradictions,
it is very easy for us to defy our side and demonize the other side.
Right.
Right.
Which of course undermines what ethics is supposed to be doing.
Right.
Of course it's.
The contradiction of the entire frame.
Huge.
Okay.
So, so that's just to kind of tie that back in.
Essentially what the, the, the, the ironic humorist who can pit perspectival frames against one another and fit them under the same overall marquee of normativity that is espoused by a particular culture does so to reveal how when you actually frame it properly,
when you try and step back and, and, and, and see it in any kind of final way.
And if you try and see through that.
Ironically.
That's beautiful.
When you try and look at your ethical frame,
unironically it results in an aporia.
It becomes absurd because it does not fit together.
He's opening up exposure to the absurdity within the ethical and in so doing gestures outside of it.
Right.
And so for what you're saying is both Kierkegaard and Socrates are doing this because,
and so I'm thinking of when Socrates is talking to Euthyphro who knows what all what,
he knows what piety is.
Yes.
And he's about to prosecute his father for being impious.
Right.
And then Socrates does the famous.
Well, what?
Right.
Right.
First of all, he gets from Euthyphro.
Well, what is it?
Well, it's to do what the gods tell us.
Well, do the gods tell us to do something because it's good?
Or is it good because the gods tell us?
Yeah.
Euthyphro wants it both ways because either way undermines his position,
puts him into performative contradiction.
That's right.
And he realizes, and so what does he do?
He literally runs away from Socrates.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Right?
Yeah, yeah, right.
That's right.
And you know what?
That's what people often do in face of the humorous.
They turn and they run.
Right.
But here's the thing.
Put all that, there's all that humor, but where's Socrates going?
He's going to the courtroom to face his charges that are going to lead to his death.
Yes.
Yes.
There's the humorous and the tragedy.
And the tragedy.
Bound out together.
Unfolded together.
Yeah.
And you really can't, because they are simply as specializations of the same condition
of existence that has us fraught with the contradiction of our humanness,
that you can't have one without the other.
Right?
So this makes me think again of dialectic into Deologos
and when people are doing the practice.
Like there's two ways in which it can go wrong.
We can get so serious that we start to choke the flow of insight that is the life breath
of a Logos.
But we can also fail by not taking it seriously enough so we do not put ourselves at stake
in the practice.
So we need both the prophetic and the gesture, right?
The prophet and the comedian.
Yes.
Right?
We have to be constantly toggling between them as we participate in the practice,
because we can fail.
This is Aristotle's classic idea about how you do the virtual engineering of a virtue.
You have constraints that limit and constraints that afford,
because we're always moving between deficit and access.
We can take ourselves too seriously and we can fail to take ourselves seriously enough.
And if we put the two together in the practice of dialectic,
we can get again, this is yet another way of how we can lean into and start to take up
the orientation of finite transcendence that really is the place that gives birth to the Logos.
That's right.
Well said.
Well said.
And when we undertake that practice to remain sufficiently mobile,
to be able to migrate our perspective properly,
and also to develop the kind of, to socialize the process properly.
Right?
That's another function that the humor has, right?
Yes, of course.
Right?
Is that it helps establish the relation, right?
Right, because you can't tell a joke on your own.
No.
A joke is inherently, humor is inherently multi-perspectival, multi-espectual,
and dialogical.
Same thing with tragedy, right?
Right.
So, now here, again, like I did last time,
I want to do this sort of semi-provocative thing with you because I can deeply trust you.
Right?
Cryptogard, to me, is great evidence of the capacity to bring humor and tragedy,
like, into a disclosure of how one can see the world the way Christ,
the way Jesus did.
I'll use my language if that's okay.
There!
Right?
And we see humor clearly in Socrates.
We see it clearly in Cryptogard.
We see it clearly, right, in many great sages.
Like, Schwangza from the Taoist tradition is just humor after humor after.
I don't see it in the Bible, in the New Testament.
We were talking about this the other day.
We were, and that's interesting.
Because we have an overwhelming presentation of the tragic in the sense we've been talking
about it.
Yeah.
Right?
And we also get presentation of human beings being foolish,
but it's not, but it's always filled with pathos.
That's true.
That might be true on its own terms.
Although it puts me in mind, again, of some of Kierkegaard's thoughts on the topic,
because one of the things that he takes pains to point out, and that Odin does a good job
of pointing out, is that he understands the incarnation as being something remarkably
comic, right?
Really?
Yes!
Yes!
Oh, you're going to have to unpack that for me, because, like, the sort of rain shadow
of my Christian sensibility, right?
It's like, it's getting irked.
And it's like, I'm even surprised in this moment right now that I'm getting irked by
that, because, like, what's going on in me?
But anyways.
Well, I know, and it's a kind of calculated, Socratic heresy.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
For him, it's no such heresy, right?
Because for him, humor is, humor is in some sense the birth canal towards the serious
and the religious, to use your language from yesterday, right?
The canal.
I mean, think for a moment of, in the same way that, you know what makes me think there's
that old, like, fable about fairies that, you know, he's gazing up, right?
One of the earliest philosophers, he's looking up at the sky.
The stars, and he falls into the well.
Yeah, and he falls into the well.
It's something very much like that, right?
Or Heraclitus.
Did you know how he dies?
Oh, buried in a horse manure.
Horse manure.
Right.
Yeah, yeah.
Right.
Yeah.
So, you have this, you have the impregnation of the finite by the infinite, okay?
So you have something like that.
And for Kierkegaard, the fact of the Son of God being born into a stable in the lowliest
of conditions, in the most impoverished of settings, isn't simply paradoxical.
I mean, it is.
But the attitude that accompanies the paradox, the affective manner of that paradox for him
is the comic, right?
Okay, so how do you get, so, okay, this is, I want to really slow down on this because
you're really intriguing me with this.
So, I get the paradoxical and how even the tragic are so, such perfect vehicles for the
numinous.
Yes.
And of course, many people, I do this, you know, I don't consider myself a Christian,
but at Christmas time, I insist on there being a nativity scene put up.
Because there's something numinous going on, right?
And so, like I say, you know, Otto, the fascinating and the tremendous.
And so, the tragedy and the tremendous go well together, the fascinating, right?
How does, do you see what I'm trying to get at?
How does the comic and the numinous come together?
Well, one of the things that the comic does, I think, think of this physiologically for
a second, right?
Like we're talking about humor as though it's this sort of abstract thing.
Think of it like viscerally.
Think of what happens affectively, right?
Think of what happens when something strikes you as comic and you laugh and you get that
sensation in your body.
It is a way of, it's, I think what it's, what it does is it disrupts your categorical
thinking.
Okay, so.
By redisposing the attitude you take in the face of something that on its face, one taken
literally, doesn't add up.
But one thing that humor does is I think it softens our attention, right?
It's a certain form of sensitization.
And I think in the case of this biblical example, I think what it does is it helps to inoculate
the literalism that would accompany the self-seriousness taken towards such a thing.
Oh, okay, okay.
I want to savor this.
I want to savor this.
This is good.
So the idea is if we only look at it one way, there's a tremendous temptation to literalism
and kind of fundamentalism, which of course is anathema to all of this stuff we've been
talking about.
Anathema to everything.
Yeah, right.
Okay.
And so what you're doing is to remember the comic means you don't take the literal presentation.
So seriously, so it's like the way the parables undermined the narrative framework.
Right.
Right.
Right.
So that they don't calcify the perspective.
Okay.
So excellent, excellent.
And then while you were saying that something else came to mind and I want to see if they
go together, I was, I was realizing, oh, but John, you have been so inculturated to regard
laughter is always ridicule, but there are the moments in which I have really laughed
have not been moments of ridicule.
They have been moments of joy.
So I grew up, you know, in Dundas and I was going to a school high school and I had a
really close friend and one day after school, we were in a room and I said, what's that
on your on your shelf there and he said, well, there's a game we can play.
And so I said, well, let's play it.
He said, okay.
And we get it out and there were there were colored spheres and he hit and he's was blue
in my regret.
He says, okay, so count your spheres and I he and he said, I have 13 and I said, I have
14.
Do I win?
And we laughed for 10 minutes after that because it's all this setup and the game is just
the count is beautiful, which, of course, it wasn't beautiful, right?
And it was and I am not ridiculing him.
I'm not note.
There's no ridicule at all.
The laughter is about, again, a capacity to suddenly see through and again, to write to
to to to really properly move between taking things seriously and not taking them seriously.
And there's a joy there.
So I want to put these two together, right?
If we can think of, if we can broaden our sense of the comic to that which induces or
conduces laughter, and then if we can remember that a lot of our laughter is not the laughter
of ridicule, but the laughter of celebration of our ability to open up to reality.
And then if we can put that with laughter as and comedy as reminding us not to get entrapped
in an idolatry of the literal, I'm getting a sense now of how the comic can be part of
the numinous.
So another moment that comes to mind about this.
So now this is really singing for me is that scene in C.S. Lewis, where the kids haven't
met Aslan yet.
And they say, is he a tame lion and all the animals go, oh, of course, they're laughing.
But he's good.
So there's a punchline and there's humor.
But nevertheless, the humor is in service of how numinous.
And it is ironic.
And it's ironic.
I'm getting it now.
And it's so ironic about that is what the kids are saying, what the kids are asking is,
can we trust him?
Yes.
That's the question.
Yes.
And the irony is yes, but you have no idea just how much.
Right.
And you also don't pull, it's the sensibility transcendence.
Not only do you need to have an insight into him, you need to have a reflective insight
in that you really don't understand trust yet.
Right.
You think of trust as, can I predict somebody?
Right.
Right.
Right.
Right.
Right.
Does what you're saying, what you're saying participates in what is real, unknowingly,
and yet beautifully and continuously, and to such a degree that you can't begin to imagine
how it participates.
Yes, exactly.
Exactly.
Your story inspires me to tell one too, which is, I think, a similar friend of mine, Leslie
Giley, who's one of the funniest people I know, and incidentally, who's Catholicism
I think is quite beautiful and quite inspiring, quite sophisticated.
So I think of him at a moment like this.
And this was many years ago, we were gathered together, a few of us friends we were watching
the Olympics, and the Olympic hockey, which was a big deal in our house.
Canada.
Big deal.
The official religion of Canada.
The official religion of Canada, yes.
The ethical religion, but sometimes it borders on the religious.
Yeah, right.
Well said, well said.
We can teleologically suspend the ethical for hockey, and it was the Olympics that was
actually held in Canada, where Team Canada won the gold medal for hockey, and so it was
quite an uproarious, okay, it was about as sacred as it could be without being in the
proper category of the religious, and like we said, it's pretty close.
And so we go out for a walk afterwards, and just really flesh, identifying very personally,
very closely with this victory, which is interesting to me now, I don't think I would
necessarily have the same reaction, but at the time it was very important.
And we're walking down the street, and there's a man who's, what is it, one or two, walking
in our direction, and they're clearly evangelizing, and I don't know what denomination they are,
but they're evangelizing, and they look at us, and they sort of, they take on this sort
of kind of solicitous manner, like, oh, we're going to engage you in conversation, and we
walk closer together, and then my friend Leslie says, have you heard the good news?
Now this is coming from a person who's properly religious, right?
And yet, the irony of the way that something that is by all comparison relatively profane
participates in what is sacred, right, if only by indirection, is something that is present
in the humor, and present in the joke.
That's really good.
That's really good.
Anyway, so I think, so this connection, the other thing that the humorist does, and this
is, again, present in what is comical about Christ, and comical about the incarnation
for Kierkegaard.
Again, not ridicule.
No, comical.
Right, the comic is not, so you've taken pains to say this, and we should take more.
The comic, comedy is often associated with cruelty, and it needn't be, right?
It really needn't be.
So when I say, and when he says that the incarnation is comic, he is not debasing it, he's not
dispraising it, he's not ridiculing it, he's not trying to remove its sacredness.
The profanity of the absurdity of the incarnation taking place in the lowliest setting imaginable
indexes to the sacred.
And he dies, the death of a criminal and a terrorist.
Right.
So you were talking earlier about, in one of our previous sessions, about the Socratic
eros and how it transmutes from the lowly and sexual, the lowly and sexual, you know
what I mean?
Yes.
To the...
The...
The anagogic.
To the anagogic, and we have to think of this in the same way, right?
Yes.
Oh, I get, there's a sense in which returning to the cave, of course, makes you susceptible
to tragedy, and that's in Plato's mind.
But it also has, Plato puts a comedy in there, because when there's a joke there, because
when he comes back, he's stumbling around, because his eyes aren't used to the dark,
and he's saying things that nobody believes.
There's a then story like that about two frogs, and one is at a pond and another one
goes away, and it comes back.
And the first frog says to the second, what did you...
What happened?
And he said, well, I saw the ocean, and the first frog says, is it half as big as my
pond?
And the first frog goes, no, it's bigger.
He said, three-quarters the size of my pond, and the second frog goes, no, no.
And then he goes, well, is it as big as my pond?
And then the second frog says, no, it's way bigger than you can...
And then it says, and then the first frog's head explodes.
Right?
But it's the same kind of thing.
Like you realize that when the person comes back, in some sense, and there's something
really...
You have to be really careful about here, the person that comes back after...
The person, the enlightened person that comes back, right, can see him as a buffoon, can
see him as a buffoon.
Absolutely.
And that's why the irony in order to be transmuted into a religious attitude needs to become
humorous, because the...
Oh, wait, I see it.
That way the person takes up.
Oh, this is almost like Gerard about the sacrifice undermining the scapegoating.
What the person, the sage, takes up allows the projection of potential buffoonery and
ridicule, but plays with the humor in there in order to turn it properly back on the person.
So this reminds me of Woodruff's discussion in his book, Virtue the...
Reverence the Lost Virtue.
He says, we now think of irreverence, and we take it as a compliment, but he said the
job, satire is not ultimately about irreverence.
It's about getting you to find irreverence for the idols so you get into proper reverence
for the reality.
Exactly.
Exactly.
Irreverence toward the king means reverence to God.
Exactly.
Render unto.
Right?
Yes, yes.
That's exactly right.
And that's why, that's why the, that's why great humorists, that's why the irreverence
of a great humorist conceals a deep reverence from what is real.
Only so much.
It's like Allothea.
It's concealed, but it's also revealed for those who have the eyes to see and the ears
to hear.
Right?
Yes, yes.
Outside of the arena, right on its, right at its outer perimeter, out on the horizon.
That's right.
The horizon of wonder.
That's right.
They stand on the horizon of wonder.
And their irreverence refers attention to that horizon.
If it is understood properly, and often it isn't, that's why we kill them.
We kill them literally or figuratively.
We are in the business right now of killing good humorists as much as we possibly can.
Yes, yes.
In service of.
Right.
Now, now think of the idea of offense, right?
Kierkegaard's idea of offense as the denial, the refusal of the beholding gaze of agape
that reforms your relationship to yourself and the ground of your being to take offense
at that.
The idea of taking offense at that, right?
Think of the offense we have at the comedian that has us know ourselves by some measure
that is well beyond our capacity to self-determine, to auto-poeticize, and to manage for ourselves.
We take offense at the idea that we could be so known and so naked by some measure that
we have not taken control over.
We take offense at the idea that we do not know ourselves.
Yes, exactly.
Which is the.
And we refuse to be known.
Yeah, yeah.
You shall not know me.
I shall not know myself through you.
No, I shall not.
I refuse that love.
Remember, knowing and love, we've made this identity claim before.
I refuse that love.
I refuse your knowing.
I refuse the knowing of myself on your terms because they are not mine.
Our offense at the comedian is, in some sense, a version of our offense at the Christ.
So it's the opposite of the Socratic know-thyself as the aspirational.
And it's mythology going back to that term again.
Right, right, right.
Okay, so, again, this is deepening the point about this sort of primary orientation, the
fundamental framing, the meta-optimal grip, the meta-orientation.
The orientation to our orientation, right, that we're bringing into the practices, right.
We're adding all of this nuance.
We're building the mythos around, all right.
We're building a mythos scaffolding to help people take up the orientation that is needed
for practicing dialectic into the elogues.
That's right.
That's right.
So what do we, like, what am I trying to say?
We've hit something.
Yeah.
No, no.
Well, there's an aporia here.
Hold it for a second, yeah.
But there's a connection, too.
Because I can think of, like, this stance of being able to challenge the ethical in
service of religio, the connectedness, the relatedness.
The ratio-religio, right.
And I'm thinking not only of, like, we, there are, I think, the proper practice of this within
a spiritual community, dialectic into the elogues, I'm thinking of work that people
like David Fuller and others are doing, of having the conversations that we're not allowed
to have.
Not because we want to espouse a racism or a sexism or any kind of unethical behavior,
but because we want to seek beyond these ethical frameworks a way of re-grounding the ethical
in something that it is in the service of, right?
And that we can't have these conversations.
And so what I'm thinking of is another dimension of the scaffolding, which is, and this is,
of course, requires tremendous care in both the sense of caution and taking care of.
That in addition to what we just said, you know, getting this finesse between taking
ourselves too seriously and not taking ourselves seriously enough.
dialectic in the elogues also requires an ability to talk about things that we're not
supposed to talk about, to have the difficult conversations.
And to understand that those conversations are, they're not the end and object, right?
Because the conversations are not driven towards coming to a conclusion.
They're trying to get us both to a kind of giving birth to ourselves that we're not capable
on our own.
And so, like, just as an example on it, I'm not going to get into it because YouTube is
not the place to do this.
But there is so much invocation of justice right now and so little deologos about justice,
which Socrates and Plato and the Republic would find so abhorrent, so deeply, deeply
disgusting.
Yeah, yeah.
Right?
And that's what I mean about standing back and saying, why are we invoking this so much?
And yet we pretend it's pretentious as if we completely get what justice is.
And we know it, and we have it, and we've got it, and there's no question.
And it's like, to me, that is also an example of people stuck in the ethical, right?
The reduction of justice to law, the reduction of justice to law, whether it be formally
or informally, however we define it, right?
But that non-identity is precise that has a non-identity.
I want to have deep discussions like this.
I want to get into deologos like Socrates does in the Republic about justice.
And I feel like we can't do it right now because anything that we say that calls particular
slogans about justice into proper question for reflection will brand us immediately like
as unethical individuals.
Right.
But this goes to Beck, and this is as you know, we can gesture to dozens of hours of
lectures to this effect.
This is one of the consequences of the meaning crisis, right?
Is that the loss of the religious category of thought and action has resulted in the
idolatry of the ethical, right?
And that's why we have pseudo-religious, meta-meaning systems, systems that were meaningful, but
not meta-meaningful, that had no capacity to govern intercategorically the way that
we arrange meaning, right?
Like political ideologies that have no business being religious, but are elevated and deified
to that category because they are...
They're trying to fill the vacuum.
They're trying to fill the vacuum, and it is a deeply, deeply dangerous case of mistaken
identity.
Yes.
Yes.
Right.
And we can just...
The examples are so voluminous, they're so obvious.
We don't even need to enumerate them, but they're rife right now.
And it's because when we lose that category of orientation, we drop a tear down.
It's a pretty significant tear, right?
It's a difference of kind, fundamentally.
But it's exactly parallel, proportionally parallel to the person living the aesthetic
life who, right, tries to...
The Puerta Ternis.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Right.
Who's trying to find a spiritual...
He's even trying to...
There's a vacuum of ethical orientation.
Totally.
Yeah.
As well, as you pointed out, I think very wisely yesterday, when we talk about the aesthetic
and it's a rough mapping, but I think it's very apt.
That's to the aesthetic and the ethical and the religious, as the child is the adult,
the adult is the...
Right, the child is the aesthetic, the adult is the ethical, and the sage is the religious.
And incidentally, I mean, I think we've made this clear, but just in case there is necessary
and independent value in each of these stages, right?
Of course.
We don't want to lose...
We don't want to lose the ideality of playfulness that belongs to the province of the child.
There's a reason that Kierkegaard really got along with kids, right?
And nor can we lose the ethical.
You have to be like children to enter the kingdom.
That's right.
That's right.
Our development comes through serious play, which children, of course, exemplify.
And of course, there is tremendous value to the ethical.
And you see the great figures, like Socrates, criticizing the laws of Athens, but refusing
to leave when they have pronounced his death.
Jesus saying, I haven't come to throw away the law, but to fulfill it, right?
And you get these constant...
That's right.
... when you're in St. Paul.
Once again, the paradox.
Right, wrestling between law and love, right?
Or the parable of the prodigal son, where if you...
The prodigal son for me is I come back to it again and again, because if you land on
any one of the identities and absolutize it, you don't get the parable.
And that's the classic...
And that is that by definition, I think by Schindler's definition is what Missology
is, is that the denial of the logos, the hate of the logos, is mistaking the part for the
whole, mistaking any...
The part of any one of these perspectives, the part of any one of these stages as being
absolute in itself, rather than being something that participates in what is.
And let's add the two things to it that go exactly with it.
The Missology is also that the logos is always instrumental and in service of something
else.
Yes, but what is all of this for?
What is...
It's for what it is, right?
It's about the abundant life, the life worth living, right?
And then the other is, well, let's get to a conclusion.
Let's get to the bottom line, right?
Yes, yes.
And it's like...
Give me something final.
Like, what's the bottom line in the parable of the prodigal son?
You tell me.
Yeah.
What's the bottom line in the crucifixion?
What's the bottom line in Socrates' trial?
Yes.
You're not understanding it.
Yes, exactly, exactly.
And so Missology is also that which has us take offense at the possibility of agape,
which is a form of knowing and being known that is inexhaustible and is not brought
to anything so final as what is so desired.
Right.
And therefore, it is also, and this is one of the great, to my mind, one of the reasons
why I think Christianity hasn't profunded it yet, which is the deep co-identification
of agape and the logos.
Yes.
Because the Missology is not only the foreclosure on agape, it is the foreclosure, therefore,
also, and in...
Of the logos, and we have to understand them.
And I think in this paradox that he talks about, in this paradox, they are co-identified.
So there's a way in which, right, and I'm not...
I don't propose we resolve it right now, but what I'm seeing, again, to help get people
oriented, is I'm seeing this interplay between comedy and tragedy, not taking ourselves too
seriously and...
In order to take ourselves seriously.
Right.
Right.
And then there's also this interplay between logos and agape, and they're like, I see them
as these opponent things, and then there's the nexus between them, and that's the place
we want to be in when we are exercising the practice.
Yes.
And it is not a place that we can articulate.
No.
It is ineffable.
No, but what we can do...
We can live in it.
And we can triangulate ways in which, like Tillich, in which we can find the tonos, and
we can find the tonos, and then we can find the tonos between the different, right, and
where they touch on each other and bear on each other.
That's right.
Yeah.
I think this was wonderful.
I think this was fantastic.
So thank you so, so much.
This was excellent.
It was.
Can I maybe just finish us off with one more?
Oh, please.
This one is a little less obvious, but I think all the better for it.
So bear with me.
Okay.
Bear with me.
Bear with me.
Instantly transforming oneself, how to become a jellyfish.
And the question is, how does the self acquire its own selfhood if it is merely a receptacle
for absorbing external values?
There is a creature about which I fall into reverie rather often.
It is the jellyfish.
Have you noticed how this gelatinous mass can flatten itself into a plate, and then
slowly sink, then rise, so still and firm that one would think one could step on it?
Now notice, now it notices its prey approaching, then it funnels into itself, becomes a pouch,
and sinks with prodigious speed, deeper and deeper, with its speed snatching in its prey.
Not into its pouch, for it does not have a pouch, but into itself, for it is itself
a pouch and nothing else.
It is so able to contract itself that one cannot imagine how it could possibly extend
itself.
It is just about the same with you, and you must forgive me that I have not had a more
beautiful creature with which to compare you, and also that you perhaps can hardly keep
from smiling at the thought of yourself as nothing but a pouch.
That is so consonant with everything, like we've been talking about, and also being
tracking Socrates and trying to follow the logos.
It also reminds me of L.A. Paul's stuff about people offering to turn you into a vampire,
and you can't possibly know what that is like, but yet the humor gets you into the serious
play between the perspectives.
That was perfect for ending it.
Thank you so much.
Thank you, everyone, for your time and attention.
Take good care.
Kierkegaard seems to be also presenting it as a positive and good thing, but he's suffering
it in this profound way.
This is what I'm hearing you saying.
This is almost ripping him to pieces, and yet in Socrates, it seems to be sitting there
harmoniously together.
