We are in the midst of a mental health crisis. There are increases in anxiety
disorders, depression, despair, suicide rates are going up in North America, parts
of Europe, other parts of the world. And that mental health crisis is itself due
to and engaged with crises in the environment, in the political system,
and those in turn are enmeshed within a deeper cultural historical crisis I
call the meeting crisis. So the meeting crisis expresses itself and many
people are giving voice to this in many different ways. There's this
increasing sense of bullshit. Bullshit is on the increase, it's more and more
pervasive throughout our lives, and there's a sense of drowning in
this old ocean of bullshit. We have to understand why is this the case and
what can we do about it. So today there is an increase of people feeling very
disconnected from themselves, from each other, from the world, from a viable and
foreseeable future. Let's discuss this, let's work on it together, let's rationally
reflect on it. What can we do about the meeting crisis? These problems are deep
problems that we're facing. Many people are talking about the meeting crisis but
what I want to argue is that these problems are deeper than just social
media problems, political problems, even economic problems. They're deeply
historical, cultural, cognitive problems and we need to we need to penetrate
into them carefully and rigorously. Getting out of this problem is going to be
tremendously difficult. It's going to require significant transformations in
our cognition, our culture, our communities. And in order to move forward in
such a difficult manner, we have to reach more deeply into our past to salvage
the resources we can for such an amazing challenge. I'll be talking about a lot of
people who have spoken in ways that will provide us the resources we need. We'll
talk about ancient figures like Socrates, Plato and Aristotle, Jesus of
Nazareth, Siddhartha Gautama, the Buddha, but we'll also talk about modern
pivotal figures. We'll talk about people like Carl Jung, we'll talk about Nietzsche,
we'll talk about Heidegger, we'll talk about current work being done by
psychologists, cognitive scientists, neuroscientists. We're going to cover a
broad range of topics. We're going to talk about shamanism and altered states of
consciousness related modern things like psychedelic experience, mystical
experience, but we'll also talk about existentialism, nihilism. We'll talk
about AI, artificial intelligence. What's that telling us? But also what can our
evolutionary past tell us about how we wrestle with the meaning crisis? So this
is a complex and difficult problem. There are no easy answers. We need to go
through this very carefully and rigorously. We got to get clear about what
the problem is and clear about what our answer could be. So I want to bring all
of this together in a coherent and a clear fashion so that we together can
discover how to awaken from the meaning crisis.
