Welcome everyone to Another Voices with Reveki. I am here with Kazra Mirzai.
Kazra is going to be part of this ongoing discussion. We're having on this channel
with people who are practitioners and also researchers about IFS, Internal Family Systems
Theory. And I'm very excited about this. I've met Kazra offline and we've had a really interesting
conversation. I'm rather looking forward to this one. But Kazra, why don't you introduce yourself,
tell us a little bit more about your background and then maybe we can talk about some of
your work and how it weaves into what we're doing here at the Reveki Foundation. And then
we'll just take it from there. Yes, thank you very much, John. Thanks for having me.
Oh, great pleasure. Yeah, so I'm a psychotherapist by training. I'm a practitioner. I'm a clinician.
And I'm a researcher and teacher at the University in Hildesheim in Germany.
And what I focus on is like, there are a couple of things I focus on. So my research is on
emotion regulation and developmental psychopathology. So I'm looking mostly on adolescent, on the
adolescent age and the age group. And what I'm doing there is I look at how psychotherapy has
an impact on it. So we know that psychotherapy works, but we don't know why to a lot of degrees.
And I have a more of a dynamical systems theoretical view on it. And I look at affect dynamics and see
how affecting emotion fluctuate and have their ups and downs and look at those especially in
teenagers. But at the same time, I'm also more oriented to more global view, more theoretical
view. And I'm also deeply influenced by one of my doctoral supervisors, Werner Griewe. He's a
professor for developmental psychology. And he's actually, I'm in this academic ancestral line
of Balthus and Staudinger. You mentioned them in the meeting process. So Werner Griewe, he actually,
he did his PhD under Paul Balthus. So he has this lifespan, lifespan perspective on,
on development. And yeah, I tried to bring in those aspects, but also the theoretical aspects.
And he's also deeply into action theory and philosophical psychology. So I also followed
this, this trend to look more broadly onto meaning making, I would say. And this is where IFS comes
in. And as a practitioner of IFS and research, I also do research on it. Yeah, I'm deeply
interested in the also in the coccyx of it and the cognitive science of it. And yeah,
and then this whole machinery of meaning making. So yeah, that's where I come from.
So what would you like to talk about first? I mean, we could pick up on a particular thread
and give people, you know, a more specific example of what your work looks like and
how it's related to meaning and the meaning crisis, perhaps that would be great.
Yeah, I think, oh, that's a good question where to start. I think there are several
paths, paths that could, that we could take. And maybe start, I know that your audience knows
IFS by now, but maybe just to sum up for them. I think we could, we can always talk more about
it. I mean, I, yeah, the work with, with Seth, Seth, Seth Allison has been really,
really profound. And, but I think having many voices articulate what it is could be very helpful to
our listeners. Yes. And I really enjoyed those videos. I also wanted to extend that and tell
you that I think you both have done a very wonderful job. It was, it was actually really
different to experience both of you. I mean, Seth does, you know, did an excellent job. He has this
wonderful personality. And you also show different sides and aspects of yourself, John. So I really
liked that too. Yeah, well, thank you for saying that. And I apologize to Seth. I think when I
first mentioned him, I confused him with Seth Dillinger. I apologize about that. But Seth Allison,
yes. Yeah, he, we spoke of a four time and he proposed doing this. And yeah, I knew it would
be challenging. But I thought people needed a concrete example in order to get a deeper sense
of what was going on. I agree. I agree. Hey, I think sometimes we tend to be way too abstract
and theoretical. So I need something to ground ourselves again. So yeah, maybe to connect to
that. Yeah, just really, really briefly, shortly at what I, what I think or my take on IFS is that
it's actually a model of a living and self organizing psyche that is composed of, I would say,
living things. And Dick Schwartz would say sub personalities or we could call them parts.
And yeah, those interact with each other in a certain, and again, this is my language in a
certain qualitative space and relationship that we would call the self. And so you see again,
this is my notion of it. It's actually tainted there. I don't assume a monadic self. I rather
assume a relational, flexible and the self is more as a process than a product.
Yeah, yeah, yeah. And so in that sense, IFS assumes the multiplicity of the psyche or a
multiplicity of the psyche. And yeah, I would, I would, I would want to start maybe to by linking
it to the meaning crisis, because I think this is so deeply important. And then we can come to
my work and how my perspective is from, I also forgot to mention that I worked many years in
psycho oncology and pediatric psycho oncology. And, and I currently work at a residential
adolescent residential crisis center where I work like with borderline personality disorders and
very, very traumatized young people. And I'm so confronted with this whole absurdity and the
meaning crisis that you automatically you try to find ways and you try to make sense out of it.
So, and I see deep, deep connections there. And so I would say the short answer is that IFS helps
both the cognitive, as well as the existential and spiritual machinery of meaning making.
So that's, yeah, that's very powerful. Yeah, and I think via a dialectic, it's a dialectical approach.
And, and I think we can add in more mythos. And I mean, not only the locus, but also the mythos.
And fundamentally, IFS, again, is a dialogical practice and a form, I would say a form of
serious play to use one of your terms or you to use your language. And the serious play,
it helps to systematically modify salience, in a sense. And, and, and obviously to switch and
change perspectives. So this perspective taking is very, very important. And I think IFS is powerful
in doing so. And it helps you forward and come into contact with your, yeah, with different
aspects of your, of your being and your identity. And, and, and, and doing so get a grasp on your
inner conflict in a platonic sense. And to resolve, hopefully resolve those inner conflicts.
That was just, wow, that was just wonderful. So let me see, I wanted, I want to make sure
that all these, as you mentioned, salience and perspective taking, you, you mentioned people
get sort of an enrichment of their self awareness. They discover, uncover, realize different aspects
of themselves. And then there's also, you were talking a little bit, well, let's start with
those three. First of all, and then we can pick up on any threads that are remaining.
So I get, I, I get that it alters salience, because it gets people to pay attention to
things they weren't previously paying attention to within their psyche. Is that the main, that's
the salience? I know I might be oversimplifying. I'm just trying to get the initial idea.
No, I think, I think that's, that's totally fair. And, and I think there was, there was, again,
a machinery behind that. And I think this has deeply to do with, I think, dynamical system
theory can, here can help us understand what we mean also by this idea of salience. So what I
understand, or what I mean when I talk about salience is that, and again, I would say this is
deeply psychodynamic or depth psychological. That's a, if this is really related to that,
that, that you're not the master in your own house, something is driving you.
Right. Yeah. And that's the poconic theme you were bringing up earlier about. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
Exactly. Something is driving you. So those different forces. And they have their own framing.
They have their own sets of glasses that they put on, right? They see the world from their
perspectives, because they have their own agent arena relationship. Yeah. This is what I would
bring in. And, and what I mean when I talk about dynamical systems theory is that I think those
forces that drive us, they, they are a system in a sense that they are a complex system,
biological system. That's why I'm talking about living things, which means and, and living things
are memory systems. And I think this is, this is an aspect of dynamical systems theory that is
often overlooked. But we are, it's, they are deeply, so biological systems are memory systems.
And this has to do with this technical notion of non-ergidicity. And I don't know if we should
expand on this or not, but. Well, we could. I mean, it overlaps with some of the significant work
Michael Levin's doing in some of the conversations I've had with him. Can I, can I, can I ask you a
question at this point? Yes. So I get that this is wonderful. So let's at least say there are
sort of auto-poietic systems, right there. They, they're, they're seeing the world in a certain
way and they have a certain function and they're trying to maintain themselves and, and satisfy
that function or functions. I don't want to be, be simplistic. Is that okay so far? Absolutely. And
then, and I like this idea of they, they each have a different framing and agent arena relationship.
And that means, of course, they can come into conflict in some significant way. And this is
the platonic model you were alluding to earlier from the Republic, right? You've got this inner
conflict. And then I, I, I've been wondering about this. So I have a question to ask. So
Plato posits the idea that we have metadrives. We have two fundamental metadrives. One is
a kind of inner justice, inner peace. We, we, whatever it, however we try to satisfy our goals
and our desire, sorry, satisfy our desires and reach our goals. We don't want that to
cause more internal conflict. We want it to bring resolution to that conflict and an inner binding
and an inner religio. And then we have another important drive, which is we want to be most
in contact with what is most real. We don't want whatever is satisfying our goals or satisfying
our desires to be illusory, fraudulent, anything. And so the question is this, I, I'm not very happy
with, you know, thinking about the self as some sort of thing. And you seem to be also like that.
You described it as a space. And I'm thinking, I'm wondering if it's a functional space. What
do I mean by that is maybe perhaps the self is understood as that, which is these two metadrives.
The self is that, which is driving for the resolution of inner conflict and bringing us
into conflict, sorry, bringing us into contact with reality. What do you think about that as a
proposal? That that is maybe how we could understand the fundamental functionality of the self.
Given that you raised the platonic model, it seems like there's a way of understanding this
self in terms of that platonic model. That's wonderful. Can you repeat that again? That's
so, that's so rich. I have to think about this again. Yeah. So Plato has this proposal, right?
He doesn't state it like it explicitly as a, as a, as a standalone proposition, but
it very clearly comes out in many places and many dialogues, most prominently in the Republic,
which is the one you were alluding to, that we, we have a desire for inner peace. But this is not
just, that's why he also uses the word justice. It's that. Yes. It's the optimal gripping.
It's the optimal gripping. It's this harm harmonic interplay, right? Yes. Yes. And so we want, we
have this, there's a, there's a meta drive to bring about that harmonic interplay. So you can
call it sort of this vertical optimal gripping if I can allow that. And then, but we also have this
meta drive of horizontal, optimal gripping with the world and other people. And the self is
those two functions. And what Plato talks about is it's possible to actually coordinate the
satisfaction of those two functions. And I would put it to you that it sounds to me like
IFS is exactly a practice for coordinating them because you're trying to get the parts
in this harmonious sense so that you can get a better grip on reality thereby.
Wonderful. That's exactly what I'm, what I'm thinking. There's so many things there that I can,
I can follow up on maybe. So I absolutely think it's about meta desires because, and I, and I
would bring also in the good, the true and the beautiful, especially the good. That's implicit.
Yeah. It's these two axes, right? The two are good and the beautiful are going both ways. Yes.
Because when you actually do parts work and, and they, they get into this harmonic self
organization and self-realization is that now at least it feels like they're committed to something
that they share, what parts share. And it, this transcends their individual desires and needs.
So there are meta desires and meta needs. And I think that is to be deeply in contact with
reality. That's one aspect. And, and for, for this harmonic interplay to go on, because it's
an iterative game, right? So I, so, so the, the efficient, the resiliency is in this long-term
efficiency. So not only for the sake of self maintenance and in an auto poetic sense. And,
and I think this makes it deeply human. And we should definitely talk about anthropology
as well. And this connects to my work in, in oncology and also as in psychiatry, because I
think it's missing. We have deeply dehumanized anthropology going on. But what I mean by,
by, make us human is to not only to care for ourselves, but also to care for others.
I think that's, I think that's wonderful. So this, this, so Plato has a term and you might have heard
me talk about it, the Anagaga, right? And, and, and so I, I think you're in agreement. The self is
kind of the anagogic function. It's these two meta desires, right? Coordinated together to
bring about the reciprocal opening of the human being, the flourishing with the world. And, and
I think this connection is, I think really, really powerful because I think if we, if we agree that
what Plato is proposing is something that increases our inner peace, our connectedness to a reality,
affords our capacity for self-transcendence, cultivation of wisdom, we're not talking about
something that can properly be called spiritual without having to invoke any supernaturalism.
And this, I think, and as I've had discussions with people doing IFS, many of them want to
sort of bring out the fact that IFS has this sort of spiritual dimension to it. And I think
that lines up with your wanting to bring in the mythos and the imaginal.
Exactly.
And yes, yes, yes.
Wow, thank you, John. That's, you're exactly saying what I am, what I was thinking.
Thank you for watching. This YouTube and podcast series is by the Verveki Foundation,
which in addition to supporting my work also offers courses, practices, workshops, and other
projects dedicated to responding to the meaning crisis. If you would like to support this work,
please consider joining our Patreon. You can find the link in the show notes.
I want to propose something to you. And this is really something to do with your work. And I hope
I get your work right and you can now see if I get your work right. And if not, please correct me
or add or complement to it. Yeah, we'll work through it. We'll work through anything that
comes up together as friends. I want to compare you to Kant. Okay, so I want to see where both
overlap. So the way I understand your work is, and where I see you both in agreement, so Kant and
Verveki, is that you both understand that reality ultimately cannot be framed, right? So where I
see you both differ is that what reality ultimately is. Now, whereas Kant sees reality as this thing
outside of our cognitive and rational faculties that uses frames and filters to make sense out of
experiences, which leads Kant to the conclusion, right, that we cannot have this access to the
thing in itself, this thing on sich, the numina, and that we are ultimately trapped within our mind,
I would propose John Verveki would say that although our frames prevent us of grasping the
whole reality, we can still participate in it, right? We nonetheless participate in reality
via these things like myth-making, mythos, mythopoieses, music, symbols, art, rituals, poetry,
and all of that. So I want to go on, if you just allow me, and this dance and this serious play
between, so basically the imaginal, what I wanted to say, so basically the dance and
serious play between the ultimate and the finite is a constant process of opening and closing.
I would also say of homing and adventuring, right? So getting back to your home, to your basis, but
also leaving this safe haven and also going to exploration, this meta assimilation,
accommodation that you talk about, and this leads me to following conclusion, and now let's see if
you agree, and because this brings, again, back in the idea of self, and where I see IFS overlap,
but at the same time also differ, and where I also have problems with it, obviously. So I would say
there is no soul beyond the body, that's my first proposition, I said there is no soul beyond the
body. So the self-organizing process of me being in the world, being in space and time, infuses
in nature, physical, right, is the soul. So the whole, the soul is that emergent thing out of the
body, the interaction of the body, but at the same time that that emanates back, right, so the idea
of emanation is important. So at this animating principle, the anima, the suke that we talk about,
and the second proposal is there is no self beyond otherness, that's what I would propose. So
meaning the self is this emergent thing out of the interactions of those parts, and again,
this is why I think dynamical systems theory is so important, also from a scientific perspective,
because it brings in this whole idea of myriology, this part's whole relationship.
Yes, one of many. Yeah, exactly, one of many, exactly. So the self that is that which homes
otherness as spectrality, at the same time, it's the parts and the otherness that gives home to
the self. So I mean, Kierkegaard has this, what's the quote, the self is a relation that relates
itself to itself. So what I mean by relationship and process, and that's why I would agree it's
not a monadic thing is that the self isn't is a constant process. And I love the idea that it's
that it's this two axis kind of thing that you mentioned, those two dimensions,
in the conflict, the resolution of in a conflict as well as getting into contact with reality.
Now, the third one, when I what I want to propose is that there is no, no thing, not a thing, no
thing beyond the spirit of intelligibility. So beyond, in other words, beyond this organizing
principle, the God beyond, beyond gods that you're talking about. And so and I think this is what
what Jung would call the animal Monday or the UNUS mundos. And I think this is similar to the idea
of self. So I think it's Jung is not talking about this. I mean, there are parts we're talking
about this monadic self. But I assume he I think he assumes something different when he talks about
self. And it becomes clear when he talks about the mandala, like this four dimensions. To me,
there are similar to those four dimensions of meaning making, the nomological, the normative,
and the narrative order, as well as the connectedness. So yeah, not to intellectualize too much now, but
what I was trying to refer to is that in IFS, you often talk about the self as the part that is
not a part. And to me, this eludes a lot or there sounds very similar to the God that is not not a
God or the God beyond God, religion that is not a religion. So there that it doesn't have this
thingness to it. Yeah, what do you think? Well, that was incredibly rich. Yeah. Okay. So I'll try
and trace through some of this. I think, yeah, what you said about my relationship to Kant is
amazing. I take, of course, from Kant, the idea of framing. And then I that's what the relevance
realization. But unlike Kant, I don't think the mind is the author of framing. I think the mind
participates with the world in framing. So I would add that E, right, there's in framing going on
and relevance is a something co created by the world and the mind. And that's what makes me
fundamentally different from Kant and makes me a plateness because I believe in this,
this sense of participation. So I think if that lands back with you well, I think we understand
each other very you understand me very well. I think that yes, I even think I understand why you
think that that that is. And I think it's because of those bioeconomic constraints that we have. I
mean, it has to be to make to so that we can give an account of evolution as well. Right. So
we have to participate and be in contact somehow with reality. So either it wouldn't make sense
with evolutionary theory and in a deep sense. And it also means that we can get we can sidestep
a lot of significant contrary contradictions in Kant, Kant denies because the mind does in his
view mind frames only in terms that are relevant relative to human experience, we can have no
knowledge of God. But as other people pointed out almost immediately, that same argument applies
completely to the thing in itself, which means Kant becomes a kind of Berkeley and idealist,
and he resisted that. And I don't want to get into the technicalities. But I think you're
very much on with you very much have caught the deep gist of what I'm saying.
Thank you. That's important to me, John, because because I think in this way, I understand you
better. I think if I if I speak your language, we can communicate better. So that's why it was
so important for me to to get to get your feedback on that. I appreciate that. Now I want to thank
you. It's usually sorry, this may come off as arrogant. I don't mean it to you. It's just
because of my particular education. It's usually me trying to reach the language of the person
I'm talking to. Yes, I get that. And so I really appreciate this. The idea that there, I think
there's two ideas that, you know, that I would your first two proposals about the soul, I put
them together. I think they belong together in the claim that the self is not substantial. The
self is not a substance. The self is not an independently existing thing. We give up that
Aristotelian model that the self is a substance. And I think a standard model of the soul, not all
models of the soul in all versions of Christianity by any means, or in Islam or anything like that.
But many central models of the soul is that it is a substance. It is a standalone thing
to which all properties and relations and actions belong. And I think that is fundamentally
misplaced. I think it is to get things exactly the wrong way around. I think this goes to what
you were saying about no thingness and other things. I think the relationality, the intelligibility,
is primary and that relata emerge out of that relational field. And this maps very well to
the bottom of our physics and the top of our physics. And so I'm not saying anything really,
you know, bizarre or weird. And I won't go into that argument, but I totally in agreement. And
therefore, understanding the self as inherently dialogical as self and other bound together.
And I think of it as there being a deep continuity. I think John Vervakey is a distributed
cognition of the collective intelligence of parts of his brain all the way down to
organs and systems and cells. And I think John Vervakey is part of systems of distributed
cognition and collective intelligence that make up various cultural environments and
historical environments that he's operating in. And I think there's deep continuity down and up.
And I think that means the self is inherently non substantial. So it's not a thing. If by thing
we mean a bounded, basiotemporal, independently existing thing. And I think there is this deep
continuity down into the depths of our body and up to the heights of our spirit because that's
that's what we're actually talking about here. And in that sense, it is a body double. And I
agree with that, right? It's sort of, it's bound to the body in this and our embodiment in a very
powerful way. And then this idea that we like the cosmos are enmeshed in the issue of the one
in the mini the emergence and the emanation. I think that is correct. And I think that's a
profound example of participatory knowing it's not that we know the one in the mini, we are the
one in the mini, we know it by participating in its very principle and processes. Of course,
the content of your cognition and mine are different, but they share this same fundamental
grammar and we share it together with reality. And I think that is a deep, deeply important thing.
And so I like the final proposal. I'm coming to your final proposal and then I'll shut up,
which is there's something. Thank you. There's something in us that is like
the neoplatonic one. There is something in us that is that participates, but it is not a part
because it is the very principle of participation itself. And there is something in reality that
is no kind of thing. It is the very principle of thingness, right? That of things emerging,
of them being intelligible, of them entering into relationships with each other. And so I do
think they're, and Proclas talked about this, there is the one within us that participates in
the one without us, but of course they are ultimately just in some important and very
hard to articulate sense one. And so I like that proposal. I like the proposal.
Turning young into more of a neoplateness would be, I think, a wonderful thing to do.
He's very platonic. I often call him the Plato of the Psyche. His notion of archetypes is just
the notion of the forms of the Psyche. And so I think all of this deeply resonates. I hope I've
done it justice in my reply to all of your proposals. Thank you, John. That's wonderful.
And especially the last part that reminded me of we being the one that reminded me,
I mean, that's such a platonic idea. So I want to circle back to the meaning crisis
with that. I'm really grateful for you bringing back also this Persian heritage
into the meaning crisis. I'm an Iranian. I'm Persian. And so first of all, thank you for that.
Well, my partner, my partner, who is the profound beloved love of my life is Persian.
I didn't know that. Okay, that that hits my heart.
She's easily one of the best people I have met in my entire life.
Yeah, I believe that. And what you said with the one, we being the one, this reminded me
of a Persian myth by one of those Persian mystics and Sufis,
Attar. I think he's one of the teachers of Rumi, if I'm not mistaken.
The name is familiar to me. I'm learning a lot about the Sufi heritage right now.
And there is this philosophical Silk Road. Yeah, it's so interesting. And there is this
mythological being. It's called Seymour. Seymour is actually the spirit of intelligibility.
I didn't know this. See this again. How would I spell that?
So S-I-M-O-R-G-H. Okay. The spirit of intelligibility. That's amazing.
Yes. And Attar had this idea that I think it's the conference of the birds. I think it's called.
If I'm not mistaken. The Parliament of the Birds, I think I've heard.
Yes, exactly. There are like thousands of birds that fly to find Seymour.
And they have to go through seven valleys. And one is the valley of self-deception,
one is the valley of detachment and all those things. And ultimately what happens is that
out of those thousand birds, only 30 survive and they get there. But they don't find Seymour.
They don't find this thing, this big bird, this mythological creature. They understand that they
are Seymour. And you know what Seymour means in Persian is Se means 30 and Morgh means bird.
So 30 birds, they survive and they realize they are actually the one.
Yes, yes. So that reminded me totally of that.
I got to get this. I've heard of this and I've never read it, but I'm going to order it once
we're done speaking because I've got to read this. This is wonderful mythos. So this brings us into
that by which, and this is where Kant struggles, in fact, in where I'm trying to be very much
more influenced by Korban. Yes. Ibn Arabi, Korban, in some ways sort of already, the imaginal as that
which ridges between the one and the mini and the inner and the outer and is not the imaginary. We
don't look at these images. They are like icons. We look through them like the way I'm looking
through my glasses, but it is also the way in which the world can reach back through them into us.
It is not that way. It's both ways. It is in a sense. Go ahead. It's so wonderful that you
invoke this idea and I think this is so important to understand that the imaginal is, again, not a
thing and that's why we think imaginary or imagination or imaginal is not something real,
but it is deeply real because it has this power. It's something like a catalyst and I learned this
also when you look at, and that's why I love coming from the place of children and adolescents
as a psychotherapist for children and adolescents who are working and researching on them.
You learn so many things and again, this is also what I want to add to IFS and to this whole ecology
of awakening to meaning and all of that because you can learn so many things from them. I mean,
Rodgers, Carl Rodgers, I think he was a school counselor, guidance guide and
you learn this so well from developmental psychologists like when you take Piaget or
other development psychologists like Mahler or even Winnicott. When you have this kid, let's say
it's two or three years old and it has to learn this normative developmental task of separation
the mother infant separation. In psychoanalytic theory, you will call, what it needs to is,
it has to have this, how would they call this, this object like the doll.
There's the, it's a transitional object. Transitional object, exactly. They have the
transitional objects. I only had the German name for it and it's a serious play. It's a
catalyst. It's this imaginal thing that they're involved in so that they can
understand and I think this is where it comes together is that how can I have my mother's love
while at the same time be able to differentiate, right? So you bring in the spirit of the mother
of the caregiver into this liminal space and I would say into the playground when we talk about
this play. And Winnicott would too. Yes, exactly. And I would, and this is where I would
want to add Vygotsky to, right? Yes. Yeah. I love what you're doing here. You're bringing Vygotsky
and Winnicott together with the imaginal. Please go, go on. Yes. And I think it's so important
because what it does is that the doll or the transitional object that I'm playing with, what
I do is I immerse into, into something that, that catches me, that is outside of my faculties at
the same time it's in me and it grips me. And I think where Vygotsky comes in is that it's,
it's this zone of proximal development. I think where we really transform and develop is this
imaginal space because it is between this overload and the under load. It's between the infinite and
the finite. And that's why I think it's in Taese, right? So it's my interest that guides me, that
guides me into this imaginal liminal space where I can, where I can have, you know, have the cake
and eat it too, right? So I have the spirit of the caregiver at the same time, I have the spirit
of individuation. And this only can happen when I have this catalyst, this in the sense of transitional
object or the serious play. And I think interest is such a wonderful marker. And what happens is
that there's so interesting research, I'm sure you know about, about private speech, right? So
when you, and I think, again, this is where IFS comes into play. It's this dialogical practice.
Now, what, what developmental psychologists talk about when they talk about private speech or self
talk is that you can observe this behavior. A kid is in exactly in this liminal or imaginal space
or in the zone of proximal development. When it starts to talk to itself, but not internally,
they talk loudly to themselves. Yes, yes. They are in the middle of that habit. Yes.
Many adults talk aloud to themselves. Exactly. Exactly. And what I think what happens is that
we we we we complexity we particularize, we individuate sorry, not individuate, but
individuate in the sense but you know, differentiate in the sense. And, and what we do is then by this,
by this, we learn how to internalize those voices. Let's say for the caregiver or the parent,
and then we talk to ourselves. So and I think this aspect of dialogical self is so important,
And this is actually where development happens.
And I think IFS, and I would say now two things about this.
In one sense, IFS helps us through this inner
dialogical self-process.
At the same time, I think IFS can still also learn
from the practice of children and adolescents
and enhance its own methodology.
And that's why I think it's so important to bring
in back those aspects of childhood and adolescence too.
So yeah, I'm sorry, I shut up now.
So what do you do?
No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, that was beautiful.
First of all, I'm going to have to remember to cite you
on this.
This bridging between you made between the imaginal
and then transitional object and winnokot,
and then integrating that with Vygotsky.
And of course, when the child starts to talk to themselves,
that's how they develop metacognition
is essential for rationality.
And I think that, and for self-direction,
long-term planning, all of that stuff,
even sense of self, is modified significantly.
I think that's right.
I think the fact that I have a book, I haven't read it yet,
a person looking at self-talk.
That's another name for the private speech.
And the fact that we devote so much time for it
means it probably has some very powerful adaptive
functionality, and yet we don't investigate it.
We treat it as noise, or silliness, or some bad habit.
And this is because we're bound up
to the buffered self that Charles Taylor's talked about.
We're bound to the monadic self.
We don't realize, no, no, talking to yourself
is like you will kind of go insane if you don't do that.
I imagine there might be some people who
transcend to a witness consciousness.
But I think of Castaway, and I think of Wilson,
and how powerful Wilson became.
Exactly.
Exactly, right?
And the profound grief, a spoiler, by the way,
the profound grief that Tom Hanks' character has
when he loses Wilson.
And I think all of that is just so pregnant with something
that is deeply culturally relevant, significant,
pertinent to addressing the meeting crisis.
Because I'll just make a quick proposal to you.
I think part of what drives the meeting crisis
is this notion of the monadic self, the single static substance
self.
And because that drives us into a kind of nominalism,
it drives us into a radical self other adversarial kind
of processing.
It's an important driver.
And it makes us resistant to alternative states
of consciousness, because they are seen merely as deviance
from the true self or something like that.
And so I think I'm proposing to you
that I think IFS and related practices,
there's empty chair therapy and assault.
There's ally work.
And I'm talking a lot with Barnaby about this.
I think all of these things are attempts
to both bottom up from practice, real transformative practice
and top down from theory, provide us
with a significant and rich alternative
to the monadic self.
I absolutely agree.
I think this whole idea of monad is difficult,
because I think it's also bound to this idea of having
and being in the having.
Oh, yes.
And I think this is very much about,
yeah, it's modal confusion all the way through.
It's modal confusion.
And being trapped in the having mode,
I think is one of the most important drivers
of the meeting crisis.
And again, now we can circle back to how
in my own biography, saw how not only the bad place
that we are in, but also how IFS played in into this.
And again, I think there are two ways now
to where we can connect to the meeting crisis again.
And one is via the mental health crisis in adolescence
and the meeting crisis in adolescence.
And we can talk about this in a second.
And the other one is, again, this missing anthropology
that I see in modern human science
and to related fields like medicine, psychiatry,
and psychotherapy, et cetera.
And I think it's devastatingly contributing
to the meeting crisis.
And I saw this, and again, I see this in practice.
And also in my research, because we
have these deep problems with the current notions
and our theoretical notions of psychopathology, that's one.
But also as well with this evidence-based translation
into treatment.
And there are several reasons that we can have a whole podcast
on this alone, but they're like understanding illness
as something as symptom aggregates, which is a deception.
Or again, the ignorance of non-urgidicity.
So assuming independent events, then committing
ecological fallacies, the generalizability
to individual problem.
There are deviation from protocols.
If you deviate from a protocol, which is actually
only a protocol for a randomized controlled trial,
then it's bad practice or pseudoscience.
And there are plethora of problems, which, again,
I would say it's a lack of a non-propositional knowing.
So by reducing, again, I'm not saying or advocating
that evidence-based is wrong or bad.
I want to be clear about this.
I think evidence.
Yeah, I get that.
And you get that.
I think we have to go beyond this notion of propositional
and bring back all those other piece you talk about into this.
And this is where I really see this landscape that it's missing.
And it's deeply problematic because we
have this dehumanized anthropology.
And it's so interesting.
Roland May talks about this and the discovery of being.
He actually, he points to the behavior modification therapies.
And by training, I am a behavioral therapist.
So I have deep sympathy for that.
I think there was a lot of wisdom in it because it's embodied.
You do things.
You experience things.
But what he wonderfully points out
is that especially in those types,
we have this missing anthropology.
We actually don't have a conception of men, of human beings.
So and I think this is deeply, deeply difficult.
And now I don't know if you know this, John,
but what happens right now in the field of bioethics
is that there is a return to phenomenology, actually.
Oh, that's good news.
That's really, really interesting.
There is this philosopher.
He's called Fredrik Svénéos.
He's Swedish.
And he has this book even.
It's called Phenomenological Bioethics.
And it's so interesting because there are several scholars
and people in this academic field
that argue now for even a definition of illness
being defined as a meaning crisis, as a crisis of meaning.
Yes, and that's so interesting.
It's even called illness as, and now listen to the language,
as an unhome-like being in the world.
DSCs, like going back to the etymology
of the original word, right?
So fortunately, this happens,
but I think all those technological advancements,
and we know this, you talk about this all the time,
that they, the technological changes happen
before the meaning crisis and et cetera.
So there is this whole disenchantment
that runs through this modernity,
also runs through medicine and psychotherapy, et cetera.
So I think this is what I'm really concerned about.
And again, meaning is, so what we can,
the lesson that we can get out of is that
meaning is not an epiphenomenon.
It's not easily dispensed with.
It's crucial, it's necessary,
even from a bioethical standpoint, right?
And again, because we're more than just a sum of cogs
and gear wheels and this mechanistic reductionistic thing.
And now there's Thomas Fuchs.
He's actually a professor of phenomenological psychiatry.
He has this Carl Yaspas.
He's a professor for Carl Yaspas in Heidelberg, I think.
He makes this.
Yeah, he makes this wonderful point
that medicine is actually a relational,
medicine is relational, it's a relational,
I don't know, I don't wanna call it science,
but a practice, it's a relational practice.
So.
Wow, who is that second person?
Does he have a book or?
Thomas Fuchs, he has lots of books.
Oh, I think he even has one in English.
He publishes a lot in German,
but there is one I will forward it to you
or I can look it up in a second.
Thomas Fuchs, really interesting.
I had the privilege to talk to him once in a conference.
So yeah, it's, I mean, it is there,
but it's still concerning.
And so to me, it was by, again, by gravity
to link my work to the meaning crisis and to IFS
is that to me, it was clear from the get go
from the beginning that we're not only
in a affinity predicament, but also in the spiritual one.
And yeah, obviously due to our affinity
and it's related to that,
but there is this deep spiritual deprivation that we have
and you see this when you work.
I mean, I worked in oncology.
Meaning is really, really important.
And even the evidence-based practice,
you have meaning-centered psychotherapy
that is actually, you have efficacy right there.
So it's actually Viktor Frankl's logotherapy,
revisited and done for oncology.
It's done by Breitbart, his called,
he's a wonderful researcher.
And it's getting there.
And again, working with adolescents
and especially those auto-line types
and in this crisis center that I'm working with
is that it's so salient, it's so present
and it's so obvious that we are lacking this
how we meet a person.
And IFS helps me there to, again, to meet
and not to reduce it to some, I mean,
obviously a model is always prone to reductionism
and I can reduce you to your protectors or managers
or exiles too, but it helps me if done correctly.
And I think it helps me to connect
to the human being again.
And this is where I see IFS helping
because John, ultimately what I think,
and let's see what do you think about this?
I'm sorry if I'm talking that much.
No, no, no, no, no, no, you're great.
Keep going, keep going.
Ultimately what I see, what is happening is that
this momentum of healing in especially experiencing IFS,
but I think it goes beyond IFS.
I think IFS is just the proxy,
it's a placeholder for what is happening is there.
What happens is that agape heals.
I see it as a deep agopic love that happens.
And I see this in therapy interpersonally, right?
This horizontal axis you're talking about,
but I also see it within the model itself
in those technical steps you do,
especially for example,
you talk about the Socratic shift, right?
And I wanna propose that before we do the Socratic shift,
we need the process of validation.
I can't get you to change into the state of a poria.
I mean, I could, but it's only,
maybe it's not long lasting,
I get back into this attractive state after a while.
But if I really am with a part,
I am with a part, it's like being with a part, right?
It's like I validate you.
Validating means that you are valid.
Your whole reason, your raison d'etre,
the reason of being, it's valid.
You have a reason to be there.
You're functioning, you're framing, whatever you do.
It's so important that you get acknowledged
because what I think,
I wanna propose to you, John,
that we do the Socratic shift a little bit later.
So before we do the Socratic shift, we validate
because if we don't do this,
we get into again the having mode
and then it's again the court,
not the courtyard, but the courtroom of debate.
It's not the courtyard of a dialogue,
but it's the courtroom of debate
because if I just spill this over you and I,
Well, let me reply because I, please.
Okay, so first of all,
to your point, a couple of minutes past
that propositional tyranny has infected medicine
and we've lost touch with the non-propositional knowing
and that's where a lot of the meaning participation occurs
and the meaning participation is a fundamental being
together being with and that's part
of what participatory knowing is, knowing by being with.
Exactly.
And so all of that, I think that tracks very well.
It goes to the work I'm doing with Terry Dentry
about trying to open up what we mean by health and medicine
and so I'm completely concerned with that.
I think the thing you're saying right now,
I take, I mean, it is exemplary constructive criticism.
I think you're right.
And this goes to what Seth Allison was talking about
where you're talking about Agapa,
he talks about integrating attachment theory and IFS
and you actually have attachment relationships
with your parts and you have to bring in sort of EFT,
Emotion Focus Therapy kind of techniques
to get into proper relation.
And then I said to him, once you're doing that,
what I've done though is I've also brought,
and maybe this is the bridging,
I sort of bring some of the Socratic
into my interaction with my parts
because I try to get them to recognize their function.
I try to recognize, get them to,
I try to enhance their own self-awareness
and their own, therefore, responsibility to themselves.
So they go from just enacting their functionality
to reflecting on it, which also opens up spaces
of possibility for them, which I think is,
but I totally-
And that's great.
I learned that actually from you
and I actually, now I'm trying to incorporate it more
into my practice.
I love this Socratic move and shift.
Actually, when you said that in,
I think it was episode eight in After Socrates,
it's like, whoa, yeah, I've never done this.
Due to Socratic shift on the part, it's like, wow.
Yeah, but I think that you and Seth are correct
that it's premature to do that
unless the attachment issues
and the reciprocal recognition has taken place.
The being with has to be in place, right?
In order to shift you out of the having mode,
in order to open you up for the real possibility
of genuine Socratic practice,
as opposed to just using or having a Socratic technique.
That's how I would put it.
And I think you are exactly right about that.
And I've been trying to incorporate that in
to my practice and we are gonna try
and see how we can feed this in.
We see the problem the Verveke Foundation faces is we,
one of our stead of past principles
is we are not offering therapy
because we are not properly vetted or certified to do that.
We have affiliate relationships with therapists
who can come in if people hit crisis or distress,
but we, our practices are not therapy.
And trying to figure out how to get that,
what you just said, which I agree,
do you see the problem we're struggling with?
Absolutely.
Right, it's like what you said, I think is deeply right,
but we will not offer therapy for principled reasons, right?
I think then genuine bioethical reasons,
we will not do that.
And so there's a struggle here.
And maybe, you know, off camera, you and Chris and Taylor
and I could talk about maybe a way of doing this
that could pick up on, I think,
the very legitimate point you just made
while still respecting our ethical requirements
of not engaging in therapy.
And can I add to that?
I wanna compliment you for that.
I think it is actually, even from the ethos,
it's the right, or the tell us, it's the right move.
I think, and this is, again, the problem that I have
and that I was trying to allude to when I talk about
evidence-based practices in psychotherapy,
I think it's a fatal mistake.
And again, contributing to the meaning crisis
if we pathologize everything,
not everything has to be a psychotherapeutic modality
and intervention or technique.
Now, obviously it can inform our practices,
but for it to be pedagogical,
I think it's way more important.
So I think therapy can help there, the techniques,
and to be fair, the Socratic move that I'm proposing,
IFS accounts for it.
Now, this is when you do the integration.
What you do when you talk to the exile, for example,
and then you have this unburdening,
and now we don't have to go into the details right now,
but you invite back the protector.
And now you do the Socratic move,
and now you hopefully do the aporian and you say,
now how can you contribute to the state
after the alleviation of pain and suffering,
after the unburdening?
Now, again, I still think that you're right,
and I love that you're doing the pedagogical work,
because, again, I think it's,
I'm actually really afraid of the fact
that we are pathologizing everything,
especially when it comes to adolescence.
And you know, we talked about the archetype
of the adolescent, and we should talk about this
maybe another time, but it's,
the idiosyncrasies of adolescents
are so important and crucial, and we tend to,
I mean, not only with regards to adolescents,
we tend to pathologize a lot of things.
So I'm deeply grateful for the work
of the Viveki Foundation,
but not just being therapeutic,
but it's more pedagogical.
I think it's a wonderful and noble thing to do, John.
Thank you, but, and you, of course, are coming back,
because I do want to talk about the archetype
of the adolescent and how it fits into it.
I can talk about everything for like,
or anything for like hours with you, honestly.
I think talking with you
and having other people hear what you have to say,
I think is extremely valuable.
Yeah, I mean, so,
I just, yeah, I do want to pick your brain
and your colleagues about that particular problem.
I'm not asking us to solve it here,
and this is not the right place to try and solve it,
but I do think there's a way,
I wanna recognize and be responsible
to the truth you've articulated,
while still being governed by the principle,
the ethical principle that I've articulated,
and that's a tricky thing to do,
and trying to figure out how to do that
is something I'd like to talk about.
Yeah, it's a dance.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah,
and it's a very careful dance.
I wanna bring back a little bit about,
because you've said it a few times,
and it's deeply, deeply impactful to me,
and we had to talk about other things,
I wasn't able to pick it up,
but I wanna pick it up now.
Yes.
So you've often invoked,
and I think the self is Metaxu,
this is the ancient Greek word for it between,
I think the self,
well, I should be careful.
This is Highland's interpretation
of what the central argument of Plato was,
which is, we are the relationship
between finitude and ultimacy,
between finitude and transcendence,
and if we try to identify with either one of the poles,
and if we lose the polarity,
and try to identify with either one of the poles,
we either fall into servile despair
or we go through inflationary hubris,
and spirituality in the proper sense,
in the, or at least, sorry,
that was inappropriate.
Spirituality in the platonic sense
that would be proper to Plato's framework
is that we enable, we induce and educate,
we draw out and we also transform people
so that they are capable of holding that tonus,
that creative tension between,
like a profound opponent processing
that gives them the most profound optimal grip
on their fundamental orientation reality
is you have to get this opponent processing
between your finitude and your transcendence, right,
between how you are as a single being
and the relationship you have to ultimacy,
but that you are that tonus.
You're like the tension of the bow as Heraclitus
talks about the logos of the psyche, right,
and that that is kind of the deepest,
most profound opponent processing,
and that is the source of our deepest,
most profound optimal gripping,
our most profound orientation.
And I want to know it,
because you've invoked those,
that pair multiple times in our conversation,
how does that proposal land to you,
that that's a deep thing?
I'm about to teach a course for the Raveke Foundation
on literature and the meeting crisis
and wrestling with these books
in which you see human beings wrestling
with the meeting crisis,
and it's precisely the way the meeting crisis
throws this tonus into Watt
and either drives people into despair
or drives them into inflation.
The heart of darkness is a classic example,
or Moby Dick, right?
Do you think, sorry, this was a long preamble,
but I hope it's landing,
do you think that IFS,
especially because it's doing the imaginal,
it's getting us related to the transitional object,
it's moving us out of the matter itself,
getting us to inhabit and be a metaxu,
a purely relational being,
in the deep relation to relationality,
which is ultimate,
do you think IFS, therefore,
can help us with this fundamental commitment
to our true humanity,
which is the tonus, the creative tension,
the opponent processing
between finitude and transcendence?
Do you think that, is that just too far afield,
or is it a good situating?
Because to me, it seems that a big part
of the meeting crisis is the way we lose the polarity
and we get attracted to either one of these poles
in either nihilism or narcissism.
And they're not opposites,
they're two sides of the same coin.
Yes, well, what a question.
I hope I can be fair to this question,
because obviously I cannot speak for the whole IFS community,
but only from my perspective of it,
but I think IFS has the potential to do so.
Now, again, with the monad, I think, or the having mode,
I don't think it's the panacea, you said it yourself,
it cannot be a panacea, it has to be embedded in an ecology.
And no matter what method, technique, paradigm,
whatever you wanna use,
there are ways to do it good or better and worse.
So I think it has the potential to do so.
And I think if IFS is done properly
with this whole sapiential framework around it,
then I think it's so powerful.
But I've also seen people, again,
being trapped in the having mode
at the same time using IFS and do the spiritual bypassing.
So I think it's a matter of, it's the how-ness,
how we do things that matters more than the what-ness, right?
Well, that's a standard definition,
or at least a distinction between knowledge,
which is a what, and wisdom is the how, you know?
And yeah, so...
Yeah, so again, to be, yeah,
I think if done properly, it has,
because I think of this essentially agopic element to it.
And I really think, and this is what I see happening
in therapy, John,
there is this magical moment happening if you,
and in this times, I'm really proud to be part of it,
to participate in it.
And I think I'm privileged to witness healing at times.
Now, and this is so interesting,
I don't consider myself as the one that heals,
I only participate in it.
And it's so interesting because Plato has this critique
of therapy, a theon, and anything,
because it relates to this, to God, right?
To theon, but therapy, a theon,
I think if you properly do it,
what therapy means, or theon means,
or therapy means in this case is that,
in its deep sense, etymologically,
is you're a servant of God.
Now, I think what happens in those moments
in the therapy room is when you witness healing
is that you are part of something bigger,
what you're relating to.
And it's a beautiful thing that happens.
And that's why you can invoke the aesthesis, right?
The perception, the aesthetics.
And that's why I think that beauty
as the primary thing is absolutely correct.
It has this beautiful, elegant thing to it.
And what Aifes brings here is this moment
of not only of logos, where the good,
the true, and the beautiful,
I think where they are one is actually the logos.
I think in meaning is where the good,
the true, and the beautiful are actually,
you cannot, they're not the same thing,
but at the same time, you cannot,
they're not separated, right?
And this wonderful, you said that Aifes is platonic
and Jungian, I would also say it's Augustinian,
in the sense that it's agopic, right?
This moment of love that's happening
is what transcends both.
And this is what Jung also referred to,
is that when it's, or Rogers too, in a sense,
that when good, when you meet a soul,
there is this potential for transformation for both of them.
And I often have this feeling that when I go out,
you know, when I have my session, when they're done,
I am changed myself.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
So I hope I was fair to your question.
You're more than fair.
I really, really enjoy talking with you.
This is really just catching fire for me.
So I thought what you said was great.
We're coming to a close,
I'd like to bring up one question,
and then I wanna,
but first I wanna propose what we could talk about next time.
First of all, I think I wanna give you space and time
to talk about the archetype of the adolescent.
I think that's important.
Yeah, that will be.
And I think that, I think this is also essential.
Yeah, necessary, especially for the mental health crisis,
especially for the meeting crisis.
I think you're bang on about that.
The second thing I wanna talk to you about,
now that we broached, you invoked agape,
you invoked the possibility of something bigger,
and God, the logos.
I mean, this has to do, and there's also Jung,
and you know, the red book, and he has Philemon,
and he has these, you know what I'm talking about,
there's no good name for them.
I mean, RAF calls them allies.
And of course, I've had this experience,
and I've been doing ally work,
and I'd like to hear,
I'm not expecting you to be an expert on this or anything.
I just want your reflections from an IFS.
I've been asking Seth Allison about this,
and other people about this.
And so if we could talk about those two things,
we'll talk about the,
well, that we got a triple A here.
The archetype of the adolescent and the ally,
if we could talk about that next time,
I would appreciate that.
That would be great.
Okay, and so thank you for that, thank you.
And what I'd like to talk to you about right now
is our final point, and it's a Socratic point,
which means I hope it comes off as constructive.
So I think all of this is very, very well said.
And then a Socratic concern would be,
and this is one of the critiques I've had
of sort of romanticism, right?
Which is, how do we look for notice
and ameliorate self-deception that might arise
in all of this work?
Because pretending that there's no self-deception
at play in this, I think is foolish,
and I seriously doubt that you would make,
engage in that pretense.
So how, so here's the concern.
Within therapy, I understand you are beholding
to the goal of healing, and that is important.
But given a lot of things we've said,
and given that we're trying to make connections
outside of therapy, to pedagogy,
and where there are deeper goals
of right relationship to reality
and the true, the good, and the beautiful, the virtue,
then this issue around self-deception, I think comes up.
And I would like to know, and if you wanna bleed
into our next conversation to address this more,
that's fine, but maybe just an initial concern.
How do, and I mean it in that,
I mean it in the platonic sense,
how is rationality as the concern for self-deception,
which can often mask as self-transcendence, right?
How is that concern properly met?
How can we be responsible to that
within an IFS practice?
Is that a fair question?
That's a very important question.
I really have to think about it more deeply
to give an appropriate answer,
but I would say the initial response would be,
and this goes back to the question you had before,
and I forgot to mention it
because I also have critique for IFS.
And I think now this comes together.
I think what IFS still can do better
is to enhance the notion of something like evil.
And I think the ally work that you're alluding to
and the archetypal work, the Hillman work,
that is, I think that is still missing.
Now, to be fair, IFS is not one thing.
This community has very diverse thinkers,
and there are beautiful people
that bring different aspects to it,
but I would say to answer your question
is to address the self-deception,
is that I think it needs to be embedded
within a system of systems.
Right.
And I think what we need to do
in order to overcome self-deception
is that we cannot overlook the body,
and I think this is very, very important,
and there is this brand of IFS
which is called Somatic IFS.
Susan McConnell, she's wonderful.
She's actually one of those
that close friends to Dick Schwartz
who actually made the whole curriculum
for the training of IFS.
So she's brilliant mind,
and she has this book,
I have Somatic Experience, I don't know if you know this.
I haven't.
Awesome.
She writes really poetically and beautifully.
I think so.
The body work is needed,
and this is,
I think something you know
as a practitioner of Tai Chi Chuan and Dave Kelly,
and we need to bring back the body,
but we also need feedback systems,
and people can be feedback systems, right?
So if I do this work alone,
so I have to have a community to do so.
And this witnessing of healing is again,
it's tenfold if you witness it
in a community of healing.
And I was privileged,
or I'm privileged to experience that over and over again
is that what happens when a collective comes together.
Now, I think there is also a danger, right?
And this is also what Jung talks about
when he talks about being one and not a zero.
I was like, okay, well, you have this,
or Nietzsche when he talks about the mass
is going to one direction, the ideological thing.
So,
I really have to think about it.
Well, I mean, it links,
so let's just say that that's your initial foray,
and we'll come back to it next time.
But what you said does connect with what you said before
about IFS needs to be situated
within a sapiential framework and ecology of practices.
But I like your invocation of, you know,
Rafe Kelly's work, the stuff on embodiment.
I think that is deeply appropriate.
This is Marla Ponte that the body is really fundamental
to keeping us anchored to the world
in a way that if we train the mind to properly listen,
can act as, you know, a significant counterbalance
to spiritual bypassing and hubristic self-deception
and other things.
So, let's pick that up then.
We'll pick up that in addition to the archetype
of the adolescent and ally work.
We can talk a little bit more about bringing ratio,
ratio, logos in the rationality
in the Socratic-Platonic sense into conversation with IFS.
So I really look forward to this.
I'd like to give my guests, this was, first of all,
just wow, really catching fire, love this, love this.
You have a brilliant and scintillating mind,
and yet it is clear that it is connected to your heart.
And I just enjoyed that.
I talk about how certain people taste, right?
Like the work of art, you know?
You taste really wonderfully.
So that, I really appreciate that.
But I'd like to give my guests,
I'd like to give my guests the last word.
Thank you, John.
It's deeply appreciated.
I don't know what to say.
I'm grateful to be able to be talking to you.
It's something that I've wanted now for years,
and I think now the time is right.
And also, with regards to your viewers and followers,
I really think it's a chai ros.
I think we are at a pivotal point
where things now come together.
And I wanna thank you for everything you've done and you do,
and I consider you a really close friend.
I mean, we haven't met personally yet.
We can become that.
Yes, I hope so too.
And we are 10,000 kilometers apart,
but I don't know if you know this,
but your voice and your spirit
fills my home and life and work every day.
So in a sense, you're very close to me
on a daily basis.
And to be able to participate in this whole endeavor
is I'm really, really grateful for.
And I wanna thank you for also allowing
and giving the platform to come together.
So thank you for that, John.
So we will speak again very soon.
I would like that.
I would love that, actually.
Thank you.
Hello, everyone.
I'd like to announce a new course.
I'm going to be teaching at Halkian Academy.
It's called Ultimate Reality, God and Beyond.
I'll talk in a minute about that very provocative title.
First, important things.
It's gonna be starting April 5th.
It will be eight weeks, not eight consecutive weeks
because I'm attending conferences,
but it's all scheduled out.
The link to the home page for the course
will be put in the notes to this promo.
And each session will be two hours.
There'll be one hour of me doing a lecture
and then one hour of Q and A.
Now, there are options you can purchase
where you can attend the lecture live
and participate in the live Q and A.
Or you can also go through this course asynchronously
and you can purchase it at that level
if that works better with your schedule
and or your finances.
I've done one of these courses before, Beyond Nihilism.
And I thoroughly enjoyed it.
I consider it by all the feedback a success
and I very much wanted to follow it up.
Which gets me to the title.
The Beyond was a way of pointing to some continuity
with the previous course, Beyond Nihilism,
which is also available asynchronously on Hellkian
if you wish to take a look at that.
I'm not assuming that people have gone through
Beyond Nihilism, the course Ultimate Reality,
God and Beyond is a standalone course,
but I've also structuring it
so those people who have taken Beyond Nihilism
will find connection and continuity.
That's a bit of a tricky thing to do as a teacher,
but I do have quite a bit of experience
with doing that kind of thing
for my many years of teaching at the university.
So that's one reason for the title.
Now, the other title is God and Beyond.
What could possibly be Beyond God?
What could that mean?
That's just a silly contradiction, isn't it?
Well, that's the issue.
That's the issue that the course is gonna wrestle with.
When we come into or try to enter
into a philosophically reflective and deep relationship
with what we consider to be Ultimate Reality,
is that relationship best captured
by what we think of when we think of God?
Now, what many of you will say to me is,
but there's many different possible meanings,
and that's exactly what this course will explore.
But the idea that there is a somewhat standard notion,
Abrahamic notion, perhaps, of God,
is one we'll be making use of
and whether or not that actually is the best way
of understanding Ultimate Reality.
So in order to do that,
we'll be taking a look at a bunch of thinkers.
Now, the one is Robert Carter in his amazing book,
The Nothingness Beyond God,
and you can see the title of that book resonating
with the title of the course in which he explores
the work of Nishita from the Kyoto School,
which is somebody deeply influenced
by both Heidegger and Zen.
And of course, Heidegger famously,
in his famous critique of ontotheology,
criticized that our standard notion of God
as a supreme being fundamentally misrepresents being itself,
because being itself is no kind of individual thing or being,
and that's the no-thingness beyond God.
If God is some kind of super thing,
then Ultimate Reality is a no-thing beyond that,
and that was explored, of course, by Nishita,
making use of both Heidegger and Zen.
And we wanna enter into discussion about this.
Please understand that this is a very exploratory thing.
This course is helping me do some deep thinking in dialogue
with others who are coming in good faith
and wanna engage in deep reflection in a discussion
in preparation for the next series I'm doing
on the Philosophical Silk Road.
And so being part of the course is a way of participating
in the contribution of that project.
We'll also be taking a look at the work
of the Canadian atheist, Schellingbert,
especially in his book, Evolutionary Religion,
but we'll also be taking a look at all,
at least be bringing in his book, Religion and Religion
After Science, and also talking about the hiddenness argument.
He is famous for being the author of the hiddenness argument,
which is considered a sort of new argument
against the existence of a personal God.
Now, you may say, oh, an atheist,
be very careful, Schellingberg is not a typical atheist.
Schellingberg is somebody who wants us to look at,
take very seriously the possibility of ultimate reality
and very seriously what he calls a triple transcendence,
that ultimate reality is transcendent in being most real.
And also, it's also in some sense, most valuable,
beyond the true, the good, and the beautiful,
and also most transformative.
And he thinks this proposal that human beings,
that there is such an ultimate reality,
that human beings can enter into a relationship with it
and be transformed by it,
is one that we should take very seriously,
but within a particular frame.
He says he points to deep time,
how science has discovered deep time,
billions of years in the past,
billions of years in the future.
The species has existed for 200,000 years.
We seem to be spiritually oriented from about 40,000 BCE.
So we have all of this going on,
and yet we also have this deep future ahead of us.
And he poses this question.
He says, given the depth of the questions we're asking
about ultimate reality,
is it likely that we are mature enough as a species
that we have got complete answers to this?
When of course, we don't have complete answers
about the nature of the atom,
or that we don't have complete answers
about how disease works, or how the mind works,
or how the body works.
Isn't it presumptuous to think that we have finished
complete answers about ultimate reality?
So he wants us to engage in the,
reflect upon the proposal
that we might be as a species, not individual,
spiritually immature.
And then he asks, what do we need to do
in order to mature ourselves across time
and across generations,
such that we could come into the kind of work
that would give us
a plausible claim on getting an answer
to that question of whether or not ultimate reality
has that triple transcendence for us.
And I think this is a very profound idea
because I think the deep time aspect
of our reflections upon ultimate reality
within standard axial age religion
and philosophy has not been properly understood
or taken into account.
And so this is very provocative.
It opens us up and it of course allows science
at the table.
Of course, he also criticizes,
and this is what makes him so interesting,
he also criticizes the atheists who think they can come
to a complete conclusion about ultimate reality
from a framework that is very plausibly one
of spiritual immaturity.
So we will be taking a look at that
and we'll be looking at what happens
if we adopt deep humility with respect
to the question of ultimate reality, God and beyond.
What happens?
What do we open ourselves up to?
And what becomes really important for him is the role,
the aspirational role of imagination,
especially in the imaginal sense.
We'll then be taking a look at the astonishing work
of James Filler, who I will actually be meeting
in person in April.
Unfortunately, his book is quite expensive,
so instead we'll be reading three papers
where he makes the argument
that the Neoplatonic tradition made an argument,
which is that ultimate reality is pure relationality
rather than a substance.
Now, when he uses substance,
he's ultimately meaning it in not just a Cartesian sense,
but in Aristotelian.
Substance is our individual things
that are considered to be able to exist independently
and are the subjects of properties.
They're the owner of properties
and they enter into relations with other things.
And so there are things from which relations emerge.
And Filler's arguments go to show
that that seems to have things
exactly the wrong way around.
It looks like relationality is ultimate
and the things emerge out of it.
And so, of course, this relationality is a no thing
because that's just what things emerge from.
And this meshes, of course,
with some of the fundamental arguments of Neoplatonism.
And I think moving off of that thing-based substance ontology
is a fundamental shift,
a new way of thinking profoundly
and relating to ultimate reality
that takes us into that space of God and beyond.
The final person is Bracken,
whose book, The Divine Matrix,
is written from a Whiteheadian perspective,
which I think is very important
because Whitehead, in some ways,
integrates that pure relationality
with the dynamic view of the world given to us by science.
But what he does is he takes a look,
Bracken, at the Western traditions,
reflections on ultimate reality,
and Eastern reflections, Taoism, Vedanta, Buddhism.
And he is trying to propose
what we can see being held in common.
And this, of course, is very much like a through line,
like the philosophical Silk Road.
And he comes to some very interesting conclusions
from this argument about what ultimate reality is
and how we could come to a shared understanding.
It doesn't mean we all will become Hindus
or we'll all become Buddhists
or we'll all even become Whiteheadians
or that we will all become Christians or Jews.
What he says is this gives us a shareable relationship
to ultimate reality between people
who talk about that ultimate reality as a God
and people like Taoists with the Tao
or the Vedantists with Brahmin
or the Buddhists with Shunyata
who do not talk about ultimate reality as God,
but nevertheless consider it to be triply transcendent.
And so this is all in service of an observation
that I have been sharing with a lot of the people
that I enter in deep discussion with,
which is in response to the meaning crisis,
there seems to be an advent of the sacred taking place.
In many different parts of the world,
different communities, different philosophical currents,
and I've just pointed to you a bunch.
There's many more that converge on this.
People are fundamentally reframing
our relationship to ultimate reality.
And I think this is a way of trying to give us
a new way of living in relationship to the sacred,
which will offer people a living response
to the problem of the meaning crisis.
Now, this is all something I am proposing,
and I am proposing that we discuss it together,
and you help me as much as I try to teach you,
that we discuss it together as we try to wrestle
with this question about ultimate reality, God and beyond.
So I look forward to seeing you in the course.
As I said, the notes for both the date,
which starts on April the 5th,
and the link and how you can register
will be found in the in,
will contain the information and the notes to this promo.
So thank you very much, and I look forward to seeing you
in ultimate reality, God and beyond.
