Welcome back to Awakening from the Meaning Crisis. So last time we were taking a look at the perennial
problems that are endemic to us precisely because of the functioning and structuring
and development of our adaptive religio. The very processes that make us intelligently
adaptive also make us vulnerable to self-deceptive, self-destructive behavior. And I propose to
you that we can address parasitic processing with a counter-active dynamical system. We
can address modal confusion by the cultivation of sati. We can address the reflectiveness gap
by the cultivation of flow. We can address absurdity by cultivating prajna. We can address anxiety
by cultivating inner dialogue by internalizing the sage through a process of internalization
and indwelling that allows us to identify with the sage. We can address the process of alienation
through the cultivation of communitas. And I mentioned to you some new sets of communal
psychotechnologies that are emerging and people who are trying to develop thinking about how
how to make use of authentic relating, circling, or trying to break through our current cultural
grammar to a form of authentic discourse and relating. So that's on offer. And that we can respond
to existential entrapment by the cultivation of Gnosis which can be empowered by a core capacity
for realizing higher states of consciousness. So what you have is basically a higher state
of consciousness that is empowering Gnosis, right? And that, right, is of course set within part of Gnosis,
as you remember I argued, is it has to be set within a proper ritual context, etc. I remind you all of that. And
that this is being used to cultivate and of course is being reflectively transformed by a counteractive
dynamical system that is going to, of course, get you sets of practices for cultivating sati,
cultivating flow, cultivating prajna, cultivating communitas, cultivating inner dialogue, etc.
When this is set within a wisdom framing which, so that comprehensively the person is developing a
interlocking set of virtues for addressing self-deception and for affording self-optimization. And this results in a reliable
possible response of amelioration and alleviation of the perennial problems, I would say that's enlightenment. At least the enlightenment that I'm trying to reverse engineer. The components can each ultimately be
explained and understood by our best cognitive science, I believe. At least I've given you reasons that we can rationally hope that. What of course needs to be done is to still try and articulate wisdom from a scientific perspective. And of course that is one of the most exciting things that's happening right now. Something that I am privileged to participate in. All of the ongoing scientific work, whether the psychological, cognitive, scientific,
and even neuroscientific work on what does wisdom mean and how can we cultivate it. And there's just so many people and we're going to talk about that at length.
But we need to do something else because we need to talk about the
something else, because we need to talk about the way in which this whole project, as I said,
can be delegitimized, undermined, and eroded if these whole sets of practices can't be situated
within an encompassing and welcoming worldview. So having an ecology of psychotechnologies for
addressing the perennial problems is necessary, but of course not sufficient for responding to
the mean crisis. I've been encouraged by meeting so many people that are trying to set
up. I keep worrying. I want my language to be responsive to the creativity of these individuals
who are trying to create these ecologies of psychotechnologies. I've talked to Rafe Kelly,
for example. He's done some amazing work on trying to bring together aspects of parkour,
the martial arts, people doing something like the circling practice, right? And again,
create this ecology of practices. I'm talking to Michael Nathan, and he's trying to integrate ideas
about the training and cultivation of wisdom into the training of martial arts in order again to try
and realize, you know, an ecology of practices for responding to the meeting crisis. And so there's
many people out there already doing this. So I don't... I want to indicate that I'm pointing to something
that people are already doing. I'm not trying to take credit for it, but I'm hoping that, and this,
I'd be getting some supportive feedback though, that the work I'm doing here with you of trying to
articulate that can help facilitate these groups and help them coordinate and communicate and potentially
commune with each other in a mutually beneficial fashion. So a couple more things. We need to go back
to this. We need to talk about the integration with the historical forces because there's a particular issue
that comes to the fore. So this is the plan for going forward. Let's talk about the interaction
between the historical forces and the perennial problems. And let's talk about more explicitly,
can we respond to the loss of the three orders and the worldview misattunement?
And then what that would look like. And again, I'm not proposing to found. I'm trying to just talk
about what I see emerging and hopefully give some suggestive steps towards, can we get that religion
that's not a religion? And then put that into dialogue with other people who have engaged in similar
projects. People like Tillich and Young and Corbin and Barfield. And so that we've got at least, I hope,
a very rich dialogue with a lot of momentum to it for trying to get to this religion that's not a religion.
So the historical forces, the loss of the three orders, let's remember this and why it matters. So you've lost
the three orders, we've lost the nomological, and the nomological basically gives us this deep sense of
coherence and connectedness, right? That is so central. We know from our current work on meaning in life,
we lost the normative order, right? Which gives us, I would argue, that sense of significance, depth,
that we get, right? Through self-transcendence. And of course, we've lost the narrative order,
which gives us a sense of purpose or direction. And then as we've lost this, right, we have a worldview
again in which we don't belong and in which our projects don't belong, etc. And of course,
that will interact with, it will exacerbate any attempts that individuals or groups have in
addressing perennial problems. And when you get that going, that's when the meaning crisis really
bites you individually or, right? It really, it gnaws at you as a person or as a community or as a group.
Now, I want to talk about, first of all, this interaction because it brings up a particular
problem. And here again, I'm going to point to the seminal work of Wolfe on her book on
meaning in life and why it matters. So I was interviewed by Leandro on a podcast,
Manifested Wellbeing. And then he then later recently interviewed Wolfe and her work on meaning in
life. So I recommend you going to that to take a look at her work or also reading her book. Now,
if you remember, she says that meaning in life is ultimately about a kind of deep connectedness
that we want. So we have all these metaphors. We want to be, we want to be connected to something
larger than ourself, bigger than ourself, et cetera. And that's what makes our life meaningful. And of
course, it's this notion of connectedness. But she says, those are metaphors. They're what I would
call their symbolic expressions of what people are really saying is that they want this.
She talks about it this way. And think about how this just sings to everything we've been doing here.
We want subjective attraction to find salient, right? And to be drawn into. We want subjective attraction
to, that meets to, that connects with, that conforms to, objective attractiveness.
So notice here, you know, notice here, but of course the, the, the transjectivity here that it's
actually in here that the, the meaning is to be found. And notice also the connectivity and how much
this is, you know, the, the relevance realizing, you know, the deep connected connection, the deep
caring, the deep involvement, the deep participation. Okay. So that all lines up, but then, but then of
course, and here's where this and this interact, right? What happens is she says, ah, because of this,
this, we know there's no such thing as this. We know there's no such thing as this. The scientific
revolution and the loss, there's nothing that is objectively attractive, right? This is a particular
grammar, right? This is the grammar again that, you know, right? You know, there isn't an, there is,
there's nothing, there's nothing, there's no meaning or relevance in this thing, in itself.
This is ultimately a sort of a Kantian argument.
And Will sort of leaves it there. Um, she does allude to ways in which we can bullshit ourselves.
We can pretend we have objective attraction just by finding, um, a group of people who agree to value the
same things we do. And that is a kind of bullshitting because the salience of the group is actually
masking whether or not it's given us what we're looking for. And she criticizes all of those attempts,
um, I think quite rightly. And that's where she sort of leaves it. Um, at least when I read the book.
Um, I, I don't know of more recent work. She's got an answer to it.
Um, so work I'm doing with, uh, Thalia Vrantidis, uh, uh, uh, Jun Sun Kim, Philip Rizzawick. We're,
we're, we're, we're really trying to, um, say, is there a way, uh, of addressing this problem using,
um, the current, uh, cognitive science, cognitive psychology, neuroscience, et cetera. I won't keep
saying everything that's in cognitive science. Um, you know, philosophy, psychology, neuroscience,
machine learning. Can we use all of that, the best of that, to, uh, address, um, this issue? See,
so notice that, again, this issue is an issue in which historical forces prevent sort of the fundamental
legitimation of the whole project that we would try to use to address the perennial problems.
Okay. So, what can we think about this? Well, part of it is, uh, I think, to ask if, do we need things to be
objectively valuable? Uh, so what that means is that things would have a value independent about how I
would value them or how you would value them. And there's a particular move that you can make
that doesn't require that the thing has objective value, right? Instead, you could think about
the set of characteristics that need to exist in order for, uh, meaning to be created. And so,
what I'm trying to, what I'm trying to point you towards, and we have to go very delicately,
right? I'm trying to point you towards that it's actually the transjectivity of the relationship
that we need. And we don't really need objective attractiveness. That's not quite right.
So, let's think about this.
Relevance realization is inherently interested in itself
because, as I've argued, that's constitutive of it being a self-organizing, self-correcting,
self-optimizing, self-developing, evolving process.
Relevance realization is not something in me. It's not something in the world. It's in the,
it emerges in the affordances that are co-created by the world and myself.
It's bi-directional in that fashion.
So, what I need to be connected to, I would argue,
is I need to be connected to finding, finding,
I need to be connected to those conditions that afford relevance realization itself. Those conditions
that satisfy my inherent valuing of the relevance realization process itself.
So, what does that mean? What that means is, I ultimately want to care about the conditions
that afford meaning-making itself. Those conditions, right, are universal in a sense. Not in the sense
that they are the same environmental conditions or the same psychological, but the same set of
conditions that make possible and afford meaning-making itself. Now, this sounds all very abstract,
and now I want to try and turn it around, and this is something that I'm arguing for,
right, that when we care to create the conditions of meaning-making because we find them inherently
valuable, because that is constitutive of our capacity to be agents and to value anything else.
When we're doing that, what we're actually engaging in is agape.
Agape is to love for its own sake the process of, right, the process of meaning-making,
and the process of meaning-making is the process of being a person, ultimately.
This is agape.
And that's why, of course, the things that contribute most significantly to meaning in life is our sense
of being connected to other people, agapically.
What I'm saying to you is that there is a way of responding to this, which is the cultivation,
the realization, the appreciation of agape.
And you say, but there's no objective value to meaning-making. Of course there isn't.
But it's not subjective or arbitrary. It is transjective.
And it is, in that sense, transcendental, in a Kantian sense. It is the, right, what I'm involved with are the
very conditions on the possibility of meaning-making itself. So to, to agapically love people, of course,
is not just to be directed at that body and mind. It's to be directed at their conditions,
their community, their environment, their development, their education. That's agape.
That exists independently of me, of you, of us, of a group. Because agape proceeds,
permeates, and follows us.
So, part of what it means, therefore, and this, and of course this was also part of the tradition,
but it becomes especially pertinent for us. Part of how enlightenment has to be for us is that
whatever machinery we craft together for addressing the perennial problems
has to be integrated, grounded in an agape way of being.
And that, of course, makes sense, too, if you think about being within the being mode,
having an I-thou relationship, etc. We have to care about the conditions that make any caring possible.
So, part of what we need to do, right, is to address this issue with agape,
the cultivation of agape.
I think we should ultimately see agape as our deepest appreciation for the caring that is intrinsic
and constitutive to the relevance realization that makes both the agent and the arena possible.
So, is that, is that pointing to something that, in the physics of reality?
No.
But, it is pointing to something, is it therefore just pointing to something that's romantically
dwelling within my subjectivity?
Subjectivity? No.
It's pointing to caring about something that is inherently transjective and has a value
independent of my valuing of it. Because my valuing of it does not constitute it into existence.
I emerge from it and participate in it. I am not the source or maker of it.
What about the historical factors, the historical forces? So, we've lost the three orders.
We can, I would argue, we can make use of what's happening in third generation cog psi, 4e cog psi,
in conjunction with the theoretical machinery you've been developing on the cognitive scientific
side of things to address that. The way I want to do this is I want to, I want to make use of an
article by Francisco Varela. This is not me saying that I think that everything that Varela has to say
or all of his particular theories are right or something like that. But Varela is one of the founding figures
figures of third generation 4e cognitive science. Of course, that work has been developed significantly
since him and that's why it's important to only see him as a founding figure, not as the final figure.
The seminal work of Evan Thompson. If you want to see this, these ideas taken into a depth, you know,
get Evan's book, Mind and Life. It's just a fantastic book. We talked about this, the deep continuity
hypothesis and how it re-situates us, right, into an order because there's a continuity between the
principles of cognition and the principles of biology and then the principles of dynamical self-organizing
physical systems. Okay? But I want to pick up on this because I want to pick up on something that
he said because he writes this piece and it's sort of, it's simultaneously argumentative and
autobiographical. And he wrote it in 2000. It's in a book called The Psychology of Awakening.
And he talks about what he calls steps towards a science of interbeing, unfolding the Dharma implicit
in cognitive science. So he relates the following thing. He was trying to, he'd been asked to write
an article about sort of, and around 2000 is when third generation cog sci was really starting to
develop. And he was, he was asked to write an article sort of, what are the main insights or claims about
this. And I want to, I want to go through that and sort of unpack them a bit and then also unpack the
elements. So sort of, what are the insights of third generation cog sci? And I have been trying to
exemplify them for you. I've been trying to exemplify them in all of the lectures throughout the whole of
the series, but especially since episode 25, third generation cog sci. And or, and unpack the four E's.
I actually think there's sort of five E's, but what's also called five E cognitive science.
And how does it address these three, the three orders?
Well he says, as he was doing this, what had kept happening to him is he kept,
as he kept articulating to himself, um, the insights that were central to cognitive science,
he found that he was constantly saying things that he found consonant with the dharma, the central
teachings of Buddhism. So he found this deep resonance between the science and a particular
path about whereby individuals and communities actually cultivate meaning, wisdom, etc.
So he, he lists the first one, and this is one of the four E's of cognitive science, the issue of
embodiment, that we're deeply embodied. We're deeply embodied. So here's a quote from that 2001,
sorry, so that 2000 article. Mind is not program, software, or rule bound manipulation of symbols.
He means symbols in the mathematical sense, not in the spiritual sense we've been developing here.
Mind is not program, software, or rule bound manipulation of symbols. Instead, the mind,
right, arises through immediate coping with the world.
So the idea here is, right, that we understand intelligence, and this is something I've been
trying to articulate, right, we understand intelligence as our coping with the world. The way we are evolving
the sensory motor loop, right, so that we deal with what, right, we deal with the problems at hand
that directly afford our interaction with the world at large.
Right? So he uses the word coping because he's trying to get us out of a fascination and a fixation
with our capacity for theorizing. Not because he thinks that theorizing is wrong or that would,
because that would be a self-contradictory act. He's offering a theory. But he's trying to say that we
have to, he's trying to get us to remember the other kinds of knowing and the way in which ultimately
to be a general problem solver, to be an intelligent cognitive agent is to have this, right, ongoing,
evolving, fittedness. The coping with my immediate interaction with the world.
And that this is the defining features, he would argue, and I would agree, with being a cognitive agent.
Now he calls that embodiment. Many people might see that, Evan Thompson, as enactment, right?
So there's a bunch of these E's here. There's embodiment.
Other people might say what Varela is talking about there is embeddedness, the way we are embedded.
Inactive. This is Evan Thompson's idea that cognition isn't inherently something we enact,
right? Extended. That our cognition is not in our head, but it's extended through our interactions
with the world, through our psychotechnologies, through distributed cognition. Because those are
the four E's. Whether or not we should pin this specifically to this, or maybe it overlaps with some
of these other ones. That's fine. We're going to see more of this with Varela anyways. But notice what
this is about. The embodiment is about the idea that, right, there is a deep continuity between your
most abstract cognitive abilities and your most, well, embodied sensory motor action.
I've tried to argue that you can see this in the following way. That your cognitive,
your cognition is ultimately dependent on, grounded in, the relevance realization. And the relevance
realization is ultimately grounded in your bioeconomy. Your body is not some clay that you drag around in
our Cartesian fashion. Your body is a bioeconomy that enacts logistical norms of efficiency and resiliency
that constrain your cognition so that it continually evolves its fittedness to the world.
There's a deep continuity between cognition and biology. And of course, the biology is, is deeply embedded.
You are engaging in what biologists talk about as continual niche construction.
So the new biology that's emerging, I'm privileged to know and I get to interact with Dennis Walsh
here at the University of Toronto. If you want to see some people that are doing the cutting edge work
on the philosophy of biology, take a look at Dennis's work and the work of other people. There's an anthology,
I think, I'm trying to remember what it's called, I think it's criticizing or reflecting on the
grand synthesis, the synthesis between Darwinian evolution and Mendelian genetics. I'll get the right
book panel to come up. But there is this idea about the importance of processes like niche construction for
understanding evolution. And the idea here is, right, and you see how I've been making use of this. There's
the organism and the environment, right, and the idea is the organism is shaping the environment, shaping and
selecting the environment, and the environment is shaping the organism. And so the organisms get involved
with affecting the environment so that it is conducive to their way of being, but they also evolve both
biologically and behaviorally, right, to exploit and make good use of that changed environment. And you've got this
transjective evolving loop going on, niche construction. We do this, of course, on a broad scale through
culture because what culture is is, right, we do this thing where we massively shape the environment and then
massively shape ourselves to fit that environment, right? So culture is about both fitting people to an
environment and fitting the environment to the people in this ongoing fashion. And so that takes us right into
this notion, of course, that we are deeply embedded. We're deeply embedded. So embodiment leads to, and
there's some people that argue that embeddedness sort of reduces to embodiment. Roland seems to be arguing
that in one of his books on the new science of the mind. But anyways, the idea here is the deep continuity,
we are deeply embodied, we are deeply embedded. Now notice how that is going, right, it's undermining the way in
which Descartes severed everything, right? And if, right, so this is obviously a species of niche construction, a
comprehensive one, right? And if this, as I've tried to argue, can even tell us something important about
consciousness, both its function and its phenomenology, then we can seriously respond to Descartes and say, no, no.
The mind and body are not disconnected. They are in a deep continuity. And the mind and the world are not
disconnected. They are in a deep continuity of embeddedness and in active processing.
So, what's the second insight that Varela brings up? Emergence. Which is, like, it's a major term now,
and this is something that has been invoked throughout this series. The idea that, right, a system,
especially if the system is self-organizing, it can produce properties, right, as a system that the
component parts can't possess. And so the idea is the mind in this sense emerges out of the embodied,
embedded brain coupled to a living environment, right? I've tried to give you ways of understanding
understanding that emergence. And how it is reflected in your spirituality by your capacity for self-transcendence. And how that could be understood, at least in part, a significant part, by the complexification
that is inherent in your relevance-realization machinery in your religio.
So what does this mean for us? This means that we are starting to get something like a vertical
dimension back to our ontology. Not a two worlds vertical dimension, but the idea of emergence
emergence through complexification of things like biology. So you've got self-organizing things. And they already, right, so what processes, like the processes, combustion is self-organizing. A tornado is self-organizing. Erosion is self-organizing. Evolution is self-organizing.
And the thing is particular kinds of self-organization, like evolution can produce things that are more than self-organizing. They are self-making. This is Varela's notion of an autopoetic system.
There's lots of controversies around this, right? And I don't think it solves everything that Varela thinks it solves. But it is definitely the case that unlike a tornado, I am a self-organizing thing that self-organizes such that I seek out those conditions that protect and promote my agency.
Right? And then of course the self-agency, right? And then of course the self-making things, right, they can become, right, more than just self-making things, they can become self-identifying things. You can become a reflective, right, self-making thing.
You can become aware of, you can become aware of, come to some understanding and appreciation of your self-making, of the way in which you are inherently developmental, because that's what we're talking about when we talk about development, the way in which you're self-making.
And then you can interact with that in ways that I've tried to show you. And so on and so forth. Okay? And so self-transcendence. And notice what's happening here. A normative order is being given a metaphysical backing.
Now, I want to come back later towards the end of the series and talk about this bottom-up emergence. And does it need to be complemented by a metaphysical idea of a top-down emanation? And what might that mean? And I'm going to be very tentative about that because this is something that is...
really trying to break free from some of the deepest grammar that has gotten us into the meaning crisis. But right now I'm going to continue with Varela.
Okay, so you've definitely got emergence. What's the third one? Right? So there's all these E's. So he's got, you know, embodiment,
which is shared with 4E cognitive science. And I think whatever you think about some of his claims about autopoiesis and others,
he helped to really bring this to the fore for current cognitive science. And this is going in, this is now informing
experimental psychology. We're seeing how much your embodiment affects your cognition. Right?
And then he, right, he gave, the next one was emergence. Right? And then the third one is emotion.
And this is really interesting because the deep divide, right, between emotion and reason,
a divide that I think is enshrined, ossified in our cognitive grammar, right, and cognitive cultural grammar,
the ongoing battle between the empiricists and the romantics, between John Locke and Rousseau,
is, right, is to, is being addressed. And we went back to this. And, right, and so we can think of the work of
Damasio here and Descartes' error. And we've talked about this. And now you see this, right?
Damasio was basically showing that people without emotion, even though all of the
calculative machinery may be operating normally well, means these people that, remember,
you remember in Descartes' error, right, that, right, although all the calculative machinery
is operating well, they're disconnected from their emotions, they are incapacitated as cognitive agents.
Why? Because without emotion, without the caring that is integral, right, to relevance, realization,
remember what Reed said, that we're different from computers, that we have to care about emotion.
And why do we, sorry, we have to care about information. Why do we have to care about information?
Because we ultimately have to take care of ourselves because of the kind of beings we are, right?
When you don't have that, you face combinatorial explosion.
There is a deep interconnection between being embodied, being a relevance realizer, and having emotions.
Emotions are one, is a way in which relevance realization is brought up into the level of your salience landscaping,
and what emotions do is they craft your, they shape and sculpt the salience landscaping such that an agent arena relationship
becomes obvious and apparent to you. When you're angry, you assume a particular role, you assign a bunch of identities,
and you, you, it's obvious to you what you should be doing.
I would make this prediction, that as we move towards making, and we're going to come back to this issue,
about artificial general intelligence, as we move towards making artificial general intelligence,
we more and more, we're already having to give these machines something deeply analogous to attention,
and we're going to, I would predict, have to give them something analogous to emotion.
So, I think it's better to talk about this. I would put the two together.
Right? That within religio, you always have caring coping.
Caring coping.
And that's the core of your cognitive agency.
The emotion also carries up to the relationship, and of course, this goes back to agape,
that emotion is how we coordinate the attachment. I don't mean it in the Buddhist sense,
I mean in the psychological sense. The attachment relationships between individuals,
such that we create persons.
That we create persons who are capable of dwelling within and coordinating their efforts within distributed cognition.
We create persons within communities of persons that shape themselves, their community, and their world,
to fit together in an ongoing agent arena fashion.
The last it points to is kind of excellence.
This has to do with connections between
third generation 4E cognitive science, dynamical systems, self-optimization, and an aspect of psychology that has become known as positive psychology.
Positive psychology is a way of doing psychology that is complementary to our standard way.
Our standard way of doing psychology is to see how things break down, how they fall apart.
And there's two, I'm not trying, I'm not, I believe most people in positive psychology are also not, trying to dismiss, or debunk, or any crazy thing like that, sort of standard psychology.
But standards, because standard psychology studies the mind by how it breaks down for two very good reasons.
One is, by studying how it breaks down, we can analyze it, and we can thereby understand its parts.
And how they might be working together.
And also by understanding how the mind breaks down, how the psyche breaks down,
we can potentially therapeutically and pedagogically intervene to fix it, repair it.
Right? Therapeutic intervention. Therapeutic and pedagogical intervention.
So that's very noble, and I'm not trying to, I'm not trying to diss that in any way.
But, what positive psychology says is, you shouldn't study the mind only in terms of how it breaks down.
You should also study the mind in terms of how it excels beyond the norm.
How do all the pieces fit together in a way?
See, your brain is a machine of machines that can make itself into a new kind of machine.
How can the brain put, right, how does the brain, right, the embodied, right, inactive, right, embedded, brain, body, sensory motor loop, mind, right?
How, how does it transcend itself?
How does it excel?
How do, how, we should study individuals who have optimized their cognition better than the norm.
Because here's the idea, very often, you can only understand something deeply, not only in terms of its parts and how it breaks down,
but you can only understand in terms of the whole and how it excels, because that reveals properties and powers that you don't see in the norm.
And so, positive psychology studies things like happiness, meaning in life.
Importantly, and this is where 4E cog psi and positive psychology really come together, right, wisdom.
Wisdom is the term we give for people who have, who are excellent in their cognitive capacities for coping and caring,
and for, I would argue, responding to issues of self-deception, helping people deal with the perennial problems of human existence.
And so, this becomes a topic, a topic to which we are going to shortly turn.
Because, as I argued, in the end we need an account of wisdom, both for cultivating the perennial problems
and also for how to make the best use of this science.
It's one thing to have the knowledge that's coming from this science, but we need the wisdom of how to use it best.
How to understand it and use it best.
The deep continuity and emergence and development, they give us back a nomological order.
We see how we fit in, how we belong.
And we see how our meaning making belongs, fits in.
We see a normative order, we see what it is to self-transcend.
We have to do more on this, especially with the topic of wisdom, but how it is we can cultivate enlightenment.
How it is we can respond to the perennial problems.
How it is that we can bring about the best internal optimization, the best external reciprocal realization.
How we can afford it anagoguing.
I think this brings with us, brings with it an important point.
This is the work of Good Enough, which is a perfect name.
And her work on the sacred depths of nature.
And she talks about how as a scientist, and she's trying to recover the sacred depths of nature's sacredness.
Awe and wonder in a way that helps her cultivate wisdom.
And of course transcendence is integral to this.
And she talks about that we, and you can see what she's doing.
She's trying to challenge the fundamental grammar that we've inherited from the actual age.
She talks about a new sense of transcendence.
Instead of transcendence above, which of course invokes the two worlds mythology.
What she talks about is we need this new sense, transcendence into.
Transcendence into the depths of nature.
Transcendence, I would also argue, and I don't see her as opposed to this.
I see her actually enacting it.
Transcendence into the depths of the psyche.
And the two deeply integrated and coordinated together in reciprocal realization.
Remember, the opposite of reciprocal narrowing, the reciprocal opening up.
The mutual disclosing, which is experienced as a kind of love.
Transcendence into.
Transcendence into.
So the one that remains, the order that remains unconnected for us to this argument, is the narrative order.
Because, right, the narrative order points us towards a telos, a cosmic telos.
And evolution and relevance realization are non-teleological, they're open-ended.
So, if we're looking to find something that will bring back the narrative order in that sense, I don't think we can find it.
But perhaps we should think differently about the narrative order.
Perhaps we should think of the narrative order now as more to do with gnosis.
We should think of it as an open-ended optimization.
An open-ended optimization.
And that we may have indispensable need for symbols and stories to afford that.
But we do not need to think of those symbols and stories as existing independently in the structure of reality.
We certainly don't want to get back to utopic visions or their antithesis in nostalgic visions.
Because both of those have been the source of a lot of suffering and distress.
Is it possible, because you see this in Stoicism, you see this in Buddhism, you see this in Taoism.
Is it possible to move to a post-narrative way of being?
In which we are concerned not with our historical narrative, our horizontal identity.
But we're concerned with the depths to which we are capable of living.
That perhaps what we need is not a grand purpose.
A narrative of a grand purpose that is connected with the history of the cosmos.
Perhaps instead, we can move to getting beyond a narrative way of conforming to reality.
To a post-narrative, the kind of experience people have in higher states of consciousness.
Where the narrative drops away and nevertheless they experience themselves as deeply connected,
deeply at one with themselves and with reality.
And that this seems to have given their life, these moments, a significance to it.
And again, there's no mystery to these higher states of consciousness.
Because there's, right, there is no theoretical mystery.
Because there's a cognitive continuum from fluency to insight.
We're just exacting the machinery over and over again to flow, to mystical experiences,
to mystical experiences that drive transformative development, the higher states of consciousness.
We'll take a look at this proposal, drawing this all together.
Coming back to the, talking about the religion that is not a religion.
Setting up the discourse with people like Tillich, and Barfield, and Jung, and Corbin.
And we also need to come back and take a look at the cognitive science of wisdom.
Because all of this is being done within a wisdom framing.
The wisdom that captures the excellence, which was the fourth insight of Varela.
Thank you very much for your time and attention.
And really inspiring all for us toуч Hallo.
Thank you.
to invite T Shockers.
Please Tillich, thank you so much too much as you, finally.
Thank you very much for allowing me today.
Thank you very much for inviting me today.
And that is the reason why I was perfect.
suscribite.
Please come to everything UCoge and I am and I'm!
Thank you very much for giving, grace!
Thank you very much for giving me today.
Thank you very much for giving it.
For especially...
