Welcome back to Awakening from the Meaning Crisis. So last time we continued looking through the
myth of Siddhartha's awakening and we talked about him leaving the palace, the having mode,
his attempt to rediscover, recover the being mode and the difficulty he faced in pursuing self-denial
as passionately as he had pursued self-indulgence and why this ultimately failed because it's still
working within the same operation of trying to have a self. And then we looked at Siddhartha's
commitment to the middle path, an attempt to overcome that through the cultivation of mindfulness and
then we began our exploration of mindfulness. We first looked at what it meant, sati, it's
this deep remembering, this recovering of the being mode that leads to a fundamental transformation
and alleviates the existential anxiety and distress that Siddhartha was experiencing and potentially
is on offer for us. And then we started to take a look at that, the practice of mindfulness
in its attempt to address at least an individual or personal experience of a meaning crisis.
And we were doing that because we were trying to investigate more broadly the mindfulness
revolution and how that is a response to the meaning crisis within the West. We began by
noting that the study of mindfulness is misleading in some ways, the scientific study, because it
begins with a feature list. And as we've noted multiple times, feature lists leave out the
EIDOS, the Structural Functional Organization. In order to do that, we brought out four sort
of central characteristics in the feature list, being present, not judging, insightfulness and
reduced reactivity or an increased equanimity. And then we noted that what we need to do is to
make distinctions between the types of features, between those that are states that we can engage
in, actions we can perform and traits we can cultivate. Once we did that, we opened up the
possibility of asking causal questions. How can the practice of being present, for example,
produce the trait of insightfulness? And then we also could ask constitutive questions. What's the
relationship, the part-whole relationship, for example, between being present and not judging?
That being said, we then also noted that we have to replace the language of training with the language
of explaining. They operate according to different principles and for different goals. And we began
that by starting to ask, what does it mean to be present? And then we talked about concentration,
we talked about different senses of that and the kind of soft vigilance that's actually conducive of
insight discussed by Alan Langer and others. This kind of involvement that is very much about conforming
to inter-essay, becoming deeply interested, connected to the structural functional organization of something.
We noted that that took us into discussion of paying attention and all the while remembering
this idea that we got from Sitartaga Tatama's story about tuning, getting the right tuning optimization.
And we started to talk about attention and made the argument that attention is not very well served
by the spotlight metaphor. While that metaphor does give us the idea of attention-altering salience,
the metaphor misses a lot of what attention is doing. We began to investigate what's missing by making use of
Christopher Moll's idea that attention is not a direct action performed by walking but it's something
you do by modifying something else, by optimizing something else. That's why you can successfully pay
attention by doing many disparate different kinds of things. You can pay attention by optimizing your
seeing into looking, by optimizing your hearing into listening, by optimizing your seeing and listening
into a coordinated tracking of what somebody is saying like you're doing right now. All of those are
different ways in which we're paying attention. So what we needed was an understanding of attention
that could capture the way it's an optimization strategy which lines up with this tuning idea and
how such optimization might be linked to a response to existential modal confusion and the alleviation of
the suffering found therein. So I want to continue that discussion about attention and start to
point towards what might be going on. If you remember, Moll talks about this idea of cognitive unison,
getting a bunch of processes to share a goal, to be coordinated together in some fashion. Now he
leaves it abstract like that and I think we should try and investigate a little bit more further, more
concretely, what that might mean and there's a lot of attention is one of the hottest areas in cognitive
science right now. There's a lot of good work done by Frank Wu, by Sebastian Watzel, Christopher Moll,
many people are talking about this and I'm not pretending to canvas all of that rich and very fertile
and very like it's very creative, it's advancing. I'm not trying to do that. I'm trying to pick up on some key
themes here because what we want to understand is how can mindfulness train attention so as to cause
more insight, to make one more dispositionally capable of insight because after all, and we've
talked about this before, we're not talking, when we're talking about wisdom, we're not talking about
an individual insight, we're talking about a systematic set of insights that are mutually related
to a fundamental transformation of the person's, as we said last time, existential mode.
So, let's talk a little bit more again about what's missing from the model of attention. So,
this cognitive unison, I think we can make use of another important cognitive scientist,
philosopher scientist who did work on attention and that's Michael Polanyi.
He pointed out that attention has an important structure and we've been trying to follow the
platonic idea of turning the feature list into a feature schema, picking up on structures and the
way in order to bring out what Polanyi is talking about, I'm going to run through an experiment with
you, an experiment you can sort of follow along with me. So, let me describe it to you first.
I need you to get some object like a pencil or a pen and we will call that your probe. Nothing
untoward is meant by that, that's just what it's called in psychology and it doesn't involve any
aliens doing graphic things to your body or anything like that. So, what we're going to do is, let me
describe it to you first. Okay, so what I'm going to ask you to do is I'm going to ask you to find some
object that you could put on a desk in front of you or hold in your hand and then you're going to do the
following. Do not start yet because I want to describe it to you. I'm going to ask you to tap
on the object as if you were blind and you're trying to figure out what the object is. Its shape,
its structure, its weight, its density. Oh, that's a cut, right? That makes sense. Now, it's important
while you, now you should close your eyes as you're doing this. I'm using touch because touch is slower
than sight and so you can become more aware of what's happening. Now, it's important while you
do this that you continue tapping. So, I'm going to ask you in a moment to close your eyes, start
the tapping and then while you're doing it, continue the tapping as you are following my instructions
and this will give you a sense of what you're doing. Okay, so what I want you to do is close
your eyes, you start tapping on your object, right? Start tapping until you start to form an image
of the object in your mind. Okay, so your eyes are closed, you're starting to get an image of what
that object is in your mind. Okay, so right now you're aware, like you're focally aware. What you're
focusing your awareness on is the object. I want you to keep tapping but I want you to shift your
awareness into your probe. Feel how your pencil or your pen is moving around, shifting. Okay, keep tapping
and then I want you to shift your awareness into your fingers and feel how your fingers are moving around,
shifting around. Okay, some of you may be able to pick up on the individual feelings that are occurring in your fingers.
Now go back, feel your fingers and your thumb and how they're moving.
Now feel how the probe is moving and now
allow the tapping to reveal the object to you once again.
So I've done this multiple, multiple times with people
and what's interesting is the following thing. Most people find this very readily
easy to do. And a couple things. When you're initially tapping, for example, I was aware of my cup
but then my awareness moves into my marker and then my awareness moves into my finger and when my
awareness is in my finger I'm not aware of the cup at all. Then I was able to reverse it. I go from being
aware of my fingers to being aware of the probe to being aware of the cup. You're saying, what's all this
about what's going on? Well, there's an important structure. Let's take a look at it step by step.
So here's the cup or whatever your object was, right? And I'm tapping on it with my probe, okay?
Now here's the interesting thing. It's not like I was completely unaware of my probe because if I was
completely unaware of it, I couldn't manipulate it. But I wasn't actually aware of it. I was aware
through it. I was aware through my probe of the cup. So I'm aware through this.
And I'm aware of this. So it's like my probe is transparent to me. And let me give you
an analogy right now where this is opaque, right? Here's the analogy. And think about,
and we talked about this before, but let's do it again. And it's like my glasses are like my framing,
right? My glasses are transparent to me in the sense that I'm looking through them, beyond them,
by means of them. They're transparent to me. But what I can do is I can redirect my awareness
so that I'm now looking at my glasses rather than through them. So my glasses have now become opaque
to me. So I can do a transparency to opacity shift. Now what does that ability to shift indicate?
Well, this is, this is part of Polanyi's idea. Here's my probe. I'm aware through my probe. He has
what I call a subsidiary or an implicit awareness. Because I'm aware through it. I'm not aware of it.
I'm aware through it, right? Of my focal object. For example, my cup. And this, I have a focal awareness
or an explicit awareness. Now his point, which is really quite good, right, is that attention is
this kind of structuring phenomena. What it is, it's always attention, as he says, from, to. It's an
attention through subsidiary awareness into focal awareness. When I'm paying attention, I'm doing this.
But here's the interesting thing. I was then able to step back and make this focal, right?
And now it's my fingers that I'm aware, I'm aware through my fingers of my probe. And then I can even
step back and be aware of my fee, of my feelings. What some people would call sensations.
So I can, I can keep stepping back and stepping back. So I'm looking at the cup through my probe.
Now I'm looking through my fingers at the probe. And now I'm looking through my feelings at my
fingers. And of course, the whole time I was actually looking at the cup, I was doing all of that.
I was looking through my feelings, through my fingers, through my probe into the cup.
And you see, the spotlight metaphor is missing all of that layered, recursive, dynamic structuring
that's going on. And notice you can move in both directions. You can do a transparency opacity shift
in which I step back more and more into my mind. Or I can go the opposite way. I can do an opacity
to transparency shift. That's when you went the opposite way. That's when you go from looking at
your fingers to looking through your fingers at your probe and going from looking at your probe to
looking through your probe to the cup. And your attention is doing that all the time. Flowing in and
out. Doing a transparency and opacity shifting. Now that's very important because that's an important,
what you're seeing is how many different processes are being coordinated, integrated together to optimize
and prioritize, to use an important term from Watzel, this particular object or this particular scene
or situation. So that's one way in which attention is operating. Now, for reasons I'm not quite sure of,
I think it has to do something with we're using a visual metaphor and the way vision is oriented in
our bodies, we tend to use an in-out metaphor for this. Like that's why I'm using stepping back and looking at,
as opposed to like looking through. Notice also something that's really important for where we're
going to need this when we talk about gnosis and participatory knowing. Notice when I was, if you'll
allow me, when I was knowing the cup through the probe, I'm indwelling the probe, right? It's not like I'm,
right, I'm participating in how the probe is being with respect to the cup. I'm sort of indwelling it.
I'm, I'm not knowing the probe, I'm knowing through the probe. I'm inter-essay. I'm so deeply interested
that I'm actually, right, integrated with it and through it into the cup. The way my vision is
integrated with the, these glass lenses so that I'm actually seeing through them and by means of them.
And the point about this, and we've talked about this before, of course, is this also works not with
just technology, but with psychotechnologies. We talked about this with second order thinking.
You can so integrate literacy, for example, into your cognition that you don't look at literacy
very much. You automatically look through it. We'll come back to that. All right. So this is,
right, as I said, this seems to be, people talk about this metaphorically as moving in and out
with their awareness. So one of the ways attentions work is it moves in and out. You can, right, look
through a lot of processing deeply out into the world, or you can step back and look at a lot of
processing and withdraw towards the center of your mind. There's another important axis upon which your
attention is working. And I can bring it out by a famous example. All right. So you give this to
people and you ask them to read it. And they say, what does it say? And they'll say, the cat. And
they're like, oh yeah. All right. And then you point out to them that they're reading this as an H,
and they're reading this as an A, and these are exactly the same thing. Why are you reading once one is
an H and the other is an A? And so what they'll typically say to you is, well, because it fits
in with this word as an H and it fits in with this word as an A. So let's use language we've already
developed. The letters are the features and the word is the gestalt, the overall structure. Now notice
here, you've got a problem. It's almost, you know, a pseudo-Zen problem. In order to read the words,
I must read each individual letter. But in order to disambiguate each letter, I must have read the
whole word. Therefore, reading is impossible. Now, of course, reading isn't impossible, which means
something else has to change. What has to change is your model of attention. The searchlight metaphor,
the spotlight metaphor, can't address that problem. Here's what your attention is actually doing.
It's simultaneously going up from the features to the gestalt, the Eidos, the structural functional
whole, and it's going down from the gestalt, the words, to the individual letters, the features.
It's simultaneously doing that. Your attention is also doing this. So not only is your attention flowing
in and out, right? Doing transparency, opacity, shifting. It's also flowing up and down between
feature and gestalt. Your attention is doing all of that. It's doing it right now. And the
spotlight metaphor doesn't capture any of that. And mindfulness has to do with making use of
all of this complex, dynamical – remember what dynamical systems are – dynamical processing.
They're dynamic, self-organizing processes, and they can be optimized. And mindfulness optimizes
them in some way. So I'm going to put something up on the board. It looks like a graph, but it's
not a graph because it doesn't have absolute position. It's just a schema because it has relative
position. So when I move this way, like we were talking about when we were talking about Polanyi's
work, I'm doing transparency to opacity shifting. And going this way is to do transparency to opacity,
and to go this way is to do opacity to transparency. It's not an – no position is transparent and the
other is opaque. It's always the direction that matters. The more I move this way, the more I'm stepping
back and looking at, the more I go this way, the more I'm indwelling and looking out into the world.
Then we have this. I can be going down from the gestalt to the features, using the word to decide
the letters, for example. And I can be going up from the features to the gestalt. Nothing is inherently a
feature. Look. The letters are a feature in the word, but the word is a feature in the sentence.
Nothing is absolutely a feature. It's always relative. That's why I'm putting these double arrows.
This isn't a Cartesian graph. Okay? This is not a Cartesian graph. This is a schema.
This is a schema. But one thing you should know is that although I can describe and you can understand
these two axes independently, they're almost always operating in a highly dynamic, integrated fashion.
Very often as I'm moving towards a gestalt, grabbing a bigger picture, I'm using that bigger pattern
to look more deeply into the world. So often I'm doing this. I'm grabbing bigger patterns and I'm using
those deeper patterns to look deeper into the world. Right? So when you find – this is what we do in
science, for example. I find this and this and this. I get a pattern and then I find a way to
integrate it together and then I use that pattern to look more deeply in the world. This is what this
is, right? I found a pattern and it allows me to look more deeply into the world. I'm no longer
looking at these individual things, force, mass and acceleration. I've integrated them together and
that allows me to look more deeply into the world.
Often, when we're stepping back and looking at our minds, our awareness processes within attention,
we're also often breaking up gestalts into features. For example, you were breaking up your experience of
your whole finger into individual sections of your finger when we were doing the experiment. You were
breaking up the whole of the cup into individual moments of contact. So very often we're all – these
two to come together. Let's call this scaling up of attention and scaling down of attention.
So first of all, let's map these onto mindfulness practices to make clear why we're doing this.
So I teach my students Vipassana, a very traditional form of meditation. Notice what the word meditation
means. It actually means moving towards the center. So we know it's going to have this aspect to it. So
what do you do? Well, typically you train people by telling them to pay attention to their breath.
Right? So first of all, what they're doing is paying attention not to the world. They're stepping
back, but they're not really paying attention to their breath. What you tell them is the following.
Again, language of explaining, not the language of training. Look at it in much more fine grain.
You tell them to pay attention to the feelings and sensations that are being generated in their abdomen
as they breathe. So as they inhale, they're feeling sensations in their abdomen and as they exhale.
And what they're doing is trying to, right, do that like I did with my finger. They're trying to
maintain and renew their interest. Constantly make it salient to themselves. Now notice what's happening.
Normally, right, our embodied sensations – I'm not happy with that word for sort of philosophically
important reasons but I don't have time to go into it right now. Right? Normally, we don't pay attention
so much to our sensations. We pay attention through our sensations to the world. Right? So normally,
I'm not paying attention to my feelings. I'm paying attention through my feelings to the cup.
In meditation, I'm stepping back and not looking through my sensations. I'm stepping back and looking
at them. Right? That's like I don't look through the way my mind is framing things. I'm looking at the framing.
I also do something else. I don't just look at it as one blob. I do something like observational
analysis. I break the gestalt up into separate experiences. I'm doing this. I'm stepping back and
looking at it and I'm breaking the gestalt of my experience up into its features, its atomic features,
if you'll allow me a metaphor that you shouldn't push too far.
That's what you do in meditation. And we'll talk about why would you do this? Why would that matter?
And importantly, our question is, why would that help cause insight?
So that's meditation. That's Vipassana, for example. I also teach my students a contemplative practice.
So the word meditation means to move towards the center. And that fits perfectly with Vipassana
and this kind of thing. Contemplation. Now it bespeaks how, how overly simplified the West is in
trying to understand this, in that these terms are now treated as synonyms. Contemplative practices,
meditative practices, it's all the same thing. Aren't these just synonyms? They're not synonyms.
And paying attention to their etymology will, will quickly reveal this. First of all, the Latin etymology.
This, look, what's in the center of this is temple. It comes from a temple, which actually comes from the
Latin word, for a part of the sky that you look up to, to see the signs from the gods. To contemplate
is to look up towards the divine. This also goes well, it's convergent with the contemplatio,
the Latin term, was a translation of this Greek word, theoria. And theoria also, originally doesn't
mean generating a theory. A theory is a species of theoria. Because what I do with theoria is I
try to see more deeply into reality. Do you see? Meditation is moving this way and contemplation
is moving that way. Meditation emphasizes scaling down, contemplation emphasizes scaling up.
And I was taught both. In fact, I was taught three things in an integrated fashion. I was taught
Vipassana, a scaling down strategy. I was taught Metta, a scaling up strategy. And you're scaling up with
your sense of identity, by the way. We'll come back to that later. And then I was taught Tai Chi Chuan.
Because Tai Chi Chuan is about moving, right? In and out. In and out. Flowing between these inner and outer
movements in a dynamic and optimizing fashion. Why teach me all these things together?
Because it's actually a system of these psychotechnologies that will optimize your cognition
for insight. Okay, so do you remember we did the nine dot problem, right? We talked about that.
Remember the fact that you can misframe things.
So let's do the nine dot problem again.
Join all nine dots with four straight lines and people find it difficult.
Why? Remember we talked about this. They automatically – listen to the words.
Remember? They automatically and unconsciously project a square there.
And then they automatically take this to be a connect the dot problem and so no non-dot
turns are possible and therefore they can't get the solution. The solution is here's four straight lines.
One, two, three, four. The reason why people find that so difficult is I have to break the square
and I have to not treat it as a typical connect the dot problem. I have to not treat it categorically,
to use language you've heard already. Because you don't do non-dot turns. Remember this.
Now notice there's two moments to having an insight. I have to break up an inappropriate frame.
What do I have to do? I have to break up the gestalt, right? And I also have to de-automatize my cognition.
I have to make it not operate unconsciously and automatically. Well, how do I do that?
How do I do that? I take stuff that's normally happening unconsciously and I have to bring it
back into consciousness. Yes? Does that make sense? How do I do that? I do that by doing a transparency
opacity shift. Normally, I'm automatically sensing through my probe. But I can shift my awareness
and become aware of my probe. I can bring things back into awareness. So you de-automatize cognition by
doing a transparency to opacity shift. So I break up the inappropriate frame and I de-automatize my
cognition by scaling down. Now interestingly enough, there is lots of work by Knoblik and other people
showing that you can improve people's ability to solve insight problems if you get them to do what's
called chunk decomposition and constraint relaxation. Chunk decomposition is just breaking up a gestalt.
That's what chunk decomposition means. Constraint relaxation is basically de-automatizing your
cognition. De-automatizing your cognition. Scaling down helps you to break up the chunks, break up the
gestalts and it helps you to de-automatize your cognition. But is that enough for insight? It's not enough.
Yes, I have to break up the inappropriate frame, but I have to make an alternative and better frame.
I have to, watch, I have to widen, widen my field of awareness. I have to take stuff that was in the
background and change its relevance. I have to look more deeply for deeper, broader patterns that I have
not considered before. What do I have to do? In order to make a new frame, I have to scale up.
And we also have lots of independent evidence, having nothing to do with mindfulness or meditation,
that one of the ways you can improve people's ability to be insightful is if they get, if they
have training or practice or are naturally disposed to being able to scale up. If people can complete
patterns in a kind of leaping that C.C. Benner and Baker talk about, right, and other people,
if we can scale up in that way, if we can take pictures that are out of focus and refocus them
mentally so we can suddenly see what the picture is, again and again and again when people can scale
up better, they're better at solving insight problems. So both make you better. But there's a problem
because both also make you worse. Because if I, if I just scale up, if I just maximize, like tightening
the string, then of course I will immediately project the square and then I'm locked.
What, well, shouldn't I just scale down? Just meditate. Always, if I just keep breaking up gestalts,
I'll never make the solution. I'll choke myself. That's what happens when people are choking.
You get, a way, like, if you're sparring with somebody, a way to get them off is to compliment them.
That was a really good, like, right hook you just threw. Because then the person will start stepping
back and looking at it and they'll get all screwed up because they'll break up the ability to generate
the gestalt. So notice what I'm saying because, stick with me because this is really sort of tricky.
This can improve your chances for insight by breaking up a bad frame.
But it can also mess up your problem solving by causing you to choke.
This can improve your ability for insight by causing you to make a better frame.
But this can also cause you to leap into an inappropriate frame and be locked in fixation.
So what should you do?
You don't want the strings too tight. You don't want the strings too loose.
And you don't want it just halfway.
Well, what do you want to do is, you want to train people in both of these skills
and then train them to flow between them.
It's called opponent processing. So they're pulling and pushing on each other.
And so they're forced to coordinate and constantly get the right degree of attentional engagement
that is most dynamically fitted to the world.
That's why the people who trained me trained me in all these things. That's why
you shouldn't equate mindfulness just with meditation. It's not.
So if you pay attention, for example, to the Eightfold Path, you'll have people be trained in
meditative practices, contemplative practices, practices in which you flow between the opposites
until you learn, like in a martial art, to get an apt and constantly adjusted fittedness,
mindfulness, attentional fittedness to the world.
Now, this leads very naturally into talking about mystical experiences and the kinds of
mystical experiences that people can have within their mindfulness practices. But before I do that,
let's gather. Notice what we've said here. We have an understanding of mindfulness.
Mindfulness. What's mindfulness doing? Mindfulness is basically teaching us how to appropriate and
train a flexibility of attentional scaling so that we can intervene effectively in how we are framing
our problems and increase the chances of insight when insight is needed.
Mindfulness. Notice that this didn't really... What... How is being present making you more insightful?
But I've given you a way of understanding, being present, that works. When I'm scaling down,
I'm actually making my mind less representational, less inferential. I'm doing all of this work to become
aware of and gain some mastery over my processes of problem framing and thereby training skills that will
make me more insightful. What happens if you were just to scale down and practice scaling down and
scaling down and scaling down and scaling down and scaling down? Well, you can actually get to one kind of
important mystical experience. So Forman calls this, and it's well attested, calls this the pure consciousness event,
the PCE. The pure consciousness event. It's a kind of mystical experience you can have after extensive
mindfulness practice. I've experienced this.
Let's do it. So right now I'm looking at the world. And the thing you're doing when you're practicing
meditation is you try and step back and look at the lens of your mind, if you'll allow me. And what happens
is it's hard to maintain because you have such deep developed habits of directing your attention back
out towards the world. And you start thinking, well, I've got to do my laundry. I've got to do this.
And then what you have to do is you have to bring your attention back again. You have to do that. You
have to recenter and step back and look at your mind rather than automatically looking through it.
And you keep practicing. And that's like that. And it's arduous. But these are like doing reps.
That's meditation. Meditation is you're building this ability
to step back and look at your mind. And then what happens is, right, remember how we went back in
layers? We went into the probe and then into our fingers and into the sensations. When I do this with
people, it's often the people who've had some mindfulness training that can step back all the
way into their sensations. That's not a coincidence. So I start, I start, now I'm looking at my mind.
Right? And then I start looking at the more subsidiary layers of my mind, the deeper layers by which I
was looking at the upper layers. And then I step back again. I step back again. So now I'm just
looking at my consciousness. And eventually I step back and I'm not even conscious of anything.
I'm not conscious of this sensation. I'm just conscious. That's why it's called the pure consciousness
event. You're not conscious of anything. You're just fully present as consciousness. You're not
aware of yourself. You're not looking through your self machinery. You're not looking through
your consciousness. You're not even looking through your mind. You're just fully conscious. The pure
consciousness event. This is the event that results from this.
What about if you were to really, real, really scale up? Well, think about things that you might
have heard associated with the Buddhist view. I see, I'm going to see everything is interconnected
and everything is flowing, impermanent. I'm going to create this overarching gestalt and the gestalt is
going to be so overarching, it's going to include and encompass me. I'm going to experience this resonant
at-one-ment. And you already know what that's like because we've already talked about it. Think about
that as just a super flow state in which I'm deeply at one with everything. Super flow state. Resonant at-one-ment.
I don't use atonement because that has a particular Christian meaning that I'm not trying to invoke
here, at-one-ment. See, this model of mindfulness explains why people get into this
kind of mystical experiences. If they do a lot of meditative practices, they will get a pure
consciousness event. If they do a lot of contemplative practices, they will develop this empathetic,
participatory, flowing, super flowing, resonant at-one-ment.
But remember, what we want ultimately is we want these two together.
There's a third state. And this is actually the state that matters. This is called the state of
non-duality. So let me try and explain to you a way in which you can at least imagine you could get
into it. It's a way I train people. Imagine that you're going to be cycling, scaling up and scaling down
with your breath. So as you inhale, you scale up. And you do that sort of resonant at-one-ment.
You're trying to, right, be at, like, flowing at-one-ment with everything. And then as you exhale,
you're doing the Vipassana. You're trying to step back as close as you can to the pure consciousness
event. And you oscillate back and forth with the breath. And you often have to do that for years.
But what can happen, and there's other ways of getting into this state. This isn't exclusive.
This is one way, the way I was taught. What can happen is you can have the third kind of mystical
experience. It's not the pure consciousness event. It's not resonant at-one-ment. It includes
both and transcends both. It's both at the same time. Your awareness is deeply to the depths of your
consciousness and deeply to the depths of reality. And it's completely at-one. It's, it's all at once.
This is a prajne state. A state of non-duality. This is one term for wisdom.
This is kind of mystical experience. Now this is the state that's actually sought for, that non-duality,
because this is the state that should lead to a comprehensive capacity for insight.
Because you're not going to have an insight about nine dots and four straight lines.
You're going to have an insight into the fundamental, the guts, the grammar of the agent-arena relationship.
You're pushing to the ground of the agent, and you're pushing out to the circumference of the arena,
and you're pushing that machinery to optimize so that you can see in as deeply integrated a fashion
as possible, that connectedness between the two. So you have the capacity for an insight,
not into this problem or that problem, but an insight into your existential modes of being.
This is how you can remember the being mode.
You can have a fundamental insight into it.
Now this is, in fact, of course, what Siddhartha experienced.
He'd been practicing vipassana and a contemplative practice called metta very deeply, very powerfully,
and it looks like one of his great innovations was to conjoin the two together.
He often talks about them. And what happened was a radical transformation.
He experienced enlightenment. We're going to talk about what that might mean.
So after his enlightenment, after his awakening, he's walking down the road
and people come up to him and his visage has changed. Think about what you,
think about when you are watching, when you see somebody and you know they're in the flow state
and they're flowing. And you can, that grace and that energy and that, the musicality of
intelligibility that's playing across their face and their gestures and their motions.
And you can't, you're, most of it you're only picking up implicitly, but you've got a sense,
what's going, oh that's so beautiful, that's so graceful, that's so much power and there's a,
there's a charismatic and, and you're just caught up in it.
So these men are approaching Siddhartha and he, he's filled with that.
And so they say to him, are you a god?
Think about what conditions have to be like where that's a reasonable thing to ask of someone.
And he answers very clearly, no, I'm not.
Are you some kind of angelic messenger or being? No, I'm not.
Are you some kind of prophet? No, I'm not.
Are you just a man? No, I'm not.
They're frustrated.
What are you then?
I am awake.
That's how he gets his title.
He moves from talking about an identity he could have
to a fundamental way of being.
I am awake.
He has fully, deeply,
the depths I've tried to indicate here,
sati, remembered the being mode in a way that isn't an insight about this or that problem,
but is a fundamental insight into what it is to be a human being.
A systematic set of insights that optimizes your entire being,
that triggers and empowers a fundamental transformative experience.
So, as a cognitive scientist,
especially one who studies the connections between Buddhism and cognitive science,
I've become very interested in these kinds of experiences that people have.
Me and I have colleagues and collaborators that are also interested in this.
Why do people pursue altered states of consciousness?
Why is the mindfulness revolution,
which is the pursuit of altered states of consciousness, so powerful?
Why are we going through the psychedelic revolution right now?
Because unlike other therapeutic pharmaceuticals,
psychedelics work exactly by bringing about an altered state of consciousness.
Why is this so powerfully important?
Why is it that we're not the only creatures,
in fact, that pursue altered states of consciousness?
It looks like the more intelligent a creature is,
the more it will pursue altered states of consciousness.
Caledonian crows will tumble down rooftops in order to make themselves dizzy,
which is a risky thing to do,
but they do it because they're enjoying the altered state of consciousness.
Why is it that these, that some of these altered states, mystical experiences,
certain types of psychedelic experiences within a therapeutic context,
we're going to talk about all of this,
can bring about and afford such powerful transformations?
What is it that's going on there?
And here's what's interesting.
Sometimes people will have a kind of altered state of consciousness that,
in my mind, it recapitulates the axial revolution.
Look, normally when you have an altered state of consciousness,
let's pick up on Siddhartha's metaphor,
awakening, wakening up.
That's in contrast to being asleep, to dreaming.
So what happens in your typical state of altered state of consciousness,
one that you experience every night?
You're dreaming.
And when you're in the dream state,
you think that that world is real.
You interact with it as if real.
But when you wake up, you go,
Ah-ha!
That was just a dream.
That wasn't real.
This is real.
Normally, when we come out of an altered state of consciousness,
we point at it, the finger of rejection,
and say,
That isn't real.
Oh, I was drunk.
That's not real.
Oh, I was high.
That's not real.
But sometimes,
people have certain kinds of experiences,
altered states of consciousness,
in which exactly the opposite occurs.
They go into that state,
and they come back,
and they say,
That was more real.
That was really real.
And this is less real.
Do you see how that's axial?
That's like, wait.
That higher, higher...
Why do we call it a higher state of consciousness?
That higher state of consciousness,
that I had access to the real world.
And when I come back, like somebody in Plato's cave,
I've come back out of the sunlight.
This, I now realize, is only echoes and shadows.
It's less real.
In fact, and because of my desire to be in contact with what's real,
I'm going to change myself and I'm going to change my world to try and recapture.
Sati. Sati.
To remember what that's like.
I want to live in greater contact with that really real.
And so they start to transform their whole lives and their whole self.
The whole agent arena relationship is completely and radically, radically revolutionarily restructured.
This is known as quantum change theory.
Bad name, bad name.
Good theory.
People do this.
This is, of course,
very important for understanding what happened to people like Siddhartha.
In fact, most of the world religions that emerge at the Axial Revolution are predicated on the idea
that there are higher states of consciousness that should empower, challenge, and encourage us
to engage in such quantum transformation.
To go through these radical transformative experiences.
It's obviously at the core of Buddhism.
You experience Satora, Satori, right?
You realize Sunyata.
It's at the core, right, of Vedanta.
When I experience moksha and release.
It's at the core of Taoism.
I, I, I realize the Tao.
So,
how is it, right, that these experiences have such authority?
But it's, it's not just that they're, they're important historically,
right, at the, they're at the core of the world religions, right?
And you, you, and you say, well, what about the Western?
Like Sufism within Islam and the Christian mystic tradition and Kabbalah,
like all of the wisdom, all of the world traditions point to these higher states of consciousness
that can bring about these radical, modal transformations in our cognition and our very being.
But it, and, and that's, that's, that's, that's important enough.
But it, like when you do surveys,
if you look at some of the work that's been done,
30 to 40 percent of the population has experienced these events.
And it's like flow across cultures, language groups, socioeconomic status, gender,
pervasive and universal. Not universal in the sense that everybody has it,
but universal in the sense that there doesn't seem to be any type, class, or order of human beings
that is not capable of experiencing it.
So both qualitatively, historically, and quantitatively, scientifically, it's like,
this is an important phenomenon.
And here's what's really important for our purposes.
There's a deep connect, remember I said before, there's a deep connection between
how often you flow and how meaningful you find your life.
That is also the, more radically the case for these states.
People who have experienced these higher states of consciousness
and undergone these quantum changes, these deep transformational experiences,
reliably import, and there's good experimental evidence to support it,
that they have had a significant increase in meaning in life.
In fact, many people report these experiences as the most significant in their life
and that a lot of the meaning of their life is hinged upon these transformations.
There are deep connections between awakening
and recovering meaning.
There are deep connections between awakening and insight.
As I've already indicated, we'll come back to see,
there's a deep continuity between this kind of insight,
mystical experience, and full-blown awakening experience.
My lab, we've just finished running with my associate, Anderson Taub,
my lab director, lab manager, Jin Sun Kim, all of my wonderful RAs.
And they'll show up in the acknowledgement.
We just have submitted a paper because we ran an experiment.
We did a massive M-Turk survey trying to see if there was a relationship between
if people have a mystical experience and how meaningful they find their lives.
And there is, in fact, a significant relationship between
mystical experience and if you have meaning in life.
We did a more fine-grained analysis and this is consonant with the work of
Samantha Heinzelman and others' experimental work showing that it's something like a capacity
for insight, making sense, which is often called coherence in the literature,
that seems to be what's doing all the heavy lifting.
So it doesn't really matter if you'll allow me so much what the content of your
mystical experience is.
In fact, very often there's no content.
They're ineffable.
But what seems to be happening is you're somehow optimizing your capacity for making sense,
both inwardly and outwardly.
It's like what's happening is some improved optimization of this,
of anagoga.
And people find that deeply meaningful.
So there is good reason to believe, I'm not, I'm not advocating Buddhism here
because I've already pointed out there are similar claims in all of the mystical traditions.
And I'm not claiming that those traditions are all identical.
I'm not Aldous Huxley.
But there seems to be some deep truths here
about the nature of attention, the nature of mindfulness,
and the enhancement of the ability to enter into
these higher states of consciousness
that can significantly alleviate existential distress
and bring about a pervasive and profound kind of optimization of our insight
and our capacity for finding our lives meaningful.
And that would be being able to do all of those things, right?
Alleviate the existential anxiety.
Create a systematic kind of insight.
A transformation of agents in arena that recovers the being mode.
Forge transformation.
I mean isn't that the core of meaning and the ability to do it?
Wouldn't that be the core of wisdom?
So what I want to do is I want to continue on and I want to explore this.
What's going on with mystical experiences?
What's going on with these higher states of consciousness?
Why are psychedelics coming back into the center of the cognitive scientific investigation?
We've got to talk about consciousness.
We've got to talk about altered states of consciousness.
We've got to talk about higher states of consciousness and transformative experience.
And what is the knowing that's going on here?
Because it's no knowing of words.
There's no words.
There's no content.
Peer consciousness event.
You're not conscious of anything.
This is, everything's the same.
It's just, there's the resonant at onement.
The flowing.
What kind of knowing is it?
That's what we're going to take a look at next time.
Thank you very much.
