Welcome again to Awakening from the Meaning Crisis. This is Episode 4. So last time we
discussed the Axial Revolution and in particular how it moved into ancient Israel. We talked about
the advent of the psychotechnology of time as cosmic history, as a narrative in which there is an open
future and in which your actions, the moral quality of your actions can determine that future, in which
you participate along with God in the creation of that future. This brings with it the idea of progress,
moral progress, the increase in justice, and this is how we move from the less real world to the more
real world for the ancient Israelites. It's understood as a journey through time and space historically.
We talked about the kind of God that the God of the Bible is, how he is in fact the God of this open
future and particularly he intervenes at moments of kairos, turning points, where he tries to bring
people back on course. We talked about the sense of faith as the sense of being on course, to be able
to sense how history is flowing and unfolding, how you are participating in that story, how you are
shaping it and being shaped by it in a tightly reciprocal manner. And that sin is the deviation
from that and what is needed is to wake us back up, to bring us back on course. And we talked about how
the prophets represented that and they represent increasingly that vision, that axial vision of the
moral redemption of history. We then turned to look at how the axial revolution was coming into ancient Greece
and in particular two figures. We're looking at the figures of Pythagoras and Socrates. Last time we talked
about Pythagoras and how he represents an exaptation of that shamanic behavior of altering your state of
consciousness entering into something like soul flight. But how for Pythagoras that had been allied with
the psychotechnology that was being emphasized in Greece, rational argumentation, the discovery of rational
patterns in the world. And Pythagoras of course is famous for discovering that music can be expressed
mathematically. He is at least associated his school with things like the Pythagorean theorem.
This idea that we can enhance our capacity to pick up on the real patterns in the world even if those are
not readily apparent to us. And by coming into a direct awareness of those patterns through our rational
insight and faculties we can transform ourselves. And Pythagoras changes the shamanic soul flight into a
release, a freedom from imprisonment in this world which he represented as being imprisoned in the body
and we fly free. And so soul flight has been turned into a radical kind of self-transcendence
in which we are liberating ourselves from the illusory world as we more and more conform
to the rational patterns that dictate the structure of reality. The other person who is going to figure
and in fact is figures even more largely in the Axial Revolution in ancient Greece is the figure of Socrates.
Socrates and Pythagoras are going to be the two most important influences on Plato and if you were to
put western civilization onto two feet, the one foot is the Bible, the other foot is the works of Plato.
So Socrates is a very unusual figure. There are as many interpretations of Socrates as there are of
people like Jesus. Even in his time there were many different Socratic movements, groups of people
who claim to be adherents and disciples of Socrates. He is an enigmatic, interesting, provocative and
maddeningly frustrating figure to try and get clear on. So I want it understood that when I'm talking
about Socrates I'm talking about a particular interpretation that I share with other people.
I think it can be well argued for but as I said whether or not this was the full historical Socrates
Socrates it's very hard to know and in some sense this isn't that relevant because it's the Socrates
I'm going to talk about that has become part of the cognitive and existential grammar of the West.
So getting into the figure of Socrates is kind of interesting. A good way to start is to see how
how provocative a person he was is to do his biography. So as many of you probably know ancient Greece
was a world in which people believed they could speak to the god through oracles.
The oracles were human or otherwise natural phenomena that represented how the gods were speaking to
humanity. One of the most important oracles is at Delphi. I've been to Delphi. If you get a chance
at some point in your life go to Delphi. It will really put the zap on your brain because the way the
landscape is organized really does have a transformative impact on sort of your consciousness and your sense
of self and your sense of place in the world. So the situation, the right, the site of Delphi is itself
very transformative. What would happen is a woman, Pythia, would sit in a cave or something similar
to it. Again, the cave. Always the caves like the association with shamanism. Remember that shamanism
is associated with cave art, ritual practices taking place in caves like in Pythagoras. So she's in a cave.
She's sitting on a tripod. There might be some intoxicating gases in there. She's eating perhaps
eucalyptus leaves. She's probably going into some kind of psychedelic trance state. That seems plausible.
And then what happens is people would, because that's, that's, that is a cross-cultural thing,
we find that people are thought to have access to the gods by being able to enter into altered states
of consciousness. So what would happen is people would come in. They would bring their questions.
They would pose questions to Pythia. She would then speak on behalf of the gods. And then after
speaking on behalf of the gods, the people around her would, there would be males who would interpret
what she had to say. So the thing about being an oracle is if you want to stay in business, you don't
want to give clear answers. Right? So if I come to an oracle and I ask a specific question, I, I don't
want to give a specific answer. I think there's a very good reason for that. I don't think that people
actually can foresee the future in any kind of supernatural manner. So typically if you go to an
oracle and say, should I marry Cassandra, you'll get an answer of something like, sometimes the spring
comes early. Or should I invest in this project? You'll get an answer like, you know, sometimes the
squirrels do not gather too many nuts. You don't know what to make of this. And it might provoke an
insight in you. It might provoke a reflection in you. And whether or not the events go one way or
the other, you can often retrospectively reinterpret them as having been consonant with the Delphic
oracle. So the oracle seems to be providing a foresightful information, but usually of course
it's not. So what happens is a bunch of Socrates' friends, he's already famous when we sort of meet
him in his biography, a bunch of Socrates' friends decide to go to the oracle and ask the oracle a
question about Socrates. So they make the trick to Delphi. And I, I, I, in my mind I sort of picture this
almost half-jokingly. They want to see what kind of crazy answer they're going to get from the oracle
about Socrates. So they go all the way up to the oracle and then they pose their question.
And the question they pose is, is there anyone wiser than Socrates?
Socrates. And what they're looking for, or perhaps not what they're looking for, what they're
expecting is some very cryptic, obscure answer. Like, you know, the snow melts farther in the south,
or some bizarre answer. And instead they get this answer. No. There's no human being wiser than Socrates.
Socrates. Crystal, clear answer. And so you can imagine how shocked they are.
So they travel back, of course, to relate this story to Socrates.
And here's, here's something telling. First of all, that's just telling in and of itself,
that the Delphic oracle would give such a clear answer. Now it's, it's, it's, it's a qualified answer.
There's no human being wiser than Socrates, right? But when they go back to Socrates, Socrates' response
is also profound, interesting. So if we're honest, if we're honest and we found out from some sacred
authority that we are very wise, most of us would be very self-congratulatory. It's like, yeah,
I knew it. And how do I know that? Because one of the most persistent biases have is that people
believe they're above average intelligence. And of course, most people must be wrong about that,
because most people have, well, average intelligence. But if you ask anybody, is your intelligence average?
They will tell you, no, I have above average intelligence. More so, of course, even for ideas
such as wisdom. But Socrates isn't self-congratulatory. He doesn't say, yep, I knew it all along.
There's the confirmation. I so want. Now that's really telling in and of itself, because to quote
a friend of mine, Leo Ferraro, we are entering the age of confirmation porn, in which people are
continuously seeking confirmation from their beliefs. And part of what's going on to the meaning crisis
and the ever-expansion of bullshit in our society is precisely because we have technologically
enhanced through social media our capacity for gratifying our bias for confirmation.
We'll talk about this later, but we all carry a terrific bias called the confirmation bias,
in which we seek information that confirms our beliefs, and we tend to avoid information that
challenges it. And part of what is going wrong right now in our culture is that through a lot of factors
that are endemic to the meaning crisis, we are accelerating and exacerbating our propensity for
falling into the confirmation bias. And I think that's what my friend Leo means by confirmation porn.
We have a kind of pornography. If we take pornography to mean the gratuitous and unmorally justified
satisfaction of a desire, then we are living in an age of confirmation porn. Socrates is a corrective
to that. Here is a great temptation. He has presented the word of the god that he is wise, wiser than anyone
else. And rather than accepting it and giving in to that confirmation bias, his immediate response is
to challenge it. Now, the challenge is tricky for Socrates. Socrates is no atheist, although he's going
to be charged with atheism when he's put on trial. But he does believe in the gods. He's going to do something
very important about the gods. He's going to transform the Greek gods into moral exemplars.
And what that means for Socrates is the gods can't lie. The gods can't lie. For Socrates, and this is one of
the ways he's going to transform the understanding of the gods and Plato along with him, the Greek gods,
as they are represented in standard Greek myths, aren't very accurate portrayals because those gods lie
and they cheat and they betray. Zeus cheats on his wife, etc. But for Socrates, and this is part of the
the Axial Revolution, the gods represent moral exemplars. They represent ways in which we can
self-transcend and morally improve. So for Socrates, it's therefore axiomatic that the gods can't lie to
him. So the gods are telling the truth. This wedding, and this is something we're going to come back to,
the way the Greeks wed divinity, divinity, I should say, to reality, that truth and sacredness are bound
up together, is going to be really pivotal. Think about how much we separate those two in our culture.
But for Socrates, they are interpenetrating. So the gods can't lie. They have to be
disclosers of the truth. But on the other hand, Socrates has significant and profound self-knowledge.
One of the things I have tattooed on my back is, know thyself. It was inscribed at the Delphic
Oracle, but Socrates makes it his personal slogan for life. There's been some recent things written
about this and I think they've largely reflected a misunderstanding of what know thyself means.
Know thyself doesn't mean become aware of your biography. I mean, we all are prey to that and
we have a culture that exacerbates that narcissism. We like to stroke the ego of our personal autobiography
and store up treasured moments that we can point to other people that indicate our uniqueness and
our specialness and why the universe should specially take care of and pay attention to us. That's not
what know thyself means. It doesn't mean that kind of stroking of your autobiographical ego.
Know thyself is much more a kind of direct participatory knowing. It means understanding how you operate.
It's not, if I were to use a literary analogy, it's not like your autobiography. It's more like your
owner's manual. It's how do you operate? What are the principles? What are the powers, perils? What are the
constraints that are operating within you? Socrates, as we'll see, thought that that kind of self-knowledge
was central. And this is the core of the Axial Revolution. The Axial Revolution is this critical
awareness and sense of responsibility of one's own cognition. So, on one hand, the gods can't
lie when they say Socrates is the wisest human being. But on the other hand, Socrates has deep
self-knowledge. He has Socratic self-knowledge in which he is convinced that he is not wise.
And he is not willing to give up on either one of those. And that's a telling thing about him.
That tells you something very central about him. He holds these two together. His existential
self-knowledge and this disclosure from reality are going, neither one of them is going to be given a
greater authority. They're going to be held together. So now Socrates faces a personal dilemma,
a dilemma that goes to the core of who and what he is. How can it be that he is the wisest human being
when he knows that he is not wise? So this is a very deep dilemma that he sets for himself. It's a kind of
profound problem that he seeks to solve. And what that means is that Socrates starts on a quest. He starts
on a quest of trying to determine how both of those things could be the case at the same time.
Now the quest seems to have evolved very naturally into a way in which he interacted with those around
him. What Socrates would do is he would go to people who claimed or were credited with being wise
and he would ask them questions. He invented, in fact, what has become known as the Socratic method,
also known as elenchus. The Socratic method is a way of asking questions in order to try and draw
somebody out. We'll talk a little bit more about elenchus in a minute, but first I want to talk about
the two types of people that we have good reason to believe Socrates was interacting and what that
can tell us about the Socratic notion of wisdom. And we're going to see how this Socratic notion of
wisdom, knowledge, and this idea of self-knowledge is deeply bound up with how meaningful your life is.
So, the two groups that Socrates, the two groups of people that were accredited
as being wise were the philosophers and the sophists. If you remember last time we talked about
Pythagoras, Pythagoras actually invents the word philosophy. It comes from two Greek words,
Phylia, Sophia. This means, right, the friendship love of wisdom. So, and Pythagoras creates a community
around him. You create a community, distributed cognition, in which you interact with other people
in order to try and pursue wisdom. A philosopher is someone who, in concert with others,
is a lover of wisdom. So, Socrates is interacting with the philosophers, and in particular, one group of
philosophers that come before him. In fact, Socrates is regarded as creating a revolution in philosophy
precisely from how he differed from the natural philosophers.
And he's also doing the Socratic method with the sophists. And you can see that this also comes from
Sophia, wisdom. It's where we get our word sophisticated from. The sophists are also people who claim to be wise.
Now, the natural philosophers are very interesting. The natural philosophers seem to represent a fundamental
change in human cognition. So, I'm going to take as an example one of the natural philosophers who is
considered to be the first example of it, Thales. Now, because these guys are just as we're coming out of
the dark age, and they predate Socrates, sometimes by a couple hundred years, right, or thereabouts,
a lot of what we have from them is very fragmentary. We don't have very much.
In fact, you can put most of Thales philosophy into three lines, into three sentences. I once taught
this to a course of mine, and one of my students went out and made a t-shirt in which they put all of
Thales philosophy on one t-shirt because that's how fragmentary it is. Let's talk about these three
fragments because they reveal something very important. One is all is the moist.
The next is the lodestone as psuche. And this is important because this word psuche, which we now
pronounce psyche, is going to be the basis of the idea of psychology as a discipline. And finally,
everything is filled with gods, which sounds very pre-axial, almost shamanic.
Now, what you have to pay attention to here is not what Thales is saying, but what he says
reveals about the kind of thinking he is creating. What does he mean by this?
All is the moist. Of course, there's controversy about all of this because it's fragmentary, it's old,
but given how other people in the ancient world, like Aristotle, followed up on this,
a plausible interpretation is everything is made out of water. Everything is made out of water.
Now, that's false. Everything isn't made out of water. It's not just scientifically false,
it's kind of metaphysically false. Everything can't be made out of water, or we wouldn't be able to
identify water on its own. But put that aside. Think about this. What surrounds ancient Greece?
Water. If you dig into the ground, what will you hit? Water. What falls from the sky? Water.
What does everything need in order to live? Water. What can take the shape of any container you put it in?
Water. See, what I'm trying to get you to see is, although Thales' idea is false, it's highly rational.
It's highly plausible. What he's doing is using his reason and his observation to come up with a plausible
explanation of what the underlying substance is behind everything. By the way, pay attention to this
word. This means stands under. Another metaphor. Right? It's related to lots of other words where we use
understanding to talk about understanding, for example. Okay. So, notice what he's doing here.
He's not doing mythology. He's not generating a narrative about some divine agent. He's not saying,
this has happened because Zeus cheated on Hera and then Hera saw it. There is no story here. There's no
mythological narrative. There's no, right, divine agents involved. That's not how he's trying to
explain or understand. Instead, he's doing a rational analysis based on observation. And he's trying to get at
the underlying stuff that everything is made out of. Do you see what I'm showing you? What Thales is
inventing, is there any other word for this? He's inventing how to think scientifically.
How, how this happens is obscure. But that's what's happening. He's inventing the kind of thinking
that we now, and I'm going to say it again, take it for granted as if it's natural. But he's inventing it.
What does this mean? The lodestone has suke. So, a lodestone is a natural form of magnet. What's
interesting about magnets is that they can move themselves and they can move other things around
them. The original meaning of this is, of course, breath or wind. But what it ultimately refers to,
and came to refer to, is, right, anything that's living in the sense that it's self-moving.
That it can move itself and it can, therefore, cause other things to move. So, I can move myself
and, therefore, I can make other things move. The magnet can move itself and it can make other
things move. I'm aware of suke within me. I see the magnet doing something similar and, therefore,
I conclude that magnet and I both share suke. He's wrong. But that doesn't matter.
This is a plausible, rational argument. Here he's trying to get at what we would now call
the underlying force behind things.
Now, please remember that, by the way, that suke originally means your capacity for
being able to move yourself and make other things move. You may ask, well, why does that become the
word for mind, psychology, mind, suke? Because the mind is that part of you which you can most move.
It is the most self-moving part of you, and it's where all of your capacity to move other things
starts. If I'm going to move this marker, my mind first moves itself, and that drives me to move the
marker. But that way of even thinking about me, so that I can start a science of the psyche,
starts with Thales. And what's this? Everything is filled with... This seems so scientific, John,
and then you're throwing this at me. The gods. Isn't that a throwback to mythology? I don't think so.
I don't think so. See, look what he's doing here.
Now, I need to introduce a term. I promise to try and keep the technicalities to a minimum,
but we need a term here, right? So ontology
is the study of being, the structure of reality. Ontological analysis
is when you use reasoning to try and get at the underlying structure of reality by getting at the
underlying stuff and the underlying forces that are at work in it.
So Thales is introducing the ontological analysis that drives the scientific revolution. What are
scientists doing? They're trying to get at the underlying stuff. They're still trying to do it,
right now. They're trying to get at the underlying forces. They're trying to see into the depths of
reality. They're engaging in ontological depth perception. This doesn't mean, right,
physical, like, this doesn't mean our normal perception into spatial depth. What I'm seeing,
what I mean here is seeing with the mind into the depths of reality. Ontological depth perception.
Now, once you get that he's discovering this way, he's discovering, he's inventing this way
of looking at the world that's going to bleed into right here, right now. Think about how powerful
that way must be. Think of the power in that vision. He gets an access to the depths of reality.
And what is he saying? That provokes awe. That provokes wonder. That gives him a sense of connecting to
what is most real. It helps him to make the most sense of things. And that's what it is to experience
something as sacred. So this is powerful stuff.
Now, Socrates was, seems to have been influenced by a particular one of these natural philosophers
called Anaxagoras, who was in Athens just before Socrates. Anaxagoras declared that the sun wasn't a god,
for example, that it was a hot rock. And he got into a lot of trouble for things like this.
Socrates seems to have enjoyed, more than enjoyed, he seems to have been impressed by
the natural philosopher's commitment to getting at the truth. But ultimately, Socrates,
he rejects this. Not because he rejects reason, rational analysis, he's going to engage in that
himself multiple times, or argumentation. His whole Socratic method, as we'll see, is all about
argumentation. What does he reject about the natural philosophers? They don't help him with his axial
project. See, the problem with the natural philosophers is they give you truth without
transformation. They give you facts, they give you knowledge, but they do not indicate how you become
wise. They do not indicate how you overcome self-deception. They do not indicate, as Socrates would say,
how to become a good person. Now it's interesting how much people say that even now, even today,
sometimes in clear ways that are helpful, sometimes in confused and mixed up ways which are unhelpful.
But the idea that our scientific worldview, while giving us all kinds of knowledge, does not in any
way train us for wisdom, does not tell us how to become wise, does not tell us how to transcend ourselves
and become better people. This is a common complaint, and we'll come back to it, about the scientific
worldview. Socrates sees it even then. So here, you have truth, but no relevance.
The truths that are discovered are not existentially relevant. They don't matter, they don't enable
the cultivation of wisdom, the transformation and transcendence of the self.
Now, Socrates interacting with the sophist, which is famous, is a lot more antagonistic.
This, this, when he talks about his relation here, it's much more the language, or the tone, at least
that's how I read it, of disappointment. He was expecting more, and he found less.
Here, and it's not clear how much this is Socrates, and how much this is Plato who's writing about
Socrates, but here the relationship is much more antagonistic.
Now, who are the sophists? Well, if you remember, we talked about when the Axial Revolution is coming
to Greece, you're getting the emergence of democracy. And in, in, in Athens, the democracy is direct
democracy. Now, before we get, uh, too far into this, we don't want to over-glamorize this.
Yes, Athens is, uh, the beginning of democracy. But let's remember, if, if I was a woman, the last
place I would want to dwell in the ancient world is ancient Athens. Ancient Athens treats its women
horribly. Just horribly. Sparta treats its women better than Athens. Democracy is only for Athenian
adult males. Women, foreigners, anybody else, even if they're Greek, they're not, right, considered to be
worthy of participation in the democratic process. And it's a direct democracy, right? Everybody files
into the assembly and votes on everything. Now, what that means is, as I've already mentioned,
your capacity for debate and argumentation is a route to power. This is why it develops so
powerfully in ancient Athens. The better you are at arguing, the better you are at persuading other
people, the more powerful and influential you will be. What happens is, a group of people invent a new
new psychotechnology. They invent rhetoric. They invent ways of picking up on how language and cognition
interact. They find standardized skills that can be practiced and developed so that you can influence
people. Increase the chance that your language will change their mind. Now, the sophists were only concerned
with teaching the skills. They basically separated the technology from any kind of moral commitment.
So, for example, a particular sophist might go in the morning to this aristocrat and help him argue for why Athens
should increase the number of ships in its navy, and in the afternoon go to this aristocrat and help him craft an
argument as to why Athens should decrease the number of ships in the navy. The sophists didn't care, which was the
case. What mattered was empowering the individual to win the argument. Now, how does this work and how
can we relate it to our lives now? So, basically, a good way to think about this is the sophists pick up
on the fact that when we are communicating, we're going to talk about this a lot later as we go on,
we are being driven by what we find salient and relevant, not just what we find true or believe to be the case.
Remember, with the nine dot problem, what stands out to us, what's relevant shapes how we see things and how we
understand them? So, let me give you a modern analog for what, how rhetoric works, a place where rhetoric
is readily apparent. Advertising. Okay? See, the point about advertisement is to make use of the way your brain
will associate things, the way your brain finds certain things salient, make things seem highly relevant to you,
in order to manipulate your behavior. Now, what's telling about this, and this is the point about
the sophists, is how much that can happen, right, in a way that is disconnected from whether or not it's true.
I mean, you watch the beer commercial, and here it is, here's really attractive people, and they all get
together, and they're all having a great time, and it's this beer, and here's the beautiful, attractive
people. Go into an actual bar. That's not like that. Okay? And you're not going to see
the kind of broken down lives, drunk people. Now, here's the thing. You know that that's not true.
You know that, like, if you, like, if you went into a bar and you actually saw something like that
happening, if when you washed your hair with shampoo you were suddenly in the shampoo commercial,
you'd worry about your sanity. You know it's not true. It doesn't matter. It makes certain stimuli
salient to you, and so you buy the beer. You buy the shampoo. This is what I mean when I say your
beliefs aren't the only thing driving you.
So this brings us to a notion I promised to come back to, and I want to use it technically.
I'm not trying to be vulgar, but this is important. This is the notion of bullshit.
And the classic work is by Harry Frankfurt on this. His essay, On Bullshit. It's 20 years old now.
Because Frankfurt is very interested in talking about the difference between somebody being
a bullshit artist and somebody being a liar. Because they aren't the same.
They can overlap. A person can be both a liar and a bullshit artist. But let's talk about pure cases.
How does the liar work? The liar depends on your commitment to the truth.
The liar tells you something. I'll use P to represent some proposition. The liar says P to you,
even though not P is the case. Because if he can convince you that P is the case, you will change your
behavior because your behavior is to some degree, significant degree, influenced by your commitment
to the truth. If you believe P is true, that will change your behavior. That's how lying works.
Lying depends on the fact that in general, people are committed to the truth because in general,
people want to be in touch with reality. That's not how bullshit works.
Lying works. See, bullshit, unlike lying, works by making you disinterested, unconcerned with whether
or not what is being said is true. When somebody's bullshitting you, they're trying to get you to not
find important or, right, central how true the claim is. Instead, they're working in terms of the rhetoric.
They're trying to capture you in terms of how catchy it is, like the advertiser.
How salient it is. How much it grabs your attention.
So, there was a famous example from this, from The Simpsons. And, you know, The Simpsons has been on
for a thousand years now. I think it's still on. So this is from a long time ago. And at the time,
it seemed so almost absurdly ridiculous funny, but it turned out to be extremely, extremely prescient.
Because the example is a political example. There are two aliens running for political office.
And they're giving a speech to Americans.
Right? And I mean no insult to Americans, but, I mean, I think we're aware of how what I'm going
to say is relevant to American politics right now. And the speech goes something like this.
One of the aliens named Kang says, my fellow Americans, when I was young, I dreamt of being a baseball.
But now, we must move forward, not backwards. Upwards. Twirling, twirling towards freedom.
And everybody cheers. Now, it's meaningless. It doesn't mean anything. But he invokes youth,
baseball, moving forward, moving upward, twirling, and freedom. And so if you're an American, you get
this rush. You get this rush. That rush is, these are all salient things. They're highly relevant to
you. You associate and identify with them. And so you're swept up. You're caught up in it.
Now, why does bullshit matter? Well, part, as I said at the beginning, part of the way people
articulate the meaning crisis is there's so much bullshit and it seems to be increasing. We are
separating relevance and salience from truth. But there's a deeper reason, and I think this is part
of why it matters to Socrates. Look, you can't, although we use this metaphor for self-deception,
it's actually not a good metaphor. You can't lie to yourself. It makes no sense. Cognitive psychologists
and philosophers have been pointing this out. You can't know, not pee, and then say to yourself,
but pee, but pee. The trouble is you know that this is not the case, and so simply stating this to
yourself doesn't do anything. You can't lie to yourself because you're in possession of the truth.
Did I just prove to you that self-deception is impossible? No, not at all. See, you can't lie to
yourself, but here's what I would argue. You can bullshit yourself. Why? Because lying has to do with
believing. I'm going to come back to this again and again. Look, believing isn't something you directly
do. Here, I'll show you. Pick a belief you would like to have. I would like to have the belief that
everybody loves me. I don't believe that, but I would like to truly have that belief.
So what should I do? I should just believe. Believe. You see televangelists doing this,
telling people believe. But you can't. You can hope that everybody loves you. You can wish that everybody
loves you. But if I say believe it, you can't do it. That's not how belief works. It's not a voluntary
action. You can't lie to yourself. See, self-deception works in a different way. You know what you can
do? You can bullshit yourself. How can you bullshit yourself? Because what you can do is direct
your attention. If I say pay attention to this finger, you can. And you can also choose to pay attention
to something. Now attention, and we'll talk about this later and how central it is, there's two sides
to attention. You can direct your attention. For example, if I say your left big toe, you're paying
attention to it and suddenly it's salient to you. When you pay attention to something, it makes it more
salient. It stands out for you. But you know what else? Attention can also be direct, not only be directed
by you to make things more salient, your attention can be caught, a sudden noise, and you turn and
you attend to it. It was salient and it captures your attention. So not only can you direct your
attention, your attention can be captured by what you find salient. And notice what this means you can
do. You can direct your attention to something and make it more salient. And because it's more salient,
it will tend to capture your attention. And because you're paying attention to it, you make it more
salient, which means it will more likely capture your attention. Do you see what's happening here?
These two things feed on each other. I pay more attention to it, it becomes more salient. It becomes
more salient, it gathers my attention. I pay more attention to it, I'm more likely to be attracted to
it. And it spins on itself in a self-organizing manner until your attention is attached to something.
It's super salient to you. It's highly relevant to you. And you lose the capacity to notice other things.
That's how you bullshit yourself. The salience and the catchiness of the stimulus has overtaken any
concern you have for whether or not it's true or represents reality. This is how you deceive yourself.
So do you see, that's why Socrates is going to be so antagonistic towards
the sophists. They are the opposite, the opposite of the axial revolution.
They are the opposite of that rational self-knowledge, the attempt to overcome self-deception.
The sophists are promoting bullshit. And when you promote bullshit, you not only promote the
deception of others, you make yourself more vulnerable to self-deception. You fall more and more prey
to self-deception.
So if the natural philosophers are truth without relevance,
the sophists and the propensity for the promotion of bullshit represent relevance disconnected from
truth. So notice here, they have the power to transform people.
But they've disconnected it from the pursuit of the truth.
These people can give us knowledge of the facts, but do not facilitate self-transformation.
What Socrates wanted is he wanted both. He wanted individuals
individuals who knew how to pay attention in such a way that what they found salient helped them
determine the truth, and that the truth that they found helped them to train their attention
to find salience. Socrates wanted something like that.
So what he would do is he would go about questioning people, maddening frustration.
So Socrates would come up to somebody and say, well, what are you doing here?
And, oh, I'm in the marketplace. Well, why are you in the marketplace?
Well, I'm purchasing something. Well, why are you purchasing something?
Well, I want to get these goods. Well, why do you want these goods?
Because they'll make me happy. And then, then Socrates starts to, oh, so you must know what happiness is.
Well, happiness is pleasure, Socrates, I guess. And these things give me pleasure.
But is it possible, Socrates would ask, to have pleasure and still find yourself in a horrible
situation that you really dislike? Well, of course, Socrates, that's possible. Oh, so then,
happiness isn't pleasure. You're being coy with me. Tell me, tell me, Socrates would say.
What is happiness? Oh, it's, you know, it's getting what's most important to you. Well, that means that
you have to have knowledge. Is it any kind of knowledge? Well, no, it's the knowledge of what's
important. What's truly important or what you only think is important? I guess what's truly important,
Socrates. Okay, so what's that knowledge of what's truly important called? I guess that would be
wisdom, Socrates. Oh, so in order to be happiness, to find happiness, you must have first cultivated wisdom.
Tell me how you cultivate wisdom and what wisdom is. And the person goes, Ah! They collapse. They get to this
point where they can't answer. They fall into a state called aporia. People compared it to being stung
by a stingray or falling under a magician's spell. You don't know what's going on.
Now, here's what, now, one, one, one thing you might say is, well, Socrates is just a skeptic. He's
trying to show people that they don't know anything because he wants to show that the gods are right,
that nobody has any wisdom, etc. That's too simple. I think something more sophisticated is going on with
Socrates, Socrates, right? Socrates is trying to get you to realize, he's like, he's like incarnating the
actual revolution. He's trying to get you to realize how much, how much each one of us,
myself included, how much we're bullshitting ourselves all the time. Why? Because we pursue
things. We find things salient to us. Their happiness, fame, it's salient to us, and we're
pursuing it. We're putting our efforts into it way before we understand it, way before we grasp the
truths of it. We are always making ourselves susceptible to bullshit because we are being
driven by powerful motivations that are salient to us that are greatly in excess of our understanding
of their truth or reality. We are always, all of us, bullshitting ourselves.
And the point about, and what that does is that provokes a reaction in people.
It goes one of two ways. People either go, ah, and they don't want to be showing that about
themselves, and they become angry at Socrates, or some people have an insight. They realize,
oh, oh, I need to transform myself. I need to find a way to keep relevance and truth tracking each other,
enabling each other. And when Socrates realized that he was having this effect on people, he had his
answer to his dilemma. He knew how it was that the gods were not lying, and he was the wisest of human
beings. His answer was the following. He knew what he did not know. And we all say, I know what I don't
know. I'm ignorant of a lot of it. No, no, no, no. He knew in a way that allows you to directly,
painfully confront your capacity for bullshitting yourself.
To really realize what you do not know is to realize, I am pursuing her, and I don't know what's
going on. I'm pursuing that, and I don't know what's going on. That's what he's talking about.
Now, many people think that Socrates just concluded that that's it. He didn't know anything. No,
that's not what Socrates is talking about. Socrates does claim to know things.
You can imagine how Socrates pisses people off.
So he's put on trial. In ancient Athens, there isn't a state that arrests you. One, one citizen
accuses another. You're brought on trial. You're put in front of 500 men. It's always men. Remember?
Very, very, very chauvinistic society. And then the accuser presents their case,
the defendant presents their case, and then the jury votes on it.
So Socrates was accused by people that he pissed off of, of atheism, which doesn't mean not believing
in gods. It just means teaching strange gods. Because as I mentioned, he was concerned to make the
gods moral exemplars. Now, when Socrates is on trial, it becomes clear that they will let him go
if he sort of agrees to stop doing this philosophy stuff that he's doing, stops pissing people off.
And then he utters something that's very famous. And this is a statement of him deeply knowing
something. He says, the unexamined life is not worth living. A life in which there is no effort
made to put these two together is a life that is not worth living, because it is a life, to use our
terms, that is awash in bullshit, that is beset by self-deception and self-destructive behavior.
So Socrates knows what makes a life meaningful. There's a kind of wisdom. Wisdom is to keep your truth
your relevance machinery and your relevance machinery tightly coupled together, so that you don't
bullshit yourselves. See, Socrates famously claimed to know ta erotica. We're going to have to
talk about this later, because it comes from erotic, and for most of us, all you hear when you hear
erotic is sexual. That's not what eros means, right? It's a much more broader term in ancient Greece.
Socrates, what Socrates means is he knows how to love well. And that doesn't mean romantic love.
What it means is Socrates knows what to care about. He knows how to keep what he cares about
with what's real. He would do things like walk into the marketplace and say, look at all the things
I don't need. He'd say, how much time did you spend on fixing your hair this morning? Oh,
about 20 minutes. How much on fixing yourself? Whoa, whoa, whoa.
Socrates knew what to find significant, what to find important. He knew how to properly care.
He also compared himself to a midwife. He knew how to take that caring and that sense of what makes
life meaningful, the cultivation of wisdom, and help people draw out, give birth to their better self.
That's why he compared himself to a midwife. This is what he knew.
Socrates knew how reason and love go together. You might find it sort of entertaining to know that
Frankfurt, who I mentioned a few minutes ago, wrote a book called Reasons for Love,
where he also puts together reason and love, things that we have been taught to keep as
antithetical to each other. For Socrates, separating them, which our culture regularly and reliably does,
is one of our greatest follies. They need to be interdependent and intertwined with each other.
We need to rationally know what we should most care about.
So Socrates is put on trial. He's found guilty. He just narrowly loses.
So then after losing,
and it looks like part of the reasons were political and part of them he's pissed off the powerful and
all kinds of things. And he associated with people that turned out to be corrupt.
But he loses by a very narrow margin. And then what happens is each side proposes a penalty.
The accusers propose death, that Socrates should be killed.
And then this tells you something about Socrates. Socrates says the following.
Practicing philosophy has cost me. I have to constantly work at it. It's very demanding.
I'm not wealthy. I'm dependent on other people. People attack me. It's been very risky.
The worst penalty could be for me to continue doing philosophy. And in order to make that even worse,
the government should give me free housing and free food for the rest of my life.
So as you can imagine, this pisses everybody off. And Socrates is found, in a much greater vote,
he's condemned to death. Now notice Socrates is so convinced that he has the right kind of know
thyself, not autobiographical, but this that I've been talking about. He knows how he works and how
to train it to transform it so that he cares well and reduces his capacity for self-deception,
that he's willing to die for it. He finds that meaning so important that he's willing to die for it.
Now he's a very interesting figure for that reason. But there's also other important things we should
know about Socrates. The shamanic is still in Socrates because he could do the following.
He could stand in one place for 24 or even 48 hours meditating on his own thoughts.
He was terrifically capable of controlling his body's physiological reactions. He could drink
a lot without getting drunk. He could go into battle in winter without any, right, shoes on his feet.
He was famously brave. And he had this divine voice. Whenever he was about to do something wrong,
he'd hear this voice that would tell him, don't do it, Socrates. So once again, you still find, right,
the shamanic has been carried into the Socratic in really important ways. We're going to talk about later
how those two are interwoven together. Now Socrates has many followers. But there's one person who was
present at the trial but wasn't present at his death when he drinks the hemlock. And you know what?
I got to sit in the spot in Athens that corresponds to where Socrates was probably imprisoned. At least
that's what they said. That person who was present at the trial and even offers to pay for Socrates' release
but is ill and not present at his death is Plato. And Plato, as I've foreshadowed, is going to take
Pythagoras and Socrates and put them together and advance even more significantly the Axial Revolution in
Ancient Greece. Thank you very much for your time.
