Welcome back to Awakening from the Meeting Crisis.
So last time we finished up our look at what was going on in Buddhism and then we moved
back to the West and we started to take a look at what was coming after the Axial Revolution
and we saw that Aristotle's disciple Alexander ushered in a period of turmoil and cultural
anxiety, a period where many people were experiencing domicile and a very wide manner, a deep and
profound sense of loss of home, not of having a house or a dwelling, but that connectedness,
that rootedness to one's culture, one's place, one's history, one's language group, one's religion,
one's community, etc. And we saw that what happens is a change in the cultivation of wisdom. Notice
again the deep connection between the cultivation of wisdom and the attempt to deal with enhancement
of meaning or the response to a meaning crisis. What happens is a change in the notion of wisdom
and that wisdom now takes on a therapeutic dimension in which the philosopher is the
physician of the soul and has to learn to cure anxiety. And then we learned how the Epicureans
responded to this, how they diagnosed the problem like a physician and prescribed a response. They
are they diagnosed the anxiety of the period of the Hellenistic domicile as being caused by an
anxiety about one's own mortality. We took a look at that and we took a look at how they responded
to that. They advocated giving up, I would argue, the quixotic attempt to achieve immortality and
instead trying to come to an acceptance, a lived acceptance of one's mortality. And they did that
by getting you to realize, by slowly getting to you to realize, getting clear about your
nebulous anxiety, that it's not about non-existence. It's not about experiencing total loss. It's about
experiencing partial loss. And then there's a remedy to experiencing partial loss, which is to
set yourself upon those things that are actually constitutive of meaningful happiness and then
realizing, deeply realizing, and structuring your lives so that you will have those up until the
moment of your death, which is philosophically informed friendship, meaningful relationships,
in which we are afforded the cultivation of wisdom and self-transcendence. Now, well,
I think mortality salience is definitely a part of the Hellenistic crisis. I don't think the
Epicureans have a comprehensive understanding. And to get a more comprehensive understanding and
diagnosis, we turn to the Stoics. But in order to understand the Stoics, we have to understand the
group that they developed out of. Those were the cynics. And the cynics were not as impressed by
Socrates' argumentation as Plato was. They were much more impressed by Socrates' capacity for
confrontation and provocatively inducing a poria and people. And they started to practice this.
And in doing so, they started to force people to realize the distinction between moral codes and
purity codes, and to thereby pay more careful attention to what they're actually setting their
hearts upon, so that their hearts would not be broken by being set on man-made, impermanent,
cultural systems and values. Zeno, a cynic, was deeply impressed by this, but he was also
impressed by Plato's argumentation. He wanted to integrate the two together. And he also had
the fundamental insight that although particular cultures and historical institutions are contingent,
being social is not. We are inherently social in the depths of our humanity. So leaving the
polis was not actually an option, according to Zeno. Instead, what we have to do is realize that our
issue isn't what we're setting our hearts upon, but how we're setting our hearts. Pay much more
attention to the process than the product. So you can see how the Stoics are even picking up on
something that's implicit in the Epicureans. The Epicureans aren't trying to change the world
and eradicate death by bringing about immortality. The Epicureans are trying to get you to reframe,
have an insight, not just an intellectual insight, but an existential insight that changes the meaning
of your mortality. And this was the core of the Stoic insight. Pay attention to how that existential
meaning is being made. Pay attention to how that process of co-identification, the way we're
assuming and assigning identities, is occurring because that's where yourself and your identity
and your agency are being forged. The problem is most of us let that process go by mindlessly,
automatically, and reactively. And so we mar this process. We make it susceptible to distortion.
And that distortion is going to be a distortion that affects the very machinery of our self,
of our being in the world. So what did the Stoics advocate that we need to do? Well,
we need to bring this process of co-identification of assuming various roles of our agency,
assuming various identities, and assigning various identities in the arena. We need to bring this
whole co-determination, co-creation of agency and arena into our awareness. So they advocated
prosaash and prokairan. And you're going to see similarities here to what we saw in Buddhism,
but also some differences. So prosaash is to pay attention. Now obviously we're always paying
attention, so that's useful, useless advice. What they meant is pay attention to how you're paying
attention. Pay attention to how you're judging. Pay attention to this process. Learn to see
there's a difference between the meaning, and why I mean here the modal meaning, the existential
mode you're in. I don't mean semantic meaning. Learn to distinguish between the meaning and the
event. Let's stop here. Let's stop here. This is the core, I would argue, of all of our current
psychotherapies that are cognitive psychotherapies. Learning to distinguish between the event and
the meaning you give the event. Because this is happening, this is like when I talked before
about your glasses, they're normally transparent, because we're almost always unconsciously framing
events. The meaning and the event are fused together. But here's the issue. They're not
identical. Events are events. The meaning is the co-identification process that is taking place
in response to the event. That could be a process of parasitic processing that's not
intrinsic to the event at all. In fact, the meaning isn't part of the event at all. And this is
important, because if you keep them fused, you will be confused. If the meaning and the event
are fused, the only way you can alter the meaning is by altering the event. The problem with that
is sometimes you can. But here's the thing. Here's the thing that the Stoics are doing. And
this is very much like what the Buddha was doing with trying to make you realize how threatened
you are. You do not have as much control as you think you do. Epictetus, one of the great
Stoic philosophers, starts his manual for living, basically his instruction manual of how to try
and live a Stoic life with saying, you know, the core of wisdom, the core of wisdom is knowing
what's in your control and what's not in your control. And stop pretending that things are in
your control that aren't. Because most of the time, we do not exercise as much control over events as
we like to believe. And we delude ourselves that we do precisely because if we lose control of the
event, we will of course lose control of the meaning, because we have fused the meaning and the
event together. We are confused. Existentially confused. How can such a confusion occur to us?
We've already talked about this. I mentioned Eric Fromm when we talked about the being and the
having mode. I mentioned at that time and we would come back to it that Fromm was directly
influenced by the Stoics. It's the Stoics who got us to realize, to use Frommian language,
the distinction between the having mode and the being mode. The having mode is met by
controlling things. And there are some things we literally have to control. Water, food, air, shelter.
But most of our most pertinent needs are not needs that are met by exercising control. They are
needs that are met by enhancing meaning. We have to become, look, the being mode is met by developing
the agent arena relationship by becoming mature, which isn't just something that happens inside of
me. Look, when I become mature, it isn't just that I'm changed inside. I also inhabit a different
arena and we recognize that socially. That's why we don't let little kids get married or
drive cars or own guns. They're not allowed to move in a certain arena. Maturity is an agent arena
relationship. It is a particular existential meaning. But if you do not know how to separate the
meaning from the events, you're liable to be very seriously, modally confused such that you
pursue maturity by trying to have a car. You pursue being in love by having sex and controlling
and manipulating. But it doesn't work because you really can't exercise as much control over the
world as you need in order to stabilize the meaning. Do you see how this is like the cynic still?
You're trying to control a world that largely is beyond your control. You're setting your hearts on
things and your heart's going to be broken. But it's not just about man. Anything can fall prey
to this. You have to practice bringing into your awareness in a way that is transformative and
developmental the distinction between events and the meaning of events and realizing this.
You often act as if you have no control over the meaning because you're ignorant of the processes
and it's transparent to you. And you focus on trying to control the event in which you often
often have much less control than you realize. This is what you should do. Pull the two apart,
the meaning and the event and recalibrate your sense of control and identity because you have
actually way more control over this than you realize or practice and you have way less control
over this than you realize or practice. That's why the court of wisdom is knowing what's in our
control versus what's not in our control. So how do you practice that? And how does your
identity change as you do? Well, the practice is prochiron. This means sort of ready to hand. It
means remembering but in the sense of sati, like mindfulness. It means remembering in a way that
brings skills and sensitivities and sensibilities to bear in an appropriate and effective manner.
It means remembering in a modally existential sense. So you practice a bunch of psychotechnologies to
try and get them so internalized that you can not know that there's a distinction. I know that I
should go outside the nine dots but I need to know how to actually separate these things.
So what do you do? Well, you engage in moment-to-moment practices. You can see this,
a book where you can see somebody doing this and the book has to be read properly because many
people misread the book. This is The Meditations by Marcus Aurelius. People read this book and they
often think the point of the book is to believe the propositions he is proposing. The book is not
written to you. It is not an attempt to create beliefs in you. Therefore, using it as creating
beliefs is mistaken. The book is written to whom? The book is written to himself. Marcus Aurelius is
practicing what Pierre Haudau called spiritual exercises. He is practicing psychotechnologies
that are attempting to bring into awareness the co-identification process and co-transform the
meaning of the world and the meaning of himself as distinct from attempting to control and manipulate
the world by accruing power and fame. This was a particularly difficult problem for Marcus Aurelius
precisely because he had power and fame. He was the emperor. Many people consider him, I do as well,
the greatest of the Roman emperors. He was the Roman Empire of the Roman Empire when it was still
in ascendance. Generally, he's considered the last great emperor of that ascendance and the
beginning of the decline is marked when his son assumes the throne. The movie, well in many ways,
a fine movie, Gladiator, does not represent Marcus Aurelius well at all. Marcus Aurelius said
something that really brings out both of these points, the challenge he faced and not getting
enmeshed in power and fame because of the way power and fame fused the meaning with the event.
He famously said this, it is possible to be happy even in a palace. And now you can think of the
Buddha leaving the palace. Marcus Aurelius, unlike the Buddha, unlike the cynics, doesn't leave the
palace. He learns how to be happy even in a palace because he does not want to shirk his moral
responsibilities. So what are some of these practices you see him engaging in? One is a
practice that Hado calls objective seeing. We're not quite happy with that term because of the
some of the associations with the word objective, but let us go on. Aurelius says,
conceive of sex as the friction of two patches of skin and the production of a sticky fluid.
You go, that's kind of like diogenes in the marketplace. It's, what's he doing there? What's
he doing and why is he doing it? He's married, he has children, so he's not a prude. In fact,
he loved his wife quite deeply. What's he doing? He's trying to get you to realize the event of
sex as distinct from all of the meaning we pour into it. The event is friction between some
patches of skin and the production of a sticky fluid. But we pour all of this into it and there's
all of this meaning. And he's not saying that meaning's wrong. That's not the point. Any more
than the being mode is good and the having mode is bad. He's not saying that. He's getting you to,
he's getting himself to realize, to enact, wait, there's a difference between the event and all
of this meaning that I'm identifying with. All of this rule, all of this rules I'm assuming,
all of the rules I'm assigning. The Syurix would recommend, get a cup that you're really attached
to, a cup you really like, start using it on a daily basis so that you really like it until it
becomes very familiar and then smash it. Because then you'll remember the distinction between the
meaning and the thing. And if you can practice it with something that ultimately isn't that much of
an event with little things, then you can learn to do it with larger things. This leads to a
practice that many people find distasteful for the Stoics. It's called pre-Meditatio.
When you're kissing your child goodnight, say to yourself, I may lose them to death tonight.
Because you have to learn to distinguish the meaning from the physics. You have tremendous
control over the meaning that you and your son are making together. You have very little control
over the physics of his mortality. Yes, you can do things to protect him and you should,
but you can't move the universe. Look, we have got to remember this better, Sati. We have entire
genres that distort and refuse together the meaning in the event. They are pervasive in our culture
and I think they're much more pernicious than we realize. The ubiquitous evil is always the most
dangerous. These are romantic comedies. Because romantic comedies teach us that the narrative
meaning we are signing to things is aligned with, consonant with, in concert with, the way the world
is unfolding. So events will conspire to bring two people together. There will be difficulties,
but the world will help them to realize until they finally end up together. Of course we have
tragedies to try and compensate that, but the romantic comedy teaches us the wrong, that's not
how it works. I'm in love with an amazing woman. I admire her as a person. I'm just so deeply
grateful to be in this relationship and it's growing and growing. And I step out into the street
and I don't notice a truck coming and it kills me. It doesn't care about my happiness. It doesn't
care about my narrative. It doesn't care about all of that meaning that I'm making with her. It's real
that we're making this meaning. It's part of our being mode, but it's not the same as the events that
I'm experiencing. See, this leads to the Stoics diagnosis. It's not mortality that makes us anxious,
it's fatality. Now, here's another instance and I would recommend Weisser's book, Beyond Fate,
where we've lost the meaning of a word because we associate that with mortality. Something that's
fatal is something that has caused death. But that's not the root of the, death is not the root
of this word. The root of this word is fate. Now, there's two meanings to this. One is some sort of
magical things are predestined by some supernatural force. I'm not talking about that meaning of
fate. I'm talking about the way things are just, are fated to happen. They're just rolling from their
own causal necessity. And here's the point. When we fuse these together, we become subject to the
fatality of all things. Everything is fatal in that the meaning and the thing are not identical.
And if we forget that, we will suffer when they come apart. Now, I can explain to you the
association. Why is this associated with death? Because death is where those come apart. Death is
where the events of the universe and all of your meaning and all of your narrative and all of your
identity radically become unglued. Death is fatal. It reveals to you in the ultimate loss of agency
that meaning and event are not identical. What's another practice that the Stoics engage in? Practice
they engaged in is called the view from above. You can see Marcus Aurelius doing it in the
meditations. He says, imagine that instead of, and think about the Solomon effect that we talked
about, moving from a first person perspective to a third person perspective. And there's all
kinds of evidence about altering your level of construal, having these very powerful effects
on your cognition and your sense of self. And so you're viewing, you're viewing some situation
and you're a mashed in it. Now view it higher up in space and time. And then higher up still in
space. So not just here, but oh, but what's situate this event, situate this event within all of
Toronto. Oh, no, situate it with an all of Canada within the whole world, within not just the whole
world now, but the whole world through all of time. What happens when you do that? Don't just say it,
try it sometime. Visualize it, imagine yourself doing it. What happens is the agent arena is
being altered. And all of this machinery is coming into your awareness. And your sense of self,
and your sense of what matters, and what's important, what things mean is being radically
transformed. You'll become more liable to pursuing more long term goals, you'll become more
flexible, you become more capable of rational reflection, self transformation. This is all
evidenced from construal level theory. See, a bunch of practices that are designed to get you
to bring into awareness this process of meaning making, and to give you the discernment to pull
apart the meaning from the event. Most therapy is about getting people to see this. Perspectival
change, perspectival knowing, and then to identify with it, change their sense of self, their sense
of control, so that they move off trying to so much change the events that they can't control as much
as they deeply desperately want to, to cognitively reframing the meaning. And again, this isn't just
semantic meaning. This is the identity, your participatory meaning, your existential mode.
And this takes tremendous practice. The last thing you'll see Marcus Aurelius doing, and even more
apictetus, is the practice of actually internalizing Socrates. Like Antisthenes talked about at the
very beginning of this whole tradition. It means trying to do with yourself what Socrates had
done with you. You can see this again in modern cognitive behavioral practices. You get people to
you get people to stop and be Socratic with themselves. So the person is depressed. I remember
I said when Antisthenes was talking about conversing with himself, he wasn't talking about the way you
ruminate. Because when we ruminate, we're running things for our head. Like everything I do is a
failure. The therapist doesn't try and console the person and says, like, well, no, go out and get
more success. He doesn't give the American commercial response. Well, go out and succeed more,
conquer the world. Good luck with that. He says, well, she says, everything you do? Everything? Was
you stating to me that that's a failure, itself a failure? Well, no, not everything. Did you get
here successfully today? Well, yes, I did. What about clothing yourself? Oh, yes. So what do you
mean by everything? I don't mean everything. What do you mean? Okay. And you realize a lot of this is
because I'm letting this go by without having my own internal Socrates that stops me and says, oh, wow,
you're making such powerful claims. You must know and understand. You see, you're bullshitting yourself
because this is very salient to you. But it's way beyond your understanding because what it's not
representing what you actually mean. This may be what you believe, but it can't be what you mean.
Everybody, everybody hates me. Everybody. So everybody's out to get you. Well, no, not most
people. Which people? Well, this person. They hate you. How do you know they hate you? Well,
they said that. Is that enough for hate? You can see Socrates here. Is that what you mean by hate?
Tell me what you mean by it. You've got all these things salient in your mind and you're running
them round and round and round. But you don't really understand the meaning.
And you're bullshitting yourself. Your motivation and your arousal is way ahead of your understanding.
And most importantly, because of that, the meaning and the event are confused together.
And again, this is not just in your beliefs. This is in your very identity.
By doing all of this, you're going to transform your capacity for interacting with the world.
You're going to not fall prey to the absurdity. And we're going to come back to absurdity again,
right? That's inflicted on you by the fatality of all things. Because if you can discern,
and this is one of the key things of wisdom, is discerning, not just in thought, but in perspective
and in identity, the difference between the meaning and the events, and properly identify
by meaning properly sensing and calibrating your sense of control,
then you will alter your sense of identity. How? And how could this possibly give an answer to
the mortality of things that the Epicureans gave a direct answer to?
Well, let's play with that a little bit. A kind of a bit of a view from above.
Let's say I gave you immortality.
You got it. What would you do with it? Well, I do all the things I'd like to do.
Okay, great. What would you do? Well, you know, add up lots of sex and eat lots of chocolate.
Okay, how long? Well, probably not very long. I'd get bored. Then what would we do? Well,
I'd pursue more meaningful things. What? Like, I've always wanted to learn archery. I'd take
up archery and then, okay, then I'd get really good at archery. Great. Then what? Well, really good
at basketball. Yeah, and then what? Really good. There's a really good story by,
well, it's a chapter in a book, the history of the world in nine of chapters by Julian Barnes,
where people go to heaven. And what they're doing in heaven is they're given what they think is
immortality. And this is one guy, he practices golf until he's getting a score of 18. Right? And
then he's sort of like, okay, what do I do now? What do I do? And then he comes to sort of Saint
Peter and he says, like, what's going on? Like, and he says, what's wrong? Aren't you doing everything
you want? I am. But like, I get great at everything. And then Saint Peter says, well, yeah, so what?
He says, well, I'm kind of done. And then Saint Peter says, ah, now you get the point of heaven.
The point of heaven isn't to live out immortality. It is to make you accept death.
Now, that's not classic Christian doctrine by any means. It's a great story. And it epitomizes
the stoic idea. As long as you are formulating your identity horizontally, in terms of a narrative,
of achieving an unending duration to your life, you're going to fail. But even if I gave it to you,
and this is what people need to stop and think about, it would fail. What you want is that moment
that that guy in heaven has. You want not a length of life, but a fullness, a depth. You want to have
lived life as fully as possible. This is why Marcus Aurelius says, you know, everybody dies,
but not everybody has lived. People quote that, and they think it's about sort of gusto or something
like this. That's not what it's meant. This is the access of fame and fortune to having mode.
There's nothing wrong with it. But this is the access of self-transcendence, the being mode.
What do you identify with? Is your identity here? Or do you identify here? And if you identify here
and you practice Pro Chiron and Pro Sosh, you can get this fullness of being. Remember, that's
what Plato promised. You could come to a complete fullness, and even if it lasts a moment, that's
enough because it's not based on duration. It's based on quality. If I can achieve that in this
moment right here, right now, then I'm done. Then I'm done.
So the Stoics have an answer. An answer that in a somewhat watered down form is still very
powerfully effective, at least in our therapeutic endeavors, which are becoming more and more central
to many people's lives because of the meaning crisis. But a less watered down version is also
existentially pertinent and relevant. We can come to realize that I can exercise much more
control over the meaning making, such that I get the one thing that is always good to have,
which is wisdom, that can afford me an identity in the depths, an ontological identity rather than
a merely historical identity. And that would be a fulfilled life. And that is actually what I want.
I'll speak personally now for a moment. I mean, at a physiological level, of course, I avoid death.
I don't step into traffic, and I'm enjoying my life. So I don't mean this in any morbid or depressive
way, but I do not want to live forever. I do not want to live forever. I do not think that John
Breveki should exist for all time. I think that would be an ontological mistake of astronomical
proportions. In some ways, I'm tired of life. I'm tired of the ways in which I've been foolish,
the ways in which I've been immoral, let myself and other people down. And I have a strong sense
of the inevitability of that. And extending that through all of eternity strikes me as a horrible
evil to inflict on reality. And one I myself do not want to bear. But have I seen glimpses of this?
Yes, I have. And we know from when people have awakening experiences that give them this,
that they lose their fear of their mortality. They lose that existential anxiety. And if that's
coupled to a fullness of being, that would be a way of responding to not only our mental health
issues, but our existential distress about our own individual mortality. So you can see with
both the Epicureans and the Stoics that we have things analogous, different, but analogous to the
kinds of things we saw at work within Buddhism. And we can see that the West is building up this
very powerful tradition in its own right. And one of the great things about Pierre Hadot's work,
and I recommend it very strongly to you, like what is ancient philosophy, or philosophy as a way of
life, is to remind us that we do not have to look to Asian history, Asian, not ancient. We do not
have to look to the East for the psychotechnologies of self-transcendence and self-transformation.
We, there's no reason not to, we should. But we should not do that because we believe there is
nothing within the Western heritage that offers us a profound response to the quest for meaning,
wisdom, self-transcendence, and a response to existential anxiety. We have those things.
And one of the things that has been happening, and I think it is a good thing, although it is
indicative of the increase of the meaning crisis in the West, is there has been a rediscovery
of stoicism, Platonism, etc. Part of what we need to do, and that's what I've been trying to do with
you, is integrate that with our current cognitive science so that once again we can learn how to,
and I mean this in a deeply, spiritually deep way, salvage from our own tradition the psychotechnologies
and practices of wisdom and meaning-making that we are going to need, but in a way that we can live
within a scientific worldview. So the Hellenistic period comes to an end with the advent of a
return to a world empire, which in very many ways is going to be informed by the axial revolution,
but in very many ways also represents a return to a pre-axial world, namely a world in which
eventually a man can be considered a god because he wields so much power, the Roman emperors,
and power and prosperity are the primary ways in which wisdom is understood. But within that
empire all of these philosophies will find home and eventually, as we noted with Marcus Aurelius,
even the emperor himself will be a proponent and an exemplar of the legacy of the axial revolution.
But something else is also happening with the advent of this empire in the Mediterranean,
and we return back now, as I promised we would, to one of the areas in which the axial revolution
had taken place, and this of course is ancient Israel, because what's happening is, of course,
Israel has now been conquered by a sequence of empires, and the most recent of course is the
Roman Empire. And I want to now speak of a religion that emerges at this time. It's not an axial
religion, but it is deeply informed by the axial legacy, particularly the ancient Israel legacy,
where the two worlds were understood, if you remember, in terms of moving from the land of
slavery to the promised land, where the real world is the future and God is this open creator,
and we're trying to sense the ath, have faith in participatory knowing of, involvement in the
course of history, and sometimes we're distorted in that and we trespass, we fall off course,
and we have to be redeemed, we have to be brought back on course by prophets who speak
God's attempt to get us back on track with making the future. This whole idea of co-creating with
God the open future, such that we can bring about a promised land for human beings.
Now there is a person, a Jewish person, who is born into that tradition and
is responsible in ways that are very hard to determine historically for a radical transformation.
And of course this is Jesus of Nazareth, and probably the most pretentious thing I'm going
to do is trying to speak about Jesus of Nazareth. I mean literally, many millions of people believe
he was God, not metaphorically, not symbolically, but literally, metaphysically. I am respectful
of this fact, I don't agree with it, at least in very standard interpretations.
My endeavor is to not try and give some final, complete version of this, that would be hubris
and arrogance on my part. My endeavor is to try and explain what Jesus, via Christianity, did to
that Israelite axial legacy, because that is what is relevant to what we are discussing here and now.
The battles, the intermeable, and I think ultimately undecidable battles, even though many
people claim to have reached the final conclusion about who Jesus was and what Jesus did,
are not something I'm going to try and resolve here. We're even going to see when we take a look
at the Gnostics that there is, right from the beginning, multiple competing interpretations
and how that has had deep historical influence. So, if you remember, we used a Greek term from
Paul Tillich, because the New Testament, the part of the Bible that talks about Jesus and the
advent of Christianity, was actually written in Greek. So, Tillich, the same Paul Tillich who
wrote The Courage to Be, talked about Kairos, about that perspectival participatory knowing,
knowing the fullness of time, knowing exactly the right time. So, some right that are going to,
the right timing to shift the course of events, what Pascal, when we come to Pascal,
we'll talk about is the spirit of finesse. You're not yet in a romantic relationship with Susan
and you kiss her, and is it the right time?
If you get the timing right, if the Kairos is right, then the course of your relationship is
altered, transformed, and your identity and her identity
changed.
Now, the Israelite conception was for the whole nation, and God would intervene
kairotically at moments in history. Christianity is going to
propose this radical idea, that God's creative logos, the word he speaks through the prophets,
that it's the same word by which he speaks things into existence, the word that helps create history.
The word that causes Kairos makes Kairos possible for us. So, logos doesn't mean just spoken words,
it means like the intelligibility, the formative principle, the underlying structure.
Christianity, it's in the Gospel of John, Anarchaean logos, in the beginning was the logos.
A passage actually probably lifted from Stoicism.
But what is John appropriating it to say? He's saying that God's capacity
for producing Kairos through logos has been identified, or to use an older term,
incarnated in a particular individual, that Jesus of Nazareth is actually the ultimate
Kairos, that all the other Kairoses were pointing to him and are summed up in him,
that he represents the ultimate turning point. And he represents it not only historically,
he represents it personally. Because he is a person, you can identify with him,
and that Kairos can come to take place in you personally. Just like Socrates personalizes
the Axial Revolution and brings it into a direct personal confrontation, the encounter with Jesus
means that you too can experience a profoundly personal Kairos, which Jesus seems to have spoken
about using a metaphor of being born again, about such a radical metanoia, a radical shifting.
This is often translated as conversion, until you read about that. But this word is much closer
to awakening. Noia means noticing. This is your perspectival awareness, and Meta means beyond.
This means a radical transformation in your salience landscape, a radical transformation
of what it's like to be you. It's this deeply perspectival and participatory transformation.
And Jesus is saying he incarnates the principle by which you can intervene in your own personal
history, or by which maybe you want to say intervention can occur in your own personal
history, such that this metanoia, you will have a new mind, a new heart, a new modal existence.
You will be born again. What's going on there? What does this Kairos look like?
What could possibly so radically transform my salience landscape, my sense of self,
my processes of co-identification? What could bring that about? And now I'm going to say the word,
and then you're going to laugh because it sounds like a Hallmark card. The Christian answer is love,
and now we all titter. That's so quaint. Love. Sounds like oh love. Okay, the problem with that,
as you've seen many times, is that this word is trivialized for us. We use one word to talk
about so many different things. Like I love peanut butter cookies. I love Canada. I love
Sarah. I love my son. I love a really good game of tennis. Are those the same?
We're even confused about this. We think that love is an emotion. No, it's not. Love is a modal
way of being. Love isn't a feeling, and it is not an emotion. How do I know this? Because loving
someone can be expressed by being sad when they're absent, being happy when they're present,
being jealous when there's somebody else around, being angry when they're neglecting you.
Love isn't a feeling. It isn't an emotion. It is a modal way of being. It is an agent arena
relationship. And what Jesus seemed to be incarnating as a kairos to change the history
of the world and to offer you to change your own personal history is a different kind of love.
This is agape. We have to distinguish between three kinds of love, eros, phylia, and agape.
See, eros is the love that seeks to be one with something, and that can be spiritual,
like being one with nature, or it can be being one with a cookie by eating it.
Of course, we come to think of eros erotically, being one with somebody by having sex with them.
But remember, Socrates knew erotica, which wasn't just sex. Socrates knew what to care about.
This is phylia. So this is the love that is satisfied through consummation.
Phylia, this is the love that seeks cooperation. This is the love in which we experience reciprocity.
We love the cookie because we can consume it. We love our friends because we are in reciprocity
with them. What kind of love is this? And this is what Jesus claimed was how God loved individuals.
This is the love that a parent has for a child. This is not the love of consummation.
You're not trying to consume the child. That's evil. And it's not friendship.
When you bring a child home from the hospital, I've done this twice, right?
That's not your friend. It's not even a person. It's basically a slug.
But here's the astonishing thing.
You love it, not because of any way you can consume it or be one with it.
You don't love it because, hey, what a great friendship. You love it, right? You love it because
by loving it, you turn a non-person into a person.
It's the closest thing to a miracle, and that sounds hackney, I know, but stop that and think about this.
You depend on agape. It's because people loved you before you were a person that you have become the
person you are. Love turns non-person animals into moral agent persons. It's like somehow,
if I could just care about my sofa enough, it would turn into a Ferrari or something.
It's that powerful.
And here's what Jesus was offering. That love can be made, it can be exacted and made available for
all. Here's what is on offer. Here's why Christianity will take the Roman Empire culturally.
With agape, Christianity can say to all of the non-persons of the Roman Empire, all the women,
all the children, all the non-male citizens, all the sick, all the poor, all the widowed,
can take all of those non-persons and say, we will turn you into persons. Persons that belong
to the Kingdom of God. We'll take another look at this in more detail next time. Thank you very
much for your time and attention.
