Welcome back to Awakening from the Meaning Crisis, so last time we took a look at how
Augustine drew all of this development, this very complex, sophisticated articulation of
the Axial Revolution, drew it all together into a nomological order that brought with
it the best of Aristotelian science, a normative order that brought with it the best of Platonic
spirituality, a narrative order that brought with it the best of the Christian process of
moving through history, and of course along the ride comes some of the best psychotherapeutic
techniques available from the ancient world. All of this was integrated together, these three
orders that articulate the space of how we're connected to ourselves, to each other and to
the world, the nomological, the normative, and the narrative. We saw, however, that while this
does address our fundamental, the fundamental axes of meaning, even as it's understood by
our best current cognitive science, this historical legacy starts to come under threat.
Initially, it comes under threat in, again, a way that doesn't seem very threatening. People are
just changing how they're using the psychotechnology of reading. They're going from a lexiodivina,
a participatory, perspectival, transformative form of recitation into a silent,
consumptive model where I'm trying to consume information and what knowledge is, is an inner
coherence between my propositions rather than a transformative conformity to the world. And that,
of course, is born out of a slowing and then a slowly at first, but an accelerating rediscovery
of the Aristotelian corpus and the best science of the ancient world. And there's the threat of how
do we incorporate this authoritative figure into the worldview that was bequeathed to us by Augustine.
And that challenge is taken up by Aquinas. And Aquinas does this, and it's hard to see how
else it could have been done by returning to the fundamental grammar of the Axial Revolution,
the two-world mythology, and reconfiguring it into two real worlds, a natural world understood
by reason and a supernatural world understood by faith, where now, and faith is now understood as
how love transforms the will and the will is primarily how I assert certain propositions
to be true. And as I mentioned, that separation while it solves the problem at the time
brings with it the threat that as the supernatural world becomes non-viable to us that we will lose
the Axial Revolution's heritage, we will separate love from reason and spirituality from science
in a particularly pernicious and dangerous fashion. I want to keep going.
And for those of you who want to pursue this in more depth, I can recommend to you the book
After God by Mark Taylor. That's a tremendous influence on my thinking, and I think it articulates
a lot of what I'm going to be talking about in a very clear and perspicacious manner.
But some things are happening. There's immediate consequences,
people picking up on Aquinas and responding to it, and we can see it in sort of two figures
deeply influenced by Aquinas, and they represent two particular lines of development that are
going to influence each other. One is Meister Eckhart, and the other is William of Occam,
which is where we get Occam's razor from, a thing that is often invoked by various skeptards
without a full understanding of what Occam meant by it. Occam certainly didn't mean it to be how
it's often used by people in a dismissive fashion. So Eckhart represents a pivotal exemplary,
maybe even a culminating figure of a group of people within Germany, and Germany is going
to be central to all of this from now on, and that is of course going to be a dangerous precedent
to set for Germany. But Eckhart represents a group that are called the Rhineland Mystics
and others who bring about a transformation in the understanding of human spirituality.
They bring about a change in the normative order. So Aquinas basically changes the
normological order. He separates it into these two worlds, and now there's a chasm between them.
There's a chasm between these worlds. Love can't lift reason up to here. Reason has no home here.
So a different meaning of spirituality now tends to be emphasized in the Rhineland Mystics.
Now they're deeply influenced by Neoplatonism. Eckhart I think is influenced in some way by
the whole Neoplatonic undercurrent within Christianity. There's of course the background
history and still there of the Gnostics. The last crusade is actually not against
the Arabs in the Middle East. It is against the Cathars in southern France, and the Cathars
are, right? They are, well I would say it, some people would argue but many people would agree with
me, the Cathars are a Gnostic revival, a huge revival of Gnosticism. So there's a huge Gnostic
revival and of course there's a Neoplatonic tradition. Eckhart picks this up and others,
the other Rhineland Mystics, and what they do is they bring about a re-understanding of the
normative order and it changes from being the Neoplatonic anagogy. It changes from being that
whole conformity, that whole ascent in self-transcendence. Self-transcendence disappears
from spirituality as does the connection between spirituality and wisdom, where wisdom is
understood as your capacity for educating yourself in self-transcendence to improve
your meaning in life. Now what happens is instead of an ascent upward, there's more,
right, God's descent downward into you.
And there's important precedence for this in the ancient world, there's the Theurgy
precedent within the ancient world, but that being said, nevertheless there's a fundamental
difference here. Aquinas had talked about love, driving the will in faith, and the Rhineland
Mystics, right, they're going to replace this ascent spirituality with a descent spirituality
and what they're going to do is they're going to say, look, what love is, it's not that love
moves the will, love is a way in which the will moves. That's an important change, okay?
It's not that love moves the will, it's that the way the will moves is love. Specifically,
when the will negates itself, that's love. So they pick up on, and that's why I emphasize it
earlier on in this series, they pick up on the sacrificial aspect of love, that the love is to
sacrifice yourself. So how is the will moving in order to be loving? Well, the will is negating
itself. You see, when my will is self-centered and it's egocentric, that of course is the opposite
of agape. I have to sacrifice this, and we talked about this, I have to sacrifice, I have to negate
my willful self-assertion in order to become a conduit for agape, or as Eckhart would say,
to make a space so that God can come to dwell within me. So the idea is that
what spirituality is about is about the will negating its own self-assertion and making a space
in which God's will is not being resisted. So here's the idea. God's will is this agopic love,
and we are resisting that, and what we need to do is we have to stop resisting,
we have to negate our own self-assertion the way we're expressing ourselves to press outward,
and we have to make a space so that God can flow in. Now what this does is it makes self-negation
and inner conflict central to spirituality. So what had been incidental and contingent
in Paul and Augustine, the fact that they have inner conflict, it becomes much more valorized
in this new spirituality. I have to be in perpetual conflict with myself, I have to be
negating this self so that eventually I empty myself. Now there are, I don't want to misrepresent,
Eckhart is one of my favorite authors, there is beautiful wisdom about how to overcome one's
attachment to one's thinking and one's self-image that are drawn from the neoplatonic heritage
and of great value in Eckhart, but nevertheless this model of spirituality being ultimately a
battle of wills, your will against itself and so it's not against God's will becomes a central
idea for what's going on in the spirituality of the time. Now that's overlapping with
a new emerging worldview. So Occam sees God's will as his primary faculty. Now some of you
may be saying, why do we have to talk all this God talk? Look, you have to understand how this
God grammar developed and how it has woven its way into the very grammar of our culture
and our cognition. Whether or not you believe in a God or not is actually quite irrelevant
to what I'm talking about right now. The fact is people have and they have so many ways of
thinking and being into your heritage. So for Occam, unlike for
Augustine and I would say the whole neoplatonic tradition, it's not God's
reason, his intelligibility that is the source of his being. For Occam it's his will
and you can see how this lines up. These two sides. Because Aquinas has made will,
the faculty of access to the supernatural, the faculty of will becomes central to spirituality
and to God here. Now what does that mean? Why does that matter? Why would he say that? Because
he sees, see again, here's the change. It's not God's agopic love that is his creativity.
God's will is the source of his ability. God speaks the world into existence. This is an
act of assertion. God asserts the world when he creates it. And you say, okay, so what? So remember
your model of God, whether or not you believe in God's irrelevant, your model of God has a
tremendous influence on how you understand yourself and reality.
God's will supersedes his reason. Now that's very, very important.
It means that God is not bound by rationality. He's not bound by how things
cohere in a rational fashion. Reason is not in any way central to God. That's why the
rational, the ascent through reason is gone. That means that any order that we find in existence
is arbitrarily imposed on it by God's will.
Right? God speaks it. It's an act of will. He's not bound by any rational principles of
organization. It is just raw power and fiat on his part.
You say, okay, so what? What does that have to do? Well, as I forewarned, your model of how
God is, is a paradigmatic model of how you understand yourself to be. Again, this is regardless
of whether or not you believe in God right now. So Akam concludes that we are like God.
We don't find an order in the, look, you look at, here's my desk, here's a book, here's a book,
here's a book, here's a book. These are all books. They all belong to the category of books,
right? That's part of what they are. They're books. And Akam says, no, they're not.
Whatever order or pattern you find in there, you're making it by how you're speaking about it.
This is called nominalism. The way God speaks and wills whatever order there is, we're making
whatever patterns we find by how we're speaking about them. They're not actually there. This isn't
really a book. There's nothing in reality that groups these together. It is only my mind
by using the term that groups them together. Now, it's automatic for me, and I can't help
but see this as a book, but the problem is there is no universal bookness. Forgive the language.
I'm speaking, and by using language, language gathers things together in the mind, forms these
patterns in the order, but all that's really out there are raw individuals. All that's really there
are raw individuals, and perhaps causal relations between them. So notice what's happening. I'm
reading, and I'm now reading inside my head. Knowledge is just how all the different signs
of language cohere together, and whatever order there is is only in here. It's in here. It's in
how I'm using the language. It's all inside the language. There's nothing out there in the world.
The world is now in a very real sense absurd. It is not in itself inherently intelligible. It's
only intelligible insofar as I speak about it, or insofar as God speaks it into existence.
Now, notice what this is doing. This is creating a radical, the supernatural world
is now not a source of reason and rational order.
Now, all of this is slowly unfolding. Spirituality is being changed.
Right? This self negation of will. The world is being changed. It's the nominal world in which
it's out there are raw individuals, and whatever pattern or order comes from how we speak about them.
While all of that is taking shape, something disastrous happens.
Shortly, overlapping, Occam is just, I think, just dead, overlapping with some of the later
Rhineland mystics, but what happens is, right, well, most people think it is, but what happens is,
right, the Black Death. We think it's the bubonic plague. Most people think it is.
And this is a disaster, right? It lays waste to a third of Europe's population.
So, in the Bible, the end of the world is predicted by the Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse,
Death, War, Pestulence, Famine. All these things start happening. There's the bubonic plague,
massive pestilence. There's famine because there's an extended wet period, and the crops are dying.
There's huge war, 100-year war, the Crusades. There's the battle against the Cathars, as I mentioned,
and what happens is the church creates the first secret police. The church creates the Holy Inquisition
to try and root out the last of the Cathars. So there's this Gnostic revival, and the Holy Inquisition
Holy Inquisition is created to find the Cathars that have escaped, to find the Heretics,
and bring them to trial. Imagine, imagine how this feels analogous to the Hellenistic domicile.
People are dying, villages are going out of existence, social order is being radically
disrupted. There's war, and then the church is not helping you, it's actually sending out people
to try and find if you're a heretic. So, first of all, people's confidence,
confidence in the worldview that they had been born into is being radically undermined.
They literally think it's the end of the world.
Most of the institutions and social structures are broken or at least put under significant strain.
Something else happens that's really important. Of course, there's a disruption in social order.
People move around, and more importantly, there's a labor shortage.
So many people die, there's a labor shortage, and because some of the order has broken down,
people are free to move around more than they were, leave the land.
It's like a bit of like the Bronze Age collapse, or the end of the Roman Empire.
People can now engage in some experimentation. What does this mean? Well, it means that there's a
labor shortage, and there's more freedom of geographical motion and social change.
People start to be able to sell their labor for more money and to even to sell their labor.
They start to be able to change their status through their own efforts.
Before, like you were locked into a quite rigid social structure, a feudal structure,
but now, because of the chaos around you, you can actually make a difference to your own life
through your own effort. Strangely enough, all of this forms a weird kind of consistency.
The world actually isn't fundamentally ordered. The order is just given by God, and it can just
be removed, and then the true chaos of things is revealed. We impose an order like God does,
and by my willpower, I can change my status. I can make myself into something different.
What's happening here is a new view in which reality is primarily being seen as a chaotic backdrop
against which a battle of wills is occurring.
God is starting to less and less be a source of rational order and more and more to be a source
of arbitrary power. Now, many historians argue, of course, some disagree, that the Black Plague
also opens up new social experimentation. People start to, as I say, sell their labor,
start to become more entrepreneurial, are willing to move around more,
and you get a rise of commercialism. Commercialism starts to ascend.
Now, commercialism is really, really powerful, right? You can make use of disparity in demand
to accrue wealth. So, I've got a lot of wool here. How much do you want from my wool? Not very
much. I've got a lot of wool, too. I'm going to go sail or travel over here. Do you have any wool?
No. What will you give me for this wool? Lots of gold. Oh, okay. Wow. I go back here. You know what
I can buy with this gold? More wool. I can go back here and I can get wealthy and look what's
happening here. I'm doing it through my own effort. It has nothing to do with the church.
It has nothing to do with the aristocracy. It has nothing to do with raising grain, farming the land.
Nothing. This is like magic.
Now, there's problems, of course, with that. One of the problems is political. The aristocracy
is in the way. And so, this emerging middle class is going to more and more challenge the
aristocracy. But also, the problem with trade, especially by sea, is your ship sinks.
So, what do you do? Well, first of all, you're going to create some new institutions.
You're going to create banks, money to lend you so you can finance such expeditions.
You're going to create insurance companies in case your ship sinks. Now, you're going to do
something really important. What you're going to do is say, look, I'm not going to take all the
individual risk. What I'm going to do is I'm going to get a bunch of friends or people together.
And like the way the church is, the body of Christ, the body, corpus, I'm going to make one body out
of all these people. I'm going to incorporate. I'm going to create a corporation. And what we're
going to do is we're going to have shares in the risk. We'll share the risk. We'll have shares in
the corporation. And when we get a profit, we will divide the profit in the end. We will have
dividends. We'll create corporations and financial institutions. And then what we'll start to do
is put pressure on the government, the state, to not just be working for the church and for the
aristocracy. One of the things the state is going to start doing is it's going to start protecting
contracts and enforcing rules on these social institutions. And you get the emergence of
corporate capitalism and the corporate state. Now that's important because it means that now
people have a place in which they can look for power, the ability to change their life,
and for norms to govern their behavior that have nothing to do with the church or the aristocracy.
Now that's very important already because what that means is people are creating
a secular alternative. Now they're not setting out to do that, but that's what they're doing.
They're creating a secular alternative, a secular source of power and wealth and prestige,
and they're beginning to secularize the state in order to safeguard those secular endeavors.
And think about it, the supernatural world is largely irrelevant to all of these secular projects.
Now this commercialism and trade also means something else really important.
I've got to get better at my psychotechnologies because I need to process information a lot better.
So what I'm going to do is I'm going to import a new psychotechnology, always the new psychotechnologies.
Look for it. What happens is people are replacing Roman numerals with the Hindu Arabic numerals.
You know these. One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, zero.
The Hindu Arabic numerals. Have you ever done calculations with Roman numerals? It's cumbersome
and long and slow and stupid. This speeds up. It empowers you. It's a psychotechnology
that makes your ability to process and calculate information way faster.
It, of course, comes through the Arab world because of increased trade, but also because
of the Crusades, etc. What also comes in is algebra, the use of letters to represent variables
rather than numbers. What comes in is this zero. And with that almost immediately,
the ability to use negative numbers because sometime when you're running your business,
you're running in a deficit. You're running in debt. Notice what's happening. You're getting a
powerful upsurge in the kind of mathematical psychotechnology that is available for people.
What else are people going to do? Well, they're going to improve their celestial navigation
because if I can sail the waters faster and better, there's less chance I will lose
all of my profits when my ship sinks. Well, how can I, well, I'm going to more carefully
observe the stars and I'm going to apply this new way of thinking, this Aristotelian, logical,
coherent, propositional way of thinking, and I'm going to use the new math and the new algebra.
So I've got this new way of thinking. I've got the new psychotechnology. I'm going to put them
together and observe the heavens way more carefully. Then something that had been known for a while
is going to become much more prominent. The heavens don't behave in this nice orderly fashion the way
Aristotle and Ptolemy said they do. For example, if you look at Mars in the heavens, right,
Mars will do this over time. It goes, it's called the retrograde of Mars. It's because of where
the Martian and Terran orbits intersect and don't. They don't intersect, but when the Earth passes
by Mars, that's what I meant. And as you get this way more careful observation, this Aristotelian
propositional inferential way of thinking, trying to get clear definitions and that's
allied to this new math, mathematical psychotechnology, people start to discover how chaotic the heavens
actually are. And of course, what they try to do is they start trying to fiddle with the system,
right? Okay, so the Earth's at the center and stuff's going around it, but on these spheres,
there's other things spinning in opposite directions and you get all these epicycles and it gets
convoluted and complex. And then Copernicus comes along and says, and this is really crucial,
what he actually, the way he actually says it, he says the math is better if you put the sun at the center.
Right? Now notice, we talked about this before. Aristarchus had said the sun could be at the
center and there was all these arguments against it. And Gal, sorry, Copernicus doesn't have any
answer to any of those arguments, but he doesn't need them now because people are committed to this
new way of thinking. They're committed to this new mathematical psychotechnology. They're committed
to this new Aristotelian way of thinking. And if it makes the math better, that's good enough.
And we all talk about this. Oh, yes, the Copernican revolution,
ha, ha, ha, ha. It'll be titter over our coffee and tea.
Look, you have to understand what this means. You have to really get it. Let's go back.
You're using this Aristotelian way of thinking, right?
Remember, what was Aristotle's Marx of how you determine if things were real?
Okay, is the relevant organ functioning? Yes.
Is the medium not distorting the information? Yes. Do other people, after rational discussion,
agree with you? Yes. Remember, we did the example. If you hear somebody, somebody says,
oh, I heard that Susan said she loved you at the party. This is how you determine if things are real.
Watch this. It's morning. We are all stone cold sober. We all have perfect 2020 vision. I don't,
but let's say we all do. We all watch the sun rise in the east, pass overhead and sink in the west.
We all agree that that's what we all see. We talk about it. We argue about it. We come to an agreement
and we're all wrong. The air is clear. We're stone cold sober. Our eyes are working perfectly.
We rationally discuss it. We all agree and we're all wrong. It's an illusion.
Now, here's the thing that should immediately occur. Put yourself back there. If that's an
illusion, what else isn't an illusion? How do you know any of this is real? Because all you
have, be honest. All you have is, oh, well, my mind and my senses are working normally.
Everything seems clear. There's no distorting fog and people agree with me. That's what they see.
That's what most of your sense of realness is based on. That's why Aristotle's view was so
powerful. And yet what Copernicus is saying is that can all be satisfied and it's still not real
because the math says it isn't real. And that all of a sudden means all of this,
all of this experience, all of it, isn't real.
Remember, we had the theory that we were in touch with the world. We're in conformity with the world.
That's gone. Now, what's happened is the following. Here's the world out here
and here's our mind and in between is this barrier experience. Your sense experience isn't
you being in touch with the world. Notice I'm using a sense term. It's not putting me in touch
with the world. It's actually availed between me and the world. The only thing that cuts through
all of this illusion is this very narrow channel of math.
Everything else is all of a sudden you are mostly out of touch with the world.
This is terrifying. It's terrifying. So you've got all this chaos going on around you and then
you've got this view that suddenly says to you, well, how do you know this isn't an illusion?
How do you know that this table is here? How do you know that your mother actually loved you?
You really have to go back. This is, we're protected. We're protected by our loss of
participatory knowing and perspectival knowing. We assert merrily in our minds the proposition,
yes, yes, the earth is not at the center, blah, blah, blah, but we don't actually translate that
existentially into what does that mean perspectively? What does that mean about your
participation in reality? Put yourself back into what it would be happening for you to just
learn this for the first time and you can see the terror. We're becoming radically disconnected
from the world. You can see the influence of Aukum here. We're trapped behind. Our experience is
now just something that we're talking about, but it's not what really is the case. Now,
Galileo comes along and says, ah, but I've got an answer to Aukum. This is what Copernicus is showing
and this is what this new scientific way where I put Aristotelian logic and I put the new math
together and I put careful observation together. What it's telling me is that the math, yes,
spoken language and sense experience, can't trust those, but the math, mathematics is the
language of the universe. He's very influenced by that old platonic view about abstract mathematical
things being what's real. Now, what Galileo does is he starts to put that new way of thinking
about math, that new way of observing, that new way of reasoning into practice. He does something
really unusual. Of course, math up until that time had been, and still primarily was, understood
via geometry. The quintessential math text is Euclid's elements. Math and geometry are pretty
much synonymous. Now, there's arithmetic and calculation and we already talked about those
new mathematical tools, but Galileo does something really, really interesting. He starts using the
geometry in a completely abstract fashion because, look, my sense experiences can't be trusted, right?
The way I'm thinking of things doesn't have to in any way look like what it's representing.
There doesn't have to be any sensual, no sensual, no experiential similarity between
my thoughts and the world. Let me show you what I mean. Here's a triangle. I'm going to use geometry,
and he's using it to represent the relationship between, you know, distance and time, and that
gives me speed. Now, there's nothing triangular about speed. He's using the geometry to represent
abstract mathematical relations. He's have nothing to do with how I'm actually experiencing the world.
There's no conformity between this and the way the world is in my experience.
So, he starts to use math in a purely abstract symbolic way.
So, he starts to observe things, like he sees a chandelier swinging in a church,
and he measures it by tracking with his pulse. He's rolling balls down incline planes.
And what comes out of all of this? Well, Galileo kills the universe,
because what Galileo realizes is inertial motion. Things don't move because there's an inner drive,
and they're trying to get where they belong. That's a purposeful narrative way of understanding
the world. Things don't move for that reason. Things move because they've been hit by a purely
random arbitrary external force, and they will continue moving like that until another random
external force. Before Galileo, everything is alive. Everything is driving, trying to get
where it belongs, to make the universe a more beautiful ordered place. After Galileo, everything
is dead. There's no inner life to matter. Nothing is moving on purpose at all. Now, that is really
important, because before Galileo, you were like everything else, because you act on purpose,
and so does everything else. When Galileo kills the universe, you're now a little island of purpose
in a vast desert of purposelessness. You're alone. You're an ontological castaway, all by yourself.
You're weird and strange, and you don't belong. And the universe is an indifferent machine.
Notice. Notice what this does. Look at this. We talk about it. Again, pay attention to the words
you're using. Oh, yes, inertial motion. What's at the heart of inertia? Inert. Inert. Dead.
Lifeless. Not capable of moving itself. And what happens is Galileo starts to understand
matter differently. In the old world, matter, old worldview, matter was the potential
for information. But now, matter goes to being that which resists. Matter resists my will. It's
defined in terms of my resistance. Why is that so important? Why do I want matter to be inert and
resisting me? Look, it's actually a beneficial thing if the world is resisting me, because
what everybody is telling me is, oh, it's all chaos out, and I'm deceiving myself. I'm creating
all these illusions. The only hope I have is if the world pushes back on me, if the world resists
my will. Everything is defined in terms of will and the resistance to will.
So now what you have is you have this lifeless universe and a battle between isolated wills,
largely creating illusions, and this vast inert willness, but nevertheless resistant machinery
of the universe. It has another function. By making matter an actual substance,
rather than the potential for information, Galileo removes there being any basis for evil.
Before, we had a cosmological explanation for evil. Evil was a whole and being, a pure,
like pure potential, pure chaos. There is no such thing now. Matter is just this resistant inert
stuff, which means we've lost something and it's telling to us. We don't really have a way,
really, of talking about evil. We don't have a metaphysics of what evil is. We think of evil
as just excessive immorality, but what is evil? Well, people used to have a very coherent and
sophisticated answer to that. Now they either say, well, ultimately there is no such thing,
or I don't know, or it's just a way of talking about great immorality.
Now Galileo gives us the scientific method. Notice how it's a legacy from the Axial Revolution.
The scientific method is a way for overcoming our willful generation of illusion and self-deception.
The whole point of the scientific method is to get the resistance of the world,
the inert, purposeless world, to resist our purposes and our will, to show us how we are
deceiving ourselves. Now that means that you're going to give huge priority to the scientific
method and to the math. So what Galileo is going to say is, look, the mathematical properties
are the real properties of the thing. The length of this, and it's mass. Anything that I can measure
mathematically about this is going to be real. It's going to be in the object, as we will come to
say. It's going to be objective. The mathematical properties are objective. Those are real.
So where are all these other properties? What about all the things I can't measure
mathematically? What about how sweet the honey is? How beautiful the sunset is?
How meaningful these words are? Where's all that meaning? Where's all that meaning?
Well, that's non-mathematical, so it's not in the world. It must be inside that mind,
remember we've developed the mind as this internal chamber that manipulates language and
propositions. Inside there, trapped inside your mind, that's where all the meaning is.
That's where all the value is. That's where all the beauty is. All of that non-mathematical stuff,
that's subjective.
It's only in the mind. You experience the illusion of it being in the world.
The world is not meaningful. The world is not purposeful. The world is not filled with beauty.
The world is not filled with truth. The world is not filled with goodness. The world is not
even filled with chairs, cups, tables, because those are not mathematical entities. Those are
all illusions created by your meaning-making mind in its willful self-deception, the way it asserts
itself on the world. Notice what's happening. The orders are breaking down.
One of the great strengths of the Aristotelian worldview was that your view of knowledge and your
view of the world mutually supported each other. The great weakness of that, of a worldview,
is as one starts to unravel, so does the other. The unraveling accelerates. As the Aristotelian
world breaks down, the Aristotelian theory of knowing breaks down. As that breaks down,
the Aristotelian model of the world. This starts to spin very fast in an accelerating fashion.
Notice where we are already. We're disconnected from the world. We're trapped inside our heads.
We've lost respectable and participatory knowing,
self-transcendence. All the meaning, all the beauty, all that that was out in the world,
that's all gone. It's all trapped inside of our heads.
All that's out there is a purposeless, inert, chaotic absurdity, and all that's here
within me is inner conflict and a battle of wills with other human beings.
It's no wonder that many people were experiencing this as a trauma.
Now here's the thing. None of us are immune to this trauma. We just don't think about it anymore.
Or what we do is we'll wake up at 3 a.m. in the morning, laying on our bed, and think these
thoughts and realize how disconnected we are from reality. How we believe in a scientific
worldview in which our meaning and purpose are self and the objects we interact with,
the tables and chairs and cars, and everything of that ilk is ultimately not real.
And all the purposes we're striving for are not real. All the meaning we're making is not real.
And then fundamentally, I'm not real. You're not real.
I mean, do you ever awake at 3 and think, I'm just a very complex pattern of atoms?
That's all that's really there. Everything else is just an illusion.
And everything that I'm doing, I'm doing for things that aren't real for a self that isn't real.
In a universe that doesn't give a damn about me, it's completely indifferent. It's not that it hates me,
it's completely inert and indifferent to me.
So, as you can imagine, this is not going to leave religion and the spiritual life untouched.
There are individuals who are going to be affected by Occam and the Rhineland mystics
and the rise of the new science and are going to try and reconfigure Christianity to deal
with this crisis that is emerging. And so, as the scientific revolution is picking up steam,
as the commercial and corporate revolutions are picking up steam, as the secularization of the
state is picking up steam, the Protestant Reformation occurs. Of course, it occurs in Germany,
because that's where everything is occurring. It's going to keep occurring.
So, what I want to investigate with you next time is the Protestant Reformation and how it
furthers the dissolution of the nomological order, the normative order, and the narrative order.
Notice how they're already all under significant stress. This new scientific worldview,
the nomological order, is one that I don't fit into. The normative order of ascent and
self-transcendence, that's gone. The narrative order of there being a story and a life and a
purpose to things, that's gone. Luther's going to come and he's going to bring about a Protestant
Reformation that is going to exacerbate this collapse of the axes of meaning and the ways
in which we are connected to ourselves, each other in the world. We'll take a look at that
next time we're together. Thank you very much for your time and attention.
