Welcome back to Awakening from the Meaning Crisis. Last time we were continuing our
exploration of sacredness and I talked about that in contrast but also in
concert with Geertz's notion of sacredness as homing against homing us
against horror. We have the proposal from Otto that sacredness puts us into
contact with the Numinous which basically exposes us to what is horrifying at
least the limits of us because it has an aspect of awe with a little bit more
which is right to remind us humiliation in the original sense of the word to
keep us to give us humility to remember that as we are feeling that sense of
expansiveness with awe that we are precisely ultimately limited creatures.
And so I propose to you that these two opponent aspects of sacredness can be
seen very readily within the light of the machinery of relevance realization where
the right the worldview attunement is a form of meta meaning and therefore meta
assimilation ultimately compression integration right things fitting
together we get an opposite which is the meta accommodation afforded by
confronting the Numinous in awe and potentially horror and we talked about how
horror is about exactly the demand the confrontation with that which demands
from us unanswerable unachievable accommodation. So I propose to you that what sacredness is is to
play with seriously play with the machinery of relevance realization as found within the
primordial aspects of religio and that doing this would be deeply advantageous to us
because it is so foundational to our agency to the world as an arena for our action to our capacities for self-
transcendence and so forth. But caught up with that when I invoked music as an example of this right was the
idea that we often do this serious play by engaging in symbolic behavior and so I'm putting the symbol here as
something that has the capacity to write can function both ways it can bring us into meta accommodation but of course it can also bring meta assimilation.
It can bridge between these two and it can go in both directions and so we were starting to unpack what the symbol is and then I propose to you to first of all
emphasize its distinction from a mere sign. A symbol doesn't just refer a symbol exemplifies it has a participatory aspect to it right from the beginning and as I've already mentioned that's going to be central to what we're talking about here because these are at the level
all right of our ultimately our participation in the agent arena transjective evolution of our relevance realization processes. So
suggested to you that at the core of a metaphor a symbol is a metaphor already we know that this has to be participatory. We'll come back to that.
And I pointed out that the metaphors we're talking about here are profound in the sense that they are pervasive in our cognition and they are highly functional.
I pointed here to the work of Lakoff and Johnson and their idea about their work in metaphors we live by and a whole bunch of other books about how much our cognition is metaphorical.
I then said there are some issues here and this goes to some critiques made by Vervecki and Kennedy and Vervecki basically saying that they have this sort of purely bottom up notion that the physical sensory motor domain is just projected up into the conceptual.
And I suggested that it's more complex than that. And we took a look at that and I suggested to you that instead of just the machinery of projection which tends to be this one way that we should think of the participatory relation as reflecting our capacity to play with exaptation. We can go sort of both ways with our exaptive machinery.
Now I try to bring all these ideas together. The notion of participatory knowing, the notion of exaptation, with this idea that what a symbol is, it's a metaphor that allows me to hold something in mind that I normally can't hold in mind. So that I can activate the machinery, the machinery that was at work in exaptation, and I can incentivize the machinery.
I can have a symbol of exaptation and I can reverse, go back through it. I can have a symbol of a scale and I could just stay there and think that. Or what I can do is I can actually try to participate, right, perspectivally. I can engage with actually balancing.
And then what I can do is reverse that process to some degree by which my capacity for balance has been exapted via some exaptive processing on my cerebellum so that I actually use it to find complex contingency relationships between any areas of my brain.
So what's been happening, in fact, in neuroscience over the last 10 or 15 years is this revolution of our understanding of the cerebellum. We used to think the cerebellum was primarily about balance and now we know that the cerebellum has all these terrific cognitive functions because what it does is it basically...
here's two areas of the brain that are often correlated together. The cerebellum picks up on trying to improve, smooth out, find the patterns of contingency and dependency between them.
And so what I can do is I can activate, if you'll allow me this way of talking, my cerebellum and that machinery which is precisely the machinery I need to practice the skill of being more just. I need the ability to coordinate, to find, to sense complex contingencies between multiple variables and make that better.
and make that better. The cerebellum is exactly the machinery I want to, right? I want to activate. I'm using activation sort of as like the reverse of exaptation. I want to activate it because that will actually allow me to participate in the processing that will allow me to cultivate the skills that will make me just...
that will then ultimately ground my conception of justice.
So this holding in mind activating process allows me to deeply participate in justice because I'm literally becoming more just.
the symbol. The symbol is affording me by making use of the exaptation machinery which is... see, this is bi-directional in a way in which the projection isn't, right? The symbol is doing that for me in a powerful way.
And you're saying, wow, this is so... really? Come on. Okay. You are much more symbolic in a participatory fashion than you might think.
Okay. Look at these. Quickly, without thinking. Which one is Buba and which one is Kiki? Which one is Buba and which one is Kiki? Overwhelmingly, and I mean because this experiment has been done by Ramachandran and others, this is Buba and this is Kiki.
I do this all the time in my class. What's going on there? Why is this Buba? And this... you've never heard these words before. They don't mean anything for it to you.
And people will say things like, well, this is sharp and spiky and so is this. And I say to them, what do you mean? How is this sharp? I can't cut myself on it. And how is this sharp and spiky?
And they're doing all this bridging and this cerebellar coordination between different sense modalities and different ways of acting. And you're doing it like that. There it is.
Now, this is playful. I'm just activating it to no purpose. But of course, I can activate this machinery to a purpose. That's what I'm doing when I'm holding up the scales.
But you have to participate in it. You have to live with the symbol. You have to internalize it. It's almost like you have to savor it.
One of the things we need to pay more attention to, I would argue, is the work of Jonathan Pajot. I mean, his work on the symbolic world is largely about trying to get us to remember the symbolic aspects of our existence.
And I mean this in a deeply respectful way. And I hope Jonathan takes it that way. To get us to savor the symbolic. And how deeply functional and active it is in us.
All right. So, symbols are participatory in this fashion that I've tried to explain to you. And then, because of that, symbols have a capacity to put us into this relationship with something.
So, here's justice. Here's the symbol. Here's me. Right? And as I've tried to argue, we've got the symbol. And what it's doing is it's actually transforming me in a powerful way.
It is reactivating, reconfiguring my machinery so that I become capable of interacting with the world so that I now start to be able to see through the symbol.
Here's the original. Remember like how you're looking through the pig at Sam. I'm looking through, which means beyond and by means of the symbol. Right? I get to see more and realize and make more justice.
So, I'm becoming, I'm activating the machinery of balance that's allowing me the perspectival awareness that's sensitizing me to the contingent relationships between variables.
It's actually helping me to cultivate the skills of justice. Right? And of course, as I start to get better contact with this, this is disclosing itself in a new way. And it discloses itself more through the processing I'm doing.
And so, what starts to happen, right, is this interesting thing that's going on. So, let me try and give you another example of this. And let's use something at the other end. Something that's not so conceptual, at least in one sense.
So, I'm meditating. And I'm following my breath in meditation. Breathing in and out, following my breath. Some of you have seen perhaps the videos I've given on the instruction on how to practice Vipassana.
Now, what's happening is normally I'm focusing on my breath. Right? And that act of focusing and following my breath is helping me to scale down. We've talked about that. Scale down my attention.
And for a long time it can stay that way. But what can happen is I can become sensitized by scaling down, because you increase your sensitivity, to how much in process my mind is.
So, I'm normally thinking of my mind as a thing. I might even think that my mind is a container that contains things. Like, here's my mind and in it is an experience of pain, for example.
But when I practice watching my breath, I start to realize that that's not actually how my mind is unfolding. My mind really isn't like a container in that sense. It's much more like my mind is a very fine-grained process.
And even something like pain isn't a thing. There's pain-ing. And it's multiple. When I'm watching my pain, for example, I've got a pain in my leg while I'm meditating.
There's all these different layers. There's all these things unfolding and happening in a complex fashion. It really isn't a noun. It's much more like a verb.
And it's really not something I possess. It's really much more something I participate in.
And so, do you see what I'm saying? The breath starts to become a participatory symbol of the impermanence of things. How much they are interconnected and flowing.
And that can then, of course, have an impact on my sense of myself, that maybe I'm much more impermanent and interconnected. And so, the breath can become, in that sense, symbolic for me.
I can start to see into impermanence, and then I can start to see into, I look through the breath into impermanence and interconnectedness, and I start to look back.
And so, of course, what's happening, now you can also train this deliberately, is in addition to scaling down, I might suddenly find myself scaling up and seeing how all of reality, including myself, is impermanent and interconnected.
So, notice what the symbol is doing for you here, right? And here I want to go back to Michael Polanyi again.
Let's take another symbol. Here's the patriot looking at the flag, right? It's a Canadian flag, perhaps.
Oh, this, this, Canadians have a weird attitude towards their patriotism. Let's make an American flag, because that's, that's more prototypical, right?
Okay, there's, so there's an American flag, okay?
It has to do with America was born out of a revolution where we sort of were birthed from, from Great Britain in a much more familial relationship.
There's nothing, that's just, there's nothing deep there. I'm just pointing out why I shifted my example.
So, Polanyi says, when you're looking at a flag, of course, you're always doing that thing he talked about.
All their subsidiary awareness is being, right, integrated together into your focal awareness.
Now, normally, what I'm intrinsic, I'm doing all of this, because what I'm interested in is what I'm focally aware of.
I'm interested, so when I'm, when I'm normal, when I, when I, when I want to drink, I'm doing all of this subsidiary integration into my focal awareness of the bottle,
because what I'm actually interested in is the bottle. I need to get the bottle in to drink, right?
But sometimes, and again, notice my language, we play with this. We look at the flag, not because we're actually intrinsically interested in using the flag in some fashion,
we're using the flag symbolically, right? I'm looking at the flag because by looking at the flag, I'm actually integrating different aspects of myself together.
So, although I'm doing this process, normally what I'm inherently interested in is the focal object, but sometimes when I'm acting symbolically,
when I'm act, although I'm focusing my attention on this, like focusing my attention on the breath, what I'm actually interested in is playing with the process.
So, by contemplating the flag, right, the patriot is bringing up all kinds of emotions and associations and, and other things,
and think about the cerebellar activity here, right, and integrating them together.
By looking through all of these, and think about a metaphor looking through, by looking through all of these things,
like I'm looking through all of these different subsidiary things onto the flag, and by doing that, I'm actually integrating all of these aspects of myself together,
and I'm becoming more patriotic. I'm actually participating in patriotism.
Now that's powerful, right? Now, put that together with what I just did. I'm looking at my breath, and I'm doing all this,
and the point about all of this is to, right, so let's change this. Now this is my breath, right?
I'm looking at my breath, but the point is to get all of, to integrate all of my processing together.
But what can happen, right, and that's one way in my, in which my breath is symbolic.
So one way in which my breath is symbolic is it gives me a focal thing that I'm aware of, I can activate all of this stuff,
and I can, you know, integrate myself onto the thing. I'm becoming somebody else.
But, as I just said a few minutes ago, but the thing is, the breath can also suddenly disclose reality to me.
The breath can also reveal an aspect of reality.
Okay, let's try and put this together. I'm going to go very carefully here.
At one stage, I'm doing this, and what I'm interested in is this. This is my inherent interest.
Although my focal awareness is here, I'm focusing precisely because I'm trying to, right, via a metaphorical process,
by looking through all of these subsidiary elements, right, I'm actually integrating them together.
I'm not actually trying to get an insight like I normally do in metaphor.
But what can happen is, right, I can actually get an insight.
This can suddenly reveal aspects of the world to me, the impermanence and interconnectedness.
And now I'm actually interested in my breath, because my breath is a symbol in another sense.
My breath is a symbol in that it allows me to see into the impermanence and interconnectedness of reality.
Notice I can, what can happen is I can resonate between these.
Okay, let's do it. I'm looking at my breath. I become more integrated.
And precisely because I'm much more integrated, my processing becomes more powerful.
And then suddenly what happens is I see something in my breath.
I get a realization. The world is disclosed to me.
And that opens me up in powerful ways.
And then, now, now I, when I refocus on the breath again, now I'm reintegrating all of that.
But then what can happen, of course, is, right, now as I reintegrate and recoordinate, again, I can more deeply see into what the reality of my breath is disclosing to me.
And I move more deeply. Do you see what I'm saying?
You get this symbolic resonance that's going on.
As I see more deeply into the object, it draws me in and then that affords much more powerful integration.
But the much more powerful integration actually coordinates my cognition much more so I can see more deeply into the reality if I'm relating to it symbolically.
Symbols are, in this sense, capable of affording an agage.
They are capable of giving you this capacity whereby I get inner optimization and then I see more deeply into the thing.
And then by seeing more deeply into the thing, I get more inner optimization and the whole process flows anagogically.
So, I'm looking at the balance.
And then I activate all of this machinery and then I look through it at the symbol and I'm looking through it at justice and coordinating all the things.
Right?
But then I start to see aspects in the balance that I hadn't seen before precisely because of how sensitized I am to the symbol.
I start to see how, right, it's actually never completely stable.
If you look at the pictures, the scales are often always off.
Balance is something, right, very much a process, not a thing.
And then that causes me to activate different aspects of myself.
This is like, you remember, when the mother-in-law has the bi-directional insight, the sensibility transcendence.
Not only seeing her daughter-in-law differently, but seeing her own seeing differently.
That trans-framing.
So, symbols have the capacity to do this.
Let's return back to something that I think is purely symbolic in the sense that I mean, which is music.
Right?
So, you're listening to the music, right?
But it's not like when you're listening to a sound and you're trying to make out what's causing that sound.
Is it a tiger?
Is it a noise in the book?
Is it a noise in the book?
You're listening to the music and although you're focusing on it, right, you're not trying to get behind it.
You're focusing on it because the way in which you're being integrated together by, right, onto the music is crucial.
But then, what happens, of course, is that aspects of the music are disclosed to you.
And you realize things.
You see things that you haven't seen before.
And that changes and alters how you can then understand and listen to the music.
And so, you get drawn in in a very powerful way.
Now, let's put this together with all of this machinery together with another aspect of the symbol that I've already hinted at.
Right?
Which is, of course, the way in which symbols are putting you into confrontation with what is potentially mysterious.
So, here's your frame, right, and here is a frame you aspire to, a more comprehensive one.
Now, you need something that can reach you inside this frame, but it can't be totally captured by this frame.
Because if it's captured by this frame, you'll stay in this frame.
It has to insinuate itself into this, but change stuff such that you are capable, it actually drives you to expanding your frame.
So, it has to both activate you, but draw you beyond yourself to a state of, like,
I'm trying not to use some technical terms here.
What a symbol has to do, right, is it has to reach into your worldview, but remember what the Gnostics were talking about here.
Remember how you're existentially entrapped.
You want to be in another worldview.
You want to find that worldview viable.
You need something that can come into this worldview, but won't be stable within it.
It has to be transgressive.
It has to shake things up and then, right, put you into all of this machinery, all of this machinery that we've been talking about,
but in a way that is making you move to and become capable of dwelling within that more expansive worldview.
In this sense, symbols are deeply ecstatic.
We get our word ecstasy from this, but what this literally means is a symbol helps you to stand beyond yourself.
So even, let's go back to the example, right?
I'm trying to use as many examples as possible.
I've got the scales.
I'm activating balance.
That allows me to start doing the skills.
That gets me some sense of justice.
I start to see...
I start to be able to see justice and realize justice in the world that I couldn't before because of my sensibility change,
my skill acquisition, my sensibility transcendence, and that starts to make me more just.
And then what's happening is I'm...
my world is being opened up and I've been...
in a coordinated fashion, I've been transformed to fit that expanding world.
And this is, of course, why symbols often are associated with wonder and awe, etc.
So, symbols are ecstatic in that fashion.
As I've tried to show you throughout this, they're participatory.
And I've tried to show you how they're integrative, not just in a simple part-whole, but in the anagogic sense.
Sensibility transcendence.
They're integrating you together, integrating...
Right?
They're...
Oh, language slows you down so much.
They're integrating you together, they're integrating a new world together, and they're integrating that new world together as they're integrating you together in an integrated fashion.
So, when a Christian sees the cross, of course, first of all, the cross is...
Right?
It's tapping into that exemptive machinery.
It's taking all this perceptual machinery and it's playing with it.
The vertical and the horizontal.
That's being exempted.
And all of that machinery that we normally look through is being exempted and it's being used, and then we're looking into there.
And if we're receptive, and of course, the question is why some people are and why some people aren't.
Right?
But if we're receptive, then that interaction starts to affect us.
We start to become a different kind of person as we're integrated in our attention on the cross.
But that, of course, starts to also disclose to us aspects of reality that we normally might not be able to hold in mind, like suffering.
Like the relationship between eternity and time.
And those go from being ideas to things that we are confronting, engaging with.
And they can draw us in.
Which then, of course, integrates me more powerfully while disclosing a world.
And if I'm willing to play the serious play with the symbol, I will start to be transformed in a coupled fashion to my world such that perhaps Christianity becomes viable for me, for example.
This is how symbols work.
So they're integrated in the anagogic sense.
This is, of course, if you remember why people do things like jeep form.
Finally, symbols are complex.
And we have to remember, I'm using the scales to stand for justice, but justice isn't a single thing.
And even when I talk about the breath and it's relating, it's showing me impermanence and interconnectedness.
Those aren't single static things.
They're complex unfolding realities.
So symbols often are multifaceted.
You'll get Athena.
She's the symbol of wisdom.
But she's also the symbol of, you know, weaving.
She's the symbol of warfare.
All these different areas are actually being drawn together.
Because the symbol is also the potential for radically reconfiguring the shape of your salient landscape, connecting things that you normally do not connect together, such that you might have an insight into reality.
Notice how the symbol is trying to do all of this.
Because it's trying to set you in motion.
It's trying to get you to do this.
And in that sense, if you'll forgive the little bit of playfulness, it's epic.
It's trying to draw you into something epic.
It's trying to afford a way in which you can radically open up your world in metaccommodation, triggering it, participating in it, confronting it, but also trigger your best machinery for being able to draw it into, relate it to, right?
Who and what you are.
So that you can become capable of dwelling within that expanded world.
So meta-accommodation and meta-assimilation are both at work within the symbol.
So symbols are inherently transjective because they are between two worlds.
The world you're in, the framing you're in, and the world you're trying to move to, the world you aspire to.
They are transgressive in all the ways I've tried to suggest to you.
Now, how does all of that machinery relate to sacredness?
Well, I've already shown you how it can be bound up with awe and horror and wonder.
But let's try and make this a little bit more precise.
I'm going to propose something to you.
I'm going to propose that we can use this term, as I have been throughout this series, differently.
We don't mean, I'm going to use mythos rather than myth to keep that distinction.
By mythos, I mean something that's always deeply connected to ritual.
Where ritual, and I've already argued this, doesn't mean some neurotic routine that I engage in.
Ritual means inactive analogy, inactive anagage.
It means the processes by which I try to activate the machinery of transformation.
Okay, so when I'm saying mythos, don't just hear patterns of representation, hear patterns of interaction.
These are deeply enmeshed together.
And then what we have, of course, are symbols in the way that I'm describing.
And these symbols are always going to be enmeshed with story.
Because you have to bring in the perspectival, participatory knowing.
And we've talked a bunch about how important narrative is for participatory and perspectival knowing.
And, of course, the story connects to the ritual.
Because if it's storied, you can enact it.
Okay, so this is what I mean by mythos.
This is what I mean by mythos.
When we have a mythos that is about religio such that we can activate religio and seriously play with it in order to enhance it, enhance its capacities for meta-assimilation, meta-accommodation, that's sacredness.
That's sacredness.
That's sacredness.
Of course, we can invoke, we can make use of mythos, right, for other things.
For other patterns that we care about.
We can, of course, our religio is always at work just in our day-to-day interactions with the world.
But when we want to activate, accentuate, articulate religio itself, we rely on mythos to do that.
Because our relationship to religio is one that can only be born symbolically because of the primordial participatory nature of religio.
Of course, at the core of religio, as I've argued, is relevance realization.
And one of the things we know, because of the phenomena of insight and the phenomena of flow, is one of the things that relevance realization is intrinsically interested in is itself.
Relevance realization, because it is a self-organizing, self-transcending, self-correcting process.
Remember, in insight you are correcting for a misleading salience pattern, given an incorrect problem formulation.
Relevance realization is intrinsically set up to be interested in itself.
This is part of its structural design.
If your relevance realization machinery is not directed toward being interested in itself, it's ultimately not a self-organizing, self-correcting, self-developing process.
Which would mean it would cease to be relevance realization.
It is constitutively necessary of relevance realization that it finds itself inherently interesting.
So, we can find the process...
Okay, so this is just deeply valuable to us, because it's constitutive of our being, our being in the world.
Right?
We can use this mythos to activate, articulate, accentuate, celebrate religio.
And, of course, we find that a deeply interesting thing to do, because we... relevance realization is set up by its evolutionary heritage to be intrinsically interested in itself.
And so we are going to find all of this deeply valuable, deeply meaningful.
This is the machinery of meaning-making, and then we're using mythos to celebrate it and trigger the fact that relevance realization is constituted to finding itself interesting.
So, what we have is, I think, a way of talking about a lot of the aspects of sacredness.
We get the experience of sacredness out of the deep machinery of religio, and when we're using the centrally important machinery of mythos to activate it, accentuate it, articulate it, celebrate it.
And that, in itself, is developmentally important to us, but serious play is the way in which we go through development, but we also find that process intrinsically interesting, like an insight or the flow state, precisely because relevance realization is constituted to reflectively be interested in itself as a process.
Now, the question is, yes, okay, maybe all of that's right.
Maybe what I'm doing in sacredness is using mythos in order to celebrate and appreciate and accentuate religio.
And I'm going to find that and I'm going to find that valuable because religio is inherently valuable to me and relevance realization is inherently interested in itself.
I get all of that.
And I get why this can be so deeply transformative of people and why it can open up their world and open up themselves in this way that feels like making love with reality.
But still, still, you're not getting the essence of sacredness.
Because the essence of sacredness is in the sacred.
And the sacred, right, takes us back to the metaphysical proposal.
The metaphysical proposal is the proposal that what ultimately generates the experience of sacredness is something that is, right, a final...
Hmm, that might be misleading.
Something that has an absolute value because it has a particular metaphysical status.
Namely, it is supernatural.
It is above nature.
And its aboveness means that it is always inherently valuable to us and therefore we will find it sacred because of its absolute value.
Now, this carries with it a particular way of understanding the process of meaning making.
It's to claim that ultimately, I think, that's what people are claiming, that this...
There are things...
Maybe that's the wrong word.
I don't...
Language is...
I'll use this word as mutually as I can.
There are things that are always of relevance to us.
What I'm suggesting to you is that this is the claim that there is an essence.
To relevance.
That there is a final formula for being relevant.
And that that essence inheres in some particular thing, object.
And so, if I come into the relationship with that object, the relevance...
The essence of relevance is inhering in it and I will therefore find that object sacred.
I'm trying to be respectful here but I think this is ultimately a mistake.
The reason why I think it's a mistake is because there is no essence to relevance.
There isn't...
There isn't even a thing.
There is only the ongoing process of relevance realization.
Right?
There is nothing other than itself that is intrinsically interesting to relevance realization.
And the relevance realization isn't even absolutely interesting to relevance realization because, of course, your salience machinery can actually lead you to kill yourself.
You may even find your own existence is no longer relevant or salient to you.
So, again, to say it's intrinsic, even that is not to say that it's absolute.
The notion of sacredness here seems to me to be a category mistake.
It seems to me to be saying that there is something, someone, some place, that essentially, absolutely, always, is relevant.
But that is to misunderstand the nature of relevance.
It's to confuse the products of relevance realization with the process of relevance realization.
And that, of course, is a hallmark of one of the ways in which we make mistakes.
We get fixated on the products of our cognition and not paying attention to the process.
Let's go back to the Gnostics.
Remember that one of the things that their contemporary apostolic Christians criticized them for is that they were constantly inventing new myths.
In this sense of mythos.
Because they saw the relationship to sacredness as an evolving one.
A deeply transgressive one.
A one that was supposed to always be launching you into a trajectory of transframing.
Might this suggest another way of understanding sacredness?
That I think would be respectful to a lot of the texts considered sacred without committing us to or needing the supernatural as a category.
Or maybe it's going to mean an ultimate, not, that's, oh wow, that's so arrogant, sorry.
That's not what I want to say.
Maybe it means a significant, yes, transformation of what we've ever meant by this term supernatural.
I don't know.
There's an inexhaustibleness in this whole process.
There's a sense in which reality can continue to disclose itself to me.
It's inexhaustible.
That's ultimately, I think, because of the reality that reality is itself combinatorially explosive.
There's an inexhaustibleness to the process of relevance realization.
Not in the sense that I'm infinite.
That's ridiculous.
But in the sense that the process is constantly evolving.
It is constituted by its evolution.
It is not something other than its evolution.
What if sacredness is not about finding the completion, the essence, the stabilized final form?
What if sacredness is actually an experience of the inexhaustibleness of reality and the inexhaustibleness of the relevance realization machinery in its coupled response to that reality?
What does that look like more concretely?
This is an example of where you could see these two concretely distinguishing from each other.
For me, Plato is sacred.
That doesn't mean that I think Plato has some absolute or supernatural value, that he has an unquestionable authority.
Plato is... or that my understanding of Plato should be stabilized or finished or complete, right?
Instead, what happens is exactly the opposite.
I read some Plato and I understand some Plato.
I get some insight and that has an impact on me.
And that does all of this to me.
And then I go out in the world and that understanding in a perspectival and participatory way transforms me.
And I engage and I become and the world discloses in a certain way.
And after that process, I return to Plato.
And then I can see in Plato what I did not see before.
I can realize things I did not see before.
And those realizations reach deeply into me again.
And then again there's that engagement.
There's that transformation.
And then I go out in the world.
Do you see how I'm doing the anagogic thing, right?
I go out in the world and the world is disclosed to me in ways I hadn't seen before.
And then I go through transformation.
I become something different.
The world becomes different at the level of co-identification.
Agent and arena are being opened up.
And then I go back and when I read Plato I see something again that I didn't see before.
And that has happened to me throughout my life.
There isn't some final form there.
I'm meaning this very carefully.
This is like Gnostic.
Not in the sense of the two world mythology or something like that.
There's Gnosis here.
I am constantly, right, finding Plato to be a fount, an inexhaustible fount of insight transformation.
An inexhaustible source of transframing of my world and who I am.
That's ongoing.
That's filled with a kind of developmental wonder for me.
I don't think Plato is supernatural.
I don't think Plato is absolute.
I don't think Plato has the final account.
I don't think Plato can give me a final definition of what is relevant.
But nevertheless, again and again and again, I get into symbolic resonance with the text.
I see through it.
And then the world reaches back through it to me.
I mean, even Nietzsche has this.
Right?
If you stare long enough into the abyss, it begins to stare back through you.
He has a kind of sacredness around that.
But it's of course open-ended.
It's deeply symbolic.
Read also Sprach Zarathustra.
But as I said, I think it's bound up with a problematic grammar of simply inverting Christianity.
I don't want to invert Christianity.
That's not what I'm proposing to you at all.
I'm trying to suggest to you that the idea I've proposed to you about what sacredness is
can be connected to an alternative proposal of what the sacred is.
The sacred is the transjective relationship between the combinatorially explosive nature of reality.
The reality is ultimately a no-thingness.
That ultimately it is not a thing that you can frame.
Reality will always transcend your framing.
That's what combinatorial explosion says.
And this is, right, linked to the no-thingness of yourself.
The I that can never be captured.
The framing that can never be captured in the frame.
The ongoing, never-ending, not in you particularly, but as a process.
Right?
It doesn't come to a completion is what I meant by never-ending.
The process of relevance realization.
There's a deep non-logical identity, a deep symbolic resonance between these two.
I think it's what a lot of the mystics were talking about.
This is a deep participatory identification.
The inexhaustibleness of reality and the inexhaustibleness of relevance realization are deeply, deeply coupled at the primordial levels of religio.
This is the sacred as this.
The inexhaustible that powers the experience of sacredness.
In a deeply, profoundly participatory fashion.
Thank you very much for your time and attention.
