Welcome back to Awakening from the Meaning Crisis. So last time I was making a proposal to
you of how we could address the perennial problems and I gave you a systematic set of things that could
be cultivated in an integrated fashion for addressing perennial problems and then we saw
how that interacts with our attempts to ameliorate and alleviate the perennial problems interact with
the historical forces and that we get the fundamental undermining of meaning in life
and that problem set by Wolf and then I proposed to you that there was a response to that in terms
of the notion of agape and then I moved into the direct addressing of the historical forces looking
about for a recovery of something like what the three orders did for us and then I proposed to
you that if we took a look at 4E cognitive science third generation cog sci and in particular some of
the insights afforded from that by sorry insights afforded by 4E cognitive science third generation
cog sci and that were pointed out by Varela in his article we can see a ways in which we can get a
a worldview that strongly situates our meaning making processes within it legitimates it we talked
about how we can recover something like the nomological order and the normative order and how
perhaps we can move to something post narrative an open-ended optimization that is seeking for a depth of
realization rather than a historical combination and I propose to you bringing with it that the notion
that good enough bringing with that whole project of responding to the historical forces and trying to
bring with it a new notion from Goodenough's work on transcendence into rather than transcendence above or beyond
and how that is resonant and consonant with the picture that we've been working on together a couple things remain that are central one of course is to give an account cognitive scientific account of wisdom because of the wisdom framing that is needed for
and the use of interpretation of grasping the significance of the cognitive scientific framework so we need to develop an account of wisdom together and I also said we need to talk about this notion of
a religion that's not a religion that's not a religion and what might that look like so I want to address the second point first because I have less to say about it not because it's not important I have less to say about it because it's very tentative and I want to try and talk about it and ultimately a suggestive fashion
I'm not trying to found a movement or anything ridiculous or pretentious like that there are many people though who are writing books about this idea I recommend to you John Karst's book the religious case against belief which I've already recommended there's Unger's book on future religion there's books like religion for
atheists in which people are atheists in which people are I think and I mean this in a serious sense but they're trying to play with what does what would this might look like a religion that's not a religion and how can it help us to address it even people like Richard Dawkins are trying to propose you know that we should get cultivate an ability ultimately poetic ability to engender wonder and awe that is consonant with the scientific worldview
So a lot of people are trying to get some conceptual vocabulary and theoretical grammar going for this so I do not see myself as offering anything definitive or authoritative but on the basis of what we have done together I'd like to try and offer some suggestions of what this would look like so remember why are we setting this problem well we we for many of us
right and the group that I self identify as the nones having no religion nevertheless a large majority of those people are still spiritually hungry in important ways returning to organized religion is not a viable option and part of that has to do with a lot of the history that we've traced out and pursuing pseudo-religious political ideologies and utopic vision
is also not viable precisely because of the trauma of the 20th century and parts of the 21st century and the clash of the pseudo-religious ideologies and the way they drenched the world with blood and torture and horror and so I propose to you that nevertheless we need to do something like what religion used to do we need a we need a comprehensive set of
of psychotechnologies of psychotechnologies that are set of psychotechnologies that are set within communities of practices that allow for the comprehensive transformations of consciousness cognition character and culture in a way that is analogous to religion that is what we're looking for something they can do all of that because that is what we need that kind of transformation
is needed today to address what Thomas Bjorkman calls the meta crisis of all the various crises that we are facing and that are interacting with each other in what looks to be an increasingly accelerating fashion and having an increasingly deleterious effect on us individually and collectively so that is part of the problem
the religion that is the religion that is the religion that is not a religion
again as I said there are many people who are taking a stab at this or trying to get a grip on this and so I am just seeing myself as contributing to hopefully hopefully to that help hopefully helpfully to that dialogue
So part of it I think is and this is of course what I tried to do is to acknowledge the centrality of religio
and that there is an important role for indispensable mythos in the activation, accentuation, acceleration, appreciation of religio and so I think that is something that should be
acknowledged as what we would be looking for and this brings out an important contrast I want to discuss so I am not equal, religio versus credo. So let's talk about this a little bit and try and get clearer about it because we have this idea of an open ended mythos analogous to the transgressive mythology of the Gnostics.
So credo of course means I believe and it's the word behind things like the Nicene Creed or the Apostolic Creed. A notion of credo is a notion of sort of a paradigmatic set of propositions that state what the essence of a religion is in terms of the
truth content of the truth content that is supposed to be believed. And so what has happened to some degree in various ways and I tried to show you this is as this of course is linked to propositional knowing and as propositional knowing has come into ascendance, right, and as the having mode has come into ascendance,
Alters of propositions, right, and all of opositions of propositions and of course willful assertions.
In any Närian selectionHmm then blood has come under ascension and this has come into ascension, this has tended to become dominant. So I have mentioned we often think about religions or speak of them as if they are belief systems, systems of belief
right, this has tended to become dominant. So as I've mentioned, we often think about religions
or speak of them as if they are belief systems, systems of beliefs, right? And so you have
propositional knowing, you have the having of those propositions, and the way you have them
is ultimately to assert them in some fashion. Usually in a willful fashion, where I mean that
very broadly in the way that we've discussed here, where it is not something that is ultimately
derived from reason, but it is something that is being asserted nevertheless. Now, I think
there's an important role for credo. And so I want to make a distinction between credo
and this credo, right, assertion, credo dominance, okay? So let's talk about this set of things,
this credo dominance, right? But let's talk about perhaps a way of understanding the functionality
of this, okay? Now, first of all, I'm of course aware of the postmodern critique, and I will
have a final, towards the final end of the series, I'll come back and talk about postmodernism.
But I'm aware of the postmodern critique and that a lot of this is, and that makes sense given
credo dominance, that this is enmeshed with power, with dominance, with control, with creating
sort of purity codes where we have boundaries of identity of the us and the other. All of
that I think is a legitimate form of argument and something I take seriously. But I would put
that under credo dominance and I would want to try and take out of what remains, what function
can we see for people doing this and how might we understand it? Well, first of all, like I said,
we can think of people having paradigmatic statements and pictures that this might be a function of
indispensability to them, right? So they can understand it, right? We can understand it as indispensable mythos.
Again, it's highly plausible that there is a mythos for you or for groups of people that is
indispensable given the contextual sensitivity, the dynamic coupling of religio, that there's a set of
symbols and stories and celebrations and shows and souvenirs and all the things associated with mythos, right?
That are indispensable for getting the kind of sacredness out of religio that people want and need in response to, for example,
the perennial problems. So, again, this of course is part of the philosophical reason, not just there's also an
independent moral reason, but this is part of my philosophical reason why I try to be deeply respectful to
religious creeds, precisely because even though I think all of these criticisms or all the criticisms associated with this,
criticisms that I've added to in this series, I think they're all legitimate. I think this is also a very
legitimate thing. Now, of course, the problem is to confuse indispensability with metaphysical necessity and to confuse need with authority. And we've talked about all of that.
What I think we can think this is not only an indispensability that's idiosyncratic to people or the group, we can also talk about an indispensable functionality that might be more universal in nature. And this has to do with a basic
idea from all of information processing, what's called signal detection theory. So, signal detection theory is a theory that basically argues that we're always facing perennial problems when, and I mean that to allude to the perennial problems that I've talked about here.
Whenever we're doing information processing, there's aspects in which the information is, and this is no contradiction, there's simultaneously too much information, but there's often inadequate information, like you're not seeing all of my body right now.
So, the information is simultaneously overwhelming and partial. The information is often ambiguous. It's unclear if that information is the information you need or you're being misled in some way by information that's similar but not in the relevant way to the information you're looking for.
So, all of these things point to an important general conclusion. Now, I'm going to have to use two terms here. I'm going to use the word signal and this means information I want. Information I want or need. And then noise. Noise does not mean audible distortion. Audible distortion is one kind of it. What this means is this means information I do not want.
Right? It's in some way distracting, right? It's in some way misleading, etc. So, here's the idea. Here's the population of events that constitute signal that you're looking for. And the idea is there's always a significant overlap with noise. Again, where noise doesn't mean audible distortion.
It means any information that you don't want that it can be confused with. Look at confused with. It can be confused with signal. So, let's take a prototypical example. Right? A prototypical example is this. You're a gazelle and you hear a noise in the bush.
Now, that could be an important signal. It could be information that you want because it's information telling you that a leopard is near. Or the noise in the bush could be noise in this technical sense. It could just be the rustling of the leaves caused by the wind.
That's by the wind. And that is, and this is the important term here. That's irrelevant to you. That's irrelevant to you. That might be signal for somebody else or something else. But for you as the gazelle, it's irrelevant. See, being signal and noise, of course, is a matter of relevance realization.
So, you're sort of caught here. Right? Because if you're the gazelle, what you're experiencing is this. This zone right here. Right? This zone of overlap between the signal and the noise. You don't know what it is.
Now, what you can say is, well, what I'll do is I'll get more information. And there's a sense in which that helps. But you have to also understand that there's a diminishing return here.
Because any new information that I try to get to resolve this will also suffer from this problem. Right? And this, of course, goes again towards you can't ultimately get certainty, etc., etc.
Also, the more I regress and try to get signal about my signal, about my signal, about my signal, the more time I'm taking. And often, time is an important constraint.
So, first of all, you can't ever escape this problem. And as you try to reduce it, you have to put in a lot of time and effort that can ultimately be too costly for you.
So, the idea is there's a sense in which every act, even an act of perception, is to some degree risky. It's a gamble. And this is part, again, and we talked about this, Tim Lillicraft, Blake Richards, and I in the paper on relevance realization.
This is part, again, of the issue of, you know, trading off between various contingencies. What's the tradeoff here? Well, the tradeoff is I have to, what's called, I have to set the criterion.
So, the criterion is basically, what I do is I put a dividing line, a decision line. Remember, decide ultimately means to cut. And I'm going to include everything, right, to the left as signal and exclude everything to the right.
Now, what's the problem with that? Well, the problem with that is, of course, I'm now opening myself up to different kinds of errors. Okay. So, one of the things I can do here is, if I set my criterion too high, for example, I will include a lot, I will treat a lot of noise as signal.
Okay. If I set my criterion way down here, I don't want to ever be wrong. I'm going to set my criterion really low, right? Like here. Right? I'm going to set my, that way I'll never, the problem is if I set my criterion so I exclude all possible noise, I'm going to miss a lot of valuable signal.
Okay. The other issue that comes up, so where do you set the criterion? Well, I mean, there isn't an algorithm for that. Because part of the problem is those different kinds of errors are differentially relevant to you depending on the context. Let's go back to the gazelle.
Now, you have two gazelles. You have Bill the happy gazelle. And what Bill wants to do is basically, right, wants to avoid leopards. Right? So Bill says, well, I'm going to set my criterion very high. Because that way, most of the time, I'm going to treat the noise as a leopard.
In the bush. And that way, my chances of missing a leopard are very small. Now, the problem with Bill is, he's kind of, you know, he runs away a lot. There's every wind and he runs away and all the other gazelles laugh at Bill. Look at Bill. He's running around again. And if Bill does this too much, of course, it's exhausting. Right? Now, in contrast to Bill the gazelle, there is, you know, a
You know, let's call it Tom. And Tom is the, you know, the really epistemically oriented gazelle. Tom will only act on the basis of what Tom truly believes. And so Tom is going to be very skeptical and set their criterion very low. And Tom says, I'm only going to believe what I'm really confident in and certain of. Right? And that way, you know, this is what's going to happen.
So what happens for Tom is, all the instances where the wind is blowing and Bill runs away, Tom laughs at Bill. Aha! Aha! Silly Bill. The problem is, Tom is missing signal by setting his criterion so low. And one of these times, there's a noise in the bush, Bill runs, Tom begins to laugh. And as he's mid-laugh, there is a
leopard on his back sinking its jaws in a death grip on his neck. Because you see, in this context, not in all contexts, not in all contexts, but in this context, missing signal is much worse than mistaking noise for signal.
See, there's two kinds of errors. I can miss signal. I can mistake noise for signal. When I do this, right, that's Bill, everybody laughs at me. That's a cost, and I'm using a lot of energy. But if I miss, right, if I miss the leopard, I'm dead. And that's much, much worse.
So that's why most gazelles are like Bill rather than like Tom. They set the criterion way over here. They're willing to make a lot of mistakes so that they do not make very many misses. Now, there's other situations where you, right, where it will be reversed, where a mistake is much more costly to you than a miss.
Then a miss. And so what you need, right, what you need is you need to be flexibly setting your criterion in a way that is deeply contextually sensitive, deeply situationally aware.
This is, again, why perspectival knowing is so crucial. Perspectival knowing is your situational awareness, and your situational awareness should be, right, your primary guide to what is the context and how do I set the criterion in this context.
In fact, there's a neuroscientist. In fact, there's a neuroscientist, cognitive scientist, Lau, who argues that one of the functions of consciousness is exactly to set the criterion for perception. So what you're paying attention to, right, is how you're situationally aware, and so how you're paying attention, how you're situationally aware, how you're setting the criterion, is actually
actually the job of consciousness. Now, as you may realize, myself and Richard Wu and Anderson Todd argued, this again is another argument that one of the main functions of consciousness is to do relevance realization within perspectival knowing. Yet another converging argument. Now, the point about this is two things, and both of them have to be remembered. What does this have to do with credo? Well,
what does this have to do with credo? Well, I would argue that what credo is, is credo is setting the criterion on religio. What it's trying to do is determine what behaviors, what things are putting me really into contact with religio, and then what is malfunctional, what is mad, etc.
Now, the issue is we have to set the criterion. That's inescapable. And one way to do this is to do it in an absolutist way. One way to do this is to say there is a final way, a final place, an absolute place to set the criterion.
I can think, I think you can see from the argument given here, why that is a perilous thing to do. You can see again why the open-endedness of relevance realization undermines the attempt to absolutely set the criterion. So you have to set the criterion, but it is dangerous to set the criterion in an absolute fashion.
So if we can acknowledge this, we can acknowledge that we will set the criterion with our mythos, but, and that's one half of credo, but we should not ever try to set the criterion in an absolute or final manner, which is what happens in credo dominance,
which is what happens in the fact that we have to set the criterion.
The point is not to set the criterion conclusively. The point is to continually reset the criterion optimally. Again, open-ended relevance realization, rather than a final solution.
So, a way of thinking about that is the religion of not, that's not a religion, would always, always have credo in the service of religio. Now, I'm sure that there are many religious people that say, well, that is what we do in practice. And, you know, we have our creeds, but they're constantly being historically interpreted. Right? And I think that's sort of right in the
practice, but there's often been a lot of conflict between de facto and de jure in the history of the religious discussions around orthodoxy and creed, etc. And I point to you again to the work of Arthur Vers Lewis and his work on the way in which the West's history of pursuing and persecuting heretics, people who, right, do
not set the criterion as we do, has actually helped to foreshadow and train the West for totalitarian regimes and totalitarian ideologies. So, I point you again to his historical argument for how that came about. So, for that reason, we should always be thinking of making credo clearly
and comprehensively always in the service of religio. That would be helped, as you can, I think, see, by being linked to a notion of sacredness as being grounded in an inexhaustible, open-ended optimization, rather than in some absolute
state of perfection. Next, I think that the religion that's not a religion should, when it's crafting its mythos and understanding that credo is always in the service of religio, it should always understand the mythos as being beholden to sort of the three levels that we've been talking about.
Next, I think that the religion that's not a religion should, when it's crafting its mythos and understanding that credo is always in the service of religio, it should always understand the mythos as being beholden to sort of the three levels that we've been talking about here.
So, you have the unconscious level, right? This is the level at which relevance realization is taking place. Most of the relevance realization that's going on for me, I do not have introspective access to in any way. And this, of course, is the grounding of my participatory knowing.
Of course, you can become conscious of your participation, but that's not what I'm saying here. I'm saying that the processes by which, from which I emerge as an autobiographical ego and the world emerges as an unfolding arena, right, are ultimately below the level of consciousness and that's where the participatory knowing is happening.
And then, of course, there is the level of consciousness. And then, of course, there is the level of consciousness. And this is the level of salient landscaping.
And, of course, this is the level of perspectival knowing. The perspectival knowing is grounded in the participatory. And the perspectival knowing with the situational awareness that I've just talked about, of course, makes possible the procedural knowing.
These are tightly intermeshed as well. This is where I am consciously directing my interactions in order to appropriate affordances given to me at this level. And I'm appropriating those affordances by cultivating skills so that my coping turns into skillful interaction.
My coping and caring becomes skillful action and apt sensibility. And then, of course, this passes into the cultural level. This is the level of distributed cognition.
And this is the level at which we are trying to communicate. So this is the level at which connections are being made. This is the level at which connections are being sensed and internalized. And then, this is the level at which connections are being shared.
And so, what we have here, of course, is the whole machinery of mythos and, of course, the machinery of science and other things such as that. But I'm going to, although that's at the cultural level, I'm taking it out because what I want to concentrate on here is addressing this.
addressing this. So, as I said, this will pick up on our propositional knowing. But, of course, the mythos also points down towards, right, all of these.
Because here we have credo in the service of religio.
And so, any mythos is going to understand itself this way, if I put it horizontally, as always in the service of religio, which means it is always going to also be directed, if you'll allow me, downwards, right, to the procedural knowing, the perspectival knowing, and the participatory knowing.
So, it should be a mythos that is explicitly committed to both of those in an integrated fashion. That the credo, the paradigmatic propositions, the paradigmatic pictures, right, are always in the service of religio, and that the mythos, therefore, is directed towards
to be directed towards accessing, activating, accentuating, right, appreciating the procedural knowing, the perspectival knowing, the participatory knowing.
So, it should be, given, given the argument, ah, this is very tentative here. What it should be doing, is once you, you've got, you've got this, ah, this is very tentative here.
So, what it should be doing, what it should be doing, is once you, you've got, you've got this, ah, programmatic framework in mind, then what it should be doing, is cultivating an ecology, right, of psychotechnologies.
An ecology that it is designed to be both top-down, it reaches from the propositional down to the participatory, but also is open to and allows bottom-up emergence from the participatory up through the perspectival, through the procedural, and into the propositional.
So, I've tried to indicate to you what that ecology should look like. You should be setting up psychotechnologies, sets of practices and cognitive styles, that have complementary relationships to each other, that have, ah, sets of corresponding checks and balances, strengths and weaknesses, so that you have a dynamical system that is reliably complexifying,
in a reliably self-correcting manner. Which means we need to do something very important.
And this is an idea that emerged in a discussion with Jordan Hall, and he put it this way, I think, which is a very interesting way of putting it.
We need a meta-psychotechnology that is designed to give us, move us out of the intuitive construction of psychotechnologies into the more explicit, so two points here, the more explicit creation of psychotechnologies and explicitly the task of trying to cultivate an ecology of more explicitly engineered psychotechnologies.
So, this would be the meta-psychotechnologies. So, this religion that is not a religion should give people ways of cultivating this meta-psychotechnology as a way of crafting the ecology of practices for addressing the perennial problems in a way that is always consonant with any
and coherent with worldview attunement. I think that there are deep connections between the capacity for collectively creating the meta-psychotechnologies, and you have to do this collectively, because that's how psychotechnologies are created, right? The capacity for creating this collectively, and the individual
virtue, the meta-virtue, because that's what it is, the meta-virtue of wisdom, the meta-virtue of wisdom, there's deep connections for that. The more the people are individually cultivating, because wisdom is basically a way of cultivating and coordinating the individual virtues, we'll come back to that.
So, you need individual wisdom, the meta-virtue, in order to collectively pursue the creation and the ongoing cultivation of the meta-psychotechnologies that will allow us to engineer individual psychotechnologies and to cultivate an ecology of psychotech that reaches comprehensively down to our participatory knowing and affords comprehensively the emergence up to our
our participatory knowing. So, I think those are some very general structural features. Some things we might be wanting to do at a more organizational level is, and this is extremely tentative, extremely
interesting. So, what might it be to create that open-ended credo? Well, we have something like that already because of the emergence of the cyber technologies that are being increasingly integrated with the psychotechnologies. And I'm using this just as an analogy, but we have something like Wikipedia. And what's interesting about Wikipedia is the way it's generated, the way it's maintained, the way it's
it's revised. It's revised. It's done in this collective, cooperative fashion. And it has both a quite, you know, reliable stability, but also a quite reliable evolution.
And what's interesting is I've recently, with the work of Konstantinos Zenioth, created something like this for one of my courses. And what we did there in one of the courses at the university is got former students to basically create a wiki of some of the main ideas of the
main themes, main themes, main arguments in the course. And what happens is people, of course, get much more involved in a participatory fashion with the generation of sort of the credo for the course. And what they also do is, right, is they create something like the Wikipedia that gives people much more interactional and evolving content to work with.
So you get sort of this presentation of what's paradigmatic and prototypical for the course, but in this collective, dynamic, and ongoing fashion. So perhaps we could think about creating a credo analogous to that, where we create something like a wiki, a credo wiki, for example,
by which groups of people that are interested in creating ecologies of practices and psychotechnologies can communicate with each other for how to adaptively set the criterion and how to constantly re-engineer the creation of the meta-psychotechnology that will
help to help to help to guarantee, maybe that's too strong a word, help to promote, reliably promote both the bottom-up and top-down functionality of this ecology of psychotechnology.
Maybe that could be set in conjunction with a co-op structure of these various communities where they are co-opting together to create a shared curriculum, a shared credo in this wiki manner, in which they are also trying to afford a kind of synoptic integration, a shared vocabulary, not imposed as an ideology, but to allow for
transformative and bridging insights and discourse between the various groups so that they might be able to afford each other's development and enhancement. Now, as I've said, all of that is not, I'm not presenting a utopic vision.
That's not what's going on. What's going on is people are already doing this. They're already trying to create these ecologies of practices. They're trying to create ways of talking to each other, setting the criterion, and they're making use of social media. They're making use of the internet. They're making use of
cooperative, dynamic forms of social organization. I think all of those could be appropriated in a way to help bring about this religion that's not a religion. And what I've tried to do is offer some suggestions on things to keep in mind.
And at least some potential methods for helping to bring this about. Whether or not this functions, whether or not any of this takes root, again, it's not even up to me. I'm not some sort of linchpin or pivotal figure.
I'm just trying...
I'm just trying...
I'm just trying...
I'm just trying to help.
I'm just trying to help. I want to give people some way of how to go about starting to make
this work more and more powerfully and perspicaciously.
All right, so I have tried to show how...
in three interrelated ways we can respond to the meaning crisis.
I've tried to show how...
in three interrelated ways we can respond to the meaning crisis.
I've tried to show that we can...
I've tried to show that we can...
there are...
sets...
of practices...
that we can cultivate as an ecology.
Alright, so I have tried to show how in three interrelated ways we can respond to the meaning
crisis.
I've tried to show that there are sets of practices that we can cultivate as an ecology
for addressing the perennial problems.
We can set those perennial problems into a legitimating worldview via the theoretical scientific
machinery given to us by third generation cognitive science, 4E cognitive science.
And then all of that can be set practically within the project of trying to bring about
the religion that is not a religion in terms of, like I said, some suggestions about some
structural features of what we're looking for and some organizational features of how
to try and initiate that and get that going.
This is ultimately going to come back to the dialogue that I'm going to set up between
what I've argued for here and some of the other prophets of this religion beyond a religion
that's not a religion like Tillich, Jung, I would argue also Corbin and perhaps aspects
of Barfield and the godfather of all of that of course are people like Heidegger.
So that's going to be something we're going to come back to.
But we need to do something else now that I've constantly been putting aside because it also
is going to be involved in the process that I have been proposing to you.
And we've said it throughout, which is the cultivation of wisdom.
And as we've seen, the cultivation of wisdom as a meta-virtue is deeply resonant with the
communitas cultivation of the meta-psychology that is needed for the ecology of psychotechnology.
And of course, wisdom is also needed for the project of enlightenment, as I've already mentioned.
And finally, wisdom has always been associated since the Axial Revolution with satisfying those
deep connectedness, the connectedness to oneself, the connectedness to the world, the connectedness
connectedness to others that makes for a meaningful life.
So I want to start talking now about the cognitive science of wisdom.
And I want to, again, this is a very exciting and hot area in cognitive science.
There's lots going on about this right now and it's becoming very, very pervasive and the
discussion of wisdom in the culture at large is coming to the fore again.
So I can't, I mean, I would like to have a series at some point that's just on wisdom.
I can't do that right now.
So what I want to do is try and give again sort of a very quick overview of sort of the
key players, if you'll allow serious players, in the cognitive science of wisdom business.
And what we can glean from that and how we can integrate it into the model and picture we've
been building here.
So this really took off in the 1990s with an anthology by Robert Sternberg.
The psychologist Robert Sternberg has done a tremendous amount of work to bring back the
notion of wisdom within psychology, within cognitive science in general, and even within pedagogy
and the understanding of education.
And that anthology really started to bring out some of the initial work that was being
done, the seminal work, and also promote a lot of work that has expanded since on this.
I want to talk about work that was happening at around the same time as this shortly thereafter.
So the Sternberg, the first Sternberg anthology on wisdom, there's been another one since, the
wisdom handbook, was in 1990.
And then what I consider a really important article came out in 1999 by McGee and Barber.
It was important because it was basically retrospective reflection on sort of the first decade of work
on wisdom, but it was doing something more than that.
So it was definitely doing that retrospective, but it was also doing something very important.
Something that is so resonant with what we've been doing here together.
Because what they wanted to do was they wanted to try and link two things together in a very
powerful convergence argument.
They wanted to look at all of what they called the a priori theories of wisdom.
Our way of understanding that I think is very easy just by seeing what they looked at.
They wanted to look at all the philosophical theories and we've looked at quite a few of
them.
So we have an understanding of what they're talking about.
We saw the Socratic theory and the Aristotelian and the Stoic, right, and the Platonic.
So you have the philosophical theories of wisdom and, of course, that's appropriate because
philosophy is the love of wisdom.
But they also wanted to look at, right, and there had been about 15 years because the anthology
comes out in 1990, some work had been going on in the 80s, and then it starts to really
take off, but you've got the psychological theories, right?
So these are very conceptually driven, they're very sort of top down, these of course are
much more empirically driven, bottom up.
And what they were trying to do was they were trying to set up basically a reflective equilibrium
between them.
They're trying to find, through a coordinated investigation, a convergent theme, both from
all of the philosophical work and all of the psychological work.
So looking at all of the philosophical work, what does it converge on?
Same thing with the psychological work and then can we draw it all together in a reflectively
coherent fashion.
And they did.
They make a very powerful argument.
They go through and they make an argument that what all of these theories converge on is seeing
through illusion.
That the core of wisdom is the ability to see through illusion.
Where this means, of course, much more broadly.
They're not meaning primarily here visual illusion.
They're meaning cognitive and existential illusion that is caused by self-deception.
So seeing through this.
And of course, because wisdom is a systematic notion, and this is something they are going
to explicitly argue about, this is systematically.
So not just this illusion or this self-deception, but a systematic seeing through of self-deception.
And then in something that Leo and I published in 2013, we argued that this, of course, has
a strong implication that should be filled out here.
Seeing through illusion and into, right, some sense of what's reality or at least what's
more real.
Because you can only know if you're seeing through illusion if you come to something
that you regard as being less illusory in nature.
So this is directly the systematic, right, seeing through illusion and into reality.
Now notice what this is.
This is a very profound meaning both deep and pervasive meaning across many different instances
of where you're trying to solve your problems achieving your goal.
This is a very profound kind of insight.
It's a systematic insight that we talked about when we talked about higher states of consciousness.
And we'll see that McGee and Barber are using exactly this idea.
It's to find across many areas in which you have been misframing problems, to see them, to
realize them as systematically related such that you can come up with an insight that intervenes
not just on this problem but in all of these problems in a systematic fashion and thereby you start to see
systematically through illusion and into what is more real.
So this is a key idea as to what you're trying to cultivate when you cultivate wisdom.
And what we're going to do next time is we're going to continue to look at, we're going to follow this,
about putting the psychological theories and the philosophical theories into dialogue,
and to, right, continue developing what is it that we're talking about when we're talking about wisdom
and, relatedly, what is it we're doing when we're proposing the cultivation of wisdom.
Thank you very much for your time and attention.
