Welcome back to Awakening from the Meaning Crisis.
So last time we were taking a look at a group of people, as I said before, the Gnostic shouldn't
be understood as forming like their own community or group, although there might have been some
Gnostic churches.
We should think of them more like we think of existentialism or fundamentalism.
You can be a fundamentalist Christian or Muslim or Jew, etc.
It's more about a style, a way of being, a way of understanding and interpreting, and
that it was pervasive during the same period as early Christianity, and the two are interacting
with each other.
In fact, as we'll see, many Gnostics thought of themselves as Christians.
So we were taking a look at how to go about interpreting Gnosticism.
Why are we doing this?
We're doing this because we're presenting the Gnostic movement as the Axial Revolution
within the Axial Revolution.
It's taking the revolution to its culmination in many important ways that I think have direct
relevance for us today.
In order to do that, I'm presenting to you something like the cognitive science of what
Gnosis actually is.
And in order to do that, we've been making use of some important work by Harry Frankfurt
and L.A.
The basic idea is that we can talk about people being existentially trapped, and that that
is a result of them being existentially stuck.
They have a Nersha.
They do not know how to engage the Anagage in order to make a worldview viable to them,
and they are existentially indecisive.
They are existentially stupefied because they're facing a deep transformative experience,
and they don't know how to reason their way through it.
They don't know if they should do it.
And that existential entrapment can be very, very damaging.
It can fragment your world and tear apart your agency.
And so people can suffer from this in a profound way, which means Gnosticism, as Hans Jonas
and other people have seen, is directly relevant to a lot of the modern confrontation with
meaninglessness and nihilism, because in the meaning crisis, people also similarly feel
deeply existentially trapped.
So what is needed, I argued, is a recovery of serious play through the engagement in
ritual behavior.
This ritual play allows us, affords an individual to engage in inactive analogy so that they
can get into that liminal state in which they can, in a perspectival and participatory manner,
engage in a very apt way between the world and the self that they are now, and the world
and the self they want to viably become.
That inactive ritual should also afford an a gage, it should afford the transframing,
the reciprocal an agogic process by which self and world are transformed such that we
can go through the sensibility transcendence which will make a worldview viable to us.
That combination, that ritual combination of inactive analogy and inactive an agage is
empowered by the cognitive flexibility brought on by an altered state of consciousness, hopefully
a higher state of consciousness that gives us a sense of the increased realness, the
more realness of the world that we are trying to move into.
So that higher state of consciousness, as we've talked about before, motivates us to
go through this radical transformative experience.
Now of course there are dangers associated with all of this.
When we are engaging in this kind of radical transformation of our salience landscape,
when we are putting ourselves and our world at risk, when we are inducing altered states
of consciousness, there is a significant chance that we will fall prey to parasitic processing,
to bullshitting ourselves, to deceiving ourselves.
And therefore it is very important, and this is also part of what was going on with narcissism,
to build up a community, a shared mythology, a shared set of psychotechnological practices,
a shared social network of distributed cognition, to provide sapiential feedback, guidance,
correction and encouragement for people when they are endeavoring to go through the kind
of transformation that will release them from this existential entrapment.
So you have some higher state of consciousness, hopefully that has some aspects of being a
higher state of consciousness, and that is going to be set within a ritual framing that
I've been talking about, and then you want that in turn set within an important sapiential
and supportive community that is teaching you all kinds of the relevant skills by which
one can bring wisdom, the ability to overcome self-deceptive, self-destructive behavior,
to bear upon this transformation.
When all of that is the case, this is what narcissism is, it's this kind of deeply transformative,
deeply perspectival participatory knowing that is ritually inflamed and embedded with
a sapiential and supportive community.
So what do we have going on here is a project that was addressing the domicide that was
still in existence, persisting from the Hellenistic domicide that we were talking about.
It's also, as I mentioned, one of the reasons why Christianity took root, because while
the Roman Empire offered a socio-political solution to some of the problems of the ancient
world, it didn't have a viable answer on its own to the meaning crisis, the domicide of
the Hellenistic period, things like stoicism had been generated.
But Christianity is a significant response, and at the same time this movement, this Gnostic
movement arises.
Now these Gnostics, many of them, not all of them, saw themselves as Christians.
They interpreted Jesus as somebody who had brought them Gnosis, and for them the important
thing was not to believe in Jesus, but as much as possible to become like Jesus, to
go through the kind of radical transformation to be, at one with God, the way Jesus was.
Now whether or not we believe in that particular mythology, two things we need to note for our
purposes in this course.
We need to note that Gnosticism and Christianity are deeply talking to each other and informing
each other, even though in many ways they'll have an oppositional relationship.
We're going to see that both Gnosticism and Christianity are also in a very important
dance and intermeshment with Neoplatonism.
Now many people, and I put it out with the examples of jeep form and therapy and martial
arts, many people are seeking Gnosis today because Gnosis is the kind of thing you need
in order to bring about a release from the existential entrapment that we're finding
in the meaning crisis.
Now what's interesting about the Gnostics is they create a mythology for all of this.
And I think the best, because if you just read their stuff, it's like, man, it's like
if you were strung out on an incredible acid trip and everybody was speaking in reverse,
it is so hard, their stuff is so bizarre and weird and strange.
But I think if you pay attention to some of the main themes of the mythology, you can
see how it is a mythological scaffolding for bringing about Gnosis.
A book I would recommend to you is April DeConnick's book, The Gnostic New Age.
In that she does some good work at bringing out some of the central themes of this movement
and she also points out how much Gnosticism is prevalent in our culture today mythologically.
And you may say, what do you mean by that?
Well, many movies, and she chose this in the book, actually have a Gnostic theme.
The mythology of the movie and movies are where we go to play with a lot of our mythology
actually are pretty clear versions of this Gnostic mythology.
So what is this mythology?
So the Gnostics have an idea and you can see part of it comes from Plato, there's an influence
from Plato.
So if you remember, Plato has this idea about the everyday world, the everyday world is
a world like the shadows and the echoes.
These things are not fully real, this table, this wall, this pen, they're in a profound
sense images, they participate in the forms.
Remember those patterns of intelligibility and realness.
So Plato had a problem, which is the forms are basically eternal.
So if you think of something like equals MC squared, that's not an event, it's sort
of timeless and spaceless, and then how do these eternal forms, how do they express themselves
in the temporal things, the things that are changing here?
So basically how do time and eternity intersect?
And so Plato proposed a mythological answer, he proposed that there was a figure, he called
the figure the craftsman, the Demiurgus, the Demiurge, and what the Demiurge is, is he
can sort of become aware of these, because he's a rational agent, and then what he does
is he shapes things in space and time in order to make the world of the coming have some
reality to it, and so it has some important similarities to the eternal world, and that
means that by paying attention to temporal events, we can become aware of these eternal
principles, sort of what science does right now.
Now whether all of that is true, I think in an important sense it's not true, there's
a mythological point here, Plato is trying to understand mythologically the relationship,
he's trying to give us a way in imagery and story of understanding the relationship between
eternity and time.
Now the Gnostics were influenced by this, but they took this notion and they did something
very interesting to it, because they said the temporal world, the everyday world we're
in, is a world of very significant suffering.
So remember, thereafter the Hellenistic domicile, they're during a period both where the Hellenistic
domicile is still in existence and the Roman Empire has caused massive pain and suffering
throughout the world.
So they're looking at the everyday world and they're seeing all this suffering, they're
feeling deeply trapped within it, existentially trapped in the way we've been talking about.
So for them, that was very clear evidence that whoever had created this world was either
stupid or evil or both.
They were looking around the world and saying look at how much we suffer, look at how much
pain we're in, look at how much we're trapped and therefore whatever is creating the structures
that we're living in is both stupid and evil.
So they, in Plano the Demiurge is basically a beneficent being, but in here the Demiurge
very often becomes something like an evil overlord.
Now what's going on here?
Well what they're trying to do is articulate, again, the sense of being trapped and that
the socio-economic, socio-cultural, political economic structures that they find themselves
in are actually thwarting them.
And now when I say it that way, it's like oh, maybe that's a mythological way of talking
about something that you might be experiencing.
You're experiencing existential entrapment and then when you look out at the patterns
of your culture, the patterns, the market patterns, the political patterns, you don't
feel like they are shaping a world that is going to help alleviate your entrapment.
Instead you feel that they are stupid and evil.
And I know from a lot of the research we did for the book on zombies with the work I did
with Christian Phillip, more and more people view their myths, their deeply repeated cultural,
political, socio-economic patterns, not as helping them, but as thwarting their efforts
to be free from their existential entrapment, adding to their fragmentation and their suffering.
So whether or not we believe in the Gnostic supernaturalistic way of talking about this,
which I don't, we can nevertheless understand what they are articulating.
We have this existential entrapment and we have socio-political, socio-cultural patterns
that are designed to further that entrapment, further our self-deception, further our self-destruction,
keep us enmeshed in modal confusion, or keep us awashed in parasitic processing, keeping
us trapped, stuck and stupefied.
So for the Gnostics, right, they needed to try and link this to existing mythologies.
And here's where they did something that is radical.
They identified all the existing gods, whether it's the god of the Jews or the god of the
Romans. Instead of seeing these gods as divine beings, they saw these gods as basically the
guards of our prison. So they see everything else that people had thought of as previously
sacred, all the gods, as actually things imprisoning us. Even Paul was talking about this in the
Bible where he talks about powers and principalities that keep us imprisoned.
Now I want you to stop and pause, because this is a radical idea. This is an idea that
there has been something common to all of these gods that must now be challenged. So
up until now, right, the relationship between us and them was one of servitude, often border
on notions of slavery. We were the slaves or the servants of the gods. The Gnostics
want to invert that. They want to tell you that instead of worshiping these gods, instead
of idealizing these gods, instead of giving in to these powers and principalities, these
patterns that are pervasive and profound in the way they entrap us, instead of thinking
how we should serve and fit into them. Think of this again. Remember, the Axial Revolution,
don't try to fit into the everyday world. You want to transcend it. Instead of serving
and fitting in, we have to transcend them all. They are not divine. They are our prison guards.
They may be powerful, but instead what we need to realize is that there is something
in us, they thought of it as a divine spark, that will actually carry us above to the God
beyond all gods, which sounds like a contradiction, because of course that's what they're trying
to get at. The idea here can be expressed using some of the Christian mythology that
they were quite willing to, well, it depends who you're talking to. If you're an Orthodox
Christian, you see the Gnostics as perverting your mythology. If you're a Gnostics, you
see yourself as disclosing by transformation what's actually available in the mythology.
For the Gnostics, this God is the God of the Old Testament, evil, jealous, vindictive,
who threatens and bullies people, authorizes genocide, shows favoritism for no moral reason.
Think about, he says, the God of the Old Testament, I'm a jealous God. Don't you dare worship
anybody other than me. If you do, I'll kill you and I'll kill your kids and I'll kill
your kids' kids and all this horrific stuff. That God is compared to the God of the New
Testament, the God of Agape, the God of light and love. The idea is that God, the God beyond
all gods, does not want our worship, wants us to reunite with him. He wants us, or she
wants us to fully participate. I have to say he and she specifically for the Gnostics
is one of the things they also challenged was the difference between the genders in the
ancient world. They're famous for that, of thinking women are as equally capable of a
spiritual life as men.
So we are radically not at home because this, our capacity for agape love means we have
agape. This our capacity for agape love means we have agnostic potential. We have the power,
the potential to remember, to know that we belong here. We can sense that we don't belong
here. We can sense that we belong somewhere else. We know there's something fundamentally
wrong here.
And then the idea is this, this God beyond all gods, this absolute fullness of being
sends individuals down into the world of suffering to bring us the Gnosis, to bring us this kind
of transformative knowledge that will set us free. And what the Gnostic Christians did
is they said Jesus was this individual. So the Gnostics don't put a huge emphasis on
the person of Jesus and his crucifixion. Instead the teachings of Jesus are much more important
to them because what is going to happen here is Jesus is going to bring us the way of knowing
Gnosis of agape so that we can free ourselves from this.
So the Gnostics therefore don't see the purpose of Christianity as doctrine or dogma. The
purpose of it is to give us a mythology that will free us from our existential suffering
and allow us to experience this transcendence of the gods. Now this inversion, this radical
inversion, it's like, that's what I mean, it's the culmination, it's the axial revolution
that is finally applied to even to the whole mythological framework of the ancient world.
And what it means is the Gnostics have a very, and this is one of the things that their critics
often leveled against them, the Gnostics keep churning out new Gospels and new stories
and new myth because for them it's not about having a final orthodox story, a final orthodox
set of principles, it's about having engaged in, participated in the process of creating
the inactive analogies, the inacted anagogy, that's what matters, that's what actually
matters. Now this idea that Gnostics, Gnostics,
spirituality is ultimately about transcending the gods rather than serving the gods is very,
it's very both pertinent to us today and very radical for its time because you have basically
the challenging of a, not even a belief, it was just an unquestioned presupposition
that our relationship to the gods was one of servitude and slavery getting transformed
into, no, no, the core of spirituality is not worship, the core of spirituality is self-transcendence,
healing and freeing people from existential entrapment and their suffering and that our
mythology and our practices should always be in service of us reuniting to who and what
we are. Now we, we, we love this story, notice how first of all it's still got all the platonic
elements, here are the people trapped in the cave, they're bound, they get the secret
knowledge, right, that freeze them so that they can return to and see the light, right,
but of course for Plato you come back down into the cave, for the Gnostics you try to
spread the message to as many people as you can, so it has the Platonism, it of course
has a way of connecting that Platonism to Christianity by reinterpreting Jesus as the
embodiment of Gnosis rather than as a sacrifice in whom we should have faith. Jesus is the
teacher who provides us with something like what the Shaman did and what our therapist
does, provides us with the keys to unlocking, right, unlocking all the ways in which these
patterns, these sociocultural, political, economic patterns, ways of thinking and being
are just permeated into layers of our psyche and ways of being in the world that they just
exacerbate our suffering, our existential entrapment and the way it is fragmenting our
world and ripping apart our agency. So we long for that now, this was Hans Jonas'
great insight, we long for that now, so we go to movies that show this, right, so the
connet goes through several movies that are basically modern portrayals of this Gnostic
mythology, of course famously, and it brings all of these elements in, the Christian, the
Platonic and the Gnostic of course is the Matrix, right, because the Matrix is this,
you're entrapped in a world of illusion, there are evil overlords who are trying to keep
you entrapped so you don't ever discover who you truly are, right, but you know, remember
there's a scene in the movie, you know like a splinter in your mind that there is something
wrong and you don't belong, right, that's the Matrix or you can see a movie starring
Jim Carrey, the Truman story, notice of course the play on words there, right, Truman, discovering
who you really are, and he grows up in a world, right, with an overlord that has manufactured
it to keep him from ever actually getting his true agency, finding true love, etc.,
and what he has to do is get the knowledge in order to get beyond this God.
We keep telling this story because it's a myth, because it keeps pointing us to patterns
that are pervasive and profound and powerful, and we can't quite articulate them and we
can't quite know them, but the myth at least gives us a moment of, right, at least narrative
and symbolic recognition of our suffering. So the Gnostics are offering a radical form
of the Exo Revolution. Now it carries with it a dark side that keeps showing you with
all of this stuff, the light side and the dark side of Christianity, right, and you
probably could see how there's a Gnostic element also within Star Wars. You're trapped within
the Empire with the evil overlord, the Emperor, and you have to get free and you need to have
the knowledge of the Force that will set you free and blah, blah, blah, blah, like
we love this and we keep wanting to do it. That's great. What's the dark side of the
Gnostic vision? The dark side of the Gnostic vision is it can, it doesn't have to, and
many of the original Gnostic writers that I've read it, it's not the case, but it can
do this. This is ultimately a conspiracy theory. This is a grand conspiracy theory. One of
the reasons why this is comforting is, behind all the apparent chaos and suffering, there
actually is some evil overlord. I mean, one of the things that would make evil so much
more tractable for us is if it was ensconced within an individual. One of the reasons why
this is the ultimate conspiracy theory. There's a whole system that is keeping you from realizing
the truth and who you truly are, the true man that you are, and how you belong elsewhere
in living another way. And now you say, oh well, conspiracy, well, stop and think. Look,
what are the Gnostic saying? This evil overlord, some of them say, not all of them, it's the
same as the God of the Old Testament. Who are the people that worship the God of the
Old Testament? The Jews. Here's an idea that's now being sown into Western culture. The Jews
are part of a conspiracy to keep us from realizing our true heritage. And that, if it's going
to turn out to be an extraordinarily dangerous and bloodthirsty idea. Nazism is a twilight
twisted, and other people have pointed this out. Nazism is not primarily a political or
even a socioeconomic movement. Nazism is a twisted, Gnostic response of the meaning crisis
that was being magnified in the Weimar Republic of Germany. So there is a dark side to Gnosticism.
So there is a dark side to Gnosticism. So we should have an ambivalent attitude towards
it. In order to understand it, we must think of how we can extricate Gnostic from Gnosticism.
How can we salvage Gnostic from Gnosticism? Just like how can we salvage Gnostic from
Christianity? How can we salvage wisdom from the ancient, nomological order?
So on one side, you can see the dangers. Why did this happen? It's a long complicated
story, but part of the problem, part of the reason is the emerging Orthodox Church, it
wasn't even an Orthodox Church at that time, it called itself the Apostolic Church. The
Church that thought Jesus was absolutely unique, and the point was to worship Him, and that
faith is what was crucial, faith in the sense of believing in Him as a sacrifice, persecuted.
And I mean that literally, persecuted the Gnostic form of Christianity and drove it underground.
And as underground, it became enmeshed with any type of group that was trying to challenge
the established order. And that's how it tends to surface again in Nazism. We'll see there
are more things that feed into Nazism, but that's all we need for right now. Gnosticism,
of course, is also deeply influential in some very important people. So here are three things
that we're going to start talking about more and more. We've already heard me talk about
Tilek. Tilek is one of the great theologians. Tilek talks about the meaning crisis in a
classic book that I highly recommend to you called The Courage to Be. And he talks about
that the response to that is a way of discovering, and it's clear because of how he talks about
symbols and he talks about transformation, although he does not use the term, but he's
talking about Gnosis. He's talking about that the response to the meaning crisis is the
Gnosis of the God beyond the God of Theism. That what we need to do is discover the God,
who of course is not a God because it's the God beyond the God of Theism, as the meaning
crisis destroys the mythology of God. Can we discover, rediscover sacredness in a way
that liberates us from our existential suffering? This is the core. Now Tilek thought that Christianity
could play a significant role in that, and one of my friends and colleagues, Jonathan
Pageau, thinks that Christianity will in fact go through this kind of self-transformation
so that it can move beyond the meaning crisis. I'm not convinced of this, but I do respect
these points. Many of you have heard me already mention Jung. Jung basically was deeply, Jung
is to Gnosticism what cognitive behavioral therapy is to Stoicism. Jung is basically
a transformation into psychotherapeutic context, the Gnostic mythology. You should understand
why that is not a coincidence. The Gnostic mythology is a way of giving us a scaffolding
for inactive analogy, inactive anagage, which of course are so central to therapeutic processes.
The person you haven't heard me mention, and I'll talk about more later, is Corbin. Corbin
was very much about trying to recover this kind of knowing because his great concern
was that we had lost this kind of knowing, and therefore we had lost our capacity for
the transformation and the liberation that it can bring about, and we can get trapped
in these historical patterns that fragment our world and tear apart our agency.
Because they represent the radicalization of the actual revolution, there is much to
learn from Gnosticism, but I am not advocating an attempt to resurrect it or bring it back.
What we need to do is understand, and that's what these individuals represent, and notice
that at least one of them was one of the most courageous opponents of the Nazis. Tillich
was the first non-Jewish academic to be fired from the Nazis because from the very beginning
and consistently he identified them and resisted them. Keep this whole framework in mind. Can
we salvage from Gnosticism Gnosticism?
And some of its radical message about how we can reconfigure, how we can have a non-theistic,
non-supernaturalistic understanding of sacredness, can we do that and avoid the conspiratorial
way of thinking that can be so damaging and has been. See, one of the things that Gnosticism
can quickly allied into is that those utopian ideologies that give you the great conspiracy
theory and tell you that you belong to the chosen few, the chosen race, or the chosen
class, and that violence is acceptable because the system is evil and means that the system
must be destroyed. I point you to the work of Chris Hedges because he's criticized both
sides. He wrote a book, American Fascists, about fundamentalist Christianity and its
pervasive portrayal of a grand conspiracy. But he also wrote a book on the new atheists
and how they also represent a utopic perfectionism that sanctions violence. And if you don't
believe me, take a look at Hitchens and Harris and the proposals for nuclear first strikes
against the Islamic world, etc. So I'm suggesting to you, and I'm trying to give you an argument
for it, how we should have an ambivalent attitude towards Gnosticism. Let's put it back in the
historical picture because I told you about the three that are crucial and how they're
intermess with each other. We have the emerging Christianity. We've seen this by taking a
look at Jesus and John and Paul, and we've seen how it's interacting with Gnosticism.
We've already seen how Gnosticism is influenced and influencing Platonism, and in particular
I want to look at Neoplatonism because it is also deeply enmeshed with Christianity.
This triangle is going to be necessary for understanding the final elements of the orders
of meaning, the grammar as I've put it before, of meaning. We've got the nomological order.
What is Neoplatonism? By the way, Neoplatonism is also why the main character in the matrix
is called Neo. For Neoplatonism, and he's often referred to as the one, because the
one is the central thing within Neoplatonism. Again, there's a reason why all of these
mythological patterns keep being so attractive to us. So, Platonism is the first thing that
comes to mind. Let me give you an analogy. I think this is a helpful analogy. Scientists
right now are trying to integrate quantum mechanics and relativity, the two great theories.
If they come up with it, they'll have the grand unified theory. Einstein tried and failed.
Many people think they've had an answer and then it collapses. By analogy, Plotinus is
the grand unified field theory of ancient spirituality. What does he do? Well, he takes
Plato's spirituality. He takes the whole idea of Anagague, from Plato. He takes Aristotle's
theory, the whole Aristotle world view, the theory of knowing, the theory of the structure
of the world. We've talked about that. He takes from the Stoics, that whole therapeutic
project. Overcoming mode of confusion. What he does is he integrates them together. He integrates them together in powerful way. How does he do that?
Well, he talks about, first of all, he says, well, let's, the thing, well, you can start
anywhere. You can start in any one of these places in Plotinus's writing and then get
to the other two. It is such a powerfully integrated system. When you're reading Plotinus,
it's not like when you're not just reading an argument, you're also undergoing a spiritual
exercise that is trying to transform your state of consciousness in your cognition. So,
what's the main theory here? Let's start here. So, if you remember, you have Aristotle's
conformity theory. We know something, right? Remember this by conforming to it, by sharing
the same structural functional organization with it, right? And then, Plotinus says, oh
wait a sec, Aristotle also has sort of levels of being. And we talked about this. We talked
about at the lowest level, right? There's pure potentiality. And at the highest level,
there's pure actuality. And we don't need to get into the metaphysics. But here's the
idea. There are levels of reality, levels of realness. As we know, there are levels
and this doesn't mean intellectual, as we, like this is participatory. This is very much
like Gnosis and he's in discussion with Gnosis. We know that Plotinus has Gnostic students.
He's also critical of them, right? But this is not just intellectual knowing. This is
deeply participatory knowing. As we make these, listen to my language, as we make these levels
of reality viable to us, as they become livable to us, right? We conform to them and we change
and this is Eric Perl's brilliant idea, right? All of his stuff is so good, right? As we conform
and make this level of reality real to us, we're conforming to it and we're also moving
to a higher level of the self. As we conform, we're also altering and this is the anagogy
of Plato, right? We're altering what level the self is at and of course as we alter the
level that the self is at, we're more capable of living in that higher level of reality.
What this does for us is it helps us deeply remember the being mode, who we really are.
Let me try and put this all together with an example. What is it that makes something
real? Think about this. Think about Socrates here, right? Socrates, like what do you mean
by real? We care about whether or not things are real, like it really matters to us. Look
at the word really, it really matters to us and yet what is it that makes something real?
How much time have you put into that? Because if you are driven by a pursuit of realness
and you don't understand what it is, if it's something you're pursuing and you don't understand,
remember what that is? That's the gap of bullshit. Okay, so what makes something real? What makes
it real? Well, and notice for Plotinus, and again Eric Perle especially in his book Thinking
Being, just a fantastically brilliant book, can't recommend it enough, but it's not what
makes something real, it's how do we also sense it as real? So it's both what structurally
functionally organizes it to be real, two sides of the worldview and what makes, how
do we sense it? How does it make us be able to sense it as real? And here's the answer.
And in some sense it's basic, in another sense it's profound. What makes something real is
how one it is, how integrated it is, how much it is structurally, functionally organized.
So we treat the object as more real than the shadows because it's more structurally, functionally
organized. That's talking about the object. What is it to understand something? Well,
here's a bunch of separate things and when I understand them, I find how they're all
one, how they can all be integrated together. When I understand something, I understand
how all of its parts are integrated together. And then what we do is, okay, these things
have been integrated here and then, oh, and I can integrate these here and this is more
real. What's one behind all of these variants thing? And then I can, of course, find what's
underneath all of this and what's underneath this and what's underneath this. Things become
more real to us as we integrate them together and they're more real as things as they are
integrated together. So as we try and find the deeper underlying principles that integrate
things together, we become more integrated together and we become more real. We are realized.
The object, we're getting to what's more real and we, as we become more integrated, more
actualized, are becoming more real. I'm becoming more integrated and you can see this is Plato's
Anagogy, right? The inner conflict within me is being reduced. I'm becoming more real
as I'm becoming more integrated and that is allowing me to make viable and real these more
integrated, deeper levels of reality and then the whole thing spins anagogically. And what
I have is I move from where things are only potential, they don't have much form, like
an Aristotle, all the way up to as having the greatest structural functional organization
that I can. And all of this isn't just, it's not just a theory, it's a change in my existential
mode. I am becoming more real. That's why I use the word realization. It's simultaneously
a making more real of the world and me and becoming more aware of what's more real. But
what is it? What's down here or up, depending on which way you want to draw these lines?
What's down, what's here? Well, it's got to be, like, it's got to be, right, the principle
that makes everything else real, that integrates everything together. It can't in any way be
multiple. So Plotinus calls this the one. He doesn't mean the single. This is that by
which reality is realized and our mind realizes reality. Plotinus uses the metaphor of light,
just like light is itself invisible and makes everything seeable. The one is not anything
we can ever know. You can't know the one because it is that by which everything is known. It
is that by which everything is. So how do you ever reunite with it? If you can't know
it, if it is beyond all possible thought, because thought breaks things apart. If it's beyond
all possible, how do you know it? You can't know it. You can't have it. You can't have
it even in thought. You can't have it even in the most beautiful theory. You can't have
it. The stuff, you can only be it. You can only have noces of the one by being one.
So at the height of Plotinus' system is a higher state of consciousness, an awakening
experience. But notice it's completely integrated with the best science and the best scientific
psychotherapy of the time. There is no deep division in Plotinus between spirituality,
science and therapy. They are all beautifully, mutually supporting, interwoven and meshed
together. It's the culmination of everything from the Greek axial age. Next time I want
to talk about how all of these currents, Christianity, Nazism and Neoplatonism, are
going to be taken up by Augustine. Thank you very much for your time and attention.
