Welcome back to Awakening from the Meaning Crisis. This is episode 25. Last time we took a look at
important developments that are centered upon the figure of Hegel. And again, as I said last
time, I can't give a comprehensive analysis of Hegel's thought. It's too complex and sophisticated.
I was trying to do the best I could to capture that within Hegel's thought, which is directly
relevant to our understanding the genealogy of the Meaning Crisis. And we saw how Hegel proposes
how to move beyond Kant and the Romantics by rejecting Kant's notion of the thing in itself
and saying, look, reality is just the patterns of intelligibility. There is nothing above
and beyond that, a form of idealism. And that as our ideas are being realized, as patterns
of intelligibility are being developed, reality is also simultaneously being developed.
And we took a look at this notion of a system, a living, a quasi-living system of these patterns
of intelligibility in development called Geist. And that Hegel proposed that that development
can be understood as a process that he called dialectic, echoing Plato, but I think severing
the notion of dialectic from anagogue, which figures in some of the criticisms of Hegel that
we looked at towards the end. This dialectic is a process in which ideas, again, not just
things in the head, these are patterns of intelligibility, patterns of the way reality is realized, both in the
sense of being known and being actual. There's this pattern in which ideas articulate and differentiate
from each other. One idea is opposed by another, contrasted to, distinguished from, and then it is taken up
in a higher order integration. And then that serves as a new idea that can be contrasted with other ideas. And this
dialectical process complexifies the pattern of intelligibility. It emerges and develops and becomes more and more.
So, the irrationality, the failure to understand is being slowly transmuted, actualized into deeper patterns of
understanding, deeper aspects of being.
And then the idea is that this reaches a state in which a system of ideas emerges that grasps the dialectical process
itself, as found exemplified, Hegel believed in his own philosophy. And this is the culmination, the state of absolute
Geist. And if we remember that for Hegel, the real is the rational, the rational is the real, what we get is that this
development of the rationality and intelligibility of reality is also the development of reality itself. And so this
co-development of meaning and being is absolute spirit, absolute mind. This is Hegel's version of God.
God. A secularized, non-religious God. We saw how much Hegel understood his
philosophy in religious terms, but that he was always pursuing that understanding by translating
religious terms and religious experience into philosophical, conceptual structure. And he advocates for a new
mythology, a new mythology, a mythology that is integrated with philosophy, a mythology of reason, which will be
the last and greatest work of mankind, the culmination of all of history.
I took you through an example of how understanding, right, the ability to make sense passes into this
moment of self-realization in reason, as mythology passes into philosophy. We did an example of that showing how
Hegel secularized the trinity in a historical process of the self-realization of rationality. And in that sense, Hegel is the
Thomas Aquinas of Protestantism. He was proposing this grand synthesis, this grand secularization of the whole
Hebraic Christian idea of God at work in history and God working through human beings and in their agapic processes to co-create the real future, the utopic but real future.
We took a look at the main criticisms of Hegel. We reminded ourselves of the criticisms made by Schopenhauer about the will to live was missing and then how Nietzsche takes this up in the will to power and this whole, the centrality of the will.
We took a look at the other great existential forerunner, Kierkegaard, and his criticism basically, using some of the terms we've developed, that Hegel has reduced everything to propositional conceptual knowing.
He has left out the perspectival participatory knowing. He has left out anagage. He has given us only epistemic transcendence. He hasn't given us existential ethical self-transcendence.
Personal transformation and transformative experience that are necessary for returning to, making deeper contact with reality has been left out.
And we noted that this is also consonant with the work of L.A. Paul about how we can't reason our way through transformative experiences that are so central to the cultivation of wisdom.
We then looked at another person who emphasized this lack of will and participation in Hegel's system and this is the work of Karl Marx.
And Marx's great proposal, great and terrifying proposal, is that history is not driven by reason, the man in Plato's system, but by the monster.
And Marx is deeply influenced by Feuerbach and Feuerbach's critique of religion as the projection of our own humanity and that religion is not the arena in which spirituality is working itself out.
Religion is the projective distortion that distracts us from how we are the authors of spirituality and history. It is a vehicle of self-alienation.
So Marx takes the Feuerbach critique and he rejects the theistic resonances within Hegel, the idealistic.
And he says, no, the dialectic is not a dialectic of ideas that's playing itself out religiously.
Firstly, it is a dialectic of economic forces that is playing itself out politically.
The dialectic is not between ideas that are in contrast, but between socioeconomic ways of life, classes that are in political conflict with each other, but are nevertheless systematically related.
And as that historical process of class conflict unfolds, this dialectic will work out all the self-contradictions in our socioeconomic system, our current one being capitalism, for example, until the contradictions are resolved in a socioeconomic state in which peace and freedom have been achieved.
Because all of the internal contradictions that drive the violence will be resolved.
This is a completely secularized version of the Judeo-Christian model of God working himself out in history to bring us to the promised land.
Marx offers the participatory knowing that is missing in Hegel by proposing how we identify with our class, we identify with the struggle, and we participate in the kairos, the turning of history, by engaging in revolution.
And so the totalizing, the totalitarian kind of ideology that Hegel is proposing is being, being wedded to the idea of violent political change within revolution.
And so this is very, very powerful pseudo-religious ideologies.
So what started in Romanticism has now come to fruition in that we have the proposal of secularized political socio-economic ideologies in conflict as the way in which spirit and spirituality is to be understood and pursued, pseudo-religious ideologies.
We should mention a couple of other ones that of course are emerging at the same time, have been emerging since the disruption in the socio-economic life of Europe following the Black Death.
We've got, of course, we've already seen the rise of commercialism, but we're also going to see, right, the conclusion of this idea that the political arena is the place in which ideas struggle with each other and meaning is made.
The, the, the secularization of course is going to be understood in terms of your participation, not necessarily in your class, like you have in Marx, but in other ways in which people are going to declare their political identity.
And this is nationalism. Nationalism is the idea that the nation-state can take the role in many ways that God has taken in the past.
That the nation-state and your patriotic devotion to it, your, your commitment to it, you're willing to sacrifice for it, your participation in its historical development that precedes you and will follow you upon your death.
Right? Is trying to do many of the things that religion had done for people in the past.
And you get the fierce nationalism that is emerging in the 19th century around the same time as Marx and Nietzsche and, right, and Kierkegaard are doing their seminal work.
So nationalism, when it is understood this way, and when it is understood in terms of will, of course, gets very clearly wedded to the emerging socioeconomic and technological power driven by the scientific and industrial revolutions in Europe.
And that nationalism very quickly gets wedded to imperialism.
So nationalism and imperialism become ways in which people have secular pseudo-religious ideologies and identities that they pursue as a way of trying to fill the gap that has been vacated by the erosion of the Christian framework.
Now a place in which this is all fiercely happening in a really intensified way is Germany.
So all of this work, all of these people we're talking about, well not Kierkegaard, but you know, Nietzsche, Schopenhauer, Hegel, Marx, they're all in Germany.
Germany, right? And again, Germany is the place of Luther where you get the first big, you know, change towards secularization.
Germany isn't a co… Germany as a country is younger than Canada.
It doesn't come into existence until, I believe, 1870 in the work of Bismarck.
The Germans had been fragmented as a nation. They were not a nation state. They had been fragmented for centuries.
And through powerful, real politic, meaning, you know, ethics be damned, Bismarck helps craft and unite the nation of Germany into a nation state.
And so nationalism is fierce in Germany because Germany has finally gone from being just a cultural leader to becoming a political entity with tremendous economic, industrial power and scientific production in its grasp.
Nationalism is fierce and Germany sees itself in competition with the other nation states that have got a head start in their imperial self-promotion.
Germany sees itself lagging behind France and England in the creation of world empire.
So nationalism and imperialism become paramount in Germany.
And then disaster strikes.
And it's a disaster that actually reverberates around the world because this whole attempt to secularize progress
in terms of material advancement, scientific advancement, technological advancement, nationalism, imperialism,
comes to a crashing disaster in the First World War,
in which all this machinery that was supposed to bring us to utopia,
was seeming to take the place of God and our spiritual traditions, drenches Europe
in traumatic tidal wave of blood and destruction.
An entire generation is decimated.
So Europe itself is traumatized by this.
But Germany is especially traumatized because it is defeated.
All its national and imperial and cultural ambitions are thwarted.
And the victors, France and England especially, treat Germany very, very poorly.
They weaken it significantly economically.
They cripple it militarily.
All of this is taken up in a lot of careful history.
And I can't go into this in great detail.
What we need to know is, let's gather this together.
This is Germany in the state, post World War I, the Weimar Republic.
This state of, right, the collapse, right, of German idealism, right,
the thwarting of the dreams of nationalism and imperialism.
Germany, as we remember, is the country that has been, I don't know what the right word,
tainted by Luther's horrible anti-Semitism.
The anti-Semitism we talked about, like, in his work, you know,
The Jews and Their Lives, in which he proposes a genocide,
genocidal policies towards the Jews.
We saw that Germany is the home of the Rhineland mystics.
There's been an undercurrent running through Germany
that helped fuel the Protestant Reformation.
But there's this undercurrent of the mystical tradition.
It comes to fruition, for example, in people like Boheme,
who's a German Lutheran mystic.
And, and a Protestant mystic.
A very odd thing in some ways.
But this undercurrent in Germany is very Neoplatonic, very Gnostic.
We've seen the, as I said, the collapse of German idealism under the critique of the
alternatives by Marx and the existentialists.
But German idealism also seems to fail because of the critiques that are coming out of
positivism and philosophical position that is wedded to the tremendous success of scientific
materialism. Scientific materialism.
Scientific materialism.
Marxism is arising in Germany as a real threat.
We saw, of course, that Germany was the home of the powerful Romantic tradition.
Goethe is one of the important generators of the Romantic tradition.
And we saw how Romanticism is also becoming decadent in Germany.
We have the ongoing fragmentation caused by the Protestant Reformation.
The Germans have developed, in explicit form, the idea of will to power.
This, this resentment, this undercurrent of Gnostic mythology, anti-Semitic religious traditions.
The collapse of German idealism, leaving this philosophical vacuum.
The collapse of the Romantic tradition, also leaving philosophical vacuum.
The thwarting of nationalism and imperialism.
The advocacy of a will to power as the way in which human beings can recapture the lost self-transcendence.
And, of course, that nationalism and that anti-Semitism very quickly integrate with a racist interpretation of history
to try and replace Hegel's idealistic interpretation of history.
Or Marx's socioeconomic interpretation of history.
And all of this is drawn together in the autodidactic vortex of Hitler's mind.
We talked about the dangers of a fragmented autodidactic approach to the Meaning Crisis.
The Meaning Crisis is being driven to a fever pitch in the Weimar Republic.
And all of these forces are being spun in a romantic, and I mean that in a decadent sense, romantic, willful, autodidactic manner.
Reading Mein Kampf is a difficult thing to do, not just because of the abhorrent moral stance of its author,
but because it verges on incoherence because of the attempt Hitler has of trying to articulate all of this personally.
You see, and this is not a coincidence, I think.
Hitler is like Luther. Be careful of this analogy. I'm not claiming an identity.
I'm not trying to insult all Lutherans. But what do I mean by that?
Hitler sees his own personal struggle, Mein Kampf, my struggle, as representative of, emblematic, symbolic of, all of Germany.
And beyond that, of all of Western civilization.
And he exemplifies this chaos.
And he articulates this weird mythology.
You see, you misunderstand Nazism if you understand it only as a political system.
If you understand it only, for example, as fascism or racism.
It is those things.
But you have to understand that the fascism and racism are actually in service of a Gnostic nightmare.
I mean, you can feel all, like, the currents of, we have our true self, we're born with it.
Well, that's, you know, it's in our blood.
You know, you can hear decadent romanticism.
And then you can hear the Gnostic, you know, here we are.
We are actually a master race.
But we're trapped within a worldwide conspiracy, right, that is keeping us from knowing our divine heritage.
And only by opposing and trying to thwart the evil overlords can we come to our true divine heritage as the master race that is in our blood and in the soil of our nation.
Do you see? And, of course, Luther's anti-Semitism is mixing up with a strand of Gnosticism that says, if you remember, you know, the people that worship the Demiurge is, you know, the people who worship the God of the Old Testament are the Jews.
And this is all, this all makes a weird, twisted kind of sense.
It's a Gnostic nightmare in which Hitler is crafting something that hangs between a religion, a totalitarian ideology, and a personal mythology that he, he exemplifies and people are attracted to.
It's, this is a, this is a, you shouldn't understand and you can't respond to Nazism as if it is just a political movement.
You're not getting it.
It is a pseudo-religious ideology, a totalitarian proposal that confuses and distorts myth, mysticism, nationalism, and fuses this with decadent romanticism,
decadent Gnostic mythology, the will to power of Nietzsche.
That's why the great propaganda film about the Nazis is actually entitled, Triumph of the Will.
Triumph of the Will.
It's being linked to imperialistic racism.
Holism.
Do you see what I'm trying to show you?
Nazi-ism is a tsunami of bullshit.
In which all of these currents, these currents, these that are emerging out of the collapse
of the three orders are being spun by Hitler
in order to try and give people
a brutally powerful
response to the exigent intensity
of the meaning crisis in Weimar, Germany.
And Hitler lucks out because that whole
socio-cultural process is intensified
the socio-economic collapse of the Great Depression.
Which seems to vindicate
his Gnostic nightmare.
It seems to vindicate
his dream of dealing with
the collapse of meaning
through
a mythology of imperialistic,
racist,
twisted, decadent,
romantic Gnosticism.
That has gathered together the shards
of this whole historical process
in the place in which
they were often originating,
which is Germany.
So we have
now these two
great pseudo-religious ideologies.
Marxism
and Nazism.
And of course they are diametrically opposed
opposed to each other.
Right?
And Hitler proposes his
history of race
against
communist proposal of the history
of class.
Israel.
And these two pseudo-religious ideologies
that both propose a totalitarian
ideology
infused with
mythologies
of grasping
and driving the kairos of history
towards the utopia
of the promised land.
they meet.
They meet in the most titanic
struggle,
to use the term that both Marx
and Hitler used,
the titanic struggle
of the Eastern Front
in World War II.
You see,
the thing about
many of us is we
tend to understand World War II
largely from the perspective
of the British or the American
or the Canadian viewpoint,
because we're British or American or Canadian.
Right?
We forget
that
the Western Front, while significant,
and I do not want to in any way denigrate
the tremendous sacrifice that people made
or endured
on the Western Front.
But the Western Front is dwarfed
by what's happening on the Eastern Front.
1943, these two titanic forces
and the historical,
sociopolitical,
socioeconomic
forces that they have marshaled,
they meet at the Battle of Kursk
in 1943
on the Eastern Front.
There's nothing like it
anywhere else in World War II.
There's nothing like it
anywhere else in world history.
This is the biggest battle ever.
Literally!
This battle involves
millions
of men.
Tens of thousands of pieces of equipment.
Thousands and thousands of tanks.
Thousands of airplanes.
It goes from horizon
to horizon.
It's brutal
and vicious.
It, it, it, it somehow
there's, there's individual acts
of tremendous brutality
set within this huge
technological machine
of mass destruction.
The Battle of Kursk
ends
eventually
in a Russian victory.
So militarily,
it, it spells the beginning
of the end of the Nazi regime
and the ascendance of
the Soviet Union
into the post-World War II
military super power
dominating Eastern Europe.
So, of course, it has all
of that historical significance.
But, the Battle of Kursk
points to, right,
it, it, the literal,
what do I want to say?
The, the, the,
it's overwhelming.
It's literally, sort of,
beyond comprehension
in terms of its size
and its scope
and the death
and, and, and, and, and the,
and, and the sheer amount
of technology and material.
This also has an impact.
You see, on, on the
genealogy of the meaning crisis.
I want to point to
what this leads to.
And of course, and, and then
I, of course, I've alluded to
the cold war that comes after it.
Right?
This, this tremendous struggle,
right?
Because, of course, it is
symptomatic of the meaning crisis.
What we have is a fixation
at the level of beliefs.
both sides are fixated
on belief systems,
totalitarian ideologies.
And attempts to create
secular alternatives to religion.
Totalitarian systems of ideas
that are supposed to explain
history, reality,
reality,
and how we can achieve
utopia.
How we can
recapture
the axial legacy.
We have the complete
politicization
of the quest for meaning.
Mythology
is being confused with politics.
Confused with politics.
Confused with politics in powerful ways.
The perspectival knowing has been reduced
to your political viewpoint.
The participatory knowing has been reduced
to your political identification.
And it marshals tremendous physical resources
in a titanic struggle of wills.
Confrontation of ideologies.
Now what does that,
what does all of that legacy mean for us?
Because of course eventually,
the Soviet Union also collapses.
Well, this whole secularized political process
of the pseudo-religious ideologies
is not only symptomatic
of the meaning crisis,
it also contributes to the meaning crisis.
It's not just a result,
it causally feeds back into
exacerbating
the meaning crisis.
Okay, how?
Well, we face,
right,
the meta-crisis.
Thomas
Pjorklin
has called it that
and talked about it.
You know, this is the
intertwining, you know,
ecological,
socioeconomic,
spiritual crises,
existential crises of our time,
the mental health crises, etc.
Now the meta-crisis,
right, in which,
in which the meaning crisis plays
a significant role,
how it's interdependent with
these other crises.
To address this,
this is going to require
comprehensive,
we have to have comprehensive change
in our consciousness,
our cognition,
because I've shown you
the deep history
of all of this.
We have to have
a comprehensive change
in our consciousness,
our cognition,
our character,
how we cultivate virtue,
wisdom,
compassion,
self-transcendence,
our culture,
how our community structure
distributed cognition together,
create systematic psychotechnologies.
Now the only thing that,
in the past,
that has created systematic
sets of psychotechnologies
that transform cognition,
consciousness,
character, and culture
in an interdependent way
is religion.
That's the only thing
that we've created
that does this.
Now in the 19th
and the 20th century
we try to create
alternatives to this.
The pseudo-religious ideologies
that have drenched
the world in blood.
So what do we do?
We need to respond
to the meta-crisis,
but we have been traumatized
by the pseudo-religious ideologies.
So that no longer seems like
a viable option.
One thing, of course,
that some people are pursuing
is a nostalgic attempt
to return to religion.
an attempt to ignore
all of this history.
And of course, this leads
to various kinds of fundamentalisms.
And I do include
certain forms of atheism
as being pseudo-religious fundamentalisms.
I'm going to read Chris Hedges' book on this.
I think he makes a good case for it.
This, of course, can interact with
how everything has been politicized.
There we go.
When those interact, of course,
we get the potential for terrorism.
So many people, rightly,
are very doubtful of this
as a response.
Many people find themselves
stuck here.
They're post-religious.
post-religious.
They reject this.
But they also reject this,
the pseudo-religious ideologies.
They're post-religious.
And they find themselves, as we said,
fragmented.
autodidactic.
And these responses,
right,
could, of course,
dangerously interact with this,
facilitated by
things like social media
and the internet.
Also dangerously interact
with these pseudo-religious ideologies.
See, what I'm showing you here is
we seem to need a religion
that cannot be any kind of religion at all.
We seem to need a religion
that cannot be any kind of religion at all.
We can't deal with the meeting crisis
by pursuing pseudo-religious ideologies,
trying to deal with this as a political issue.
This is why I steadfastly
refuse
to build an argument
for this work that I'm trying to share with you
as
on the back of a political controversy,
as a confrontation
of political ideologies.
Trying to frame or understand the meaning crisis
as a struggle
as a struggle
between
political ideologies
as a political thing
about,
as a political process
of using
violence, potentially,
or argument
to change belief
is to
misrepresent
the meaning crisis.
there is no political solution
to our troubled evolution,
to quote the police.
We somehow need
a religion
that is not a religion at all.
at all.
We need a God beyond all gods.
For many people,
this seems,
I think,
reasonably enough,
to be a dilemma.
To be a contradiction.
And we are not just
being
stuck on the horns of a dilemma,
we are being
gored and ripped apart
by
the horns of the dilemma.
So, the clash,
the adversarial clash
of pseudo-religious ideologies
is not only symptomatic
of the meaning crisis,
it contributes
to the meaning crisis
by
locking us into,
or at least contributing
to the way
in which we are locked into
this dilemma,
this aspect of the meaning crisis
in which we need
a religion
that is not a religion
at all.
So,
I mean, I could continue on
this history.
I could talk about
great works of literature
that struggle
with this dilemma.
I think,
a fruitful way
of understanding
one of the great novels,
I consider it
one of the greatest
and certainly
one of my favorite,
you know,
Moby Dick
is about this dilemma.
this dilemma.
I think you could make a good case
for that.
You could talk about different aspects
of popular culture.
You could see the zombie mythology
as an articulation of this
and aspects of the meaning crisis.
but we'll come back to that.
Because it's now time to move
from the historical analysis.
From understanding the genealogy,
the collapse of the three orders,
the nomological,
the normative,
and the narrative.
The dilemma that emerges
out of the attempt to deal
with the collapse
through the creation
of pseudo-religious ideologies.
It's time to pass from that historical analysis
because we could continue it.
We could carry it, like I said,
into an analysis of popular culture,
important works of art and literature.
We could talk about Dostoevsky or,
as I've mentioned,
Melville or Conrad.
And that, of course,
is not in any way
an exhaustive list.
All right.
But it's time, I think,
now to turn
to the other side
of the argument
that we need to make.
We need to turn now to
not a historical analysis
of the genealogy
of the meaning crisis,
but a cognitive scientific analysis
of the machinery,
the cognitive machinery
of meaning-making itself.
Because if we want to
respond,
awaken from the meaning crisis
in a way that does not
enmesh us inexorably
in this dilemma
that gives us a way
of recovering
the axial legacy
without trying to do that
through utopic totalitarian ideologies.
I propose that what we do is try to understand,
using our best science,
the machinery of meaning-making
and use that as a way of trying to build
a theoretical structure for recovering and salvaging
what we can of the axial legacy.
And hopefully that science,
that science of cognition,
that cognitive science,
will also afford the engineering
of new systematic sets of psychotechnologies,
practices of self-transcendence,
that can be coordinated with the science,
such that we are not just talking about
responding to the meaning crisis
and the historical forces therein.
We are affording and providing people
with the means
to begin the process,
individually and hopefully collectively,
of creating systematic sets of psychotechnologies
that bring back the connectedness
lost in the three orders
and bring back
the sapiential pursuit
of self-transcendence.
So,
the way to begin that is to just talk about
what cognitive science is,
and of course,
I mean, I'm a cognitive scientist.
I teach cognitive science
at the University of Toronto.
I teach the introduction to cognitive science.
I teach many courses.
I teach a course on Buddhism
and cognitive science.
Some of you may know about that.
I teach upper-level courses
on the cognitive science of consciousness.
And I teach also cognitive psychology
where I do a lot of work
on this machinery of meaning-making
and the machinery,
the cognitive machinery at work
in wisdom and self-transcendence.
So, what I want to do is present to you...
I mean, I'm laughing because I have entire university courses
in which I do this.
But I want to try and present to you
or introduce to you what is cognitive science,
or a particular vision of cognitive science.
Because, of course, academics will disagree
as to what cognitive science is.
And I'm going to present what cognitive science is for me,
not in terms of my personal proclivities or tastes,
but my argument for what I think is the best vision
of what cognitive science should and can be doing.
And I want to present that in a way that is deeply interrelated with the meaning crisis.
Okay, so cognitive science is a fairly recent discipline.
It really emerges only in the late 70s as an explicit academic discipline, the early 80s.
And it's born out of an important idea.
That we actually have multiple disciplines that are studying this thing called mind,
the organ of cognition.
So, for example, there are some people...
Let's organize this this way.
We can talk about sort of levels of reality or levels of analysis.
Right?
To keep Kant happy.
Right?
And then we can talk about different disciplines.
Okay?
All dealing with this phenomena.
And I want to show you how, as the science is advancing,
it's also contributing to the meaning crisis
in the way it's fragmenting the sense of mind
and attendant senses of identity and self.
So, what do I mean?
So, you have, right,
the understanding of mind by understanding the brain.
And people should be more careful when they criticize this.
The brain is a terrifically complex and sophisticated thing.
But what you do here is you're going to try and understand the mind by studying the brain,
studying patterns of neural activity,
and, of course, the discipline that studies this is neuroscience.
And, right, they talk about entities like neurons.
Neuroscience.
They talk about neurons, neural processes.
They use, you know, fMRIs, perhaps EEG.
Right?
New technologies for observing the brain's behavior.
But, of course, there's another discipline that is talking about the mind cognition
at a different level.
This is where you try to understand the mind in terms of information processing.
Right?
And here you're not so much talking about neurons,
you might be talking about neural networks,
but you're talking more, like, about, like, programs, algorithms.
You're talking about ways in which we could potentially make artificial intelligence.
Because, you know, computers and neural networks aren't made of neurons.
They're made, right, out of different kinds of matter.
And so we're not talking about the brain level now.
We're talking about information processing.
And, you know, this is sort of computer science, but especially in the project of artificial intelligence.
Especially, and we'll talk about what this means later, artificial general intelligence.
Where the, what I'm trying to do is not just make machines that can do sort of sophisticated things,
but I'm trying to make machines that actually are cognitive agents.
And we're going to talk a lot about AI.
And, of course, we know that AI has the potential to radically transform our self-understanding
and exacerbate the meaning crisis.
And it is doing so already.
But, of course, another way I study your mind is I study your behavior.
Now, notice here I'm talking about, what do I do here?
I don't cut up brains and slight, like, slice them under microscopes or run fMRIs.
I, I make simulations.
I actually create programs or neural networks or various combinations.
So, notice what I'm showing you.
Each discipline is directed to a different level, and it's using different language,
and it's using different methods of investigation, and it's amassing different kinds of evidence.
So, what's the, what, what's the discipline that studies behavior?
Well, of course, that's psychology.
A discipline that I'm privileged to practice at the University of Toronto.
And we talk about different things.
I mean, psychologists sometimes talk about brains, and they sometimes talk about this,
because cognitive psychology is very influenced by cognitive science.
But, generally, psychologists are trying to understand behavior.
And we talk about things like working memory and long-term memory.
We talk about those kinds of things, and what we do is we use experimentation on human beings,
and we gather statistical data, demographic data, et cetera, and we try to understand.
So, again, a different level using different language, different methods, and different kinds of evidence.
Is that enough?
No, there's another discipline that talks about mind.
Because of what I'm doing right now, I'm making noises come out of my face hole, and you understand my mind.
Language.
Language seems to be a really important way in which mind operates and mind communicates.
It's through language that minds are linked together.
And so you get language here.
And this, of course, is studied by linguistics.
And here you don't talk about working memory and long-term memory.
You might if you link them together in psycholinguistics.
And notice how there's this constant wanting to link the levels together in these new hybrid disciplines.
But generally in linguistics, you talk about things like tree structures.
You talk about transformational grammar.
You do something like experiments, but it's more, right, where you're testing people's judgments
about whether or not a certain utterance is grammatically acceptable, makes sense.
So again, different level, different language, different methods, different kinds of evidence.
And as I've said before, long before the internet networked computers together,
culture was networking minds together.
Because most of our problem solving is done with distributed cognition.
And the discipline that studies that, of course, is anthropology.
And anthropology uses a different method.
It uses participant observation.
Because, listen to that language.
Because culture is something you have to know in a participatory knowing fashion.
You have to go through the transformation of enculturation to know what a culture is.
It uses participant observation.
It generates ethnography.
So what am I showing you?
I'm showing you, right, that this term doesn't refer in a univocal fashion.
It's equivocal.
When I'm saying mind, it's not clear what I mean.
Science is fragmenting what the word mind means.
And therefore, it's fragmenting you.
Who and what you are.
Now, here's the idea, right?
We have a problem here.
We'll come back about this.
If we don't get clear about how we can integrate these various different meanings of mind,
we're going to engage in lots of equivocation.
I'll come back and talk about that.
But here's the other idea.
It's highly unlikely, and already we've seen that these different disciplines want a hybrid together.
It's highly unlikely that these various levels are not culturally…
I'm sorry, are not causally impacting and constraining each other.
In fact, it's highly plausible that these various levels causally interpenetrate and deeply influence each other.
So, we need to capture the causal interaction between the levels.
How do we capture this causal interaction that is not being captured by any one of the individual disciplines?
When we follow that impulse to hybridization, but we pursue something more,
what we want to do is we want to get all of these disciplines talking to each other,
not in an equivocal fashion, but in a meaningful fashion, talking to each other.
We want a kind of theoretical integration because that integration of these different languages and ontologies
for each one of these disciplines is how we're going to capture the missing causal interaction between the levels
and avoid equivocating.
And it also holds this potential.
Because if we can get a discipline that does that,
then we will also not only have a theoretical scientific advance,
we will start to be responding to the fragmentation of the mind.
Now, a discipline that helps to bridge between different ontologies,
discourses, methods, ways of theorizing, bringing evidence together.
The discipline that does that is philosophy, right?
So, what you want is you want some philosophical training in how discourses,
and I mean this very deeply, how disciplines, ways of theorizing, observing, studying reality,
these different levels of the reality of the mind, right?
You need a discipline that is capable of trying to bridge between those vocabularies.
And that's philosophy.
Now, if I take this philosophy, and I, so I get training in this,
and I get training in these, and I start to try to bridge between the disciplines,
to avoid the equivocation, and to facilitate grasping the causal interaction,
then I'm doing cognitive science.
So, in the next episode, we'll talk a lot more about the nature and practice of cognitive science.
But I hope you can see already how it's going to be relevant to trying to understand the machinery of meaning making,
and the fragmentation of ourselves and our identities that is at work within the scientific revolution.
Thank you for your time and attention.
Thank you.
