Welcome back to Awakening from the Meaning Crisis.
Last time we tried something somewhat pretentious, I hope it was still valuable, we endeavored
to discuss the contributions to the notions of meaning and wisdom that were made by the
advent of Christianity.
In particular, we looked at Jesus Nazareth and the exemplification of this participatory
knowing in God's agape creativity, this forgiving of personhood to others, John's
radical idea that God is in fact this agape, that that is actually what we've always been
talking about when we've been talking about God.
And then Paul's radical personalization of this and how the metanoia of his own transformation
is seen by him as a powerful instance of this gnosis agape, but how that also carried with
it a potential dark side in which elements of his identity get projected onto cosmic history
and the idea of inner conflict within history, within God as being reflected of and reflected
in his own inner conflict between the old Saul and the new Paul, and how much this gnosis
participatory knowing is bound up with an exploration and an understanding of how our
agency can be fractured, how we can be at war with ourselves, how we can suffer.
And I want to take this up because the notion of how we can suffer, how we can become at
war with ourselves, how our agency can be undermined, and how much cosmic forces may
be aligned with our suffering becomes a central idea amongst a group of people known or at
least called by their enemies, the Gnostics.
Now there's a lot of controversy about whether or not this is a useful theoretical construct.
There might have been some Gnostic communities.
It's more apt to think of Gnosticism as a style, a way of thinking like existentialism
or fundamentalism.
You don't go to a fundamentalist church, you belong to a branch of Christianity that might
be fundamentalist.
It's a way of orienting yourself that is not belonging to a particular community or a particular
political or socioeconomic group.
Nevertheless, this sense of inner conflict, this sense of losing agency, the sense of
the importance of Gnosis and Agape are all made central to this style, this movement.
Now, before I talk about them in particular, I want to reverse how I want to present this.
What I want to do is instead of trying to historically teach you about them first, I
want to try and make clear to you from the inside, so to speak, what Gnosis is and how
you are probably at some point seeking it or will be seeking it or have sought it in
your life.
And then once we get this existential understanding of what Gnosis is, then through that lens,
I think it is more appropriate to try and understand the historical figures.
The Gnostics are sort of, I don't know what to say, sexy hot right now, a lot of conspiracy
theories and Dan Brown kind of crap around all of this.
And I think that's the wrong way.
You don't really understand the Gnostics as a movement unless you understand what Gnosis
is itself.
This is going to turn out to be important because I think a way we can understand the
Gnostics is they are the axial revolution within the axial revolution.
They are the attempt to take the axial revolution to its culmination, to its rational culmination.
And they are going to provide the undercurrent to Western culture's understanding of its
spiritual history and direction.
So for a long time you won't hear me talk about the Gnostics because like I did when
I was talking about the Buddha's enlightenment and we did a lot of cognitive science on higher
states of consciousness.
I want to try and do some significant cognitive science before we turn back to the history.
So let's get, let's work our way into what this is.
We've already got some sense of what this is.
We've had a lot of discussion of participatory knowing and perspectival knowing and Gnosis
has both of those elements in it, of transformative experience.
We're going to try and draw this all together.
But let's work our way into this.
So we've talked about a worldview and a worldview is when you have a way, you have this deeply
integrated, dynamically coupled way of seeing yourself, your agency and seeing the world
as an arena.
You have this bi-directional modeling, it is simultaneously modeling the world to you
and modeling you to shape the world, this mutual conformity, this reciprocal revelation.
So that's a worldview.
This has happened to me and I hope something similar has happened to you.
That's when you're reading a book, a novel, or I'll use an example, I'm reading the works
of a particular philosopher.
Let's say it's Spinoza, right?
And I'll be reading, you know, and Spinoza is a profound and deep thinker and you spend
a lot of time and you're reading the arguments and you're trying to understand and you can
come to follow the arguments, you can come to follow the inferences, you can even come
to believe some of Spinoza's conclusions.
And so you have a lot of beliefs and they don't even have to be in co-hate, they can
be sort of systematically related together.
But then something else happens, sometimes, not always, but it's happened to me multiple
occasions and it's often what I'm trying to convey above and beyond what I'm saying,
what I'm teaching other people.
I'm reading Spinoza and it's like there's this change.
I go from seeing what Spinoza is saying to seeing things the way Spinoza says.
That's it, right?
Spinoza goes from something, oh, I believe what Spinoza is saying there and there and
there and there, about the world and about what it is to be a human being.
I go from that to actually seeing the world spinozistically.
It's because, you know, Spinoza is now, to use a metaphor, it's now the lens by which
I'm both seeing the world and myself.
I'm now living the world as if Spinoza was an adverb, I'm living the world spinozistically.
I have the perspective of what it is like to see the world the way Spinoza did and what
it is like to participate in that worldview.
You get this advent of the viability, the livability of a worldview.
James talks about that.
He talks about the difference, William James, the great psychologist and philosopher.
He talks about the difference between believing things and it actually being a live option
to you.
So what happens there is, at least for some period of time, right, the agent-arena relationship,
the perspective and the participatory knowing are now, right, conformed to, at least it
seems to me to be that way, to what Spinoza had, not just what, right, Spinoza said, who
and what Spinoza was and what his world was to him has become available to me.
Now that's important because that viability, that ability to enter into a particular agent-arena
configuration will help me to take the next step forward, right?
So John Wright talks a lot about sensibility transcendence.
And he talks about it and this is based on the really important work of Iris Murdoch
and just an absolute gem of a book called The Solventy of the Good.
If you read ten books in your life, one of them should be The Solventy of the Good.
Your life will be less if you have not read it.
So Murdoch was trying to get beyond sort of the rules and reasons for morality to something
much more important.
She was trying to get to that viability of morality, the way in which we pay attention
in such a way that our salience landscape and the agent-arena relationship is transformed
such that we do the good.
But let's use Murdoch's particular example.
There's a mother-in-law.
She has a son.
The son is married to a woman and she doesn't like this woman.
The mother-in-law doesn't like the woman.
It's obviously the mother-in-law to the daughter-in-law.
She doesn't like this woman because she finds her coarse, finds her loud, finds her kind
of uncouth, and therefore beneath the sort of elegance and dignity of her son.
And then think about agape and forgiving here.
Think about agape and forgiving.
What happens here at some point, Murdoch says, and it happens like an insight.
It happens like when you come out of the nine-dot problem.
The mother-in-law realizes something.
And Murdoch is clear about this.
It's not a normal insight.
Like in a normal insight, we reframe how we're looking at something.
I reframe how I look at the nine-dots.
But what's actually happening is the mother-in-law is having a bidirectional insight.
She's not only reframing how she sees the world, she's reframing how she sees herself.
And these are happening in a completely interfused manner.
This is a participatory change.
The agent, both the agent and the arena side of the relationship are being co-changed together.
So it's not a reframing of this or that.
I often use this term.
It's a transframing.
It's not a reframing of a particular problem.
It's a transformation of the whole framing process, both ends.
Because what's happening is the mother-in-law is seeing the daughter-in-law not as coarse,
but as spontaneous, not as uncouth, but sincere,
not as lacking in elegance, but as possessing authenticity.
And then she's simultaneously, in a co-determining fashion, realizing that the way that she,
the mother-in-law, has framed things habitually has been wrong.
She's having what we've talked about before, that systematic insight,
not just an insight here and here, but there's a whole system of errors that she's transformation,
that she's transforming.
She's going through that kind of developmental transformation that we've talked about.
Wright calls this sensibility transcendence.
Because what's happening simultaneously is, right, the daughter-in-law can be
something that she couldn't be before, and the mother-in-law is becoming somebody
she couldn't become before.
She couldn't be before.
These two things are happening together.
Her sensibility, her whole way of participating in a world view, an agent-arena relationship,
is being transformed.
And so both things are going through transcendence.
Do you see this?
Here's herself, and here's Wright, the daughter, the object of her attention.
And this is going through self-transcendence, but so is this.
And that's happening in a completely conjoined way.
The mother-in-law is becoming what she couldn't be because of how she is opening up
what the daughter-in-law can be.
And precisely because she's coming to see, have a radical insight into what the daughter-in-law
could be, opening up that she's opening up what she can be.
It's again this process of participatory knowing, reciprocal revelation.
And it's this mutually accelerating disclosure, this knowing by loving.
It's this sensibility transcendence.
So notice what's happening here.
There's a way, you can see that I can go through a process like this and enter into a world view.
And of course, that's what Christianity was offering, right?
It was offering people that metanoia of how they can go through this radical transformation
in this way, opening up the world, opening up themselves, etc.
Now, why is that important?
Because now I want you to think of the opposite.
Your inability to enter into or make viable to yourself a new way of being.
Now, in order to get to that, let me bring up again, somebody we've spoken before, Harry
Frankfurt. Remember, he's the person who talked about bullshit.
Frankfurt also talks about how wonderful book, Reasons for Love and the importance of what we
care about, how much our reasoning depends on what we love, what we care about, how we're bound
into an agent-arena relationship.
Now, Frankfurt brings up an important notion.
He brings up a notion he calls, I don't quite like this word, but to be fair to him,
I can't think of a better word.
He calls the unthinkable.
So let me give you an example of this.
So, the way to think of the unthinkable is, although you can make thoughts,
images, propositions, run inferences, you can't actually make it viable.
You can't go through the sensibility transcendence that would bring you into living that worldview.
So, here's my example.
My oldest son currently lives with me, and this has been such a blessing for me.
I get to live with him and spend time with him as he's building his career.
Now, I can think this thought, it would be great if I kicked Jason out.
I can run this thought through my head, because if I did, then the apartment would be clean,
I'd have more money.
I can draw, I can imagine what it would look like.
I can run the thought, I can drive all the inferences.
But what I can't do is actually make this a viable alternative for me.
It's in that way, it's unthinkable to me.
My love for my son doesn't mean I can't run these thoughts.
Imagine these scenes, draw these inferences.
I can do all of that.
What I can't do is bring myself to live in that world.
It's unthinkable to me.
Perhaps a better way of thinking about it is, it's not viable to me.
It's unlivable for me.
Now, that's a good thing, right?
So, do you see how I have a way, a sensibility transcendence with my son that means,
there's no effort on my part to treat him morally.
And I'm not trying to be self-congratulatory.
What I'm trying to say is, doing that thing of kicking him out,
which I think would ultimately be an immoral act, is not viable to me.
So, right now, this all sounds, this is all really great,
but there's a way in which this can be twisted.
I want you to now think of the negative of it.
What if you're stuck?
You're stuck in a worldview you don't want to be in.
You want to go over there, to that worldview, but you can't.
You can't go through the sensibility transcendence that will make that worldview viable to you.
Because you can run inferences in your head, you can run imagine scenes,
you can state things to yourself, you can make all kinds of affirmations,
won't get you there.
You're stuck.
You can't go through that change.
You experience a kind of existential inertia.
People often enter therapy for exactly this reason.
They can state who they want to be and what kind of world they want to be in.
They can imagine it.
They can make inferences of what it would be like if they were there.
They can deeply want to be there, but they don't get there.
They stay stuck.
I want to stop getting in these horrible romantic relationships.
I want to be in a relationship that is deep and profound.
It would be so good.
I can imagine myself there.
I can see myself, but I can't get there.
Every time I try to get there, I end up here again.
Every time, somehow, and I don't understand how,
I don't understand how the way I'm caring about things,
the way I'm participating in myself and my world,
is preventing me from making that way of life a viable option to me.
I want to be there.
Think about Paul and the old man and the new man.
I want to be there.
I want to be that person living there.
But all my efforts to get there circle me back to here.
I just can't get out of this existential inertia.
I don't know how to bring about the sensibility transcendence
that's going to make that way, that person and that world viable to me.
How do I get there?
How do I get there?
How do I stop suffering?
So one thing that can happen to people is they can lose their agency.
Remember, that's what suffering means because they are stuck like this.
They're losing any sense of how to get to that other worldview, that other self.
They're experiencing radical existential inertia.
Carl Jung used to talk about the primary thing
that people would have to get to and have to express and why they would come into therapy
was precisely because they felt stuck.
It might not even be that there are particular concrete problems in their life.
It might be that everything's actually going kind of well, but they're stuck.
They're stuck, they're thwarted.
There's a sense of they're not moving and they should be.
And although they can talk and draw images and make inferences about how they should move
and where they should move to, they don't have the participatory perspective of annoying.
They don't know how to get there.
They don't know how to engage in the sensibility transcendence.
They don't know how to bring about the transforming.
And often they enter into therapy and therapy has an agape element into it.
The therapist is affording an agape transformation.
But in addition to being stuck because of existential inertia, there's another problem
people face when they are seeking, when they need significant transformation.
And this goes to the heart of one of the best books.
I've already mentioned it before in this series and I think philosophy in the last 20 years.
This is L.A. Paul's work, Transformative Experience, because what L.A. Paul's work points to
is a way in which these transformative experiences render us, the possibility of such transformative
experiences, render us kind of stupefied because what they have us do is confront a deep kind
of existential ignorance that is endemic to these transformative experiences.
And it has to do again with this very perspectival and participatory knowing that I'm talking about.
Okay, so she first starts with a very trivial example just to warm you up to the thinking.
She says, somebody offers you to taste this fruit that you've never tasted before.
And the problem is people have a very bimodal reaction.
They either think, wow, this fruit is so unlike any fruit I've ever tasted, it's so wonderful.
I love it.
Or they say, this fruit is so unlike any fruit I've ever tasted, I hate it.
It tastes like vomit.
And the thing is, you don't know which reaction you're going to have until you bite the fruit.
And she says, well, do you bite the fruit?
And you may say, well, I don't know.
The point is, right, you bite the fruit or not, you'll typically say, well, what does it matter?
There's nothing significantly at risk if I have the fruit.
That's true.
But what the fruit example points to is the following.
There's a kind of knowing that is dependent on your state of being.
This is your perspectival knowing.
You don't know what it is like, because that's the core of...
You don't know what your salience landscape will be like when you eat this fruit until you have eaten the fruit.
There's no way of knowing that ahead of time.
You have to go through the experience to know what it is like to have the experience.
You say, okay, I can sort of get that.
This is kind of what she calls an epistemic transformation.
But she says, some of the times what we're confronting is something deeper,
where we're confronting a personal transformation.
This is where what's happening again is knowing, not just by having a particular perspective,
this is knowing by having the agent-arena relationship radically transformed.
You don't know what it's like to be that person in that world,
because you have to actually be changed, and the world has to be changed,
in order for you to have that participatory knowing.
So she talks about the fact that what she means by a transformative experience
is one in which you're going to undergo that change in perspectival knowing
and that change in participatory knowing.
So she gives a gedonkin experiment to bring that out first, a thought experiment.
She says, imagine the following.
She said, your friends come to you and they reveal the secret.
They give you just indubitable evidence that they can do the following.
They convince you that they can absolutely do the following.
They can turn you into a vampire.
Do you do it?
Do you become a vampire?
Now before you put this off as stilly,
the point of a philosophical thought experiment is to play with something free from your own life
so you can get clear about what it means.
After we've played with it, we will go back to our lives.
But here's the issue.
You can't make any inferences about this,
because you don't know what it's going to be like to be a vampire,
and you don't know who you're going to be when you're a vampire.
Because your preferences, your character, everything is going to change,
and your salience landscaping is going to radically change.
You don't know what it's going to be like.
So here's what you face.
I don't know what I'm going to lose if I become a vampire.
I don't know what I'm going to lose.
Once I go through this change, I will have lost a way of being.
It will become unthinkable to me.
I can't get back to it, but I don't know what I'm going to lose until I go through it.
So, oh, well, then I shouldn't do it.
But if I don't do it, I don't know what I'm missing.
I don't know what I'm missing.
There could be a way of being here that is amazing and wonderful.
I don't know what I'm missing.
And I'm caught.
I equally don't know what I'm going to lose,
and I don't know what I'm going, what I'm missing.
And I can't do any calculations.
I don't know what my values are going to be.
Are my values now the right set of values?
Are my values then the right set of values?
Is the kinds of experience that I'm having now?
There is no place above I can make the comparison.
I can't reason my way through it.
And now, unlike the fruit example, everything is at risk.
Both the agent and the arena are at risk.
And you go, okay, so what?
I get it.
Who cares?
I'm never going to be a vampire.
That's not the point.
The point is once you acknowledge the logic of the problem,
this is what she now gets you to realize.
You confront these in your life at multiple times.
Here's an example.
So relevant to everything we've been talking about with Agape.
Should you have a kid?
Should you have a child?
Do you see how it's exactly the same?
You don't know what you're missing if you don't have a child.
Because you are going to, we talked about it,
you're going to become a different person
with a different salience landscape.
And until you have a child, you don't know what it's like.
So you don't know what you're missing.
You also don't know what you're going to lose.
All people will tell you, oh, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah,
but until you go through it, you don't know.
You're existentially ignorant.
Here's another one.
Should I enter into a romantic relationship with that person?
You don't know.
You don't know who you're going to be,
because if it's a real romantic relationship,
it's going to change you.
You don't know who you're going to be.
You don't know what your salience landscape's going to be
when you're on the other side.
You don't know what you're missing
by not getting into the relationship,
but you don't know what you're going to lose
when you get into it.
So should you do it or not?
We face irreversible change,
and yet there's no way to reason our way through it,
because on both sides of the transformation,
we are confronted by radical ignorance.
We don't know what we're missing
and we don't know what we'll be losing.
We don't know if we should stay here.
We don't know if we should go there.
I've had the pleasure to talk to L.A. Paul Laury
about some of this and present a case to her,
which I think there's some agreement about this,
and I look forward to we have some future work
we're doing together.
Because I pointed out to Laury
that whenever we're going through any significant
developmental change, like to use Paul's example,
going from a child to an adult,
the child doesn't know what they're going to lose
when they lose their childhood innocence,
when they become an adult.
They don't know.
But as an adult, right,
the child also doesn't know what it's going to miss,
what it's missing if it doesn't become an adult,
and you think, oh, that's ridiculous.
No, it's not.
Do you know how much people face difficulties,
precisely because they get transfixed by this?
They write, if I grow up, I might lose stuff,
but if I don't grow up, I don't know what I'm missing.
What should I do?
What should I do?
What should I do?
What should I do?
If I choose this career,
I lose all these wonderful potential realities.
But should I just keep all my possibilities open?
Look at all my possibilities.
But if I choose this, I'll lose.
And some of those possibilities I don't even know.
But if I don't ever choose, what am I missing?
I'll never know because I've never actually gotten
into any particular career.
So we can be stupefied as we face the need for radical transformation.
So people are not, they go into therapy,
not only because they're stuck,
they don't know how to transform.
They're also stupefied.
They don't know if they should.
And this is bound up with the aspect disguise
that people get into when they're stuck.
And it shows this stupefication and the stuckness working together.
Look, somebody comes in, they're doing therapeutic work with you, right?
Why are you here?
I'm stuck.
How are you stuck?
Oh, well, I'm so stubborn.
I'm stubborn.
I'm rigid.
And I, oh, oh, and I need to get, I need to be more fucked.
Oh, okay.
And then you talk to them and let's talk about other stuff,
come back and go, what do you like most about yourself?
Oh, I'm persistent.
I don't give up.
And you see, the very thing they're trying to change,
it's the very thing about themselves
that they don't want to let go of,
that they're most identified with.
I don't change my mind.
What do you like about yourself?
I'm persistent.
I don't give up.
I don't change my mind.
They talk about the same thing,
one under a negative aspect and one under a positive aspect
and they don't realize it.
They're stuck and they're stupefied.
And when we're stuck and we're stupefied,
when we're stuck, we can't imagine
how to make an alternative worldview significant,
how to make it viable.
When we're stupefied, we can't imagine the alternative.
We can't figure out how to rationally make the choice.
So we get this, right?
Inertia and indecision were stuck
and stupefied.
And then we're trapped.
We're existentially trapped.
And then you can think about how that could be mixed up
with the stuff we talked about with the Buddha,
the parasitic processing,
the parasitic processing,
the modal confusion.
But we get stuck.
How do you get out?
What do you do in therapy?
Because therapy works.
What do you do?
How do you get people out of being existentially trapped?
Well, let's go back to it.
Let's try and work our way through it.
So what do some people do when they're considering
whether or not they want to have a child?
Some people just throw themselves into the Darwinian flow
and just blah, right?
But some people are like,
oh, should we have a child or not, right?
What do some people do?
Well, I've noticed many people doing this
and it's very interesting.
They get a pet.
They get a dog, typically.
And then they do kind of bizarre behaviors with the dog.
They have pictures taken with the dog
and they give the dog a bed and some toys
and right and stick it.
And what they're doing, right,
is they're doing something that's kind of like having a child.
Should I enter into a romantic relationship with this person?
This is advice that was actually given to me
when I was dating and I see people do it.
Go on a trip with them.
Go on a trip with them.
Live with them for seven days.
It's kind of like living with them.
It's kind of like being in a relationship with them.
People say, well, yeah, I sort of get that.
But even the things like being a vampire,
how do people do that?
Well, they play role-playing games
and you say that's just fantasy.
And that's the intention to the way this is evolving in our culture.
So role-playing games have moved into live-action versions
where you act out the role-playing
and then this has evolved into a Norwegian,
not Norwegian, it's Scandinavian style,
which is called jeep form.
And in jeep form, what you're doing is
you're given a scenario to act out
and the person that plays the role of,
you know, London Masters, like a movie director,
they will tell you to cut scenes or switch roles.
And here's the whole point of jeep form.
You're trying to enact emotionally difficult situations.
Why would you want to do that?
What people are seeking in jeep form
is they're seeking a phenomena called bleed.
I'm going to do this role-playing
and this person here is a director
and they're doing stuff to mess up with my transframing
and my role-playing,
because what I'm trying to do is get
so that the line between my real life
and what I'm doing in this psychodrama bleeds.
So that the line between the game
and reality bleed into each other,
blurs, I'm looking for bleed,
so that I can play, seriously play with
the possibilities.
Do you see what's happening here?
People engage,
and we have to learn how to take this word seriously again,
they engage in play.
The whole point about play, right?
The whole point about play is it puts you in between.
Here's the world you're in
and here's the world you want to be in
and then there's this liminal zone where we can play.
There's no coincidence that as organisms become more intelligent,
more in need of developmental transformations,
they also become much more playful,
they need more and more play.
And play is not a frivolous thing.
One of the disasters of our culture
is we think of play as only about fun.
We've trivialized it.
Now play can be fun,
but I don't think fun is what people are after in jeep form.
It's not really fun that people are after
when they adopt a dog and treat it like a child.
See, the word play doesn't have to be about fun
because you can play music and it could be heartbreaking music,
it could be Mahler that you're playing.
In Tai Chi, you don't do Tai Chi, you play Tai Chi
and it's not about having fun,
it's about a deep engagement with processes of transformation.
So the way to think about this is
what are people doing in all these instances?
They're confronting the possibility of a transformative experience
and so what they do is they have an inactive analogy.
This isn't an analogy of word or thought
because that's not going to work
because this is about perspectival and participatory change.
This is an analogy you enact.
You go through the actions.
Now this takes a lot of skill
to create an inactive analogy.
It creates a lot of skill.
I've got to get it right.
If I'm doing the jeep form, I've got to get it right
and that's what the director is there to help.
You might do role reversal,
suddenly give me an object I've got to use.
The therapist will suddenly get you to talk to that,
pretend that that empty chair that your mother is there
and start talking and you've got to get it right
because the inactive analogy has to be similar enough
to the world and the person you're trying to become in that world.
It has to be similar enough that you can feel it.
You can start to get the perspectival and participatory knowing
but it's still similar enough to this world
that you can pull out if you need to.
It's this delicate balancing act.
It has to be relevantly similar to the world I want to go to
but still relevantly similar to the world that I'm in
because I want to put myself into a place
where I can play with the two
so that I can compare them together.
This creates, it demands, I should say,
it demands tremendous skill,
this ability to come up with an act.
There's a beauty and an elegance here,
an apt metaphor that you can actually play within,
that you can participate in
so that you can, ah, that's what it would be like.
Ah, but I still know who I am right now
and I can feel and see and sense the two together.
That's what you're doing in therapy.
One of the things we need to do,
as you can probably see the implication of what I'm saying
as part of addressing the meaning crisis,
is we have to recover play.
And I hope you now understand what I'm going to say
and that is not meant to be disrespectful.
One of the important things that religion was was play.
That's what ritual properly understood is.
People are playing, serious playing,
in order to try and put themselves into a liminal place,
a place between two worlds,
the normal world and the sacred world they want to dwell within.
They're playing there in order to see how
and whether they should go through
the change in world and self
that the religion is demanding and affording.
Now notice, in order to make a world view viable to me,
I have to go through this self-world sensibility transcendence,
but you've seen that before.
You've seen that before.
This is an agage.
An agage is precisely to set things up
so that as this is transcending,
as I'm coming more into contact with what's real,
getting below the illusion,
like Paul just seeing things in mirror
or just shadows on the cave repler,
as that opens up, that affords me transforming.
So sensibility transcendence is just, I think, an agage.
And sensibility transcendence is how I enter into a world view.
So what I need is I need not only an inactive analogy,
I need a way of enacting an agage.
And that is also what religious ritual used to do for us.
Religious ritual was a way of playing with inactive analogies
so that I can compare, so I can overcome the ignorance.
I can see isn't even the right verb.
I can see, be these two worlds, these two ways of being,
these two persons within those worlds.
But ritual also was enacted an agage.
It was giving you the skills for knowing how to get unstuck,
how to go through sensibility transcendence,
how to make that world viable.
So in therapy, you're often doing this,
you're giving people an inactive analogy.
So it's coming clear that you're stuck
and it has to do with how you relate it to your mom.
So pretend that your mom is in that chair.
I know she's dead now, forget that.
This isn't literal, but it's not fun.
It's not frivolous, it's serious play.
Pretend your mom is there, enact that,
get the analogy, talk to her.
And then here, I'm a therapist.
I'll give you ways of reframing her and reframing yourself.
I'll help you to engage in an agage
so you'll start to know how to go through the sensibility transcendence.
And that's how you get out of being existentially trapped.
You have this ritual behavior.
Again, like when I'm doing Tai Chi, like Tai Chi, right,
these are all, this is an inactive analogy.
I'm doing these motions.
This is how, like if somebody's, this is how,
single whip, this is helping me actually enact
what it would be like to be in a fight situation.
But it's also an agogic, right?
The whole point about doing Tai Chi
is it's also radically transforming.
That's one way of understanding Chi.
Don't understand it as magical energy.
Understand it instead as it's a way of radically transforming
how I'm experiencing myself in the world.
In Tai Chi, we talk about the two eyes.
I have an eye that's looking out at the world
and looking at myself and what I'm doing
is I'm radically transforming them.
I'm trying to bring about the know-how of an agage
and I'm enacting the analogy of fighting.
It's a ritual.
I'm seriously playing with an inactive analogy
and enacting an agogic transformation.
That's why it's a path of wisdom
and a martial art at the same time.
You see therapy, real martial arts.
Martial arts that aren't just kick and punch,
but real martial arts that we're all doing this.
That's why so many people in the meaning crisis
are attracted to martial arts,
are attracted to things like jeep form.
They're hungry.
That's why they go into therapy.
They are hungry.
They are hungry for ways of dealing with
being existentially trapped.
So, people are looking for ways of transforming
not just their cognition, their beliefs,
but perspectively transforming their consciousness
in a participatory fashion,
transforming their character.
What they identify with
and how that identification enables them
to inhabit an agent-arena relationship.
We're close to telling you what Gnosis is.
So, in Gnosis,
what I'm trying to do
is bring about an altered state of consciousness.
Because that is going to put me into the flow state.
It's got the possibility of giving me
a higher state of consciousness,
a mystical experience that's transformative.
And then what I'm doing is I'm setting this
within a ritual context.
Where I'm doing inactive analogy
and I'm doing inactive anagage.
I'm doing serious play.
And I have the flexibility,
the cognitive flexibility.
This is how the psychedelics can be enmeshed.
Why psychedelics can improve therapy so much.
Because the psychedelics give you
the cognitive flexibility in the flow state
and the possibility even of a higher state of consciousness
that then empowers this process
to get you free from existential entrapment.
This is why you give people psychedelics
and you put them through the therapeutic process
and you can get them free from post-traumatic stress disorder.
Okay, so now, what's Gnosis?
This is Gnosis.
Gnosis is to have a set of psychotechnologies
that create a ritual context like jeep form,
like martial arts, like therapy,
that allows us to overcome
being existentially stuck,
existentially stupefied.
And that is being powered by
an altered state of consciousness
that's induced by chanting, sleep deprivation, psychedelics.
And what this does,
what Gnosis does is it frees me
from being existentially trapped.
It's this combination,
this integration of psychotechnologies
that activate and transform
perspectival and participatory knowing
and give us a sense of a greater reality
that we want to live within
and thereby liberates us from being existentially trapped
and heals us from our fractured suffering,
our fragmented agency, our broken world.
That's Gnosis.
So what I want to look at next time
is how Gnosis was taken up within a movement
within the same time period as early Christianity.
Thank you very much for your time and attention.
Thank you very much.
