Welcome back. This is the 24th episode of Awakening from the Meaning Crisis. Last time
we were talking about the historical developments that happened around Kant. We took a look
at Kant and Schopenhauer and Nietzsche. I presented Nietzsche as one of the great
prophets. I'm using that in the Old Testament sense of a prophet of the Meaning Crisis.
We talked about a way of understanding what Nietzsche is saying. It's not just simply
atheism. We also took a look at a way in which Nietzsche doesn't really adequately give us
a response to the Meaning Crisis, although he indicates that an important project within
the response to the Meaning Crisis is how to we reappropriate from the axial legacy the
idea of radical self-transcendence within a secular scientific worldview. Now I want
to go back to Kant and trace out another important line of development that's going to be crucial
for understanding the Meaning Crisis. That's the line that comes from Kant and to Hegel.
I can't go through all the various important German thinkers like Fichte and Schelling,
but I want to talk a lot about Hegel because of the tremendous impact Hegel has had on
the political landscape and the cultural landscape surrounding the Meaning Crisis.
As we know, Kant also had a deep influence on the Romantics who also have a significant
impact on Hegel. If you remember, Kant has this model of the way the mind is framing
reality in order to produce what is rational within it. This was then taken by the Romantics
and reversed in an interesting way that the closer you got to the actual re-establishing
in the contact with reality, the more you're reversing this process of rationalization
and you're coming into contact with reality via more irrational states of mind.
What Kant had, of course, is the idea that reality out here was the thing in itself which
we cannot directly interact with. We can only interact with our experience. You see how
the disconnection from the world becomes radicalized in Kant? All the Meaning is totally within
a self-enclosed activity, a self-constructing, self-enclosed activity of the mind. The thing
in itself is nothing that we can come into rational contact with. That's why, of course,
as I said, the Romantics propose this radical idea, sort of the exact opposite of the actual
revolution, that by moving into more irrational states, we can re-establish contact with reality.
Now, Hegel is aware of both the Romantic response and the Kantian framework. And talking about
Hegel is, oh my gosh, Hegel is a titanic and complex and difficult thinker. And so once
again, I want to remind everybody that I'm trying to cut through a lot of material, trying
to zero in on those aspects of Hegel's thought that are, I think, directly relevant to understanding
the genealogy of the meaning crisis. So what Hegel says, first of all, is that this idea
makes no sense. Hegel points out that the thing in itself is completely unknowable. And for
something to be completely unknowable, he argues, is indistinguishable from it being
non-existent. If there is nothing that can possibly be known about it, then we should
stop thinking about it as something that exists, something that should be taken into account
when we're talking about a relationship to reality. And if you remove the thing in itself,
then you get this idea that reality is totally found within this structure. This is of course
a form of idealism, which has nothing to do with pursuing ideal. Idealism is the idea
that reality is ultimately constructed made by the mind in some fashion. And so Hegel
makes the famous claim that the real is the rational, that this rational stuff and reality
are actually identical. If you get rid of this side of the equation, the thing in itself,
all you're left with is this, that reality is the rational, the real is the rational
and the rational is the real. And this, of course, is an important derivation, I think
is the correct way of putting it, from the original insight from Parmentides that we
saw exemplified in Plato, that there's a deep connection between being and being known,
that there's a deep connection between our sensing something as real, and I don't mean
just physically sensing, I mean making sense, our sensing something as real and how intelligible
it is to us, how knowable it is to us. And Pearl, in his book, Thinking Being, The Classical
Edition of Metaphysics, just does a fantastic job at explaining how profoundly fecund this
idea has been for us. So Hegel takes that platonic inspiration and he weds it to a critique
of the thing in itself, and then we get this idea that what's going on, actually, is not
just not that the mind, like in Kant, is making the structures of rational experience of reality,
no, no, you get that the mind is actually making the structures of reality itself.
Well, what about the irrational stuff that the romantics were talking about? Well, Hegel
re-understands and reinterprets these developmentally. He understands the irrational aspects of the
mind, not as us moving towards the contact with the unknowable thing in itself, instead
the irrational aspects of the mind are actually a potential within the mind, a developmental
potential for rationality. So the idea is our rational, intelligible experience has not
fully developed, has not been fully self-actualized, and you can hear the Aristotelian aspects
in Hegel's thought. Now, when I start talking about mind in this way and rationality, we
have to be very careful. We're not talking about mind in a sense that's your mind, the
individual mind. We're talking about mind in an extended sense. We're talking about the
entire system of patterns of intelligibility that are at work in humanity, all of the patterns
of intelligibility that we're using to make sense in this profound way. So if you think
about this room, for example, and my mind is structuring my experience, and then if
you give Hegel his critique of Kant, that there's nothing beyond the structuring of
experience, then you have the idea that this is all in a deeply metaphysical sense, this
is all the activity of these patterns of intelligibility. The patterns of intelligibility and reality
is this mind in this extended sense. So try to think of these patterns of intelligibility
as structuring reality, not just the experience of reality, and that they form a living system.
They're developing like an Aristotle. It's like a living thing. They're going through
a process of self-actualization. The irrational elements are constantly being transformed into
more rational, intelligible elements. So the Germans have a great word for all of this,
the word geist. And like all German words, it doesn't translate that readily into English.
It covers these two words that we separate in English, and it overlaps between them, mind
and spirit. Because what it's trying to pick up on are, again, this living systems of patterns
of intelligibility by which we ultimately make sense. And given this argument against
an unknowable reality being a reality, then the patterns by making sense are identical
to the patterns by which reality is intelligibly structured.
So this is an individual idealism. This is what's going to become known as absolute idealism.
Because the absolute is another term that's used for this system of self-reliance, which
is the realisation of the patterns of intelligibility, rather than talking about an individual mind.
I'm trying not to get too abstract here, but it's hard not to be abstract when you're
talking about Hegel's idealism. And so my task with you is to try and explain this in
a way that constantly makes it plausible to you, and also at least viable, so you can
see why it became an attractive way of thinking. If you deeply buy Kant and the Romantics and
yet you accept Hegel's argument against this, you reinterpret the Romantics the way he did,
you get this position. How do you study it? How do you understand it? How do you study
this living systems of patterns of intelligibility that structure experience and reality? Well,
you study history. And here you can see, of course, the deep influence of Christianity
and going back to the Axial Revolution within ancient Israel about understanding history
as the process by which reality and our understanding of reality are co-unfolding together.
So you study history and you look for patterns in the history. What are you looking at? What
kind of patterns? These are patterns in how we have systematically made sense, how cultures
have created worldviews, ways of making sense, ways in which we have, as I've often used
the metaphor, we've created grammars by which we make sense of ourselves and the world.
So you can see some of the influence of Hegel on some of the terms and ideas that I've
been using as we've been engaging in our historical analysis. Okay, so these are patterns we realize.
And I want to really pick up on the double meaning of this word, like I've indicated before,
when realizing means here both that it is something we experience, but it is also a
way in which things are being made real, coming into realness, coming into reality in a developmental
sense. So we're talking about looking at history to discover the development of this grammar
of intelligibility, this grammar of human thinking, human being, human living, how humans
are worlding, how they're creating worlds of intelligible patterns in which we can act
in a meaningful manner and understand ourselves, the world in each other. And what you discover,
Hegel said, is if you look at this history, you see it's not static, you would see that
it is going through a developmental process and that development is driven by sort of
two opposing movements or forces. One is a process of differentiation.
So think about when you're trying to make sense, what do you have to do often, right?
You have to grasp the differences between things, you have to distinguish, you have
to clarify, you have to contrast. So a good way of thinking about this is this term we
used articulation. Articulation means to speak and to make sense, but it also means to find
all the joints, find the division points between things. So part of what we're doing is when
we're trying to make sense, we're engaging in a process of differentiation, articulation.
But of course we also are doing the other. We are doing integration.
We are gathering things together so that we have systematic connections are being realized.
Again, we're not, we're becoming aware of them, but we're also constituting them and
making them. And again, not as individuals, but as participants in this project of how
the patterns of intelligibility are working themselves out through our thought, through
our behavior, through our ways of living and being in the world.
So Hegel understands the process of understanding as the creation of a system, a systematization.
Because when I'm doing this, when I'm differentiating things and also integrating them together, I'm
putting them into a systematic relationship. And so let me give you an analogy for understanding.
Hegel, please remember it's an analogy. So when you study child development, you can
see children have ways of making sense of the world and that discloses the world to them
in a certain way. And that way in which they make sense works for them. It gives them a
certain understanding. But what happens as you go through stages of development is that
that system gets incredibly improved. Things that were often confused together get differentiated
apart and then get reintegrated so that you get a more sophisticated systematic understanding
of the world. And again, when I say this understanding, you have to understand that
it means not just in your head, but how the world is structured for you.
So you've got this living system of patterns of intelligibility and you see across history
that it's always being articulated by differentiation and then being integrated into a systematic
way of understanding being and not just being, but how the world is being to us.
So Hegel thought he saw this internal development in Geist, that this is his name, as I said,
for this notion of the extended mind. It had an internal development, much like a living
thing, much like a child. So what do you see happening? You'll see in the history of ideas
as we try to make sense of things, you'll see an idea as proposed, a particular idea,
a way of understanding, and it gets contrasted. It gets clarified, it gets distinguished, it
gets differentiated from a counter idea. But then what typically happens is that these
two ideas then are drawn together into a higher integration. Now, this is often popularly
explained. Hegel doesn't actually use these terms this way, but this is often explained
by this idea of thesis, antithesis, and synthesis. Now, what happens is that these two ideas
get integrated together. So the idea is you get an idea, you'll get a counter idea, it's
integrated together, and then this serves as a new idea to start the whole process again.
Here's the counter idea, and then that gets integrated, and so on and so forth. And what
you have is the increasing articulation and integration of the patterns of intelligibility,
which for Hegel, given the argument, are also the patterns of realness, the patterns of
reality. You get this incredible complexification, you get emerging capacities for understanding
and being in the world. He calls this process dialectic.
So, just to give a quick example from the history of ideas. You have people who are trying
to get at what is reality, what kind of thing is reality, and you'll have certain people
like Parmenides and Plato and saying, well, being, for things to be, is ultimately for
things, reality is changeless. Because when I know something, I know it to be true, and
for things to be true, that has to be that that's the way they really are, and if they're
changing, and I try to know them, I can't ever get a true grasp of them, and you get
this idea that reality is changeless. And then you get people like Heraclitus and others
saying, no, no, if you do that, then the whole capacity for understanding your experience
of reality, that things are changing, if you write off all that experience as an illusion,
then there's no content to your experience. There's nothing actually that you're having
an experience about. In fact, they argue the opposite, that reality is pure change.
So you got Parmenides, and an aspect of Plato, and then you got Heraclitus. To be real is
to be unchanging. No, to be real is to be changing. And you can see this where people
in our culture, they'll talk about reality as if it's eternity, but they'll also talk
about there's nothing as real as change itself, that reality is always in process. And then
Plato comes along, as we've seen, and proposes a way of integrating them together, and what
he says is, no, that there are eternal patterns, and they structurally organize changing processes.
And if you remember that maps on to this is more having to do with the upper world, the
more real world, and this is the more illusory world. And you can see this played out in
our science. What do you say? What do you mean, John? Well, science is built around the idea
that there are these eternal patterns, laws, and yet they constrain and interact with forces,
which are defined completely in how they change things. And so science is a synthesis out
of these two ways of trying to understand reality. And it ultimately goes back to Plato. And
we use math to talk about this, and we use experiments to talk about this, and so forth.
Okay, so this is not a ridiculous idea that Hegel has. It's a profound idea. You can see
at it at work. And if you talk about something to use, I think a strong analogy, about how
science is progressing, and something about the patterns that science discovers are also
the patterns of reality, then you have something strongly analogous to how Hegel is thinking
of Geist. So this dialectic, even the term that Hegel uses, by the way, this is inspired
by Plato, although I think Hegel's interpretation of dialectic is very different from Plato's.
But this whole process of the way in which Geist is historically developing is a process
of self-transcendence on Geist's part, emergence. It's the way in which Geist is developing,
self-actualizing, the way in which it is moving from a more and more irrational making sense
to a more and more rational, systematic making sense.
So Hegel proposes that in the history of dialectic, we can get to a stage where the system of
understanding and realization becomes aware of itself, that one of the things, one of
the ideas, one of the systems of making sense that emerges is this idea itself. And you
see what that means? And there's hubris in Hegel here, right? But Hegel's basically
saying his philosophy is the philosophy in which this process of Geist and realization
has become reflectively aware of it, which this process has created a systematic understanding
that grasps the dialectical principles of Geist. When you get that, then you have what
He calls absolute spirit, absolute Geist. There's this telos, there's this goal in this
whole process. All of history is moving, and of course He now sees Himself as the discoverer
of this, but all of history is moving to this moment of absolute idealism.
So rationality is seen as a systematic process in the self-development of Geist, of its
self-understanding. Now many of you are probably finding that this is a very impersonal way
of talking about mind and meaning, and we will come back to that. So hold on to that,
we will come back to that.
So when the process of making sense of understanding passes into this stage of self-understanding,
when the process creates systems of ideas that grasp this pattern of dialectic, then
Hegel says that what's happened is we have moved from understanding with a capital U
as not individual understanding, but the understanding in Geist to reason with a capital R.
So what does He mean by that? The principles of rationally making sense, this living system
of principles for rationally making sense moves from understanding things to understanding
everything systematically. All the things are getting integrated into a systematic understanding,
and that systematic understanding is now self-reflective. It includes and refers and grasps itself.
In a very deep sense, rationality has realized itself. It's a very powerful way of thinking.
Put this all together with the original and crucial premise of idealism. If this is a
process by which reality realizes itself, and the real is the rational, this is also
a process by which reality realizes itself. This process at work in and through us and
in and through history, by which reality and rationality have realized themselves, and
is God. You see what Hegel's done? He's taken, again, as I've mentioned, this Hebrew Christian
idea that God is that process by which we make sense and we develop and create the world
with God, and he has created a philosophical understanding of that, and it translates into
that religious way of talking about history into a completely secular philosophical way
of talking about history. He has secularized and rationalized the Hebrewic heritage. Now,
this is important because this God is, in many senses, a secularized, non-religious
God. This is not a God that is intervening in history through prophets. This is a God
who has been realized through the reflective actions, the contemplation of a philosopher.
Hegel understood his project in very religious terms. But, and this is a very important but,
he was always translating those religious terms into philosophical, conceptual terms
of rational development. He would consistently take the religious terms and go through this
kind of translation, this kind of exposition and explication and explanation that would
transform them into philosophical, conceptual theories of how rationality, intelligibility,
and reality have co-developed together. So, I'm going to read you a quote from the
earliest system program of German idealism. He states the following quote, here I shall
discuss an idea which, as far as I know, has not occurred to anyone else. We must have
a new mythology. Notice the word he's using. Notice he's using that word in a way that
resonates how we've been using the word mythology in this lecture series. We must have a new
mythology, but this mythology must be in the service of the ideas. Notice that language.
It must be in the service of the ideas. It must be a mythology of reason, capital R reason.
It must be about this. He goes on to say, quote, in the end enlightened and unenlightened
must clasp hands, right? The philosophical and the mythological, the enlightened and
the unenlightened. Notice the language, enlightened, right? Must clasp hands. Mythology must become
philosophy in order to make the people rational, and philosophy must become mythological in
order to make philosophers sensible. Notice that this is simultaneously a philosophical
proposal and a social cultural program for how to transform religion, people, and the
role of philosophy within that transformation. He then goes on to say that this will lead
to a, quote, higher spirit sent from heaven must found the new religion, right, among
us. It will be the last and greatest work of mankind. This is the final utopia. This
is the culmination. This will be the last religion. This will be the last thing because
all of this results in this final stage in which Geist, this living system of patterns
of intelligibility and how reality itself is structured has generated a systematic self
understanding, and we grasp all of our previous cultural and intellectual history. I want
to show you how Hegel does this in a specific example. This translation between mythology
and philosophy to create the new religion that is beyond all other religions. So let's
think of the process by which understanding is moving to reason, and you can see that
that's directly parallel to the process by which mythology is moving to philosophy.
So let's get an example of a very important mythological structure, and of course I'm
going to take Christianity because as I tried to show you, Hegel is secularizing Christianity
in many ways. So Hegel argues that, right, let's put the myth on this side, and then
the philosophy on this side, and we're going to see how we go from making sense of things
to this self-realization, participating in the system that grasps the systematicity
of this whole process. So you have the father and the trinity. What does the father represent?
Well the father represents, Hegel would argue, understanding is undifferentiated, unarticulated,
unactualized, unarticulated, unactualized, undifferentiated. And then of course the idea
is you get the incarnation in the sun. Sorry, that should be compromised, I don't mean any
disrespect. Now the incarnation is how our understanding starts to get differentiated
into particular things. Here's a table, here's a cup, I'm here, the world's over there, we
get all this articulation. So you get the beginning of articulation into particular
things. And so you can see there's a sense in which the sun is the counter, the antithesis
of the father. But then you get the reconciliation of the sun to the father. The sun is sacrificed
and the sun reconciles with the father. And that of course is that moment of higher integration,
a higher new kind of identity is created. So this corresponds to the realization of
again trying to pick up both meanings of this term, the realization of the identity indifference
of the father and son. So the father and son are both different in one, and the other
and that's how understanding is now moving to this process where the integration and
the differentiation are being brought together. Understanding is realizing that understanding
is made out of differentiation and integration. And there's a kind of reconciliation, a higher
order self-awareness that is taking place. And then we finally move down here, right,
to the Holy Spirit. And of course there's a bit of a pun intended because that's, you
know, Geist is one way of translating Spirit. And this is what, what did we see in the New
Testament? We ultimately get the idea that God is a Gape. God is identical to the very
process by which we are making each other into persons. And we don't individually possess
a Gape in our minds. A Gape is something we dwell within a process of making sense and
making persons and making community of persons. And of course what does the Holy Spirit corresponds
to? Well, this is, right, this is Geist dwelling within its self-awareness.
God has always been a Gape. We just didn't realize it. God is dwelling within the development
of the community. This is what Hegel's doing. This is why Hegel has been called the Thomas
Aquinas of Protestantism. He's doing, right, in Germany, post the Protestant Reformation,
what Aquinas was doing when, wait, if you remember, when European thought, the systems
of European thought encountered Aristotelian science. Hegel is now taking, right, all of
the machinery, right, the theological machinery that he sees at work in myth, and he is integrating
it with the philosophical and scientific understanding that is impacting so powerfully on Europe in
his time. He's trying to deal with how to restructure Christianity in light of the scientific revolution,
the Protestant Reformation. And this is what he's doing. And he creates this powerful system.
It's this just tremendously powerful system. It's grand synthesis. And that's important
because Hegel felt, and like I said, there's an element of hubris in here, but that his
system exemplified what it was talking about. His philosophical system, in the way it provided
a total, pay attention to that word, a total explanation of reality, mind, being, God,
religion, philosophy, history. He thought it exemplified it, demonstrated it. And so
German idealism was just massively influential because of this grand synthesis that it offered.
But you can see what's going on here, right? You can see that this is a very powerful attempt
to try and save the meaning-making machinery and salvage the axial legacy and somehow give
us an account of, right, how we can still develop an increased sense of reality. And
we're seeing contact with reality in a way that is ultimately spiritual and rational
at the same time. Hegel is, in many ways, a titanic figure trying to provide a powerful
grammar, philosophical set of, you know, concepts, conceptual vocabulary, and theoretical,
like, theoretical principles for structuring that vocabulary. He's trying to create a grammar
by which we can deeply respond to the meaning crisis. So he's enormously popular. And as
I said, this form of German idealism spreads across Europe, very powerful ways, deeply influential.
You'll even see figures within America, like Josiah Royce early on in the intellectual
history of America, deeply influenced by Hegel. So why is this important? Well, Hegel
is just going to have a profound impact on any future attempts to try and respond to
the meaning crisis just because of the way he's trying to synthesize everything together.
But what's more important is, for many people, this form of idealism, German idealism has
completely collapsed. It's no longer considered a viable position. Now, I'm not here to argue
about this sort of an abstract philosophical level, right, because of course there are
many defenders of Hegel today. I want to take a look at what has happened, right, in the
critical response to Hegel and how that has infused the development and the intensification
of the meaning crisis.
Remember, Hegel sets up this pattern of secularizing religion into systems of ideas that attempt
to give us a total explanation and guide. He's the godfather of the world. He's the
godfather in this sense of totalitarian ideologies. So, the three main avenues of seeing a response.
We already did one. The person who has a deep critique of Hegel is Schopenhauer, and as
you remember, Schopenhauer understands the relationship, not the way Hegel does in terms
of reason. Schopenhauer understands it in terms of will, the will to live, and then Nietzsche
takes that up as the will to power, and he tries to use that as a way of recapturing
self-transcendence. We've already talked about that, so I'm not going to go over that again,
but please remember it. So, the fact that the aspect of will and the will to live and
the will to power wasn't adequately being addressed was what Schopenhauer points to.
Then we have, of course, the tremendous critique of Kierkegaard. Kierkegaard fabulously said,
Hegel made a system and then sat down beside it. What's he pointing out here? There's
an impersonalism. There's a lack of perspectival and participatory knowing in Hegel's whole
proposal. It has been rendered into a system of ideas. All of this connectedness to reality
to ourselves and to each other. All of the process by which we cultivate wisdom and self-transcendence
has been rendered into a system of beliefs, a system of ideas.
Perspectival and participatory knowing have been lost. The only participation we have
is in our understanding and appreciation of the Hegelian system.
Now, what does that mean? Kierkegaard is pointing out, I believe, to the idea that this, our
attempt to make contact with what's most real or attempt to realize the divine, like
in Platonic Anagage, Plato's dialectic was linked deeply to Anagage, has been completely
severed from personal transformation and self-transcendence. You do not have to undergo
any radical change. You do not have to have mystical experience. You do not have to have
a higher state of consciousness. You do not have to have encountered a Socratic challenge.
Theology has become completely conceptual, propositional, rational, self-reflection.
It is not in any way engaged with projects of transcendentalism.
It is a transformative experience. Westfall, in his book, transcendence and self-transcendence
echoes this critique and points out that while Hegel is proposing this tremendous epistemic
self-transcendence, we come to know how we know he has lost the deep connection you saw
in Plato to Westfall. I'm not quite happy with this term, but he calls it ethical self-transcendence.
This is the process by which we become radically different. We overcome our egocentrism. We
become more capable of agopic love. And Kierkegaard points out, I think, quite correctly, that
when we move through those transformative experiences, it requires what he would call
a leap of faith. And this is a very dangerous concept, and I'm not going to try and defend
it. But I think this makes sense, given what we've already seen in the work of L.A. Paul
and others, that going through these transformative experiences is not something you can reason
your way through. We exist before we have discovered this essence about who and what
we are. That's the whole point of existentialism, as I mentioned. So what Kierkegaard is pointing
out is that this system for all of its grandeur is in a very deep sense, like what Socrates
found with the original natural philosophers. It is profound truths that have no existential
transformative relevance. You cannot find in Hegel how to cultivate wisdom. You can
only find a theoretical structure for interpreting history. What about Marx? Marx is the other
great critic of Hegel. And I hope you're seeing a pattern here. What's missing is the connection
to will, right? Our participatory, perspectival involvement. What's missing here is the connection
to transformative experience, to ethical self-transcendence. What's missing here, according to Marx? Well, what Marx
is basically arguing, again, Marx, I'm like, my God, you know, just no, the Titanic things
we're talking about here. And there's all these aspects of Marx I can't touch on, like
his whole economic critique. That's not what I'm trying to do here. Marx is basically
saying, right, that history is not driven by, think of Plato, think of the man and the
lion and the monster. History is not driven by reason, by the man. History is driven by
the monster, right? It's driven by our socio-economics. It's driven by our socio-economics. It's driven
by our economic activity as we try to provide for our material existence. So Marx was, of
course, deeply influenced also by Feuerbach, which means fire stream, which great name.
And Marx says, you can't understand me unless you have passed through the fire stream of
Feuerbach's work. Feuerbach made this proposal that, contrary to Hegel, that religion is
not the arena in which Geist has been unfolding itself and reality and intelligibility have
been co-developing. Instead, he argues that religion is a projection, a term, of course,
that Freud and Jung are going to pick up on. That when I'm thinking about God, what I'm
actually doing is projecting an ideal model of my own humanity. And Feuerbach's idea is
that this projection distorts, distracts us, deludes us, and it ultimately alienates human
beings from their own role within historical processes.
So Marx is going to take up this idea, this critique of religion, and he's going to see
religion not as Hegel does as the vessel and vehicle in which Geist is unfolding itself.
He's going to see religion as a noxious projection that is actually deluding people and distracting
them from how they are the authors of history. So what Marx does is he says, okay, once we
get rid of the religious distortion and we shift to the material monster, we see the
dialectic at work there. The dialectic is a dialectical materialism, not a dialectical
idealism. So the clash is not between ideas that are contrasting and integrating. The
clash is a process of political struggle between opposing ways of socioeconomic life.
We have different classes, that's what the class is, a socioeconomic way of life, that
oppose the idea of distinction and articulation has been turned into one of conflict, which
is the idea of distinction and articulation has been turned into one of conflict between
these classes. But these classes are nevertheless systematically related. They are interdependent,
they rely and define each other. So history is a dialectic that is constantly through
these clash, these conflict, the political struggle between the classes is working out
the self-contradictions in socioeconomic life. This is the core of Marx's critique of capitalism
that contains all these inherent self-contradictions. And that this process, this process of political
struggle and violence will work out the self-contradictions in our socioeconomic activity until the
political state of peace and freedom, the promised land, always the attempt to find
the promised land. So what has Marx done? Do you see he's actually in a sense completing,
I'm not trying to justify it, I'm just saying he's developing and bringing to a kind of
logical conclusion the secularization implicit in Hegel. And he's supplying the political
I have criticisms of this being an adequate solution but this is what he sees himself
doing. He sees himself supplying the missing participation that we don't have in Hegel.
How do you participate in Hegel? Well Marx says this is how you participate, a call
to arms. The philosophers have only talked about the world. The communists want to change
it, that's the communist manifesto. Workers of the world unite, we have nothing to lose
but our chains. The idea is that the dialectic and participation come together in the idea
of political socioeconomic revolution. And you can also see elements of will here. Violent
ideologies. Violent, totalizing ideologies that promise a secularization of the world.
A secular utopia that is the culmination of the internal logic of history. So you have
this deep politicalization of the process by which people are supposed to try and have
faith. Sense the course of history. Participate in the kairos. You see the kairos of Christianity
has become the revolution, the turning point in history that you have to participate in.
You have to be on the right side. You have to help bring about the utopia. So these three
critiques all push, this is of course pushing towards existentialism. This is a religious
kind of existentialism. This, through Nietzsche, is pushing towards an anti-religious existentialism.
This of course is pushing towards Marxism. But what they all share, right, is that the
sense that Hegel's totalizing ideology has not captured the core of human meaning making.
We'll take a look at how this ramifies through Germany in the next episode. Thank you very
much for your time and attention.
Thank you.
