Welcome back to Awakening from the Meaning Crisis.
So last time we had begun to take a look at the transformation that was occurring in the
Eastern Mediterranean around the time of the advent of what was going to become Christianity.
Of course, this figures upon the person of Jesus of Nazareth, a very controversial figure
to say the least, and as I said, I'm not going to endeavor to claim to give the absolute
or exhaustive account of this extraordinary individual, but instead I'm going to try and
do what I've done before, which is to show how what he did contributed to our understanding
of meaning and wisdom and how that eventually pushed the history that has led to the Meaning
Crisis forward.
So we were talking about one of the core messages of Jesus.
Jesus seems to have understood himself, or at least those around him, understood him
as Kairos.
If you remember, that's a turning point in the course of history because as we spoke
before, the Israelites, and by this time they were known as the Jews, had developed the
psychotechnology of understanding history as a cosmic narrative in which there are crucial
turning points, and Jesus saw himself as such a Kairos, whether or not he saw himself
as the Kairos that was known as the Jewish Messiah is again controversial.
I don't need that for the purposes of my argument.
It seems though that he had a sense of himself as deeply participating in the way in which
God was directing and involving himself in the course of history.
If you remember the model of God we talked about when we talked about the ancient Israelites,
the God of the Exodus as a God who is creating into an open future and that human beings
participate in that creation by identifying with a particular course, the earth loving
it, being shaped by it as well as shaping, participating in its flow, and Jesus of Nazareth
saw himself as having an especially deep participation such that he felt himself to be at one with
this God who is capable of altering the course of history and redeeming human beings.
He seems to have understood this Kairos as having something to do with a profound way
of understanding the participation in God, which we've talked about before, makes sense.
We've talked about how this participatory knowing is a process in which you're coupled.
You're neither making it or being made by it, but it's this reciprocal revelation in
which you are making it and it is making you the way you participate in your culture,
the way you participate in your language, the way you participate in history, and you
know this not by gathering beliefs, but the way in which yourself is fundamentally transformed.
So Jesus understood his participation in God as the disclosing of this profound kind
of love.
We began talking about this, the kinds of love that human beings experience and how love
is something that deeply transforms who we are and our salience landscape, our character.
We talked about the Greeks have three terms and it's helpful because by this time the
New Testament is being written in Greek.
It's helpful to understand these Greek terms.
So there's eros, which is the love of being one with something, and it can be just drinking
water so I become one with it, but of course it can become what is more commonly known
as becoming one with someone through sexual union, erotic love.
Then there's phylia, that's at the core of philosophy.
This is the love that is born out of cooperation.
So eros is consumptive, making one with, phylia is cooperation.
We work together, we work together in a lot of how we succeed as human beings is the way
we work together.
But Jesus starts to emphasize a new kind of love, agape, and this is not the love of consumption
or cooperation, this is the love of creation.
It's the love that God is demonstrating towards humanity in the way God is an ongoing creation
of the open future.
So God is creating the future, he's creating the historical process and course of that
history that makes people possible.
See agape is the kind of love that creates persons.
So the main metaphor for agape, if you remember, is the way a parent loves a child.
You don't love a child because you want to consume it in some way, that's hideous and
vicious.
You don't love your child when you bring it home from the hospital because it's a great
friend to you, it can cooperate, it can't do that at all.
It's not even a person, it's not a morally, rationally reflective agent.
In fact, it's exactly the opposite, you love it precisely because by loving that non-person
you turn it into a person.
This is the powerful, creative, it's a God-like ability that we have.
By participating through love in another being, we can transform that being from a non-person
into a person.
A person that could enter into a community of persons and find meaning, fellowship, belonging.
So that radical transformative power of agape, its ability to radically transform us and
reorient us, brings about a metanoia, a radical turning.
This means above and beyond and this means your salience landscaping, how you are fundamentally
perspectively knowing the world.
So metanoia, I'm fundamentally turning, altering my whole field of consciousness, altering my
whole orientation.
What's fundamentally happening in the metanoia of agape is I'm having a personal kairos.
My personal course is being radically transformed.
Jesus is not only teaching this, he is exemplifying it.
He experiences himself as a kairos and he's giving to people through agape the possibility
of experiencing their own personal kairos.
See what happens in the experience that Jesus is pointing to, I believe, is we get a fundamental
reorientation.
For a very long time we are born out of, we are the receivers of agape.
It is only because you as an animal, because that's what you are before you're a person,
a biological animal, it's only because you as an animal received the agape love of others
that you were actually transformed into a person.
And what you actually do is you internalize other people and how they are aware of you.
And that is how you gain your reflective rationality.
That is how you gain your own understanding.
You fundamentally gain your self-understanding, your sense of self, and your ability to reflect
on yourself by how you are reflected through other people.
It's a fundamental thing to say, and because it is so fundamental and we can say it with
few words, it can be trivialized.
But we are in a very deep sense born out of an agape love that precedes us.
It's because of agape, because of the way other people have devoted themselves and participated
in you, that you went from a non-person into a person, that you got the ability, it's almost
like other people are mirrors through which you come to see and realize yourself, that
you got a sense of self, that you got the ability to reflect on yourself, that you became,
got a sense of your own ownership.
There's nothing that in fact is more transformative for an adult than having a child.
So from the child's perspective, what's happening is they are in a sense consuming the love
that the adult is giving them.
They're taking in this love and they are becoming one with it.
You understand yourself and can reflect on yourself because of the way you have internalized
other people's attention on you.
But that's the child's perspective.
So you can see for the child it's very egocentric.
And Freud picked up on this, but I think he also twisted it.
Our relationship to our parents, and please listen to this very carefully, is in that
sense erotic, in the sense that we are consuming them, we are internalizing them, we are becoming
one with them.
Now I don't mean erotic in the sense that Freud ultimately meant, because Freud thought
that all of that was always a sexual experience, I think that's too simplistic.
But I think there is insight here.
But take a look at this from the parent's perspective.
From the parent's perspective, the person giving agape, it is not egocentric at all.
In fact, there is nothing that will more challenge your egocentric orientation that everything
is moving this way than having a child.
If you're a good parent, and of course we all vary in how good we are as parents, I
have been privileged to be a parent myself.
But what happens is, you are no longer the center of your salience landscape.
The child is.
Because the child is absolutely dependent upon you.
Do you see, this is the metanoia of agape.
I mean, the metaphor is turning, but the problem with that metaphor is all turning is still
egocentric.
You have to think of the turning this way.
The turning is, I go from being egocentric to being centered on someone else.
And what I'm actually centered on is, I'm centered on the process of creating a person,
like God.
But not egocentrically, like, I'm a God.
It's like I am participating in that agopic process that made me.
The agape that precedes me flows through me and transforms me as I'm oriented.
What Jesus was offering, I believe, was he was offering a teaching so that all people
could experience this, not just individually, personally, with their own parents, but in
terms of a relationship to God.
You could all experience this fundamental turning such that we become vessels through
which agape creates other human beings.
So what's going to happen, of course, and you see this in the Epistles of John, is the
Christian community starts to understand this capacity for radically transforming people
so that they become conduits of this God-like creative process whereby non-persons are turned
into persons.
They're coming to understand agape itself is God.
That's what God is.
So the Israelite notion of God creating the open history becomes specified in the teachings
of Jesus to the idea that, no, God is agape.
God is this process that we participated in.
It made you, you didn't make it, you participate in agape.
It precedes you, it flows through you, and you participate in it insofar as you help
other people to come to personhood through you.
Now this is a radical idea, as I mentioned last time.
This is going to give the Christians a psychotechnology, a grammar for how to transform
perspectival and participatory knowing that is going to allow them to conquer the Roman
Empire.
I don't mean militarily, of course.
What I mean is, what Christians can do is they can offer all the non-persons of the
Empire a process by which they become persons within a community of persons, enmeshed together
in agopic love.
So all the women, all the widows, all the sick, all the poor, all the non-male Roman
citizens, all the weak can come to Christianity and receive the opportunity and the community
that supports this opportunity of a radical transformation.
Now we know that the community around, there's many different communities around Jesus, I
should say, just like around Socrates, there's many different Jesus movements.
But this seems to be the key idea, and it seems that it carries with it some kind of
notion of a sacrificial element to it.
And again, there's a lot of controversy around this, and we have to be careful not to read
too much of Paul into this, but we'll talk about Paul in a few minutes.
But agape has a sacrificial element to it in that you give yourself, you forgive, you
give before the person earns.
It's not philea.
It is not reciprocity.
It is not you and I are working together.
You have earned my trust and love.
Philea is great and it's important.
It is not eros.
I love you because of how I can consume you and make you one with me.
Now, agape has a sacrificial component to it because what I'm actually doing is I'm
giving up.
I'm making myself an affordance for your transformation from non-person into person.
So this is why Jesus emphasizes forgiveness as central to his message.
And one of the things we should remember, and this is controversial to say, is Jesus
does not anywhere in the Gospels present himself as the means by which we obtain forgiveness
from God.
He often presents himself as a way and things like that, and we'll talk about that.
But when asked how to obtain forgiveness from God, this opportunity of radically transforming
ourselves, Jesus' consistent message is by forgiving other people.
We experience agape from God, the degree to which we give it to others.
This has been, of course, radically trivialized in our culture.
We think of forgiveness largely as a matter of, you know, somebody feels sorry and we
tell them it's okay.
That's not the core idea of forgiveness.
The core idea of forgiveness doesn't depend on your contrition.
The degree to which you are trying to afford someone else growing into their personhood
and the degree to which you are making a sacrifice towards that is already forgiveness.
Some forgiveness is when somebody has slighted us and the relationship has been damaged and
we have to act agopically in order to reestablish the relationship.
But in a very real sense, all agopic love is forgiving love because it is giving before
the person that is receiving the love can in any way be said to have earned it.
So this idea that we are sacrificially extending the capacity for individuals to redirect their
own history, experience their own kairos, was often captured by Jesus in famous language
of being born again.
You're dying and you're being born again.
It's radical transformation of your entire orientation, your entire way of being.
Now the tragedy that befalls the Jesus movements, at least some of them, because not all the
movements care about this.
This is again something that many people don't realize.
There are many elements of the early followers of Jesus, communities that don't care about
his death, they only care about his teaching.
But of course Jesus does die and that has a profound effect on some of these movements.
And again, this is hard to state anything clearly or anything that we could have any
great confidence in.
But somehow his death exemplifies the sacrificial forgiveness that is at the core of God as
a gapi.
Now Jesus' death enables people to internalize that sacrificial love and empowers them to
transform other human beings.
Now there, of course, is resistance to the Jesus movements and to Jesus.
It's plausible that his death was due to the fact that he was angering and upsetting a
lot of people.
We see this as something similar to what confronted Socrates.
One of the people that seems to have been an early persecutor is a guy by the name of
Saul.
Now Saul is a very interesting person.
He's both a Jew and a Roman citizen.
At a time when these two groups of people are quite antagonistic towards each other,
there had been already wars between the Romans and the Jews, a new one was about to come
to major Jewish revolts.
So the relationship is a very tense one filled with a lot of tension and this is reflected
within this person himself.
He seems to have integrated these two disparate and warring aspects of his personality and
his identity together around a commitment to law, organized rules of behavior and conduct.
And he sees the Jesus movements, the followers of Jesus.
They're not, in fact, just to point out something, they're not initially called the followers
of Jesus.
They're initially called the followers of the way because Jesus had presented a way.
See the word way is so wonderful because it doesn't just mean method.
It's not just some procedures.
It's also an affordance of how you're going to move into the future.
It is a new orientation.
So Jesus is the way in which we can experience the kairos of Metanoia and become forgiving
individuals who are constantly forgiving agopically to others.
It's all seems to see these people and their language of agape and their adoration of Jesus
as deeply threatening to his Jewish heritage and also to Roman order.
And so he becomes involved in the persecution of the followers of the way.
And it's about at the time that he's involved in the persecution that they start being called
actually as an insult, initially Christians, the followers of Christ, which means the anointed
one.
And so he's involved in persecuting them.
He's there, the first time he's mentioned in the Bible, he's there when the first Christian
is martyred, Stephen.
Stephen is talking about this message and the crowd gets angered and they stone him
and Saul basically holds everybody's coats so that they can more effectively stone Stephen
to death.
So Saul becomes deeply involved in this and he gets basically a letter, an official letter
to travel to Damascus and round up these so-called Christians and bring them in for prosecution.
And on the road he has what I think we could call a transformative experience.
He relates it himself in a couple places.
It's also represented third person in the book of Acts and there's differences in it
as there always is in something that has a mythological element to it, again where myth
doesn't mean fable, where myth means trying to present a profound pattern.
But he's struck by a bright light and of course this is the metaphor of enlightenment and
we know that transformative experiences often involve this experience of radical super salience,
often tremendous light and he is struck to the ground by it, it's an overwhelming experience
and then a voice speaks to him and says, why, Saul, Saul, why do you persecute me?
And Saul says, who are you, Lord?
Lord isn't a title for God, Lord is anyone who has some important higher status than
you and the experience carries with it that onto a normativity that we talked about.
Saul has the sense that he's confrontering something more real than himself.
Who are you?
And the voice says, I am Jesus who you persecute.
And that's all we need to talk about, I mean Saul is blinded by this light and encountering
this voice and we can think about Plato's metaphor here of as we encounter these things
we're often blinded by the light but what we need to understand is this engenders in
Saul a deep, deep inner conflict and in fact when you read his biography as I've already
painted here you can see that his experience of inner conflict is really profound and this
reminds us again it's analogous but different of Plato's concern with inner conflict the
way inner conflict reveals the psyche but as whereas Plato is going to develop a scientific
theory of inner conflict Saul is going to undergo a transformative experience because
of this inner conflict it is going to riven him to his core because how can it be that
he hasn't had this transformative experience this awakening experience is more real from
the very being that he was persecuting how can he reconcile these together he's actually
he travels to Antioch and he actually gets taken in by the very people he was going to
persecute do you see this this is this forgiveness the very people he was going to persecute take
him in so the people that he was going to destroy are actually responsible for his care and under
their care his sight is restored what's all this pointing to again it's a pointing to right
he's at war with Agape itself and we all are like we all are we have a very tough time and
this is part of the message of Jesus and John and Paul at least to my mind we have a tough
time acknowledging the reality of Agape we like to create personal fables of how we are
self-made and self-directed and self-secure and self-sustaining and Agape challenges that in a
profound way so Saul goes into the desert to reflect and this is always a biblical mythological
paradigm for a process of undergoing radical reflection and when he comes out he has gone
through a radical transformative experience so he's had this higher state of consciousness this
visionary experience he then experiences Agape from the very people he was persecuting he goes
into the desert and when he comes back he's a new person he's gone through a radical transformative
experience and we know that because he's changed his name he changed his name from Saul to Paul
and he has a radical message
it's a powerful message he comes to present Agape in one of the most beautiful passages famous
passages in the Bible you've probably heard it at some point it's often misread at weddings
people read this passage often at weddings and they I think are misinterpreting it because
what Paul's talking about is an agopic spiritual kind of love now there should definitely be that
aspect in a romantic relationship but I don't think romantic relationships typically are
understood by most people as venues in which agopic love is the primary focus let me read
the passage to you so Paul begins by saying and now I will show you the most excellent way
so he's showing you the most excellent way this is and notice the word excellent the way in which
we can most radically go through transformation and grow I'll show you the most excellent way
now he's not going to make an argument like Plato instead what he's going to do is he's going to
present everything from the framework of a participatory kind of knowing that's how he
begins if I so he's not making an argument he's talking about what his very identity how his
identity is being informed and transformed by its conformity to agopic love if I speak in the
tongues of men and angels but have not love I'm only a resounding gong or a clanging symbol if I
have the gift of prophecy and confound them all mysteries and all knowledge and if I have faith
that can move mountains but have not love I am nothing notice all the language here this is
participatory language this is the language of knowing by identifying if I give all I possess
to the poor and surrender my body to the flames because Christians are starting to be burnt right
but I have not love I gain nothing notice this language here it's very radical
love is patient love is kind it does not envy it does not boast now this of course is not
romantic love because romantic love does experience envy and jealousy it is not proud
it is not rude it is not self-seeking it is not easily angered it keeps no record of wrongs
love does not delight in evil but rejoices with the truth it always protects always trusts always
hopes always perseveres those are the those are the features you need in order to help
and afford someone coming into personhood love never fails now we think what are you talking about
I've been in so many relationships and they fail that's because you're thinking of this as romantic
love that love does fail what he means is agape can't fail we are always born from
and always have to give birth to agape or personhood itself will disappear
but where there are prophecies they will cease where there are tongues they will be stilled
where there is knowledge it will pass away now he's trying to get them to understand
like what what what are we talking about here for we know in part and we prophesy in part
but when perfection comes perfection here meaning completion the imperfect disappears
and and people you're like what and so he gives a metaphor one we've seen elsewhere
when I was a child I talked like a child I thought like a child I reasoned like a child
when I became a man I put child childish ways behind me
okay so when you're a kid you have a particular identity you have a particular salience landscape
right and things really really matter to you in a certain way we talked about this when we talked
about sarfason when you become an adult right your world becomes radically reoriented what is
salient and what is central to you is radically changed so I hope for many of you as adults your
life is not primarily centered upon and oriented towards the super saliency of candy and toys
if you're right really really oriented towards candies and toys and playing
then of course you're not growing up as an adult
when we go through agape it is like the change in our salience landscape and our fundamental
identity how we participate in ourselves in the world is fundamentally transformed and that's what
paul is offering here then he says look you've got to know what this means now we see but a poor
reflection as in a mirror then we shall see face to face now I know in part then I shall know fully
even as I am fully known and now these three remain faith hope and love but the greatest of these is
love okay so now it's like we're seeing and a reflection we're not in touch with reality
we're like the people in plateaus cave we're looking at the right the shadows and the echo
we don't see things as they are we're not in touch with reality but with agape the most excellent way
we will come to know as we are known right he's talking about this participatory love
think about how when you are and now even use a romantic relationship one with some
significant depth when you're when you really love someone how you know them to degree to which
they know you it right it is it is such a participatory way of knowing
you you you get to be in touch with their reality in a way that somebody else doesn't
that's I mean that's part of the bargain of a mature understanding of a romantic relationship
right you give up the extensive erotic pursuit of many different partners
in order that you can deeply know and be known by someone else
right you and then and that's that's like growing up that's like going from being a child to a man
so paul is actually talking about there's a way of knowing we're going to come back to this the
term that's being used there is nausis that is bound up with agape this way of loving
so
all these things god is agape we forgive agape we are forgiven by agape we know as we are known
we are participating in the the the becoming a person of others and then they are participating
in ours it's this powerful new whole new way of being and it has become so sedimented in our
culture and so ossified and so below how we live it's like the ground we're walking on
and like the ground we walk on we have contempt for it without realizing how much it holds everything
up
i'm not a christian i'm not advocating for christianity i'm trying to get you to understand
how profound an expression of meaning transcendence and way to wisdom
is being on offer here now there is a dark side to this i think and here's where i will probably
part company with people who identify as christians see the difficulty with participatory knowing
and this nausis this is we'll talk more about this right this knowing by participation and going
and going through radical metanoic transformation right this nausis agape that
paul talks so much about there is a danger with it right there's a danger of misunderstanding
we have to go carefully here look when i am knowing someone participatory agopic
relationship right my knowing of them and my knowing of myself are deeply they're inseparably
bound together that's why jesus will say his this relationship he has to god is i and the father are
one and paul will say it's not i who live but christ who lives in me right this is knowing by
this deep bonding of identity you know not by transforming your thoughts or even
right your mind you know by transforming yourself but there's a danger to this
the danger is that any aspect of yourself that you do not properly understand has not come into
knowledge can get projected onto what you love this is the great danger also in the romantic
relationship precisely because you are so bound to this person in your identity a lot of what is
unconscious in your identity can get projected onto that person
so see this is why there's such a moral obligation on you when you enter into a romantic relationship
to commit yourself to a process of self-knowledge in the socratic sense self-discovery because
the degree to which you are self-ignorant is the degree to which that participatory knowing
will be darkened and twisted into a projection of aspects of yourself
and i think to my mind for all of his astonishing spiritual brilliance that's also happening in
paul see the inner conflict in paul was very profound he he comes up against the problem
that many of us encounter aerostat will talk about this with a crazier and weakness of the well
we know what we should do and we do the opposite of what we know is the right thing to do
i know what i should do it's clear in my mind that this is what i should do and yet i do this
somehow even though knowing what i should do i find myself almost if this i'm being pulled
to do something else and he describes paul paul uses the language of like somebody in the midst
of a civil war who's standing sort of at the center of their citadel and the outlying provinces
are in revolt and experiences this radical inner conflict there's lots of different theories about
what this is what's he what's he so conflicted about but paul comes up with a narrative of course
it's going to be a narrative right he's he's in the israelite jewish tradition he comes up with
a narrative for understanding this conflict and it's the narrative that comes from a personalization
of the notion of the movement from the two worlds as being right a liberation from an old place and
a movement to a new place the exodus because christianity is personalizing this the x paul
experiences the exodus personally he experiences there's two of him there's the old sol right who
wants to right follow the way of the law but is actually right it feels guilty and angry and feels
feels disconnected from god and rejected by god and then there's the new paul the paul of love
who feels connected and he sees he sees the old man and the new man and what's happening is the new
man is trying to be born from the old man and so we we have picked this has become endemic to our
culture this idea of the old me and the new me we we think oh this is just natural i came up with
this such bullshit we tell ourselves at times the old me and the new me paul understands this and he
understands this tension between the old sol that was committed to law and order and justice and
punishment and the new paul who is participating in the liberation of love and he's trying to
understand why do i have this inner conflict because he's personalized the god of history
he understands his inner conflict and here's where i think the danger of projection is clear
he understands his inner conflict as reflecting an inner conflict in god
god was actually conflicted within himself it's it's it's a radical idea and we need to know this
not because again i'm trying to advocate for christianity because we have to understand paul
in order to understand augustine and in order to understand luther and we have to understand
augustine and luther if we're going to understand the meaning crisis
so you've got this idea that god has two aspects to him or herself one part is god represents
law and justice and order and insofar as god represents that we are we stand in judgment we
have somehow failed we have not lived up to the moral perfection that morality demands for us
look caught made a point about this morality demands nothing less than perfection from you
you have to be completely honest you have to be completely courageous and none of us can
ever meet that standard now i mean we we need to we need to balance that with compassion and love
but what paul is seeing is he's saying well god is perfectly just and therefore we fail
to meet that standard and therefore legally we are condemned to death
but yet god isn't just a judge god is also the agopic parent that loves us
and so what he does is he takes the notion that jesus's death was somehow sacrificial because we've
talked about how sacrifice is born up within agopic love and he gives it to this idea that
jesus sacrificed himself in order to satisfy god's demand for justice so that god was capable
of freely loving us now there and and you know and and how that redemption model works out there's
all kinds of theological battles about it and and whether or not we should understand it this
way or that way is not relevant to our purposes what's relevant right is that within this astonishing
foundational message of gnosis and agape there's also an attempt to project on like
sorry this this this sounds so radical and i don't mean to make it sound ridiculous i'm
not i'm trying to be respectful but the the idea that somehow the course of reality itself is
amashed in a conflict between justice and agape
what that's going to mean is that people that experience deep inner conflict
are going to find a welcoming home within the auspices of christianity individuals who are
driven by a sense right of personal failure of not living up to what they canon should be
that their personhood has been thwarted they have not come into a fullness of perfection as
paul says a completeness of their personhood are going to be deeply attracted to the christian
message now you you're probably now seeing how this might be relevant to the meaning crisis
to the meaning crisis because what happens if we still because we are still participating in
the waters of christianity within our culture even if we're not christians when most of us aren't
anymore how do we tap into all of this the power of agape acknowledging its reality the participatory
gnosis the radical transformation our own sense of not living up to the fullness of our personhood
what have we still experienced all of that but we do not have the machinery of christianity
with its metaphysics of cosmic redemption available to us
that could be a powerful experience of despair
i mean camu famously said my whole of my life i've tried to figure out how can i be a saint
without there being a god and he of course famously came to the conclusion that reality
was radically absurd and come back to that so there is a price we pay and this is not
a statement of resentment but there is a price we pay for the gifts to use a christian word the
grace that's what grace originally means the gifts that christianity has given us it has given us
expectations of love and transformation and growth into personhood and relief from inner conflict
expectations that i would say are not well met in our post christian worldview
so we carry the grammar of god
but we no longer believe any of the things we say with it for many of us
so what i'd like to do is try and now trace how christianity coming out of the israelite
jewish heritage and i've already sort of been giving making illusions of this starts to intersect
with the axial revolution that was coming out of greece
because christianity is going to take up into itself it's going to take up into itself the
stoicism we've already talked about paul quotes stoicism in the bible
and as it does that it's also going to come into conflict not conflict well some conflict
actually to be honest it's what it's going to come into confluence with
that strain of the actual revolution spirituality that came out of greece it's going to come into
connection with neoplatonism it's going to come into connection with nosticism so next time what i
want to look at is i want to look at the nostics these followers of jesus because of course it's
controversial to call them christians who really center in on this gnosis agape what they were
talking about and the neoplatonism because all of that is going to have an impact on the generation
of more orders of meaning we'll review that again but if you remember we talked about how with
Aristotle we had developed right in the west a nomological order to meaning a way in which
we could pursue world view attunement we're going to see that as neoplatonism and christianity come
together we're going to get two more orders of meaning emerging an order by which we pursue the
most excellent way and an order by which this cosmic narrative history is enmeshed into the western
world view thank you very much for your time and attention
you
