Welcome back to Awakening from the Meaning Crisis.
So we have been engaged in a very long discussion because we're talking about a topic that is
essential about the possibility of enlightenment and to try and make that something plausibly
accessible to us rather than something wrapped and shrouded in mesmeric mystique.
Instead, we've been trying to understand this from a cognitive science perspective that
could tell us why these higher states of consciousness might in fact provide a means
for the radical self-transformation, self-transcendence, enhanced inner peace and connectedness to
reality that are the central legacy of the Axiol age revolution and that are still needed
today even if we no longer believe in the mythology of the Axiol age religions and philosophies.
How do we find a place to vouchsafe the value, the precious value that these states can confer
on lives in terms of meaning and transcendence when we no longer can understand and articulate
and legitimate that in terms of a two worlds mythology?
So if you remember we had been discussing the properties of these higher states of consciousness.
We had discussed what the world is like, it's a bright both comprehensive and detailed intricate
and interesting, the world in a grain of sand, it's highly intelligible, it's beautiful
and behind it is a pervasive sense of oneness.
The self that is resonating with that world in the higher state of consciousness is a self
deeply at peace like in Plato's description of Anagage.
It's experiencing joy, it's experiencing a kind of deep remembrance, sati of the being
mode, it's true and authentic self, it is losing its egocentrism.
We talked about the connectedness between the self and the world as one so intimate,
so flowing, so anagogic that the sense of participation and conformity is achieving a sense of identity,
deep and profound being at one with the oneness, but that it is so profound that it is almost
always described as ineffable.
We then took a look at what might be going on in these states because we're trying to
remember, we're trying to give a descriptively adequate and a prescriptively adequate account.
We took a look at the continuity hypothesis that they're the same machinery that's at
work in our everyday experience of the fluency of reading into the moments of insight, into
the insight cascades of flow and then being exapted even more into mystical experience
and then some of those mystical experiences bring about a quantum change, they bring about
a deep transformative experience.
And I suggested to you, I proposed to you that what's going on in these higher states
of consciousness is something like a state of flow, but that the skill, the expertise
that is flowing is not this particular skill of rock climbing or being a martial artist
or playing jazz, it's the skill, the domain general skill of getting an optimal grip on
the world.
So what's happening is people are getting a flow state in their ability to optimally
grip on the world.
This connection to the machinery of insight helps to explain why disruptive strategies
are used in order to try and bring about the higher states of consciousness because disruptive
strategies are so central to trying to create insight.
They're both naturally disruptive strategies and you can acquire them through mindfulness
psychotechnologies.
We were examining what these disruptive strategies do, they massively increase variation in your
processing and that reveals invariance, both good invariance, you get to see more of the
real patterns that are remaining unchanged through all the variation, that's what science
does.
Across all of their variations we try to find the real patterns that are invariant and what
science does is increase the variation.
We run experiments, we increase the variation, we do all kinds of manipulations and increased
variations to try and find what remains invariant because we take that to point out to us what
is more real.
That's what you're doing.
But it also, it's opening up the invariance of the world and you're using the flow state's
capacity for enhanced implicit processing, implicit learning of complex patterns, tracking
of causal patterns to do that.
But it's also picking up on the bad invariance, it's helping to reveal all the ways in which
you are systematically misframing.
So that like a child going through a developmental stage, and I would point to you to the work
of my former student and friend Colleen Jensen Kim for this idea of development as a systematic
form of insight, something that he and I are working on together, like a child going through
a developmental stage realizing not just this error or that error but a systematicity
in the way that they're misframing reality and finding a nexus, a point of where the
insight is not just an intervention in this problem but in a whole class and type of problems.
That developmental change of seeing through illusion and into reality that is so central
to wisdom is also being afforded by these higher states of consciousness.
What about the de-centering that's so central to both flow, mystical experiences, and then
ultimately to higher states of consciousness?
My colleague, Igor Grossman, has produced quite a bit of good experimental evidence
that sets de-centering strategies, although this was prefigured in earlier work by the
Berlin paradigm. Igor Grossman has done some excellent work on showing that such de-centering
strategies are very relevant for bringing about wisdom. He has worked on what he calls
the Solomon effect. Let me describe it to you. You'll see why these disruptive de-centering
strategies can be so powerful. Get people to find a problem that's very messy, problematic,
and that they're stacked in. Usually it's an interpersonal problem because as Sartre
said, hell is other people. Our deepest and most pervasive problems are generally problems
with other people. Why? Because the thing that is most predictive of how meaningful
your life is is your meaningful relationships to others. The problem is human beings are
endlessly complex. You're describing this interpersonal problem and when people describe
it, they are, of course, mesmerized by the mirage of their own egocentric perspective.
They describe it without thought, default, from the first person perspective, and they
remain stuck. Remember this notion of stuckness. We'll come back to it again when we talk
about Gnosticism. Then you get the person to re-describe the same problem from the third
person perspective. You get them to de-center. What will often happen is they will break
frame. They will realize a way in which they have been blocked, systematically locked,
and not solving their problem. They'll often have a central insight into how to resolve
their problem. This is why it's called the Solomon Effect because it tends to make you
more wise. Think about the radical de-centering that's going on in these awakening experiences
in these higher states of consciousness. Notice the systematicity of the error of egocentrism.
It's not an error in this problem or this problem or this problem. It's a systematic
error. That's why it's often described with metaphors of like being asleep because when
you wake up, you have a systematic change in your consciousness. What's happening in
these higher states of consciousness in these awakening experiences? You're getting a transformation,
an intervention in systematic error you're seeing through illusion precisely because
of the powerful de-centering that they are affording for you. That, of course, can be
a powerfully traumatic experience. It can be a terrifying experience.
Pursuing this in an autodidactic fashion, like all autodidactic, being a completely self-taught,
is very, very dangerous. Autodidacts tend to get into echo chambers, vicious circles
of their own egocentric entombment and entrapment. The Buddha gives a wonderful parable about
this. He says, this is how you catch a monkey. You put some pitch on a piece of wood and
it looks like something very shiny and tasty. It's salient. It's attractive. The monkey
grabs it with its hand and it gets stuck. Then it uses its other hand to try and free
itself and it gets stuck. It uses its right foot and then its left foot. Then it puts
its head and its mouth on and then it's completely trapped and then the hunter comes and kills
it. De-centering can alleviate that, but if you are still pursuing this as an isolated
individual, as an autodidact, then think about how ill-prepared, unscathed, and self-taught
killed, untutored, and egocentrically you are trying to confront this radical transformation.
That is why I think it is a very poor idea for people to take psychedelics without having
them placed within a wisdom tradition in which they have a committed community that
can give outside, de-centering, and wise advice for how to process and handle these transformations.
But once again, I point to you to think about how to handle these transformations.
An aspect of the meaning crisis. We have institutions of information, we have institutions of knowledge,
we have traditions, and we have respected experts who give us guidance. We do not have
this before wisdom. Now what is amazing of course is that some individuals, like Siddhartha,
are able to do it as individuals. I want to point out two things about that. They deserve
our admiration for successfully doing it as individuals, even though the Buddha had training
from other people all along the way. But we should not take from that some kind of promotion
of our North American individualism, because the Buddha made it very clear that the sangha
of the community was necessary for the cultivation of these transformative states.
So you have got this radical de-centering. It can afford wisdom. It can be used as a
and I want to try and show you how it's not just a perspectival knowing. It's not just
a radical transformation in our salience landscape. This is a participatory change. This involves
not just the machinery of cognition or the machinery of consciousness. This alters the
machinery of the self, and therefore is also fundamentally a transformation of character.
Remember, participatory knowing is knowing by conforming. Well, the radical at oneness
of these brings about a radical kind of participatory knowing. We'll come back to this when we
return and talk about Platinus, but it's so beautiful precisely because the coupling
is so profound. And think about you getting reciprocal revelation. The world is revealing
itself more deeply and more adepts of yourself are being revealed in a coupled fashion. Well,
that's love. Love is mutually accelerating disclosure. If you want somebody, if you want
to fall in love with somebody, although you shouldn't, you can never sort of pursue it
that way, I think. But what happens is if you get two people mutually disclosing from
each other in a coupled fashion, I disclose, I honestly disclose something about myself
and then you in response disclose, and then I pick that up and disclose more and then
you disclose that reciprocal enhanced mutual conforming engenders love. And love is something
you know by participating in it, like your culture and your language. This is knowing
by loving. Now, what I want to suggest to you is that some recent cognitive science research
can give us some understanding about why this de-centering and this transformation of the
sense of self might be functional here. There's a lot of work, I would recommend to you, the
work of Sui and Humphrey from 2015, for example, showing that one of the functions of yourself,
not your mind, but your self, is to act as glue. This is a term they use, it's a metaphor.
By making things relevant to myself, I can make them relevant to each other and glue
them together. I'm always doing that. I'm simultaneously gluing things together as
I'm gluing myself together. What the self is, is a powerful set of functions for integrating,
actually complexifying, processing. To say you have a self is to say you have a systematic
set of functions that are integrating, not homogenizing, complexifying things together.
Now, if you remember, we talked about the work of Michael Anderson, Acceptation, Acceptation
of the Tongue. Here's a proposal to you. This powerful machinery that is central to your
cognitive agency, your ability to make sense of the world by gluing the world together
as you're gluing yourself together. This powerful machinery of complexification, of information
and information processing, can be exacted. What if you were to take all that machinery
of integration that you're using to integrate yourself and you turned it on to the world?
What if you took all of that capacity to glue things together and you exacted it on the
world? That would mean that machinery that was normally self-focused about integrating
the self and integrating its processing could be used to achieve a deeper integration of
the world, to reveal deeper underlying patterns. Novark in 96, Glaxon in 2000, both suggest
with argumentation and with phenomenological evidence, and many reports from people who
are undergoing mystical experiences seem to corroborate this, that what seems to happen
is all of the energy and machinery that has been bound up in our self has been turned
on to the world. That's where the world comes alive to us, and we see so deeply into it.
Imagine the intimacy you have in your self-knowledge being turned on to the world. So all of that
energy that's stored up in your egocentric processing, all the time and the resource and
all that, who am I? What's going on? All that. Imagine if you could take that machine
and say, forget about John Vervakey, just for a while even. Turn all that massive machine
on to the world. Radical, radical decentering, I propose to you, is doing exactly that. All
of the time and effort and processing and skill and memory and structures that we've
built into our ego can be exacted to disclose the world. And that of course would be coupled
with a radical sense of moving into the being mode and a radical sense of remembering who
and what we really are. So what I've tried to show you is we can understand the higher
cognitive process at the psychological level in terms of this decentering, the acceptation
of the self-machinery, flowing optimal grip, enhanced awareness of invariance, both in
the positive sense and in the ability that allows us to pick on a systematic error. We
can see why this machinery is operating and producing the experiential profile it is producing.
What about at the information processing level? I don't want to get very technical here,
but this is the level at which we turn to work that's being done in machine learning,
artificial intelligence, where people are actually trying to make machines that make
sense of the world. And what kind of strategies do they come up with for trying to get the
machines to be better learners? One interesting thing is precisely the use of disruptive strategies.
So Woodward et al. in 2014, this is a direct quote from them, right? I'll give you the
quote in a sec. They introduce randomization into a neural network. A neural network is
a very powerful and cutting edge form of artificial intelligence that in some important ways
mimics how brains work. And when you're training these neural networks, you don't program them.
You train them to learn for themselves, right? But very often what you have to do is you
have to introduce noise, entropy, randomness into these networks. In fact, he goes on to
say that such randomness quote is essential aspect, an essential aspect of the self-optimization
process. So these are not people doing psychology. These are not people trying to understand
higher states of consciousness. What they're trying to do is they're trying to make neural
networks that learn better, that can self-optimize. And what they do, what they say is essential,
that's the word he used, to this is disruption, disruptive strategies. Why? See, the problem
with powerful machines is they pick up on patterns. And you say, well, John, that's good.
Isn't picking up patterns good? Well, remember all the stuff we've talked about when we talked
about implicit learning and picking up on only correlational patterns, not picking up
on real patterns. See, the problem you face is you're always sampling from the world.
So here's your experience, and then here's the world. And there's some pattern in your
experience. And what you want to know is that pattern in the world or not? We invented
a whole discipline to deal with this. It's called statistics. All statistics is basically
this problem. How do I know if the patterns in my sample are the same as the patterns
in the world? How do I know that? So, for example, if I was in class at U of T and I
let's say it's even a huge class, 500 students, a psych 100, and I say, how many people here
think that student tuition should be reduced or school should be free? And they all put
up their hands. Should I then conclude, look, the overwhelming majority of people think that
student tuition should be reduced? You'd say, that's ridiculous. And this is what you should
say because that is not a representative sample. The pattern there is all students, you need
the sample to have the same patterns as the environment. So why is that relevant to disruption?
Very often what will happen with these neural networks is they will overfit to the data.
They will too tightly pick up on the pattern in the sample, a pattern that does not generalize
to the rest of the world. So let me give you a way of understanding this graphically. So
very often, like you've probably taught this, you do a scatter plot, you point your point,
and then you don't typically draw a line like this to try and capture the data. Instead
what we typically do is a line of best fit, which might not touch any of the data points.
This is called data compression, the line of best fit. Why do we do that? We do that
in science because what we're trying to find is the function that will generalize, that
will go to all kinds of different contexts, that will not be true just of this sample,
but will be true of the population. But what the networks do is they do this, they overfit
to the data. They track a function that perfectly describes the sample, but does not generalize
to the population. Precisely because they are so powerful, they overfit. So what do
you do? Well, you can throw some noise into the system, you can do dropout, you can turn
off half of the nodes. You basically disrupt the processing a lot because what the disruption
does is it prevents you from overfitting to the data and it actually allows you to compress.
What does the compression do? It allows you to find the real invariance, the real patterns
that will generalize across all the varying contexts. Now of course, you don't want to
underfit. If you underfit, then you're not picking up on any patterns at all. Notice
again, these systems have to toggle, they have to toggle back and forth, they have to
disrupt, very analogous to breaking frame in order so they can make a better frame and
they're trying to find that sweet spot between disruptive variation and compression to detect
real patterns that allows them to become good learners. So what we know is that, again,
you have to have disruptive strategies set within powerful pattern networks that allow
pattern detection. That's exactly what we're seeing at work as I mentioned to you in these
people that are pursuing these higher states of consciousness. It's also again why belonging
to a tradition that can afford powerful pattern detection, introduce disruption when needed
and guide you to help toggle to find the sweet spot is very, very important. If you
want to be really good at jamming, right, you have to have the requisite skill. Jamming
without skill just gives you junk, doesn't give you jazz.
So what's going on in the brain? So notice what I'm showing you here. The machines are
doing, right, the compression. That compression is, right, that toggling of attention that
you see going on in the higher state of consciousness. They're disrupting and then compressing and
they're trying to find the huge invariance patterns but they're trying to break frame
and they're doing stuff that seems, I think, plausible to say is analogous to what we see
going on at the psychological level within people. What about at the brain level? Well
this is where we have to turn to Neuber because he's done most of the work on tracking brains
as people are having these kinds of experiences. And what you see is, right, initially you
get increased activity in the frontal area and the parietal area. These are the two areas,
the frontal parietal connection that is most associated with your general intelligence,
your ability to make sense and get an optimal grip on the world because that's what your
general intelligence is. So initially you see these areas get hyperactive and then you see
the opposite. You see them hyperactive. So huge increase followed by a huge decrease.
Now throughout, you have, throughout all of this, this is the frontal parietal, you have
enhanced activity in the thalamus. This is the area of the brain that tries to integrate
all kinds of different information together. The greater the shift, the greater the disruptive
shift, the more powerful the awakening experience is. It's just like what's going on in insight.
You initially bring all this machinery to bear to frame it and then you have to massively
disrupt it and break it. And then the system re-self-organizes and that is precisely what's
going on, I would suggest to you, in these experiences. So what is happening in the frontal
in the brain, for example, in psychedelic experiences, is you'll often see this kind
of shift. What's important and there's a bunch of people doing work on this, metastability.
So what, for example, Psilocybin does, according to recent work done by Lordedale, is it increases
metastability in the brain. So if you look at the work of Kelso, Tognoli and others, what
metastability is, is a state in the brain that's doing this complexification I talked
about. So normally your brain is integrating things or segregating, integrating, differentiating.
But in psilocybin, what you get is a state called metastability where, and this is a
state in which the brain is simultaneously integrating and segregating. It is massively
complexifying. Please remember, complexification is when a system is both integrating and differentiating.
When you went from being a zygote to being a biologically complex organism, your cells
were differentiating into different types of cells, liver cells, eye cells, etc., but
they were also integrating. You are complex because you're both highly integrated and
highly differentiated. Complexification gives you emergent functions. It gives you new
abilities. You can do things as a person, a biological human being, that you couldn't
do as a zygote precisely because you're complex. Look, emergent functions come with that.
Because I'm highly differentiated, I can do many different things, but because I'm highly
integrated, I don't fall apart as a system by doing these many different things. I get
new emergent abilities. The way you grow and self-transcend as a system is by complexifying.
Silo-Cybin, by putting you into metastability, helps your brain complexify and come up with
emergent abilities. It allows you to see the world, massive integration, in a grain of
sand, massive differentiation. So, I think what we can see here is at least
highly plausible, and I'll come back to what I mean by that in just a minute, the count
at the psychological level, at the machine processing level, and at the brain level of
what is going on in these higher states of consciousness, and why they are so powerfully
optimizing your cognitive functionality. Once again, not to repeat this, but that of course
has to be placed within the proper, sapiential context. You need a tradition and institutions,
a committed community of cultivating wisdom. Now, what about the prescriptive argument?
I've laid a lot of the groundwork for this. Why should we listen to people who have been
in this state? Why should this state serve as the justification for a transformation
of your life? If someone comes up to you and says, I want you to transform your life according
to X, Y, Z, you need that claim justified, not just described and explained, you need
it justified. What would make it a good thing to do? Are these states actually good guides
for transformation? Well, in order to do that, I need to introduce a notion to you first.
We're going to come back to this notion again when we talk about the nature of cognitive
science, although I've been exemplifying a lot of cognitive science to you throughout
these previous videos. This is the notion of plausibility. We need to talk about this
because plausibility is central to your notion of how real things are. Now, there's two senses
of the word plausible. One is a synonym for highly probable. That's not the sense I'm
using. I'm using it in the sense that Rescher and others made famous, where this means makes
good sense, stands to reason. Right? So, I'm going to go back to this notion of the sense
should be taken seriously. Most of the time, and I'll make this point in detail in a few
minutes, you cannot base your actions on certainty, but you have to rely on plausibility. Now,
there's a lot of work on plausibility, and I'm just going to try to sketch to you what
I think work I'm doing with Leo Ferrara and Anderson Todd about trying to integrate work
by Lombardi and Nashman and Sinatra from 2015, Kyle 2006, Milgram 1997, Kicher, Rescher,
I should say. There's just a lot of different work going into this. Here's what I think
it is to make something plausible. First of all, it involves what Rescher calls trustworthiness.
I think there's an important way in which trustworthiness comes about. You can see this
in some of the work that Kyle has done on explanations we prefer. We regard a particular
proposal or a construct or some way of trying to model the world as trustworthy if it's
been produced by many independent but converging lines of evidence. Let me give you a clear
concrete example. You will regard as more real information that comes through multiple
senses as opposed to one sense. If I'm only seeing something, there's a good chance that
it's an illusion or a delusion caused by the subjectivity of my seeing. But if I can
see it and touch it and hear it and smell it, then the chances that each one of those independent
senses are producing an illusion is radically diminished. The fact that they all are telling
me the same thing, now that doesn't give me certainty, but it gives me trustworthiness.
It reduces the probability, and that's what trustworthiness is, it reduces the probability
that I'm self-deceived. Now that's not the same thing as certainty, because unfortunately
for example, there is a form of schizophrenia in which people not only hear voices, but
they see people attached to those voices, and when they reach out to touch the person,
they get a tactile illusion. It's very hard to convince those people that their illusions
aren't real, precisely because this is highly trustworthy. This is why science likes numbers.
We like numbers because they allow us to converge the senses. Look, you can see three, you can
touch three, one, two, three. You can hear three. We like numbers not because we're fascists
or something in science. We like numbers because numbers, quantification, help us to increase
the trustworthiness of our information gathering. They allow us to reduce the chance that what
we're getting, what we're measuring, what we're modeling, is being produced by self-deception.
Is that enough for plausibility? I don't think so. So we're converging to some processing
state here, but we also want something to be the case, because we're not just looking backwards
into how we got there. We're also looking forward what we can do with it. What we want
is we want a model that we can now apply to many new domains that will open up the world
for us, that's multi-apped. This is like, again, taking a martial arts state. I don't
use this, but I'm taking this stance because I can quickly adapt it to many different
situations. It's multi-apped. It's highly functional. So why do I want this? When I can use the
same model in many different places, I would argue what people mean when they say a theory
or a model is elegant. You can use the same model. It's adaptive enough. It's multi-apped.
You can use it in many different places and apply it. So you have convergence for trustworthiness,
but you have elegance for power, for multi-appness, for multi-app application. Is that enough?
No. I think this state has to be highly fluent to you. Remember we talked about this? This
has to be one that you can use readily, powerfully for yourself, that you can internalize. So
when you have this, when you have fluency, convergence, elegance, you need one more thing.
You need a balance between the convergence and the elegance. If I have a lot of convergence
without much elegance, that's triviality. The thing about trivial statements is not that
they're false. They're true, but they're not powerful. They don't transform. Many times
we reject things. We don't take them seriously. They don't make good sense to us precisely
because they're trivial. What's the opposite? Very little convergence with a lot of promise
of power. This is when things are far-fetched. Conspiracy theories have this feature. If
they were true, they would explain so much. If we would just accept that the British royal
family were lizard beings from outer space, we could explain so much of their behavior.
But the problem is, although that would be a very powerful explanation, we have very
little trustworthy evidence that that is in fact the case. So what we want is we want
that, as Milgram says, our backward commitments and our forward commitment map. We only commit
powerfully forward if we've got a lot of trust in the model that we've produced. When
all of this is in place, I think we find what we're processing not only fluent, we find
it highly plausible. When we have very deep convergence and very deep elegance and very
efficient fluency, I think we then find the proposal profound. So you're saying, why
are you going on about this? Because what I'm trying to show you is what the brain is
doing is performing a kind of evaluation of the plausibility of its processing when it's
in a higher state of consciousness. See this model? What did we see? We saw lots of things
going into the higher state of consciousness. We saw de-automatization. We saw de-centering.
All of these things are strategies for reducing bias, reducing bias. These are all strategies
for reducing bias. De-automatization, de-centering, fluency and processing. We saw de-centering.
The state that you're in is a state of flowing optimal grip. It's intrinsically valued. It's optimizing
for processing. And what's this affording, this state? Well, you're finding a nexus for
a development. You're finding that systematic error. You're getting that complexity of the
classification of your processing. So you're getting emergent new functions. You're getting
the expectation of machinery, the insight machinery and the self-machinery into new abilities.
Do you see what I'm arguing? Your brain is in a state in which it's getting information
that saying this processing is deeply trustworthy, deeply powerful, deeply fluent. And you're
therefore profoundly plausible. Plausibility is not certainty. But plausibility is what
we have to rely on. What do I mean by that? You can't get certainty for almost all of
your processing. You have to rely on plausibility all the time. You have to rely on plausibility
when you say, but I could turn to science. Science will give me certainty. But first
of all, pay attention to the history of science. When has it ever done that? Almost all of
those theories that have been proposed in science have ultimately turned out to be false
in some significant or an important way. Science isn't believed in because it gives us certainty
or facts. Science is believed in because it gives us self-correcting plausibility. Look,
this is how, how do I decide what hypothesis to test? I don't test any hypothesis I come
up with. I wonder if clipping my toenails will reduce famine in the Sahara. Let's test
it out. I wonder if I gather enough frogs together, can I influence the Australian election?
Let's test it out. Do you know how many hypothesis, and you say to me, that's what? Ridiculous.
That's absurd. What you're saying to me is, those hypotheses don't make sense. They don't
deserve to be taken seriously. What you're saying to me is, I reject them because they're
implausible. Now I go into my experiment. I'm going to run an experiment in science.
What do I have to do? I have to control for alternative explanations. What we're always
doing in science is inference to the best explanation. Let's go to the work of Peter
Lipton and others. Here's some phenomena. What I do is, I have some candidate explanations
for what's causing the phenomena. Then what I do is, I put them into competition with
each other. Which one of my hypotheses best explains it? The one that best explains it
is chosen as what's real. How would you make this certain? The way you would make this
deductively certain is, you would have to check all possible explanations. How many possible
explanations are there? An infinite number. You can't ever make science certain because
you're always doing this. This explanation is only as good as the competition it beats.
You can't ever make science certain because you're always doing this. This explanation
is only as good as the competition it beats. In science, you advance by coming up with
plausible alternative explanations that you beat with yours. Science depends on plausibility
judgments. It depends on plausibility judgments when we choose our hypothesis. It depends
on plausibility judgments when we choose what variables we're going to control for an experiment.
It depends on plausibility judgments once we're done and we have the data and we have
to interpret it. What is the number of interpretations I can give for any data? Infinite a number.
What do I do? I generate the most plausible interpretation. Before the experiment, during
the experiment, and after the experiment, I'm relying on plausibility. Plausibility is
indispensable. That's why your brain looks for it. Notice what we've got. This higher
state of consciousness is an optimization of your processing. It brings about a state
of high plausibility and it's relying on processes that are fundamental because optimization
has priority. I have to get my optimal grip before I can judge what it is. I have to zero
in on the relevant information and have the right formulation of my problem before I can
try and answer it. These higher states of consciousness, notice what I'm saying you
that. They have indispensability because they run in terms of your plausibility machinery.
They are optimal in terms of getting the best possible functioning for you. They are prior
because they are fundamental to any and all of your cognitive processing. Getting this
optimal grip, toggling between trade-offs, getting the best relationship between generalizing
and discriminating. All of these have priority. These are why these states are such good
guides. Again, if they're set within a set of sapiential practices, set within a sapiential
tradition. What I'm saying is these higher states of consciousness are great guides on
how to transform yourself, how to cultivate wisdom, how to see through self-deception.
Sometimes people come back from these states and they make pronouncements about the nature
of the world. Sometimes these are bizarre. People will come back from DMT and tell them
that hyperspace elves have told them that they should remain forever inside their head
or some bizarre stuff. Here's the thing you should know about. The propositions that people
generate from this are largely useless. You can read these reports. People will have these
higher states of consciousness and one group of people will come out and say, I know there's
a God. Other people have these experiences and they come out and they're filled with
joy and they say, I know there's no God, diametrically opposite. Because this isn't about propositional
knowing. This is about participatory transformation. This isn't about getting secret metaphysical
knowledge. This is about getting wise practices, wise transformations.
Ultimately, what we need to do is to take the wisdom from these higher states of consciousness
and get it into rational discourse with an independently established, via our best science
metaphysics, best science and philosophy. When we can put those two together, then we
will have properly salvaged what these higher states of consciousness can afford for us.
Do not confuse the rationality of wisdom with the rationality of knowledge.
Next time what I want to do is, now that we've got a preliminary account of what these
higher states of consciousness, what the awakening of the Buddha might have been plausibly like,
we can return to what did he propose specifically, thereby finishing off the axial revolution
or discussion, I should say, of the axial revolution in India and then we will return back to the
Mediterranean world and look at what was happening there after Aristotle. Thank you very much
for your time.
Thank you.
