Welcome everyone to uh, I've really been looking forward to this voices with revaking. I'm going to be talking with and I'm introducing you to Elizabeth
O'Fields. She had me on her show on the sacred and I had such a wonderful
Personally powerful
Interview and discussion with her she really drew me out in a powerful way. We got into some very deep stuff and I was very moved by it
And I've seen her on a couple other videos
Conversations very impressed. I asked Elizabeth for two things to gifts to send me a copy of her book and to come back on my show and talk about it
The book we're going to be talking about is her wonderful book fully alive
Which is a very interesting it's very Augustinian. It's a mix of a kind of autobiographical confession and
Psycho-spiritual theological reflection and so I'm putting you there in some very august company
Literally august company
So yes
And I'm going to introduce Elizabeth in a sec and let her tell her a little bit about herself and what I thought we'd do when I proposed Elizabeth is
I'm going to pick out some parts of her book that really sang to me really resonated either like they called to me deeply or they provoked a question in me
And the intent is I'll say how
What it evoked or provoked in me share that with Elizabeth give her a chance to respond reflect and hopefully we'll get into a good flowing dialogos
And so that's the intent but first Elizabeth great welcome very much appreciate you coming and why don't you just say a little bit about yourself
We're going to get into some of you because your book is autobiographical
But maybe just a little bit of framing you think might be helpful for some of my listeners who haven't met you before
Gosh, how does one describe themselves? Well, I
I'm speaking to you from a very small
I've realized writing this book that the phrase intentional community is more jargon than I realized that it is it doesn't actually make a lot of sense to everybody
So I'm using the phrase micro monastery a small community of families that live together and drawing on monastic rhythms in South London in the UK and
I think the thread of my life has been being really interested in these questions of what is a good life. How do we live together? Well, how do we learn to love each other more
And what are the stories that culture is telling us that make that easier easier or harder
And theological questions have been woven through that I've been in and out of faith and in all different kind of flavors
But those are my those are my
Abiding questions. What does it mean to really live? What does it mean to grow in love?
What does it mean to connect with each other and have all done all kinds of jobs related to that but that's the kind of underground river
Well, thank you. That's very very helpful
So I guess as I said I want to just pick up on a few things and I want to pick up on
I guess the first thing and
That really really struck me is and I found kind of a
Sympathico between us is you you say at one point so many people I speak to and I take it you mean when you were writing or when you were doing your show
So many people I speak to create places to belong and ways to settle their soul and
I thought wow that's right because for me how that resonated with me is this sense of belonging this sense of connectedness meaning in life
Relevance realization I do a lot of work on that and then also this idea of you know getting the various elements of the psyche levels
Kinds of knowing aligned this is very platonic right inner justice outer connections reality and they're reinforcing each other so that's what landed with me
And I wonder how what I just said lands with you is that was that something you were noticing in general that people are seeking
I mean Plato proposed that there was the sort of two metadrives we want this kind of inner fullness peace and we want this fullness of contact and not just an intellectual we want to belong in some way
What do you think what what what comes up for you when I say that yes that's beautiful my knowledge of
Plotonic philosophy is patchy at best and so the main thing is allowing to learn more and to understand the different the ways different wisdom traditions use language
That often feel like they're trying to get to something similar right something unspeakable something beyond language
But certainly the the thread that I've been pulling on is what does it mean I used the phrase to someone recently and honestly as soon as I said it was like oh that sounds so smug
But that we were talking about psychedelics and the psychedelics renaissance and what that might mean and the way it's changing the spiritual landscape and she said have you have you ever been tempted and I said well sure in a like curious way
But I don't feel a need because I have a deep sense of existential satisfaction and then I was like that's like check your existential satisfaction privilege and I was like it's true like I need to be honest about that
And I wonder if that like internal coherence that you use this lovely thing about different parts of our psyche lining up that actually the very deepest part of ourselves are very I sometimes think of them as our very deepest values things we want to define our lives
We are conscious of them for one thing and then we are making choices around them we are seeking to stay loyal to them rather than just sitting there thinking actually I'm not living the life I wanted to I'm not staying I'm not paying attention to myself I'm not staying loyal to my values
And I'd love to I'd love to hear more I'm really interested in the way most wisdom traditions seem to
Have reached for language to indicate that there are different parts of us right you might think of the ego and the id
Super ego my tradition is the flesh and the spirit of the you know this is actually broken up in different ways and different parts of scripture and different parts of my
Is that what Plato's grasping towards do you think there
Well there's there's there's two different I mean because play there isn't one play though just like there's not one voice in the Bible right so one of the great mistakes that was predominant in
Academic philosophy philosophy and research on play though with for a long time that has now been pretty much overturned was this idea that there's a single voice of play though and we can get a single
And we can get a single theory theory out of that single voice and we've largely come to realize no that's not how his philosophy works but two two of them are and this one really prefigures Freud in major ways there's sort of three centers in us.
There's one you could call he calls it a monster that's sort of in your abdomen in your genitalia and it works in terms of super salient very present it's in the present moment super salient it's very urgent it works in terms of
Appetites and drives. Yeah, yes and then you have this thing that's there's no real good translation for it I'm sort of touching my heart area but when I say heart all kinds of romanticism rolls in that's not important relevant or even important.
So I'm going to the Greek word through moss it's kind of where our sociocultural emotions are how we want to be connected to other people recognized and values by others is where we have things like pride and shame and admiration and envy that that so it's working at this sort of social connectedness level.
And then there's this and he represents that with a lion lion hearted and where we get you know courage and lions are social animals and then forgive the sexism but compared to a lot of people played it was you know very far ahead he actually said women could be philosophers they could be in the army they could be
Govern they could be rulers of the state right but there's a man in your head and they that man can pursue long term abstract goals and they work in terms of truth he works in terms of truth and falsity.
And then he talks about right so they're working at these different scales and they have different goals and his point which is I think very well.
I think he develops better than Freud in some ways because he talks about the cognitive dimensions of these things is that each one of these has got pretty good sort of psychological cognitive cognitive scientific evidence for it that we have these different kinds of motivations.
And then his point is they often come in conflict with each other because they're working according to different criteria and at different scales and then what part of it is to be wise is to figure out the optimal relation.
Each one seeks to be maximal but the degree to which it's maximal it damages the other two right and so you have to get away of getting them all working as optimally together and that's a fullness of life because then everything is being as fully as live to use your phrase as it possibly can.
And if you'll give me one more minute and then the idea is that inner conflict is the driver and this is where it overlaps with Freud of a lot of our self deception of a lot of our projection our defensiveness our neurosis.
And as we ameliorate that inner conflict we start to cleanse the doors of perception and see more deeply into reality.
As we see more deeply into reality we get better at seeing more deeply into reality and then we can more better realize the real patterns of the psyche.
We can align the psyche better we can then see more deeply into reality and this is the ascent out of the cave this rolling reciprocal opening that's going on.
That's the and Plato's idea is that is the way to mutually satisfy our two metadrives.
Our two metadrives are in addition to whatever satisfies our desire we want the satisfaction of our desire to not create inner conflict and undermine our agency.
We want it to lead to a piece of fullness.
And in addition to whatever satisfies our desires we want what satisfies our desires to be real not fake not an illusion not a fraud.
And when we can mix though when we get those two together we get that sense of inner peace and connectedness to what's most real.
And that's his proposal for human happiness.
Thank you.
I'm going to go away and chew on it.
Sorry I didn't know I didn't want to get it.
No it's really helpful because it.
The the sort of working thesis I have about sin and again this is pretty personal.
Just ponderings allowed rather rather than and well here and in the book I'm not claiming a kind of.
Closed thesis or.
You know one of the things I had to liberate myself actually from in order to be able to write was this desire that.
Anything you say in this deep area you have to be completely certain of and you need to approach in this very academic fashion and liberating myself honestly to sort of.
In in in place of his language to draw on wisdom from all of those right and to say particularly this bit for me.
Connection is everything fully alive this is everything relationship is everything and.
It's not that he's completely abandoned you know reason or the man in our head or or or whatever but that the primacy of that post enlightenment post reformation the way.
Disconnected we have made wisdom subsumed under knowledge.
And scripture and my scriptures are incredibly clear that wisdom is not the same thing as knowledge that you can learn a bunch of facts.
And it puffs you up wisdom builds you and other people up.
And so my kind of getting to the point of thinking what do what do I think is getting in the way of my fully aliveness and the fully aliveness in the world.
Why do we do what we do not want to do and not do what we do not want what we do want to do why can we not tackle the climate crisis why do we not seem to be able to live together well.
Why is tribalism polarization exploding.
What is it about humans right given we are so beautiful and so tender and have so much potential for glory and goodness.
What are we doing and that deep sense of actually the tradition that was in the background in my childhood and that I had rejected once.
That says that's a sin that this is what's tripping us up and I was like a sin.
Yeah, I want to dig into it is unfashionable.
Well I don't care.
I think you're saying something really important.
First of all, I agree wholeheartedly with the distinction between knowledge and wisdom.
Knowledge is about overcoming ignorance.
Wisdom is over about overcoming foolishness and those are different things.
Ignorance is a lack of knowledge.
Foolishness is a failure to grasp the proper significance of what you know and apply it appropriately.
Live it.
Yes, exactly.
And and that's when talking about different kinds of knowing and getting them aligned could be important.
But let's not get into that right now.
I see so I once proposed this definition and I was trying to create a bridge and I don't know.
I don't think it succeeded because I don't think anybody got it or they didn't seem to pick up on it.
So I'm going to try again.
Sorry, I'm making you a guinea pig here.
I was trying to bridge between the theological language and this philosophical language around foolishness where foolishness isn't just you do this thing.
No, it's more like this system of self deception that takes on a life of its own.
And one of the papers I published with Leo Ferraro, we called it parasitic processing.
It's this kind of thing that takes you over and narrows you down and narrows and flattens your world.
And you get sort of locked in very much like the machinery that my friend Mark Lewis talks about with addiction.
You know, your cognitive flexibility and your sense of who you could be diminishes and the world shrinks and they reciprocally narrow, which is the opposite.
And here's the connection with love because love is reciprocally opening, right?
And so I said, and so if you can get to this notion of foolishness as kind of anti love, I said, I wonder if we could understand sin as a failure to love wisely.
I wonder what you think of that as a proposal.
I know it's very Augustinian, but if you object, I'm happy to hear.
But what do you think about that?
I, in my current working ponderings, love and sin are opposites.
And so for me, fully aliveness is connection is moving towards life, moving towards our own soul, moving towards each other, moving towards the earth, actually, and moving towards the divine.
Yes.
And it's the withdrawal and the disconnection that is the sort of blanket category for sin.
Luther and Augustin use this phrase, homo incanvatis in say, I don't know.
No one knows how you pronounce that.
That's how you pronounce that.
Man or humanity turned in on ourselves and the sense of an ingrowing toenail.
And so the idea that love, that sin is love, not applied wisely or foolishly.
I'd have to sit with that a little bit.
I think it, it, for me, for, for me, I haven't given much thought to foolishness.
But what you're making me think about foolishness is it's a real category in the book of Proverbs spoken about a lot.
The wise man and the foolish man, the wife man and the foolish man.
Jesus does too.
Yeah.
Jesus does too.
Yeah.
And it, I guess for me, the sort of outworkings of what I've been grasping towards is that foolishness is a failure to understand that life is connection, that love is what draws us, that love is what defines us.
And, and, and pride as the sort of kings in is the idea that we can manage without it, that we can manage without other people, that we are not relational, that we're not interconnected,
that actually we are the solipsistic, autonomous, self-actualizing, self-creating.
So maybe there is some overlap because that's a withdrawal from love.
I think so.
What I heard when you were doing the ingrown toenail is very much what, first of all, let's get the idea that the self is not a monad, that the self is not an Aristotelian substance independently existing, possessing its properties and being the sole author of its behavior.
Let's go to 40 E. Cogsci and say the self is inherently dialogical, it's inherently relational.
And then that inward turning is what we were trying to get at with this notion of reciprocal narrowing, right?
Where, where I, I'm, I'm not, I'm less and less tapping into the depth of myself and less and less opening, tapping into the depth of the other.
And that seems to mean like the hardening of the heart also that's talked about.
Yeah.
Right.
I was, I was trying to get at the idea that when we're not loving wisely, we're, we have chosen to go into reciprocal narrowing and harden our heart.
And the heart is what we're behind as we engage in the bullshit pretense of being autonomous substances, completely self-making and self-interpreting.
That, that was what I was trying to get at.
Yes.
I think that's brilliant.
I love that language of, of, of patterns because I'm obsessed with formation.
This, this, you know, the, the, this interconnects with William McGill, Chris, work about attention.
And, and the, I, and I was the, the, the hardening, the heart thing came up for me because I was talking to someone about what is going on with these people having very spiritual experience on psychedelics.
And what is the role of attention and what is it that means that I feel able to have what certainly seem to be experiences of the divine in a way that people with a different temperament,
formation, history than we find, would long for, but find really difficult.
Yes.
Yes.
And whether these types of attention can, yeah, that they shape what we can see, right?
They shape what's possible for us.
They should, and that, that, that, what did you call it?
Reciprocal narrowing.
Yeah, reciprocal opening.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And that when we've tried, when we try and live in ways, practices and rituals and themes and communities, crucially communities that are, that mean that our formation is towards love.
We will increasingly open to the world and open to reality and open to each other.
And now I want to read that paper.
Okay.
Thank you.
So, so that notion of connectedness, I mean, this is what I do a lot of my actual scientific work on.
So the core of one of my central theses is that general intelligence, the kind of intelligence we demonstrate and the kind that they're trying to make with artificial general intelligence.
At the core of it is this ability.
There's two things interlocked anticipation.
The more you can sort of anticipate the future, the more intelligent we, the more intelligence we attribute to an organism.
But interlock with that is like the core problem, which is relevance realization.
There's so much, there's so much information available.
It's astronaut astronomically vast.
There's so much information in your memory and all the ways you could combine it.
There's so many different sequences of behavior sounds you could utter.
There's so many logical possibilities you could consider.
And the thing that you do, and this is kind of like the Zen Cohen, is you're intelligent by ignoring almost all of that information.
But you don't ignore it randomly because if you ignore it randomly, you'd have an astronomical chance of doing the wrong thing.
Somehow you zero in on the relevant information.
And here's the thing, relevance isn't in me and relevance isn't in the object.
It's how the object and I are fitted together, how we belong together for a certain task.
And it's not cold calculation because it's what's grabbing my attention.
It's what's arousing my affect.
It's what's committing my agency.
And so it's always bound up with care.
So relevance realization is this homing, and notice the word I'm using, homing in on something.
A deep connectedness, a deep caring, a deep evolving involvement.
And I use the Latin word religio to talk about that sense of connectedness.
And then that's the first thesis and I won't give you all the arguments and evidence for that.
I've been doing that for like, I don't know, 25 years making that argument.
Tons of publications and other people publishing on that and all that.
So I'm just going to take that.
And so I think that's the core of our agency as intelligent beings.
And I think it also plays a significant role in consciousness.
We could get back to that if you wish.
But then here's the second proposal that that religio, that sense of connectedness.
So that's coming out of the part of psychology that's studying intelligence.
One of the problems in psychology is the different parts don't talk to each other.
That's why I'm a cognitive scientist.
And then you have two other streams.
You have people doing meaning in life and people doing the psychology of belonging like Kelly Allen.
Here's my proposal that what the psychologists are talking about and measuring when they're measuring meaning in life is they're measuring that,
that how much people have a celebrated sense of religio of connectedness that is deeply relevant to them and affords them solving problems
and using your language, forming their identity and their agency.
And that's also what people are talking about in that sense of belonging in the belonging literature.
And then if you don't have a sense of belonging, you're in trouble psychologically, socially, even physiologically.
And I think all three of these converge on this sense of religio and that sense of connectedness.
And the way you can sort of test for meaning in life.
I think you and I might have talked about this is you can ask people three questions.
What do they want to exist even if they don't?
How real is it?
And how much of a difference do they make to it right now?
The more answers you have to those questions and the deeper you think your answers are,
the more I will predict you say your life has meaning in life.
What do you think about that as trying to unpack this?
Because you do and wonderfully so you keep coming back this sense of connectedness,
this movement towards an opening up to but also letting the world and letting other people into oneself.
Like this seems to me to be exactly what you're talking about.
And this scientific literature would plug into that.
I think very readily.
It just makes so much sense to me on such a deep level and it is essentially what I think most of theology is about,
which makes sense if you believe that we are made in the image of a God who is relationship in and of God's self, right?
If you believe in the Trinity.
Oh, I want to talk to you about that.
We're going to talk about that.
That's great.
I think it's amazing.
The other real thread that I pull on a lot is Martin Buber and I Thou.
And the phrase that he uses about when we see and I say two thirds of I Thou,
the very short book is about moments between us and other people.
And the last third is about moments between us and the divine, us and God.
But he says the moments of religio, you could, I think, replace me when we turn and other people stop being objects to us or symbols or ciphers or just collections of pattern recognition predictions,
what we already know about them, you know, we put out into the world and we don't really need to take the cognitive time to,
people do what you expect them to do.
The moments where we cut through that and we really see them and we see them as a you.
And we were taking in new information.
We're seeing them.
That is all that is really real.
That is that that is living.
That is life.
That is fully aliveness.
That is that's it.
That's that's everything.
That's the game.
And he, in another book of his, he writes about how we spend a huge amount of time in different disciplines thinking about the individual self, which neither you or I really believe in.
But, you know, on all different disciplines, health and psychology and sociology and politics.
And then we spend a lot of time thinking about ourselves as groups as like, you know, in sociology, how do groups work?
How do they integrate?
How do we define?
But there's a third category, which is the between.
Yes, exactly.
The between.
The between the religio.
And there's, we don't, it's so hard to, it's so intangible.
It's so difficult to talk about.
And so the idea, I didn't know that I didn't know your thesis on this.
I know there was a whole scientific way attempt.
I know that there's some work being done in philosophy on it.
But, yeah, I, that, that awareness that the thing that's hard to talk about might be the really real, like might be the ball game is very exciting to me.
So, and this is a, this is an idea from what's called for ecog sigh.
But I've coined a term, I talk about the religio as neither subjective nor objective, but transjective.
It's exactly the between.
Don't know what that means.
Well, what it's a new term.
What it means is it's, it's, it's beyond and between the subjective and objective.
It's what binds the subjective and objective together so that meaning and truth are possible because neither subjectivity or objectivity will give you meaning or truth, because meaning or truth are inherently relational in nature.
And then you can bind together meaning, religio and truth in a powerful way.
Let me, let me, let me show you what, what you're talking about.
So I want to take the, I want to take the Boober and I agree with you.
I, thou, I think is a very central book talked quite a bit in other places about Boober.
But I want to, I want to then shift to a Murdoch example that John Wright talks about.
Murdoch talks about the mother-in-law who has his daughter-in-law that she regards as really kind of course and, you know, and rude and a little bit disorganized.
And then one day she has this realization and notice the word I just used, she has this realization that, wait, maybe her daughter is spontaneous and rounded and really authentic.
And maybe she's been understanding, you know, things, these phenomena in exactly the wrong way.
So notice she's, she's getting an insight that's going in both directions.
And here's that opening.
She's getting an insight into who this person might be beyond all of her patterned predictions.
But she's also realizing that her way of framing it, that way of doing this was also problematic and she needs to unlock the two together.
And Wright calls that sensibility transcendence.
And what I'm trying to get you to note is what's happening there is this reciprocal opening of the relevance realization machinery.
It's like, it's an insight.
It's like, oh, I was treating the wrong, I was treating the, I was seeing this in the wrong way.
I was considering the wrong things.
I was ignoring the wrong things.
And the way I was framing it, the way I was homing in on it was wrong.
I have to open both up together.
And we get a sense, like you said, and this, and then I want to drill down on another one of your quotes.
We get a sense of the really real.
And that's where I want to pause because you said that, right?
And then we use realization.
And it's this betweenness.
And that's the really real.
And I want to talk about your first, is that fair conversion?
I don't know what language is not offensive.
But you talk about, I believe you're at a camp or something and you talk about it.
And you, let me try and see if I can quickly find the actual quote because I thought it was really wonderful.
You talk about having an ecstatic experience, you quote Murdoch and the unselfing that I was just referring to.
And you talk about it as terms of here, my question had been answered with an overwhelming felt presence.
An encounter with a you, which you put in scare quotes, which means don't use that word.
The way we typically use it defined by love and acceptance and peace.
And you also go on to talk about my life had acquired another dimension.
So reality is opening up.
This is a real, real for you.
It's a realization.
It's a transformative realization.
And it's the sense of a felt presence that right is something like, but not the same as what we are normally capturing by you.
And this is wonderful.
And I want you to unpack that a little bit more if you can.
And I know we're both smiling and I appreciate your smile.
I'm not expecting you to, you know, to be Thomas Aquinas here or anything like that, nor am I expecting that I would be that.
But what I want is I just want to play with you about this, like real serious good faith play around.
These things are all coming together.
The sense of the really real, the betweenness, the loveless, the love, the connectedness presence.
And you're not talking about, like you're not talking about, you know, the presence of a determinant thing.
Boober's very clear about that.
Right.
And you want to, you want to say this is in the second person.
It's not the first person subjective.
It's not the third person objective.
It's the second person.
Right.
Transjective, if you'll allow me my neologism and you're playing with all of this.
And I think this is all resonant with what we've talked about so far.
But just more, say more, like, can you go back on that?
Because like that is so, like this, because I, and later on, when you're talking about God, you talk about God more adverbial.
You talk about God as a way of paying attention.
Right.
Which is really, really interesting, much more relational, much more adverbial, rather than the properties of a thing.
It's a way in which there's a presence, presencing, if I can put it that way.
That seemed to be fair to how you're talking.
Yeah.
And I, and the reason, so part of this is selfish on my part.
Part of it, I'm doing a lot of work on this.
There's a book out.
Oh, I can't remember it called Presence right now on some of the cog sigh about sense, a felt sense of presence.
And we can sort of induce a little bit of it in the labs, which doesn't mean it's an illusion because we can make you see a car when there's no car.
And that doesn't mean cars are illusion.
Right.
That's a bad argument.
But right.
So I'm, part of me is the selfish scientist.
I really want to, you know, somebody like you give me some data.
Well, give me some data, but, but, but, but I promise you, I'm not going to just, I'm going to really listen also as a you.
Right.
I'm going to listen because I care about this also as a person.
Right.
Think about it. Wisdom is about this loving enhancement of our connectedness of our ability.
The wise person can go into a complex, messy, ill-defined situation and home in on what's relevant.
Summon their agency in the right way so that they are properly responsible.
And so there's a connection between the realization of this and the ability to be wise.
Sorry, I'm talking too much because I'm enthusiastic.
I'm going to shut up and open a space for you.
I love it.
Thank you.
So it is a very, it's a tender and powerful invitation.
And as you know, sort of when I approach with fear and trembling and the, the book where the bit in the book, we're trying to address it directly is it's like four paragraphs of explaining why this is hard.
Yes.
Yes.
Yeah.
So what we're talking about in the source, my most simple and familiar language is God is.
Which I sometimes use the cinnamon of love for with a capital L.
And that experience, even though I've, I've written about it in the book, someone's, I'm currently trying to write about it again for someone who is fascinated by an essay for them.
And they're, they're like, I know you say words can't get at it, but will you try?
Like, will you, will you go more, will you go deeper?
And so I'm really reaching for.
I want to help you.
Yeah.
Yeah.
The edges of language with it and the things that.
The things that.
The things that come up for me.
Are just the undeniability of that moment of encounter and how.
How, but how impossible it is because.
Honestly, like I can close my eyes now and.
No, no, myself's.
Seen and.
The.
The deep, the deep knowing of present of the presence of love in my life.
And the way that every other moment of love and encounter and intimacy and reflection reflects that is.
Is the ground is the ground of my being, you know, in Kierkegaard's understanding of it and.
In that moment, it was really like.
Night and day.
It was people have been theorizing about God around me and I've been a bit interested and.
Questioning and being like, maybe I do believe, maybe I don't believe.
Asking loads of hard questions of this youth group that I randomly ended up in through a friend and then at this festival that I randomly ended up in because of fancy some of the boys.
Not from a particularly Christian family at all.
It wasn't a big deal in my childhood, I didn't have it shaping my imaginative world as a child in a way that.
Lots of people did for good or ill.
I know that that was complex for you, but it.
It went from a theory to reality in that moment I asked a direct question and received a direct answer and.
You know, the other thing that gets close to it and I quote is Pascal's what's known as the night of fire when he says.
Not the God of the philosophers or the scholars.
The are attempts to tame and theorize and analyze just get like.
And you're left with.
He says fire, fire, fire, joy, joy, joy.
You know.
And as I've gone back to it and it feels.
Feel there's a chapter in the book on sex and writing about sex felt less intimate and vulnerable than trying to write about this moment.
Yes.
Because it feels solely and personal, but.
What I've been thinking about it is when I first when I when I had my babies.
When I met my babies for the first time and it was this weird mix of surprise and deep recognition.
Surprise and recognition.
Excellent.
That's that's.
Like hello.
Of course it's you.
Also, who are you?
I know you.
I don't know you.
Who are you?
You're so here.
And.
Honestly.
I want to make sure I'm getting the connection.
Sorry for interrupting.
Please do.
That that that that moment of.
Let's call it.
Like encounter.
It's almost like platonic anemesis.
You remembered something you didn't know you had in you like Plato talks about this weird kind of remembering.
Where like when we're doing when we're doing the dialogical practices with people they'll often say I discovered a form of intimacy.
That I did not know about, but I've always been looking for that kind of weird.
Yeah.
Right.
Okay.
Okay.
So that's landing.
Good.
So.
And are you saying that that obviously also you're experiencing a particular kind of love.
You're pro you're experiencing the prototypical instance of agape club.
You're not loving this person because you want to consume them.
They're consumable.
You're not loving them because they're a great friend and you've had a life together.
You're loving them because you're caught up in the process of.
You know, there's a possible there's a person that I'm going to participate in them in the creation of which is like analogous to God creating persons something like that.
The Bible uses that metaphor.
And am I understanding you correctly you're using and saying that that intimate remembering of and surprise when I encountered my babies is a close analogy to that sense of God.
Am I am I I'm trying to get the make sure I'm not connecting it inappropriately.
The thing about this is everything.
Every time I go, okay, it's like this.
I'm like, yes, but it's also not like that.
It is.
Yeah, of course.
Of course.
Of course.
It's all these it is literally a space beyond language.
And so the poet poetry gets closest.
Music gets closest like and it really helped me.
I was reading.
I think Mike McHarg was.
And this might be one of those bullshit studies.
So forgive me.
I did not go check my references or look at the, you know, look at the rigorous rigorous.
That's okay.
How seriously it'd been here.
But in some ways it's a metaphor.
But he was saying when when when researchers are trying to do FMRI scanning on people in in sort of deep ecstatic states or deep prayer, deep contemplative prayer.
Particularly nuns that have prayed, prayed for a long, long, long time.
But other type ecstatic states like akin to the kind of ones that I have.
The language center of the brain is just quiet.
Yep.
Nothing is.
And the default mode network goes down too.
Right.
Which is your sense of self.
Yeah.
Which is why you get that unselfing experience.
Interesting.
That is fairly good evidence, by the way.
It's great.
It has.
It's not bad.
Great.
Wouldn't want to be quoting.
But it really helped me.
Because I'm a writer, right?
This is my thing.
I love words.
The not.
The feeling like my sentences would like ricocheting off this memory.
And that was something almost dishonorable.
About attempting to capture it.
I both want to because I so want.
I so want to share this.
Yeah.
It's the treasure.
But also it is so personal.
And it's where I saw.
I don't believe in individuals, but I do believe in persons.
And I do believe in human particularity.
And who knows what the soul is.
But it's the closest language I've got for the particular me that has connection
with religio with encounter with either with divine love.
And that you can't.
It has to be particular.
It has to be personal.
To be the really real.
I think that's right.
I want to pick up.
But first of all.
I want you.
I think you know this.
You're safe here to talk to me.
I'm not out.
I'm not gunning for anything.
I know.
I do feel that.
Okay.
Good.
Okay.
Secondly, I've had several of these kinds of experiences in my life.
And I also have practices that are designed and succeed in bringing me into a more reliable
conformity to that realization of the really real.
So this is something I think we deeply share.
I think there's, so there's a couple of things that are reverberating.
God is a gap.
And the great, you know, the great statement in the epistle of John, right?
God is a gap.
It's this guy.
The this is an identity claim, which we don't get very many of the Bible.
And the identity claims there's basically four.
And they're all inherently relational.
God is love, a topic love.
God is light, which is also relational.
You don't see light.
You see by means of light and the way it creates relations of intelligibility between things.
God is the logos and logos doesn't mean.
Just word.
And we've tend to reduce logos to logic.
But logos means this, what you're trying to get at this ground of intelligibility.
Right.
And of course, God is also life.
Right.
And it's right.
And life is inherently relational too.
And I wanted to, I wanted to, I wanted to.
So we've got this, right.
And yeah, I think persons are inherently relational things rather than substantial things.
And there's something particular about them.
The Buddhists have this term suchness.
Everything actually has its suchness in some ways.
It's absolute.
Like, because anything, any words I use to talk about this is our categorical and they
don't pick up on the suchness of this, the way it's not the way it's different from
every, all the other things in the category.
And then there's also a moreness that that suchness is somehow non logically identical
with all of the relations and connections that it bears.
And I think persons are a particular kind of nexus there.
And I wonder if that, you find that language helpful.
This, this, this surprise and recognition.
I like Plato talks about this a lot.
This is how we, this is how we recognize the forms.
We go, oh, but, oh, and then we go, oh, but of course.
Right.
It's, it's, it's that simultaneous like in, and it's like, and beauty is that combination.
This is why beauty is so important to play.
Beauty is a combination of surprise, but yet, right.
Of course.
Yes.
Why didn't I see it that way before?
Yeah.
Exactly.
Exactly.
And so that is all background.
And I'm not, I didn't try to thread it as a premise by premise argument.
I was just laying it out as, okay.
Yeah.
Because this is the thing that, and I mentioned logos and light because they bring out that.
Yes.
We don't see the light and there's nothing in terms of which we can understand the logos.
The Neoplatonists talk about the one is that by which you understand anything, everything,
but it's nothing.
You can't conceive of the one because you can't put it outside of it, of it in order to conceive
of it as an object because it permeates.
Like you keep trying to step out and looking and it's already behind you.
Right.
Yeah.
Making it possible for you to live and move and have a being in.
Exactly.
Exactly.
But here's the thing.
And I get the reverence.
Right.
The deep care because the importance.
Notice the heightening of a legio, the deep care and the importance of this.
And so I'm not trying to trespass on your reverence, but the question is like this, the thing that
I'm driving at is maybe it's even ask its quest maybe is, but it doesn't mean that there is
any disconnect from all of that intelligibility and that ground of intelligibility.
The fact that the words don't capture it doesn't mean that there is this gap or space.
In fact, it reaches into the words, it permeates them, it grounds them.
Right.
And it's, it's, it's, it's loving in that sense.
It embraces them.
It affords them.
It makes them possible.
It is the inexhaustible fount of flowing intelligibility.
And so, and it's, and the reason why I get like that, it's that connection.
That's why we have the weirdness of the connection, I think, because the surprise is I can't capture
it, but the, of course is, ah, but it's intimately interwoven with all of my sense making all of
the light of my world, all of the logos of my world.
And for me, that's what I'm trying to, and you can see now I'm doing the same thing.
I'm struggling.
I'm doing things with my hands.
Yeah, exactly.
Yes, exactly.
But did that, I'm trying to take a baby step here, but does that land for you?
What I was trying to get at, because part of the, part of what I want to challenge and
push against is people who think what we're doing is a kind of, a kind, I don't know,
something like a mystification, a kind of fundamental, right, otherness.
It is, but it's, and you quote Williams about this, but it's, but it's also, as he points,
it's an otherness that somehow embraces us, right?
And it isn't even competing with us, not one, not one Iota.
I'm trying to get at, I'm trying to get that the surprise and the recognition are sort of
the two sides of this, right?
The ineffable, but that is also nevertheless sourcing all of our intelligibility.
Sorry, that was a lot, but that's, I want, my question is, does that resonate with you?
Does that sing true to how your experiences are?
I think so.
I'm not sure if I've understood you, but I, the things it's making me think about are
how the, that experience and the experiences that I have now
felt like the cultural scripts around them were irrational, right?
That they were sort of, yeah, that my identity, you know, I worked at the BBC for five years.
I want to run a think tank in Westminster.
I have two degrees, you know, I'm a feminist, I'm sort of sickeningly metropolitan
intelligentsia, at least in this aspiration.
I read the New Yorker, right?
And so that, seriously, it's disgusting.
Self-making of my formation, you know, smart girl at school, jump the academic hoops.
And honestly, when I was young, there was like two parts.
You're going to be the hot girl or the smart girl.
I'm going to be the smart girl.
That's who I am.
And it, the reason I, that's surprising.
You're quite a beautiful woman.
I mean, that's okay.
Teenagers, teenagers, you know, weird.
But it, when, when you're thinking about the self that we make from the messages we get
from the culture around us, intelligent became one of my things I wanted people to perceive me as.
And it, it's very left hemispheric, actually very male, disembodied, increasing these
science-leaning, not humanities-leaning, you know, that kind of, okay, in order to be respectable,
in order to be impressive, in order to, to, to connect with the kind of people I'm interested
in, in the world of ideas and the books, this bit of me that like lay flat on the floor
weeping at the feet of Jesus when I was 15, I couldn't hold those two things together.
And so it, it fell apart.
And the bit that the things that we can't talk about, the emotional experiential encounter
of the really real, I didn't have categories for and no one around me had categories for
and the kind of person I was wanting to be becoming required me to let it go.
And I think part of what the sort of quest I'm on is to push back against that and say,
and I think your work and McGillchrist's work and a bunch of other people in the last five years to go
expand our understanding of what intelligence is, expand our understanding of how we access the real,
of what, how we perceive the world of what it might, what wisdom might mean.
And it, like, honestly, I'm full circle.
I'm back, I'm back like waving my praise flag, praying in tongues.
And a part of my brain is like, what are you doing?
And starts doing the like, you know, all the, all the, all the, all the, all the, all the
all the, all the theories, all the psychology, all the crowd dynamics, all the credulity, all the,
my friends who take psychedelics have these experiences, it's just induced all these things,
like some of that's going on in my brain.
But this bit, you know, you talked about this, like, so the middle bit in the Plato thing,
what I would call myself, is like, I need this.
The, the, the, the, is it Pascal again?
I'm obsessed with Pascal, like past, I would, Pascal would be my boyfriend if he was alive now.
He said, the heart has reasons, reason knows not.
Yeah.
And I'm like that.
And he talked about the difference between the spirit of geometry and the spirit of finesse,
which prefigures Ian's work.
I was, I just saw Ian a couple of weeks ago, we were at a conference celebrating his work together.
And he and I have had several conversations together.
So I think we share that project.
What, well, let me just say, for example, there's a paper,
first author by Johannes Yeager, but I'm also a co-author on it with some other people.
And we're in third round of revisions.
We, we had two reviewers, we went through all their edits, we're ready to go.
And then the third reviewer out of other blue finally sends in the review.
We have to start the whole process over again, which is, yes, I, those are some of them.
And the yuckiness of the academic world, but I'm very confident we're going to get it published.
And basically, and I presented this argument directly to Ian,
like he was literally four feet away from me facing him and he liked it.
But it's around the fact that so logic is logic is an example of a formal system.
Math is an example of a formal system.
Like it's completely self-contained rule defining.
And there's Godelian problems with it.
And so remember that, but that's what a formal system is.
And the proposal is that's what the left hemisphere likes.
The left hemisphere likes to use formal systems to solve well-defined problems like math problems
and logical problems in which you have a very good representation of what matters.
It's all packaged for you there by the formal system.
Now here, and that would be the spirit of geometry in Pascal,
but the process of formalization of creating a formal system,
which uses relevance realization is not itself something that can be done by a formal system.
The process that makes formal systems is not itself something done by a formal system.
It is done by something that is dealing with messy, ill-defined flowing problems
that require this very careful trading off between complex dynamics
in a flowing dynamic gestalt.
And that's what Pascal means by the spirit of finesse.
And what my work is trying to show is that intelligence isn't primarily a formal system.
It's about the ability to make, and then once they're made, use formal systems.
And that's not that I'm trying to map everything onto the left and right,
because that can get very dangerous.
But think about this.
It's like, here's what can't be captured in any kind of formal system.
But nevertheless, it makes possible and is constantly shaping the possibility space
for any formal system.
And so the two are deeply interpenetrating.
And I'm trying to say something like that.
See, I'm trying to maybe, sorry, this is audacious because I also respect Pascal the way you do,
but I'm trying to say it's not just, there's two.
There's a deeper legio between them.
Finesse actually makes possible and fuels the spirit of geometry.
Yeah.
It makes sense.
And I think resisting our temptation to swing too far back the other way.
Okay, we've had too much of this bad.
Let's have this different type of attention, this different kind of one.
Again, if we think everything is about connection, if we think everything is about relationship,
everything is about interdependence, then it's leaving those competitive instincts in us, right?
And like, my way is right.
So your way must be wrong.
Or maybe we need each other.
Maybe we need the spirit of geometry and the spirit of finesse.
And they are designed to work together.
The imagery in my scriptures is of our body, right?
And the church is not always great at living this UK church right now, struggling with this.
But the head cannot say to the foot, I do not need you.
You know, when we are threatened, when we don't have a stable sense of self,
when we do not know ourselves to be beloved,
the Rowan Williams talks about this in relation to God,
like that there's a relief sitting in the presence of the divine
because it's not constantly negotiating its identity in the way that we are.
And the more I know that which is not constantly negotiating,
God's not constantly negotiating God's identity.
And in the presence of the divine, I no longer have to either.
Just loved.
I'm a mess.
I'm loved.
Then I can go into the world and encounter other messy people who are loved,
who are presenting a completely different spirit from me,
functioning the world completely differently.
Naturally might threaten me because they don't care
or they don't understand about the kind of things that we do,
what this instincts in us.
But I can hope I can cut that.
I can kind of have an open heart to that and go tell me more, you know,
that's interesting.
What can we learn from each other?
And that's all work for me.
That's like long, slow, steady muscle building of resisting the temptation
to see everything in competition with each other.
Thank you for watching this YouTube and podcast series is by the
Verveki Foundation, which in addition to supporting my work also offers
courses, practices, workshops and other projects dedicated to responding
to the meaning crisis.
If you would like to support this work, please consider joining our Patreon.
You can find the link in the show notes.
Okay, that's beautiful.
And that's a connection.
And let me, let me try and make a connection with some of my current work.
Other people are doing on.
Okay.
So again, we think of logical as, and this is Descartes monological.
What you do is the individual person running an argument and of course
subject predicate logic.
And that's where we get our substance property ontology and it's all bound
together in this wonderful package.
But the problem is that we're now, we now have increasing evidence growing
rapidly that we actually reason better together dialogically than we do
individually monologically.
Take standard reasoning tasks.
An individual does them and the success rates like 10%.
You replace that with four people who they have to.
Dialogue with each other.
They, or what I call that dialogos, they have to do this shared group agency
and mutual correctiveness.
But if they, if they do that, they get that success rate goes up to 82%.
Wow.
I mean, that, that the finding doesn't surprise me.
This stat does.
That's amazing.
It's, it is impressive.
Um, uh, Sperber and Mercier have done some of the important work on this,
but more and more people are showing this.
So, um, and this of course is part of why Plato and this always frustrated
people.
Why doesn't Plato just write his arguments because Plato is trying to
show because you have to show this.
Right.
That we reason best dialogically, not monologically.
Right.
Now think about that.
Think about how there has to be something that makes the dialogos possible.
And what you're talking about, if I understand you correctly, is you have a
sensed participation in this presence that allows you to enter into and make
possible a dialogical mode with others that actually is ultimately more
reasonable.
Yeah.
Yeah.
That we are made in the image of a God who is relationship.
Right.
Even, even in the heart of the divine, there's no monologue.
There's no.
Okay.
So that, that, and we're, I need, so I'm going to invite you right now to
come back.
We got to talk a lot more if you want.
Okay.
So, um, so I've been, I'm doing a course ultimate reality, God and beyond.
Don't be put off by the title.
I'm trying to explore thinkers who are getting beyond the, um, the monological
substance, subject predicate logic model of God, which I think has become predominant.
And then one of the things in that I think is really strangling, um, uh, sort of
current theism.
Um, but, uh, James Filler's astonishing book, Heidegger Neoplatonism and the
History of Being, he makes an argument.
The Neoplatonists were actually trying to argue that ultimate reality is pure
relationality.
Information is purely relational.
Quantum entanglement is purely relational.
Relativity is purely relational.
Intelligibility is purely relational.
You can, you can get things out of relations, but you can't get relations
out of things.
That's why we had the collapse of nominalism and all those problems.
It's an astonishingly brilliant book.
And then he makes the, he makes the, he makes the, he makes the, he makes the
argument.
And then he makes the argument that Christian Neoplatonism is actually a
kind of apogee because Christian Neoplatonism says yes.
And our sacred appreciation, and I'm trying to use that word in all of its
meanings, our sacred appreciation of ultimate reality is very well captured
in the image.
In an imaginal sense of an image, the image of the Trinity.
Like you said, God is not a monologue.
He is an inherently dialogical.
All, all of the persons are inherently relational in their nature and they're
bound together.
And the identity claims of God are relational, logos, love.
And this is, and he's saying people don't get this.
Although he says, I suppose this is shameless advertising for my friend
Bishop Maximus, because Eastern Orthodoxy tries, is very much more awake and alive
to these thinkers, the Cappadocian Fathers, Dionysus, people like this,
Maximus, obviously, that, right, people don't get this because they're still
trying to understand this presence, this pure relationality, this you that isn't
bound to a specific thing, but somehow is the you of all youing.
I don't know if that even means anything, but that's how I, that's how I sort of
understand it.
And that they're trying to grasp that with the subject predicate logic, and then
they're trying to grasp it with substance property ontology.
And therefore they, the only way they misunderstand it is they think, well, it
must be a super substance, a super thing that owns and is the author of all
things and all properties between them.
And I think, and you may push back against me on this and that's fine, but I
think this is an important thing that is happening right now.
I think there's an advent of the sacred going on both within, I think people
are groping towards that anemesis of this understanding that we once had in
Christianity, I will put it that way, Neoplatonic Christianity, and they're
finding, not unsurprisingly, that it is deeply resonant with aspects of Zen
Buddhism or Taoism, where the same language is being used in powerful
ways.
And you very clearly state in the book that you're open to learning from
other traditions beyond Christianity.
I understand Christianity is your home and I'm not trying to take you from
it.
But I, so I've sort of laid my heart and my thought on the table about like, and
I know you're not doing this, so I'm not attributing to this to you.
I think saying God is love, that ultimate reality is ultimately relational is
way, way, way, two more ways, way, way more radical than people realize.
It is a profound challenge to our default way of thinking, of interacting, of
determining what's real, of sensing.
Like, it's, sorry, now I fall into a poria.
And I'm wondering if that lands with you.
Yes.
Yes, it does.
Because the word love has been worn out by overuse, right?
Oh, yeah.
And trivialization.
Yeah.
So I talk about sitting in the book quoting Francis Buffard, who forgive me, I'm
going to swear for reader, distance with sensitive is, but I think it's important.
He calls it the human propensity to fuck things up.
Oh, I think that's excellent.
Brute, the brutality of it really helps me.
And when I interviewed him, I said, I need you to do the same thing for love.
I need you to take this word, which is everything and help us hear it again
because we can't hear it.
And it slides past our consciousness and it goes in one ear and out the other.
And to say God is love, reality is love, reality is relational.
All living is meeting.
Everything is relationship.
It's not strong enough.
It's not radical enough.
It's not profound enough to, and this is the key for me to make us change our behavior,
to make us change our orientation and our heart posture.
It might make some people go, interesting, interesting ideas, interesting theories.
Oh, isn't that cute?
Lovely.
Nice.
Honestly, and I'm going to sound more like a like, I'm going to sound more like a Pentecostal
preacher than I usually do, but if it doesn't fundamentally in some way drive you to your
knees, drive you into worship of some kind, into a seeking after and encounter with that
love, then that's just like head knowledge.
Yeah.
I think that was beautiful.
You're pointing back to Pascal's fire, right?
If it doesn't have that fire, right?
The problem is, I mean, and I mean, other people have written about this perhaps better than
I, but, you know, we've trivialized love to being a feeling of love isn't a feeling.
That's ridiculous.
And then people think, oh, what love is an emotion and love isn't an emotion.
I love my partner profoundly.
And that sometimes makes me happy.
It sometimes makes me sad.
I miss her right now.
Sometimes it makes me angry if somebody is insulting her.
And I want to, because there is a function of emotion, of the emotion of anger, just to protect those
things you genuinely value if they're threatened, right?
And you realize, oh, all of those are expressions of love.
All of those emotions are expressions of love.
So love isn't an emotion.
Love is an existential stance.
It's a way of being.
It's a way of participating in the identity of something or someone else and allowing them to participate in yours.
It's a religio.
It's a binding that reciprocally opens.
And then if you say, oh, OK, that's good.
And you say, but think maybe reality is a binding that reciprocally opens.
And maybe that's why our minds evolve to try and focus in on this as a fundamental thing.
Maybe that's the logos of the ontos, the ontology, the ontologos.
And our psyche logos is actually evolved to be able to track and conform to that.
And that experience, the one where we experience that most is in the experience of love, understood in this wise way.
Not in as a feeling or not as, ooh, not as infatuation, not as desire.
This is one of the most important tests for the longevity of love.
Do you love someone even when you don't desire them?
That's an important question to ask yourself.
And when you get a clear answer to that is, yes, I do.
Then you go, oh, right.
Love isn't right.
Love can express itself in desire, hopefully so.
Love can express itself in all these, but love is behind them all.
And it's because we have such a shallow notion of love that we find it so hard to believe that people could say ultimate reality is love.
Well, that's a very pleasant metaphor.
No, right?
You really open up with that is and then that opens you up to reality in a profound way.
Yeah.
I mean, I think you're right that the sort of conflation of romance with love is non erotic loves are as much the really real.
Like deep friendship.
We have devalued it.
Parent child, like the.
Those loves are as much the root to wisdom and growth and fully aliveness as sexual love is and we just have devalued them.
But honestly, John, the thing that's making me think of and I'm sort of surprising myself by going here is that in my tradition, the symbol of love is a torture instrument, right?
It is that he opens his arms of love upon the cross that the that's another thing that keeps me on my tradition that it resists abstraction.
It resists generalization to the point of no bite through the incarnation and the crucifixion and the resurrection and the no greater love has anyone than this that they would lay down their life for their friends.
And that is what I think is.
Is it the Greek words that you just can notice self emptying.
Yes, yes, the love.
Love as opposite of pride.
Love as opposite of withdrawal into ourselves as the toenail turned into ourselves.
But like outward to the point that we might even lay down our lives.
We might even empty ourselves.
And that that has been done for us is is is like gritty, dirty, bloody, painful, not fluffy.
You are not going to draw a Valentine's card about it.
Right.
It's just to do completely different things.
That's a very good point.
That's a very good point.
The cross prevents the Valentine's Hallmark carding of love.
That's a very good argument.
I like that.
I don't know if you're aware of it.
I think it's John Cobb.
The Christian theologian has an anthology.
I haven't read it yet, but I'm looking forward to it.
Called the self emptying God, because there's this ongoing discussion between Buddhists from the Kyoto school, like Maso Abe.
And there's a Jewish theologians and Christian theologians all talking about this, this notion of the self emptying God.
And how each one of their traditions says this is something very, very central that has been lost.
And they find that obviously they don't all agree, because there's no sort of mush religion that everything will dissolve into or anything ridiculous like that.
But they do all seem to be converging, at least on, we all want to talk about this and make this more prominent.
Again, this notion, I think of Kenosis and the connections between Kenosis and Theosis, especially in the Eastern Orthodox.
Because if you hear Theosis, divination, right, the Eastern Orthodox idea.
Divination has been coming like God, not as in the lesson in Harry Potter.
Yes, yes, yes, exactly.
There's all my level of references.
Well, the idea is, yeah, but you become it's not inflationary because the Theosis is interwoven with the most extreme force form of Kenosis.
Yes, you can be Godlike.
You know what you have to do?
You have to do the most radical self emptying to participate in God, right?
And I think you're saying...
The first shall be lost.
Yes, yes, yes.
And I do think there's something important about this.
I mean, what's coming up for me now is Han in his book, Saving Beauty, talks about the reduction of beauty.
We've taken the shock out of beauty, right?
And so I'm going to say something that I think an ancient would get, but a modern person would find repellent.
I think the crucifixion is beautiful, not because it's pleasant or pleasing.
And Han talks about how we've reduced beauty to the smooth, the easily gratifying, the easily graspable.
But if you read Plato and Plotinus or read even Rilke, you know, beauty is an angel that could kill us, but decides not to.
Like, come on, think of that language, right?
That's again, like, right, the profound shock of it.
But you did this thing.
It's the shock that immediately you go, but of course, because if I didn't have that shock, it wouldn't awaken me to what love really is.
And then that is what I mean by saying this is a kind...
So I'm saying it's not only that we've trivialized love, we've trivialized beauty, and those two things, those trivializations in some sort of...
I have a complicit, right? Mutually reinforcing fashion that traps us.
And I think the epitome of that is pornography, because pornography is the reduction of love and the reduction of beauty to the smooth.
And Han has a very good book on the agony of Eros.
You seem to be nodding when I was...
Is that also resonating with you?
I mean, so much of that is resonating with me.
I just can't order my many, many thoughts.
The first one was about beauty as, you know, obviously Aquinas talks about goodness, truth and beauty as one way of thinking about God.
And we hear the beauty better, like, pretty, like nice.
And it...
Kant has a work on aesthetics, which is the only bit of Kant I know, to be clear.
His thinking about the sublime and the numinous is that, like, actually it's quite scary.
It's the bit...
It's when we encounter something that could kill us and does not.
And the way I think about it is it sort of makes us feel right-sized.
The part of the agony of being a 21st century of human is that we are trying to be something we are not.
Like, we are trying, like, relevance, whatever it was, that there's just so much.
There's so much.
And we're supposed to create ourselves.
We're supposed to decide.
We're supposed to know everything.
We're supposed to be across all these references.
We're supposed to have read everything.
We're supposed to be thin and successful.
And we're supposed to save the world from climate change.
And we're also just, like, we are not gods.
We are not...
You've all know Harari is wrong.
We are...
There is...
That that is beyond us.
And when we encounter, I think, the real, the real divine, the real God of love beyond us.
Yes, it's quite scary because we feel our smallness and we feel our vulnerability and we feel our fragility.
And I think we feel our sin.
We feel our disconnection.
We feel all the ways we have not lived up to the kind of people that our soul longs us to be.
But it is also sort of a relief.
Because then we're rightsized and we know where we are.
The thing about porn is that was the scariest part to write because I am basically trying to make quite a full-throated defence of the Christian sexual ethic from a feminist perspective.
And say, yes, I know.
I know, I know, I know that this church teaching around sin has been used as a cost to beat people, gay people and women in particular.
However, it at its heart, I think, is about a refusal to treat another human being as an object and a very, very high attunement to power imbalances.
And my argument against porn comes down to the disconnecting formation of treating another person like an object.
Totally, totally. I think that.
So there's a couple of things that come up for me.
There's all this scientific work going on in awe right now.
I'm involved in it when we're running an experiment.
Some of the work that's come out of it that seems pretty reliable.
Keltner and Jennifer Steller here at the University of Toronto is awe does that proper proportion.
Awe is, and think how it does relate to our word awful, right?
But awe is, people reliably report a shrinking of the self.
But one of the interesting things about awe is it's one, now if you push it too far, that becomes horrific because if the shrinking goes too far, you get horror, right?
But awe is one of the few experiences where the self shrinks and people experience it positively.
It's not shame, right?
It's not depression.
It's shrinking, but it's positive.
And you know, this is Murdoch, you know, love is the painful recognition that something other than yourself is real.
I propose, it is a hypothesis, that that unselfing actually makes us realize a possible connection to reality that we always long for but didn't know that we were longing for it.
And that's why, although the self shrinks, we get something positive.
Now, for me, and this is where I'm putting on my Cognitive Scientist hat, but I'm going to also put on my Play-Doh hat.
The thing about that is, like, you can imagine, right?
You can imagine that there's two sins.
Play-Doh was worried about two things.
Drew Highland's book on finite transcendence, that Play-Doh is always trying to get us to get that we are always finite.
And that means finitude, fallible, right?
But we are also open to transcendence.
And he says, if we just fall into our finitude, we can fall into despair.
We can fall into horror, right?
We can lose a sense of the proper dignity of a person.
Right?
So we have to also realize that we are responsible to transcendence.
But if we just identify with the transcendent pole, then we suffer hubris and inflation.
And he says, what you have to do is you have to have a tonus.
You have to get this proper proportioning, proper sizing, but I'm trying to change it from size to...
When I'm not trying to change it, I'm trying to amplify your sizing to making it inherently relational.
It's a sizing that puts you in a light relationship, right position, like the right holding together of, right, your finitude and your transcendence.
And I think one of the problems we have, and this goes to your polarization chapter, is we have severed those.
And the left says, we're so finite and we're so subject to fate and we need compassion and they're right.
But the right says, but when they're both at their best, because neither one of them is at their best right now.
They're at their worst right now.
So when they're at their best and the right says, yes, but we're not just animals.
We're persons called to responsibility.
We have a relationship to the true, the good and the beautiful.
And then what you need is like a dialogical relationship between them for a healthy society.
And of course, we've abandoned all that.
We've polarized.
We've changed that into each side is now at its worst trying to kill the other and demonizing the other.
But I'm trying to bring a lot of what you said into one thing.
So I'm wondering if, because here's the thing and I got to be careful here.
So the research that's coming that we're doing right now seems to show something.
Sorry, there's a long time, but I'm sort of building an argument.
Keep going.
Okay.
So I thought all is this right opening up and everything.
And so what you should see is if we induce our experiences and we have some reliable experimental techniques using the overview effect and music and people can get sort of that off.
Right.
Then you should see increased measures of cognitive flexibility because those indicate that people's minds are opening and they're exploring possibility.
So we induce all and we do all these tests and no measures of cognitive flexibility.
What all predicts is a confidence in any insight you might have.
Now that can be very dangerous, as you can imagine.
But here's the proposal, which I've been making to my fellow researchers.
The point isn't off.
The point is a humble sense of the transcendent.
The point is reverence and reverence is a virtue.
And what the odd does is it gives you some confidence to start cultivating reverence, but you don't get the cognitive benefits from the experience of our, you get the cognitive benefits from taking up the encouragement.
I use that word very deeply.
Yeah.
Cultivate a proper reverence.
Hmm.
What do you, what, what are you meaning by reverence in that context?
So what I mean by reverence is exactly that tonus, that creative tension.
Sorry, I'm using a Greek word because our English word tension is only negative for people now.
We forget Heraclitus, the tension of the bow, the tension of the liar, the tension that holds the bridge together.
Muscle.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, exactly, exactly.
And so I think of reverence and, you know, this is somewhat similar.
But I think also different with, is it Woodruff's or Woodward?
I'll hit the book on, reverence is a forgotten virtue.
But I think of reverence as a humble wonder that we, we get, we get the profound sense of our finitude.
That's the shrinking, but we are wondering, not in the sense of curiosity, curiosity is trying to get something.
Wonder is calling things into question, including oneself.
We get a humble wondering towards things.
That's what I'm calling reverence.
And that takes, that takes time and effort to cultivate because it's a virtue.
It's not just an experience.
That's what I'm talking about.
Okay, that's making sense to me.
Yes, that does.
So one of the things I reflect on a lot of these peak experiences, these ecstatic encounters that have been really defining in my spiritual life, but are not sufficient.
Exactly.
It really, it really, when I talk to, I'm sorry to wind on about this, but I've got lots of friends at the moment who are fast, who are, who are taking a lot of psychedelics.
And I'm very interested in what it's doing to our spiritual landscape.
And there are some similarities between the peak experiences they have on psychedelics and the peak, what I would call my experiences of the Holy Spirit.
We don't know because they go beyond language and we can't actually compare them.
But, you know, we are, we at least can see in each other that we've, we've, something's happened that it's big and it involves our bodies and our emotions as well as an idea.
And I was talking to my friend, Jules Evans about this recently as a psychedelic journalist.
Yeah, yeah.
Yeah.
And I was saying, I think, I mean, within Christianity to be clear, the fact that I'm a charismatic Christian makes me quite a weirdo.
There are, there are lots of us, but it is not, not this, not something that all Christians have speaking tongues or have these exotic encounters.
But the bit of the, I would say my flesh or the bit of me that's foolish just wants it to be about those because those are amazing, right?
Super pleasurable.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Really connecting, really nourishing.
But they are.
And I think it was, who has the pyramid of needs?
Maslow.
Maslow.
Talks about them as.
Actually, by the way, that's a misattribution.
Maslow doesn't have that pyramid.
That was put in all the psychology textbooks and attributed to Maslow.
Maslow is much closer to Aristotle than to that pyramid.
Interesting.
By the way, beyond self-realization, Maslow had a final thing that doesn't show up on most pyramids.
He had self-transcendence.
Yeah.
So that's the luck.
That's making me feel better now because that's the bit I quote.
But he's talking about the relationship between religion and these exotic experiences.
And Maslow's fundamental understanding is that religion is these moments of encounter.
And then around it accrue all these dogmas and these rules and these regulations that stop looking like real religion, which these ecstatic experiences.
Like, no, Maslow.
The peak experiences, I would say, my experience with the Holy Spirit, my moments of encounter with God.
Should send me back into the rigorous spiritual path of trying to grow in faith, hope and love.
And love my neighbor.
And if they are just some solipsistic self-actualization, that in my tradition, this is sort of worse than useless.
Because spiritual gifts are for other people.
They are doggedly communal.
We receive these things to make us better at loving each other.
And so I sort of joke with Jules about charismatic Christianity is my set and setting.
Like, I need a book to check it against.
I need a community who are wise and know me and will be like, no Liz.
That thing that happens to you in that ecstatic experience does not sound like it is going to lead you towards love or fully aliveness.
It sounds like foolishness.
Also, you're getting a bit self-obsessed.
And I need, frankly, to be repeatedly told that I'm mainly supposed to be feeding the poor.
Like, not getting out of my head on divine love much as I need that and want it.
And temperamentally, it's where I would spend all my time.
I think that's right.
I'm teaching a course right now on the nature and function of the self.
And it's just wrapped up and I had a student in there and the work I was teaching and that the work the student was coming together,
converging on this idea that these peak experiences, they are, as you said, they're not sufficient.
They're necessary.
What they do is they, and this is the term that's now emerging.
They create epistemic vulnerability.
They make you vulnerable to new ways of knowing new possibilities of seeing and being.
But if you don't have the setting and I would add the sapiential framework and ecology of practices oriented towards the cultivation of wisdom and virtue,
that epistemic vulnerability can go, it has the potential to go in multiple directions.
It makes you hugely vulnerable to abuse, gurus, cults.
That's right.
And so, like you, I reject that idea and Huxley has it to some degree that if we could just peel away all of this, all of these doctrines and structures.
Now, I'm very, I have issues around reducing religio to credo.
We can talk about that when we talk next.
But I do agree with you that you need a practice and principles and philosophical in the wisdom cultivating sense framework that's housed, sorry, wrong word,
homed in a community for these peak experiences to turn into transformative experiences that are transforming people towards wisdom and virtue.
I think the evidence is mounting for that, by the way.
Yeah.
Great.
This is a good place to end, I think.
This has been truly full of wonder, wonderful in that sense.
I've really enjoyed this.
And I hope that you found that you had enough that I wasn't talking too much that you have found enough time to speak.
Because I wanted, I didn't want this to be an interview.
I wanted this to be the logos.
This is much more fun, a conversation.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And yes, exactly.
And sparking, you know, insight and interest in each other and asking interested questions rather than interesting questions.
Right.
That's a distinction that my friend master Christopher master Pietro has brought into the dialogical practice.
But I definitely want you to come back.
And I hope we can continue and doing diving a little bit more.
Maybe we can do a little bit more about the vices and the virtues and a little bit more again about what we were talking about.
And what is the relationship between religio and credo?
And how do we hold that relationship in the context of a lot of the things we seem to be resonating and converging on?
That's what I propose for our next discussion.
Sounds brilliant.
So Elizabeth, I always give my guests the last word.
You can be cumulative, summative, provocative, elusive, whatever you want to say.
I'm so tempted to go nitwit blubber.
What is my last word?
I think holding onto the fact that love is the really real.
If you had to bore wisdom down to that, you wouldn't go far wrong.
Yeah.
Thank you so much.
I look forward to our next discussion.
Thank you so much for having me.
