Welcome everyone to another voices with Rebeccae. I'm here with somebody who's been here before cast of Mirzai and
We had an amazing conversation. This is part of a series of ongoing conversations. I'm having
They often get into the logos on IFS and related topics around ally work and parts work and the
Dialogical nature of the self. I've recorded one recently with Paul van der Klee on just this topic
It'll come out shortly
Recorded one with the Mark Lewis, which will come out
So I've been dying. Yeah diving very deeply and all of this and
so
First of all, how's it great to have you back?
Why don't you just tell us again a little bit about yourself, you know your credentials and
You how you're in like how your work and my work are connected in your mind and things like that
Very good to have you back. It was a great pleasure talking with you last time. Thank you John. Thanks for having me
It's a it's a pleasure to be back and to you know to talk with you again. So, yeah, I'm Castro Mirzai. You introduced me. I'm
clinical researcher. I'm a psychotherapist and
I'm
I'm also a teacher at a university. So I'm doing this kind of you know
three things teaching researching and treating like doing psychotherapy and
And
Basically, I have a very broad spectrum of interests in my work. So it's on the one hand. It's IFS related
I'm by training. I'm a behavioral therapist and I do combine certain things I work, especially with adolescents and
adolescent
residential crisis center where I'm working with heavily
Impaired adolescents from 14 to 18 that are like, you know, personality disorders severely traumatized
at the same time also doing research on
Effect dynamics, it's called and it's basically it's it's the psychological research of
Self-organized criticality, I would say. Oh, wow. Yeah. Yeah. So what I'm what I'm looking at is
how how
emotions and affect how they
fluctuate and how, you know, the tipping point comes
Probably doing therapy. It can be doing therapy where things shift where a phase transitions takes place
And I'm looking at this from, you know, a more technical perspective
Dynamical systems theoretical perspective. So that's the technical part of my work and yeah, besides that, I'm deeply deeply interested in
the question of meaning
basically and
Yeah, this has drawn me to your work, John
I've been an avid follower of your work for many years now and yeah, it's a pleasure to talk to you. So yeah, I'm again
I'm this this topics of meaning and spirituality and how it can be
How science and spirituality can be conjoined again. That's deeply deeply relevant to me
All right, let's talk about this and I'm gonna talk to you about self-organizing criticality
Yeah, I've been doing some recent stuff on that
But let's start with the IFS and there's a couple questions that come to mind
We sort of laughed left off last time and you brought this up and off camera
with a question that I really wrestled with both with with Mark Lewis and
with Paul van der Kley and
And you know and feel free to sort of, you know
Fumble your way around because they were too and that's not an insult to them
That's not an insult to them like there was this like like this is a hard question and
And I'm gonna while there's two questions
One is the question of self-deception with IFS and the other is the question of self-deception in IS
Okay, so there's the one is
Can people use IFS to?
Significantly deceive themselves bullshit themselves. There's a new paper out that chat GPT-4 is basically not lying
It's doing bullshitting where it's making things salient and indifferent to the truth and making us very prone to that and it's very dangerous
already and so there's that question about
About self-deception that way, but also can the parts deceive us
That's self-deception in IFS can can they
Deceive us can they lie to us if they have some
Intentionality and if they have goals, which are sometimes orthogonal or perhaps even
Opposite of ours
Could they deceive and lie to us and then that brings up the the question that is in the in lurking in
The background of a lot of religious peoples thinking when they confront IFS
Which is the possibility of evil
In all of this and then that will I think if we get into it that in the right way that we can shade into the second topic
Which is you know
IFS and spirituality and and things like that, but let's start with the first one
So what about you know self-deception with IFS and then we'll move into self-deception in IFS
I if I'm not mistaken, it's it was the even the last question you asked me in the last conversation that we had
Yes, and um
Now I really had time to really good
Sit with a question and I really contemplated on it and meditated on the question actually more deeply and
Well, first of all, thank you for doing that. Well, thank you for asking because it
and
It really gripped me the question and I think it was interesting because I
Was a little bit blindsided by the question and I don't mean this in any kind of you know
reproachful sense or you know, but because I had an implicit assumption and I projected like how you know
John Bovaki the you know the guy that gives courses and you know dedicated parts of his entire career to this question is
Asking me about self-deception
So I I think I gave an initial answer now
Well, you know state my answer in in a second, but if you allow John I want to first leave out
the IFS bit and address self-deception more broadly and generally and then
Yeah, yeah totally fair totally fair. That's a Socratic move. Let's step back and make sure we're clear about our orientation
Yeah, because I also and you know, I really took the serious and I and I really not only thought about it in an intellectual sense
I did practices on it on you know, how I can you know answer this
How can I question? How can I get into contact with this question?
And it's you're really wedding my appetite. You're really wedding my appetite for this
It was an IFS and let's say Jungian informed practice that I did there
So yeah, so the answer to it is also in the practice I would say
and
Yeah, as I as I said, I was really thinking about it and so again to reiterate my initial answer from last time for the audience
Part of my answer was that I think we really have to reconnect to our body like deeply
Inhabit the body again in this mellow ponte sense that you mentioned to and
I also mentioned that we I think that that
Communal feedback is really necessary like social communal feedback and
I
Still think it's a good answer
But I was I was dissatisfied with it a little bit because I felt it's incomplete
There's something missing and then it hit me when I you know
Had my daydreamings and I you know did my practices and all of that and
So first of all, I think this this communal feedback is also something that ties
back to what we talked about last time about
Vygotsky and scaffolding because
Well, IFS is something like an inner ecology of communal feedback
It's like when we take the outer family system or external family system serious
We build a scaffold to internalize these stuff. So I I really think that you know
External feedback systems like the community. They are important for for correction, right to for maybe not self correction, but correction and
and and and it was interesting because I
Think the scaffolding part isn't important and something that hit me is just the you know side note John is that
Well, the scaffold is important
But the goal is this internalized internalization
Because the goal is self governing, you know, it's you know to be self-government and interestingly enough John
I realized recently that that's actually the I find that mistaken
I mean, you know people can correct me in the comments if they like but if I'm not mistaken
That's also the root of the word God and Farsi in Persian
It's like we say hodah and in hodah there is hodh which means self and and the term means self-governing
So it's like this auto poetic thing of self-making
self-government and this is this is a notion of God that really
That I always found
Meaningful even as a teenager and even as a kid
So that's just as a side note. I still think that's a good one
I like so the the idea that God is sort of
Fundamentally like auto poetic in that sense not just self-ruling but self-generative too and I mean
I can see what why that would appeal to somebody
with you know with
With deep experience and reflection on you know young and also I have s right because there
Well, I can see that and again new Platonism and the philosophical. Yeah, right. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, Sufi and mystic as well
Yeah, yeah, yeah, and and you know
So that was that was one one thing that it came to my mind. It's that it's about this self-government and
So
If you'll if you allow me that's already that's already you're doing yeah, just to put a pin in it for foreshadowing purposes
I mean you're already bringing a spiritual dimension to this because this is a way of like
Being God like in this in the virtuous sense of the word being like God
Participating in God's nature not just representing and thinking about it
But enacting what God is fundamentally in some way. Is that a fair thing to say? Absolutely, and I think you
You're spot on when you say participate in it
Because I think there was this danger of again identifying with God, you know
Self being God, but I think it's really a participation setting up the inner ecology and the right constraints
So that this spirit of intelligibility this this this ultimate can unfold and help us and
Ultimately that can be also the scaffold too so that we can self actualize self realize
so yeah, I understand God in that sense at least from this perspective and
Okay, so that's good. Excellent. That's useful for where we're heading, but let's go back. Yes
But self-deception so I was sitting in the
After our conversation, I was sitting
I don't know where I went, but I was sitting in the train and I was observing people and
Then I thought really thought about this question of self-deception
I really left out the IFS part because I wanted to understand self-deception first
the nature of self-deception and
If I'm not mistaken and John you can correct me if I'm wrong, but I think fundamentally it's the question about sinning
Would you agree on that? Oh?
So I think like in the sense of how I see ya like, you know missing the mark. Yeah kind of thing missing mark
So I well let me respond because I think this is an important distinction
I think there is self-deception and then I think there is a profound kind of self-deception
that begins to progressively dehumanize us and
Make us incapable of properly connecting to our humanity to the our shared humanity and to
Ultimate reality and then when the self-deception becomes like that, right then I think it takes on a kind of
existential psychological
Ethical and therefore spiritual profundity and then I would call it sin. We become incapable in a deep way
Realizing how deeply the self-deception has become I just
So I don't want to say things like you know when I you know
I deceive myself about thinking that there's enough food in the fridge. Is that a sin? Yeah
Yeah, yeah, yeah, it's you know
I've made use of the rubber the confirmation bias or something like that. It's definitely self-deception
but it but
It's sin because what you're doing is this the self-deception is making you miss the mark of connecting to your humanity
Connecting to reality. That's how I would yes, and that that's that's how I was thinking about it
Not so much from this moral or ethical perspective like reducing sent to just a misdeed
But actually so my my view was that it's I
Could be wrong about this
But the image that I had in that moment was that it can't be on a continuum from certain biases like cognitive biases that we have
to yes, yes, like really distorted views that really
Fuel misdeeds or you know are the are the vehicle for these kind of things
We aren't exactly on this. We are exactly on the same page about so that to me is important because
You know, it's the fundament of my argument or what I was thinking about and and then when I was observing the people in on the train
I realized well, it's interesting because
If we are all sinners which we in some in the sense are me included and those people in the train included
how come we can
Still relatively live in a peaceful manner. I mean obviously
Right now in parts of the world. There are there isn't so much peace and
But you know, you know to be fair, it's still, you know, we can still get along
and
Why hasn't all hell broke loose? I was thinking hmm and I was wondering if there is any solution to this problem of self-deception at all
Because and then then I realized really that it's a just how you say it. It's it's this perennial
It's an eternal. I would say archetypal struggle that you really struggle with this and
And then I thought
Well, if maybe if if there isn't a solution
Maybe there can be a counterbalance like a counter system that can at least
balance this out and
Then it hit me and I thought what maybe the question could be is is there something more relevant than self-deception or more?
Permanent self-deception
Okay, can I reply to both of those points? So yeah, I think the first again, I think we're on the same page
I think I talked about this in awakening from the meeting crisis
Yeah, so when self-deception is like it's that parasitic processing and especially when it's moving towards sin
You need a very comprehensive counteractive
Like dynamical system that can yeah
Right
Yeah, yeah, yeah the eight full path exactly and and and then that idea of that you just said about
We we get to this state
where you know, we're sort of incapable of
Loving which like I think of sin as a failure to love wisely and so what happens is a lot of our primary abilities get
hijacked but
We're not completely bereft of love
And so I mean this is sort of a Buddhist Christian answer a Zen answer and a Zen Neoplatonic answer and
Reason is bound up with love. So I don't mean it in the modern sense. They're all bound up together, right? There's a possibility of
of
loving our way into a
Gapically loving our way into a
A
Darmic dynamical system that can counteract. Yeah, the parasitic processing and
Wake us up. That was sort of my response to both of the things you said. What do you think about and actually that was my
that was
This big part of the answer I arrived at it's like if there is a panacea
Then it's love and I would add forgiveness
Not only in this sense of I forgive you but in this agopic sense of forgiving
Yes, very much. I yeah, that struck me. I'm like
Well, that could be if there is a panacea, then it's love
Well, obviously we have to differentiate between you know, how you love and I think you know the ability to love wisely is
absolutely spot-on but
But I was thinking like well people do all
We deceive ourselves all the time and we sin all the time, right?
So I was thinking well what still helps us to keep the world in balance and it's and it's these and these are the small acts like
Well, I don't you know, don't think about it. It doesn't matter. It's these
Small needs of forgiveness and love that to me balance out this deception that can also, you know, that too can
You know while I'm saying this I I also again imagined it being on this continuum from bias cognitive bias
to those really big misdeeds that maybe also needs forgiveness at times and
Yeah, I want to you can respond to well, I was just gonna say and I think I think
Correspondingly
There's love and forgiveness on a continuum for a moment of somebody steps in front of your way to get on the bus
And you say, oh, don't worry about it all the way up to
The profound kind of agape forgiveness that could end a war. Yes, exactly
Exactly. So that to me was really important to again to ground me and to now think about the more technical
Matters, but I was thinking of again this, you know
Committing the act of sin and self-deception and and they're realizing that it can also be quite traumatic if you do so
If we realize that we haven't properly framed the world correctly the world around us correctly and
also and therefore the space, you know of agency and actions and
This can often result in remorse and guilt, right?
So you realize oh, you know, why did I do this? Oh, I'm really feeling bad about this
And that to me this again necessitates at, you know, some point if we talk about like real relationships a real relation
Also, this again this counter counter act of forgiving and loving
So, yeah, yeah, I think that's right
I mean random in his book on Hegel talks about a spirit of trust. Yes, and now a Hegel actually argues that
We we are we
We are the we that becomes an I that is part of the we like and that that and we and that's absolutely ultimately dependent upon
Trust and forgiveness acts of trust and forgiveness that give us the basic shared normativity
So that reason can actually be at work in the world
And if you don't have all of that reason has nothing no purchase on people and it just to degenerates into sort of a
Mechanical and maniacal logical machinery or it becomes this weird twisted cleverness
And things like that and that's exactly right because I was thinking about people who are maybe really clever
Really logical maybe really successful and I was thinking well
I would choose someone with the with his heart in the right place
Over someone who's really smart, but you know is able to play those games
You know anytime at any day I would still choose this person because to me that's like the basis and
Do you I'm probably you probably know this this quote by Terence like this
I am human and nothing human is alien to me. So this to me is really a credo
like to really get to understand the person and and that's you know, and that's maybe the segue to the to the
Question of how I fast also can can respond to it
But before I come to this I wanted to add to this to my initial answer
I think the missing piece for me was
the heart like really
What what helps to counteract or you know
Transcend self-deception is if if things come from this place from this place from this place of
From the heart and it's having the heart in the right place to me that
Well if any practice
That engages authentically in this kind of you know, let's call it agape in this kind of you know heart space
That practice to me can be deemed virtuous
And if I fs does so then I fs too can help it
That's a very good answer. So did now you may not be implying this. So let me ask you as a question
Is there the possibility of I fs being practiced?
Not from that space and then being a mechanism by which people engage in very deep or even traumatic
Kind of self-deception. Is that a possibility? Yeah?
I absolutely think so and I would be really
skeptical and hesitant
About statements that refute that
Because I've seen this I've seen people even an I fs engage in this parts language that
That became the root of their self-deception because ultimately it's some form of framing
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, if they then if you don't have a
Variety of practices
And whatever you want to call maybe beliefs, you know believe in certain practice or whatever
Then I think you can it's it's it you can be trapped quicker than you think
in it
So to me, I mean I was trained now we can maybe again now we can
Focus on I fs a little bit more. I was trained by
Tom Holmes who was a professor for clinical psychology. I think somewhere in Michigan. I got where I know he lives in Kalamazoo and
he
He practices I think for like 30 or 40 years now I fs and he was you know friend close friend
He is a close friend of Tom Holmes
But he kind of has this unique and individual take on I fs where he combines it with spirituality
Oh interesting yes, and and and I was trained by Tom Holmes like he's like
So maybe that's why to me there they go hand-in-hand so much together and he calls it also even a path of the heart
You also has this book John that I can recommend to you. It's called. I think I fs and spirituality the path of the heart if I
Fs and spirituality path of the heart. I
Will look that up. Yeah, and thank you. It is his his style is deeply
inspired by his Christian upbringing, but at the same time, I think he was later
He also later from his, you know
His path as a Sufi so he got into the Sufi order. Oh
And it's really wow. Yeah
So the Neoplatonism is quite strong in him. I sound like I sound like somebody talking about the force
The Neoplatonism is strong with him
Absolutely, so yeah, please keep keep going. Oh, well, I just wanted to ask so for you
There was the training that you know the proper way to do I fs is from a spiritual orientation
Where spirituality means having this wise heart that is orienting you and acting as a sort of
Deeper conscience on anything you're doing. Is that a fair way to talk about it? I think
Because anything to me I experienced that if I'm if if these
If these things come from the heart
They are life promoting and
And they serve life in this niche and so I want I want to slow down here because I know what you're saying
But I know what a lot of people can hear when they hear come from the heart
They just mean a deep impulse or something that they really like
Right and you're not saying that you're taking you're talking about something very different
You're talking about agape and you're talking about an orientation to forgiveness
In both senses of the word and you're talking about trying to be wisely connected to yourself
Embodied as you said last time to other people also listen to the community and be open to correction
I want to make sure that that's what you are talking about. Is that correct?
Thank you for clarifying this again. It's implicit and it makes sense for the audience to clarify it again
That's exactly right. I'm not talking about the heart
as this place where
Affective and emotional impulses come right so yeah, sometimes they can be part of it
But yes, I think there was a simpler way and you talk about it in your work when you also even in
In in your reference to heidegger
It's it's about the caring
It's about caring the fun the caring that's just wrapped up with being
A cognitive being yes, right
And that's why I was talking about life, you know things that promote life
Things that promote existence and being and they they bring it also into being
So yeah, that exactly that's that's the place what I'm you know when I'm talking about and um
And one of the reasons why I like parts work and before we talk about where it can you know promote self-deception is that
It somehow restores our you know capacity for potential john. It's like
Say more about that. That's really intriguing. Yeah, so that was actually I mean I add this, you know, I came to to IFS from this young yen
background and you know it always
Sounded right that we aren't you know again not the masses of our own houses, but
There was also something relieving, you know, there was a great relief in the fact that it's just a part
Well, I don't want to trivialize it. But what I'm what I'm saying is that
It isn't it's an answer to our vices and deceptions actually when I when I if there was a part of me that feels
That way or did that way there was always also the potential and capacity for different kind of things
to
To change and to to allow me to transform
and to
Yeah, and I think parts work in that sense is really powerful because it it helps us to get out of this stuckness and fixation
Especially when it comes to just want to add this last thing just yeah, please especially when it comes to like these
adjectival traits
Like what we mean in personality like the big five. It said when I when I when I when I um
Attribute these traits like no, I'm lazy. I am. I don't know. I'm or unorganized
Just framing the language differently and saying well a part of me is lazy
part of me is unorganized creates this
potential and I would say hope
for
different kind of things for variation
so
so
I just want I'm sorry. I don't know. No, please go ahead
so, I mean
Again with the sort of the the neoplatonism of bringing Plato and Aristotle back into this discussion
Where I think they should be
You know, if you got you got Plato's idea about
um
If I can get the right inner justice or harmony or musicality between my parts
Then they all can come to the overall greatest fulfillment
And I can achieve a kind of profound inner peace
Which liberates me from external self deception because I might my
My perception and attention and cognition are not being twisted and thwarted by all this salience manipulation
and conflict inside
There's that and then you took that
And you said oh in Aristotle's proposal that what we can do is we can cultivate traits that
Compensate for our personality or constitutional deficits, you know, uh, well, you know, so, uh, you know, I'm really introverted
So I'll cultivate the virtue of courage to to compensate that
Yeah to attain the golden mean, right?
Yes, the golden mean exactly and this idea that by doing that, uh, I I release all kinds of potential
for the kind
What's oh magnanimous I can become the great sold person. Yeah, that's what the original meaning of Aristotle's term was
Like the great sold person
The person of great anima, right? Um, not in the Jungian sense in the greek sense. Um
And so I think that's um, well, I think that's glorious what you just said. I think that's a great connection. Yeah
and
Wonderful, it's to connect, you know, again to these great thinkers like Aristotle and Plato and um
Maybe this is also again a place where we can dive a little bit more into this
Neoplatonic
Maybe sufi kind of thinking because again, I came to the realization John, you know, just to reiterate and to
Say it again. The missing piece to me was this heart
Kind of thing in the sense of caring but in the sufi sense of heart
You really I can really hear the like the sufism the the way of the heart
Which is not the romantic the way of emotion or impulse or you know, anything like that. Yeah
It's the place to me from which the love to our embodiment to our community to our culture to nature
And ultimately to the sacred comes from and it emanates and also emerges from
And interestingly enough John recently I independently of you know, this thought process
I realized later that there is that is really
Congregant with this sufi kind of thinking because and these mystic traditions because
They really view the heart as this nexus, right the bridge
between the spirit and the soul between
Rube and nafs nafs what we call the the psuche the
Right the breath and yeah. Yeah. Yeah
We still have that meaning of heart. Yeah
Even left in English language. We talk about getting to the heart of the matter. Yes
Right where we where the the thing that's holding it all together and keeping it alive
Like yeah that very much too. Yes and and also to add again to this layer, you know
This dimension that you mentioned which I think is spot on is that
Even to the self and to reality. They're they're they're
Levels to it. They're layers to it, right and this heart heart space as well. They're layers to it
and
And that's is that part of the potential too
So, you know the idea that
Plato has this idea when I start to get the inner harmony and I think ifs is about getting the inner harmony in a deep way
um, uh, you know, I start to see more deeply outwardly into reality, but I also like
like
Mirror back reflected back reflect
I also see more deeply into me than I could before and that unlocks potential
And and and and that gets I get sort of the I get the meta virtue of soferson
I get this ability to be more and more tempted by what's real and by what's good
Absolutely
I create more in a piece and that in a piece allows me to get again more into contact with reality
With different layers of reality and that again affords my inner work and transformation
Then we have this not the reciprocal narrowing but the opening in the anagoga that you talked about the reciprocal
So I think that's that's really congruent to that and
So I'm really looking forward to this ifs book, especially if it's bringing in the sufi themes
Thank you. Yeah, he would also be a wonderful interlocutor. He's um, I really respect his work and
Again, he's you know, my teacher and I learned a lot from him
And he's really open to these kind of things and I think lots of
lots of
The intellectual stuff that we talk about are often implicit in the work that they're doing or that he does in this sense
so
Yeah, and and again
And to me that's the bridge to also to your question about spirituality
Because if it comes from this, you know, if we
Learn the language of the heart in the sense that we're talking about
We
I think automatically
Or naturally transcend this
notion of sheer therapeutic method and technique
And we
And to me that's a naturalistic account of spirituality too
Thank you for watching
This youtube and podcast series is by the verveki foundation
Which in addition to supporting my work
Also offers courses practices workshops and other projects dedicated to responding to the meaning crisis
If you would like to support this work, please consider joining our patreon
You can find the link in the show notes
So wait, this is also gold
Okay, I want to just put i'm just going to put a couple things to what you said with some of my language and see if this lands for you
Yes, please. So you've got this idea that
IFS is an imaginal
Dialogical learning the language of the heart and there that that is inevitably a spiritual practice in some way
How does that does that land for you? It's hard for me to
Well that absolutely lands I just wanted to say it's hard to not view it like that to me
It's really difficult
to separate them
I see I see but but again, that's that's maybe a personal thing
um
I think there are ways where we can like really strictly look at it from a therapeutic perspective, but I think it's like
there's
Way more potential to it
And I think in both senses like we have to be responsible about this as well when we talk and when we um
Bring it into
Connection with spirituality because again, it opens up this whole pathway for spiritual bypassing
Which yeah, it's again
It can to your question of self deception within in this case within ifs. Yep, right? Yeah
And I I concerned about that
So i'm glad you brought that up because I could see
If ifs isn't done on the path of the heart
It could very much be the pathway to spiritual bypassing. Yes in a very significant way
And I do have a concern about that and so I but I think you've already given me a very good answer
So we're getting into the spirituality and before we do that. I want to do evil. Yes, uh, which which is
You know and and this came up
um
Not that the person can use ifs
To engage in self deception to which you have given a very
Yeah, beautiful answer
I think a really beautiful answer
But this other question is can the parts themselves?
Be deceptive can they lie to us? Can they bullshit us? Can they manipulate us for their own survival?
Whatever that means at our expense
Right and and a lot of people are concerned and of course this concern comes up when those parts
Like hermes uh for me. Yeah become archetypal. Yeah
and and claim to be
explicitly
You know transjective in nature and things like that
Yeah
That's a really good question. Um
I'm thinking if I maybe if I if I'm
I'm thinking if I should share my experience first because I had a similar archetypal experience
Regarding this question and then it's up to you like do do what you think
I mean, I don't want you to I don't want to expose you to expose yourself
Psychologically unnecessarily, but
And I and I think it's okay to share it because
I think the truth is out. I mean, you know, there's phenomenologies out there and
Maybe it's time to speak about these things. So I I really thought about it. It's okay. I mean good
Obviously, I'm making myself vulnerable to this but you know
I'm actually I I I try to follow your lead there. I mean you you
spoke about your Hermes and I think that was really courageous and now I want to follow up with on this
and
so John when I thought about this
question of self-deception I really
Try to
Again, and this is where ifs helped me
Try to you know, remember the credo of ifs, which is all parts are welcome
Yeah, and so what I what ultimately helped me was actually this kind of approach and practice
so I treated self-deception as a
Living thing. Let's call it part for a second. I treated I personified it
imagine a leak
As a living thing so that I can dialogue with it
And I can I can come into relationship with it and it was really interesting because at first john
I was able to grasp personal parts like the subjective parts
That you know that apologized for their misdeeds because they were thinking about you know, sending and doing things wrong and
That was okay. And I was you know, I said for this part in a you know
Curious manner and I you know, I welcomed them and it was okay. We could laugh about these stuff
But I was quite clear on this that that I was saying like well, that's not what I'm looking for. I'm not looking for the personal
Biographical
You know, you know, you're tainted by self-deception. I'm trying to talk to self-deception
Oh
Yes, that's oh, wow
Just let me savor that for a minute. That is not only
Existentially brave. That's brilliant
Oh, well
Thank you
Well, it's I mean it's I'm not I'm not lying about this. It was really an experience and um
And then it was interesting John then suddenly a force talked to me that didn't feel like a part
and
and it spoke to me, you know, like
At first it sounded a little bit more like an oracle
But it had this you know
it had this poetic language to it and
And I really tried to make an effort to grasp and understand it and in IFS terms you would say be friended, right?
I really tried to be friended
And see and get curious about what it has to tell me and to really understand its
Role and purpose and then it spoke to me John it it said it said to me
um
How can you realize the really real?
And significant things without me
How can you love and forgive without me?
What can you love if not for the illusion?
What can you forgive if not for the sin?
How can you build responsibility without errors? Tell me who will carry this burden if not me?
Oh
What the hell
Yeah, the proper response
Yes, and john it was really interesting because this figure really
on the one hand it it's you know, it talked to me with
great might power and grace
So it was numerous for you even yes. Yeah, and yeah, and at the same time
It also it it it had the side this
Right it it was it also came from a place of exhaustion
It's part of it. I think it felt like the burden that that this
You know archetypal thing is caring, but also from the ungratefulness that we have towards
it
I see
So what I then realized in that moment john was that it's really a life force again
It's something that promotes life and it's not something that deprives life
And I think to me that's the response to your question of evil
It's like this
Well, okay, let's let's before we go to the next one
So, I mean this is what came up for me
This is what came up for me is
The very things that make us adaptive make us prone to self-deception
And our deepest self-deception can actually disclose to us the depths of what it is that makes us adaptive
Yes, and without that self-knowledge. We can't actually properly flourish. How does that land for you that absolutely lands because again, I think there is this
Deep ontological reality attached to it that I think we both
Propagate
Or you know promote
And it's that reality is fundamentally relational
Yes, and and this encounter with this
With self-deception. Let's call him
The spirit of self-deception exactly. It's a spirit exactly
it really, you know, I
It really made me realize that we that through self-deception
And through let's say sinning that we attain first of a consciousness
But also that we really learn to love and that we learn humility and that we learn for forgiveness in this agape sense
So it really made its point that
You know, don't kid yourself. I am important and there is no way around it
And then john, it hit me then I then I thought about it
Um, but I will give you a chance to come comment on this. Sorry
Well, no, first of all, I
I mean, there's a strain in christian theology. I don't know if there's anything like it in suphism
Sort of about the idea of the benefit of the fall
That if human beings didn't fall, they would have never achieved self-consciousness and without receiving self-consciousness
They could not actually they they would they would have the image of god, but they could not come into
The like they could not be like god
And is it is it similar to milton's lucifer kind of?
um
I i'm not sure I I don't I don't know if I'd say that but it's it's more the idea that
So they're very careful about this the the fall is a fall
It is an act of sin
But if that sin hadn't have happened then human beings couldn't have lost their innocence and without losing their innocence
They would have never become
capable of being
Well being properly godlike they had to be tempted by godhood
In order to become godlike
If I can put it that way
well, yeah
Oh, that's good. That's really good
yeah, um
and and it's I mean, it's a powerful idea and uh like many powerful ideas within the heart of a religious framework
It's deeply paradoxical because it sounds like the fall
Is necessary?
Which means god wanted it to happen and then how could it be a sin?
Yeah, because if god's making it and you get into all of these things and I'm not going to comment on that
Because I can't thread I and I don't know anybody who gets out of this
But this idea this idea that we face this sort of primordial original sin
Right that actually launches us into the path of virtue in some profound way
Then this is although I don't I don't know if it's in melton. It's clearly in blake
Blake has this idea running through his poetry. Yes. Yes, you're right. And I was thinking maybe
Maybe it's not about solving this paradox and this is also again something I learned from yung
Because some things need to be you know, we can't solve them. We have to outgrow them
And to me self deception was that's exactly what I you know, what I
Realized that it's like well, there's no way around it. We have to experience it
Maybe we even have to experience remorse so that we can practice forgiveness
So that to me was this deep realization and again, I'm not you know
Now we can get into more theoretical
Understanding of my experiences, but and I'm not trying to equivocate or sound deep in any sense. I
What I'm trying to articulate is that
if the deepest
Ontological reality is relational and in this sense of aletheia in in heidegger's sense, right? It's yes, and it's a relationship between
sufficiently differing aspects like the idos, right?
And themselves being relationships and then we are again in this argument of this line
then in some
And in some cases even opposites complete opposites
Then in order for relationship and let's see how you think about this john
In order for relationships to make sense
We need to validate the things that the relation binds
Right, so they have to be real too and to me. This is what I also understand with ratio religio
I hope that I understand it correctly, but what do you think about this?
Um, I think that I think so far. I'm agreeing with you
I
except I would
I mean, and I've been doing this because I've been I've gone through a fillers book in the course on ultimate reality
you've got him beyond and
I and I don't know if james thinks this or not
And I'm looking forward to talking to you about it, but you don't want to simply invert what I mean by that
Is you don't want to say well?
It's the it used to be the rillata from which the relations emerge and you don't want to say no
It's the relations from which the rillata emerges just inverting and all of the arguments that destroy the first position
Symmetrically destroy the second position. Yeah, you want to say pure relationality is that which is below
The relations and from yeah. Yeah. Yes. Yes, and from which it but it's not a substance
Yes, right because it's pure relationality
It is that from which the relations and the rillata
Co-emerge and then that means it is like the spirit that is flowing
Through the emergence and the emanation completely interpenetrating up and down. Yes, that's that's how I would okay that
That makes to me a lot of sense and I don't think it's um
I don't even see an argument against what I said, which is good
If I'm not mistaken because I'm not arguing for
The hierarchy. I think that absolutely you're right. It's it's below that right? I was thinking
Would you agree that?
The things that are bound and linked by the relation
Um that they also then necessarily have to be real and valid too. Would you agree with?
Yes, and this is one of the problems. This is one of the issues I have
With sort of some notions of pure relationality
If you don't have any point where the relate where the relationality bends on itself
Like the noose in the in relationship to the neoplatonic one
Then you just get this homogenous like the one of parmenides, right? Which is just this homogenous sphere with no
That is no different from nothingness
Um, yeah, I agree. There there has to be a and you know, this is where I think I have a lot of christen's the white head
But this this is where white heads idea that yes, it's like that
But the mini become the one that adds to the mini right and then goes back
And you got this sort of flowing accordion
Holographic fractal thing going on rather than just this homogenous blob thing going on. Yeah, that's wonderful. And and
You know, well, I have something to ask you just hold your thought get take a moment to get your thought
I don't want to just I don't want to draw it out of your head
But you know, I've been and this comes from the sheet
I was thinking about and a proclasus idea about the one within
Is the vehicle of the one without and we were talking about the self last
Not as a thing or a substance but more like a field of pure relationality and I was thinking
You know, maybe what can happen in an ifs is you can move to the participation in that which gives you a way of understanding
By participating knowing by coupling knowing by participating ultimate reality as pure relationality. It's not identical
But it is a deep realization by participation. What what do you think of that?
I was actually thinking about exactly the same thing. That's the thought I was holding. I was trying to bring in the
Wow, what you said makes sense to me the context that you give
Or gave a second ago
Gives meaning to what Kierkegaard says with the self, right? It's it's
Self that relates itself to itself
In that sense, it really makes sense that even this thing like thing is the relationship that relates itself to itself
Yeah, yeah. Yes. Yes. And to me and now to again to answer the question of how we can
Deceive ourselves within ifs. I would say one of the fundamental mistakes people
I don't want to say mistakes because again, it's the language of training whereas the language of explanation. So
But I still see problems with it even in a practical sense
When they again
when there is this reification
Of the self and they and they
Yeah, yeah, it becomes an idol with the with the self again
That's something as a part and then what happens typically john is in ifs practices
People get into this
Push away kind of mentality to push away a part to get to the self as if it's
And I think that's this that's this really it's it's seductive
But in a in a bad sense like it's really productive to think like this
But I think that really is the self deception often going on in ifs
Oh, that's that's that's brilliant
So the idea is that like if the self is this pure relationality
That properly orients us towards reality because it participates in the grammar of reality
We can lose that by trying to turn the self back into a substance and then turning it into an idol
And then we get in totally the wrong even though we're talking the word self
We get into totally the wrong framing that is what is most crucial about the self not what is framed
But the way you're participating in a fundamental framing. Exactly. Is that absolutely? Oh that and okay, and
Now again talking about the traps and gaps of of parts work. I I think
I have a problem with parts work when
when
Parts are used as a scapegoat
For avoiding really responsibility. I brought that up and that's that's a species of the spiritual bypassing kind of thing too
Where you know, I did I bring that up with mark? I think I brought that up with mark lewis and I said
I can see people using that to divest themselves of their moral responsibility. Well, that wasn't me. That was this
Exactly
Yeah, yeah, it's the old joke of the devil made me do it kind of thing and I think that is deeply problematic because
By definition that is something you want to address because when you say something like that, first of all, you cannot just dissociate
Apart from your own agency, right? I mean you could but that it would be either pathological like and dissociate of this
Identity disorder and complex trauma where this can happen. But then it's a pathology, right?
Or it's really self deception
And I think that that's one of the points
so, um
So that's why I personally try to limit parts language to when I'm
In situations of, you know, emotional upheaval and where I feel like my framing and my agency is hijacked by a part
In the sense that you talk about when you talk about parasitic processing
Yeah, you know in yungi in theory, you would say when you're gripped or possessed by a complex
Right complex. Yeah, and then in ifs you have to step the stepping back move that you do with your glasses to
We call it unblending, right? So you try to unblend from it
But the problem there's also a problem in unblending though in my opinion
It's like well, just as a stepping back move, you know can't account for everything
I still have to step back in right I have to get into a part again to me and this is something
I might be wrong and people, you know, with more experience in ifs might disagree with me, but that's okay
I what I see often is that
Well, I still have to act in the world, right? We are enacted beings, right? Our cognition is enacted, right?
So my part still has to do the job
Well
And to use the glasses metaphor you have to put the glasses back on and look through the part and see if you can now see the world
Differently because then something has changed. Yes. That's fundamental and to stick with the analogy
I would say when you
You know
Take off your glass and you look at you know smudges and you which is akin to the self deception
And you try to wipe them away you put them back on you still have the same thing, but you have a different quality, right?
and to me this is what
To me that describes what people talk about in ifs when you talk about being self led
Right. It's a quality. It's not a thing, right? It's there's no thing to it. Yeah
It's a functional we talked about this that it's probably has to do with these two platonic things about
You know bringing about inner peace and bringing you into connectedness with reality affording an agape
Affording agape. That's what it is. It's it's something like that. Exactly and and to me this
It captures better the idea of the self as this very process and product of optimal gripping and self organization
Yeah, yeah, right. So no self beyond self organization or I think you you
Compared it to the metaxu and and I think it's the inner logos then when it maybe could be logos. I don't know
I've recently discovered
The work of William Desmond and he built an entire
Impressive profound ontology around metaxu. Oh
I'm just diving very deeply into it deeply influenced by play-doh
Really astonishing
And he's got the what is it metax illogical metax illogical
as a
And he proposes as that is what what's sort of beyond the hegelian dialectic
Um
and so
I I what I'm
Why did I say that because I think
We're doing this
We're and I mean this in the right way. We're doing something like the theology of the metaxu here
And we're trying to bring it into a deeper
And we're arguing for a deeper and more proper
Apprehension and appreciation of what's going on in ifs. That's what that's what I was. Yes
Trying to articulate. Can you John? Can you put the it's a book right the metaxu one?
There's I recommend there's the William Desmond reader. Can you put it into the reading list also?
I don't have anything to write it. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. That would be great. I would love to look into this
and
If you allow John, I just want to you know circle back to the to my encounter with the with the spirit of self deception
Yeah, because we were talking it's it's I just wanted to note
It was interesting that the spirit of self deception
Spoke to you sounds like very truthfully, which is a really interesting sort of meta move but keep going. Well, yeah
That's actually there was also a feeling I was thinking about this if it's you know
Maybe it was a trickster archetype something lately because you have it like low key and different kind of god. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah
Yeah, it's totally totally knows if it was right
So but we're talking about this, right? So we're trying to figure out these things together, you know, you know collective intelligence here and um
so
you agreed that the thing that
The relationship binds then necessarily also have to be true, right? So then I would say if they are real before
Yeah, real. Yeah. Yeah, exactly real. And I then I was thinking if they are real then I should attend to it
Yes, if they are real, I should attend to that's why I try to have a conversation with this. That's a good point. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, yeah
and
And and and ultimately my realization was that there is no reality without illusion and illusion isn't necessary
for reality
And vice versa
Right. So and and they're relative to each other
Well, I mean, this is a Taoist move you're making out, but it also goes to
I've just finished a course on the primacy of beauty that I've taught
And this idea that uh real is a comparative term. Yes
And illusion are and and and and as comparatives they are they're they are bound
Something is only real in comparison to something less real an illusion and something is only an illusion in relation to something
That's more real and you can't you can't just saying something like
Saying everything's an illusion is like saying everything is tall
But it would be equally be wrong if I'm hearing you right to say
Everything is real because that would be like saying everything is tall too
It's the relationship of what I'm trying to allude to again and
Maybe again, no and Heidegger has that right by the way, right? Yeah. Heidegger has that
being is both the
Unconcealment and the concealment at the same time. It's the shining forth and it's always also the withdrawal into mystery
Yeah, and this and this withdrawal this
Shining forth and the withdrawal I was thinking about this in a Jungian sense interesting enough because yeah
Understanding Jung hopefully correctly means that if things
Work into two directions
Then it's not about the poles
He you I know that you talk about it's the it's about the polarity
And I would think it's about the polarity. It's the force field
It's the force field not the pole and I'm hearing Jung say well if they work into two directions then then the goal is the center
Ah, right, right, right, right, right. That's something I also associated with this
you know this deep wisdom by Heidegger and
Again, maybe we can turn it into something practical also for the audience so it doesn't stay as this kind of
theoretical intellectual
Please and maybe from a therapeutic perspective that you know to make things really real now
And so it also doesn't sound like a deepity. Okay. Yeah. Yeah
As you might as you might know and I'm I'm sure you know that
there is deep and persistent
There is a deep and persistent search for meaning in the state of trauma
People who are traumatized have like pdsd
They really try to figure out what this beast is
Right. They ask what's they really ask about the meaning of this and
And if you want or if I want to make sense and draw meaning and significance from my trauma
Then maybe I can manage to understand my trauma
As a force that wants to communicate something to me as a messenger
And and this is actually really something I do with my trauma patients then
Oh, I see. Well, I really try it's it's it's by understanding these that these events can potentially be relevant
To your transformation to your growth
I can by just framing this relationship like that. I can enter into a different kind and quality of relationship to my trauma
Yeah, yeah and and then
In this relationship and the quality of the relationship lies the transcendence and then I can and then patients and often clients
Can overcome that trauma because again in an hermeneutic style. They can make
Sense out of it. They can draw meaning out of it. And it's exactly this reframing of the relationship
That take that also can take away the power of the trauma and hand it back to the client and hand back the agency
So if you ask me john
Because that that's to me ultimately what trauma is. I mean, what it's a lot of things, but
It's it's a displaced. I would say a displaced or disturbed and or maybe in your words parasitic
hermeneutic process
Right, so right it's a loop and and it's not an event
The trauma is not an event and it's also not in the event
It's in the relationship of me and the world
And how I make sense of myself and the world
And it keeps that with you. Does that make sense that yeah, yeah that
Yeah, and I'm getting that this looping it takes on a life of its own
Yes, and and that's how it sucks agency away from the person that's traumatized
This is landing very well for me. Keep going, please. Yes, and I think
In in very complex cases again that becomes difficult with ifs to be really honest
I think then you really really need a you know ecology of practices not only ifs
But there is a way in ifs, you know if it's really found a way to
Address this being frozen in time in this loop, right?
That's the unburdening process and going to the exiles and and it's this updating, right?
It's it's this reframing and again, it's a hermeneutic process because you're trying to draw meaning of it and
you know
Yeah, attend to it and I again, I would say in it from an agopic position
Yeah, by you know attending to it from a from a place of love
So that again something opens up so you can
So you can put the memory into its into the different into the right kind of
I don't know. I don't know what the right word. Well, it's it's ratio
It's the properly proportioning and prioritization of things in the correct perspective and from the correct
Participatory standpoint. It's deep logos. Yes, it's that proper proportioning that we expect from the reasonable person
That's what it is. It makes it reasonable
It makes their it doesn't mean they get all instantly happy
But now they are back in having a reasonable orientation that allows them to properly process
This yes
Is that what you I like when you when you're struggling for this language of proportion
Yeah, because I've been trying I've been trying I've given up
Kazra, I've given up trying to get people to use the word rational to mean this broader notion other than logical
And so I'm saying well, we have this other word we use reasonable and we don't mean logical
We mean like in the court of law you you have to do what the reasonable person would do
What does the reasonable person do? Well, they take the right perspective. So they prioritize the right things
They see things in the right proportion and they participate as they properly should and that's what I'm talking about
Yes, and even from that perspective even logic takes a different kind of meaning because it's then yeah, we can understand that it's deeply
Bound to the idea of logistics right to distributing all these sources
Yes, we have this optimal gripping again and this harmony. I would exactly exactly exactly said like this
Rational proportioning that really that that was the word I was struggling with to find. So yeah, thank you
um
Yeah, it's it's crazy
So, I mean, I think you've given some like really
I mean this beautiful answers and
I love I love
Like so, you know, I I love talking to all everybody about this. I mean I'm talking to you know
Seth allison about this and he's coming in with this deep
You know deep reflection from from the psychotherapeutic which you have of course do and then you know and mark
Like you has this deep psychotherapeutic perspective, but you know, but he also has this cognitive scientific thing that I show
Right, but now John just to you know just to mention my work on self-organized criticality
Intersects with mark louis's work by the way. Oh, yeah, so I I know I briefly talked to him
via mail and I'm because
His lab in in in in the Netherlands. I'm actually doing research with them
So that's interesting. We not only there is not a not only an overlap in ifs in the therapeutic sense
But also even from the cognitive scientific perspective
So, I'm sorry. I just wanted to add that no, no, no, I think that's good. And I mean, I think we should have at least one more conversation
um before
We're sort of going to wrap up our voices with for vakey
But I'd like to have one more with you
And I don't want to completely lose the thread with everything we've been talking about
But I do want to have that conversation with you around your uh self-organizing criticality work and what the connections are between that
Yeah, I would love that all this stuff and I you know, I have a lot of connections between self-organizing criticality and the cognitive science
I do and and you're totally right to mention mark louis
So let's let's let's have you come back and do at least that
Because I don't want to we're almost out of time. So I don't want to start that now
I don't want to start that now, but I do want to do what I always do. First of all, I wanted to thank you
Uh, I like I was saying you and I you you bring in the therapeutic and you have the cognitive scientific, but you also have the
like a deep philosophical spiritual
side of this that
Resonates very very deeply with me and I'm very appreciative of that
Um, and so I just wanted to I thank you and uh, thank you for being courageous about like opening up and making yourself vulnerable
Don't pay any attention to the horrible trolls that say stupid shit
Because you did that because they'll do that no matter what you do. You just have to ignore them
but
Pay attention to a lot of the people that a lot of people that are encouraged that are encouraged by you
Opening up and saying we need to talk about this stuff because it happens and it really happens
And it really transforms people and we need to get the new language to talk about it
Correctly in order to deal with what's happening in the meaning crisis and the advent of the sacred
I want to thank you. You you participated and contributed to that very significantly. Thank you, john
that really means a lot to me and
again to be able to share this
with you and
to have a forum to speak
To speak about these things for these things but also together with you is
I think there is
nothing that is more meaningful to me and
Well, socrates says. Yeah, sorry. Go ahead. No, I was going to say socrates says, you know
participating in genuine dialogues is the best life that we can actually live
I would 100% agree with this and I just wanted to say to the trolls. I mean, I'm
I don't want to be too
I don't want to participate in hubris and to be too arrogant
But i'm not too afraid because I know that the proof is in the pudding
And I think I would speak with less confidence
if I didn't see
The merits and also the
the success in the work that i'm doing with
The students at the university
The community that i am in but also with this again the severely impaired people that I work in on a daily basis
And so that is reassuring to again to open at least open the dialogue in this conversation
And we know we both don't claim to have the answer and we are still in
On the dialogue, right? So but um, at least let's you know, keep the ball rolling
So the phrase is uh
Uh, the proof is in the eating of the pudding and you are deeply, uh, you said some very delicious things
Here today, and I wanted to thank you for that. Thank you. I'm I always like to give my
my guests
um
The last word and it can be whatever kind of word you want inspiration summation
provocation
Whatever whatever you'd like to say
It I think it's not so much in my nature to you know provoke people or you know to say something provocative
um
I will say
I would love to continue the serious and to talk to you again
and also again to bring
Some of my colleagues and other thinkers like robin bear
Just as an example because we promised the audience the last time that we want to talk about the AAA like
um, the
The archetype of the adolescent and also right and yes
I just want to say maybe we can keep it at that. I'm looking forward to this conversations conversations
Yeah, good. We'll make that one happen too. We'll make that one happen. I'm not going to stop having conversations
We're just putting voices with her vakey
Uh into retirement. I will still have you know individual
conversations
Dialogs
but so
Thank you so so much. Thank you john really sincerely
Yeah, I hope we get to meet in person someday. I think that would be really wonderful. I hope that's
We will
