John Varvakey and Sean Coyne have together authored a new book,
Mentoring the Machines.
It's a book about artificial intelligence
and the path forward that further develops the arguments
of how to align artificial intelligence
to human flourishing, and it sets those arguments
into beautiful and accessible writing.
It's an incredibly timely book.
In fact, it will be released August 1st, 2023
as a four-part series that will culminate into a final volume.
You can pre-order today a special edition copy
that will include a signed hardback edition.
Pre-order in the link in the description below.
Welcome, everybody, to another Voices with Varvakey.
I'm very excited here to be talking with Joe Alto.
We are going to be doing an interesting thing,
and I'll let Joe talk about it a little bit more.
Although he's on Voices with Varvakey,
we want you to consider that this is, I'm also on Joe's channel.
We're sort of going to be interviewing each other
and talking for both audiences in an integrated fashion.
So welcome, Joe.
Thank you so much for having me, John.
Just a quick introduction, I guess, about myself.
As John just mentioned,
I have my own YouTube channel called The Gist with Joe,
and that channel is really dedicated to talking to,
but I consider great minds in the fields of psychology
and philosophy, theology, really just culture in general.
And I essentially ask my guests,
what's the gist of their intellectual,
their artistic, their spiritual project?
We know that distilling what your project is
to the gist is a good practice.
So I like doing this with my guests,
and it usually blossoms into a really beautiful
and meaningful conversation afterwards.
So that's going to be one part of our conversation today,
as John said, I'll be on Voices with Varvakey.
John will be on The Gist with Joe.
And obviously my channel is much more teeny tiny than John's.
So to, I guess, even further introduce myself,
I'm currently studying Clinical Mental Health Counseling.
I am the campus minister at a public university
in Cleveland, Ohio,
and just very interested in pursuing what, you know,
my, as a Catholic man, you know, with the church fathers
or what other great thinkers in philosophy in general
would consider the good, the true, the beautiful.
So I'm on that search myself, and it's a hard, long search,
but having conversations with great thinkers
is something that helps me with that endeavor.
So yeah, I'm just really honored to be on today.
So thank you so much, Jen.
Well, thank you, Joe.
Let me go first, and I will happily answer
your gist question.
But on my side, I guess what I'm really interested in
hearing from you, and talking about it a bit,
is how does my work intersect with your pursuit,
your quest as a Catholic man to track
the true, the good, and the beautiful?
How does my work, like, does it help?
Does it afford?
Does it challenge?
Is it a problem?
Well, it definitely does a lot.
It definitely does a lot.
Challenge is one really good thing.
Help is another.
It helps a lot.
And so, you know, as a Catholic, I will explain.
So, you know, I'm a Catholic campus minister,
but I'm also studying intensively right now.
I'll be able to practice next April.
I actually start my clinical internship in a couple weeks.
So I actually start seeing patients soon.
So I'm on this journey right now,
as I stated, about clinical mental health.
And, you know, I don't have any plans
of ever advertising myself, per se, as a Catholic counselor.
I actually think, and you know what?
Anyone who does religious specific counseling,
that's very needed.
And I laud, you know, anyone who's watching does,
like I said, religious specific counseling.
However, given just my charisms, my personality,
personality, just what my goal in this profession is,
I don't necessarily plan on ever advertising myself
as a Catholic counselor.
However, I do believe that in my,
it's in my opinion that counseling, you know,
psychotherapy is, one can consider a spiritual
or a religious endeavor.
Yes.
There's many Christian, there's many Buddhists.
There's many Islamic.
There's many Jewish.
There's really all, every major, you know,
world religion and the ethos of that religion,
you can see elements of that in the counseling profession.
Right?
Right, right, right.
And so it's not going to ever be explicit,
but you know, it's more so in the implicit of my counseling
that I want to, well, that I will express or exude
my Christian faith that ever, without ever,
you know, possibly ever stating,
hey, I'm a Christian man.
And so, John, what is your work coming for this?
So, although I've only had a couple encounters, right,
with people coming to counseling,
but in my time in classes, in my work,
reading the great thinkers of both, you know,
just the psychological field
and just even the counseling field,
I do know that, and although I don't have any stats
to prove it, this is more operating the anecdote right here,
I do know that many people go to counseling,
not for, well, what we would consider,
what the DSM would consider, you know,
a particular disorder, right?
So not everyone, so people who are depressed
don't always have a major depressive episode
or major depressive disorder, right?
People who are anxious don't always have a specific phobia
or generalized anxiety disorder.
And that's actually one of the downfalls
of the current field of counseling, in my opinion,
is, you know, the over-diagnosis of these patients.
Yes, yeah, yeah, yeah.
You said it, and again, I don't know the,
I'm gonna misfire on the exact quote,
but you once said that in all of his time counseling,
around something like 60% of the patients he's ever saw
were never dealing with an actual psychological disorder,
but they were dealing with,
and John, this is where you come in, a crisis of meaning.
Yes, yes, yes.
And, you know, your work has been so influential
in what I want to do when I hopefully knock on wood, right?
Either I work with a group
or I open up my own practice one day.
I want to create really this psychotherapeutic model
that invites the individual to think more deeply
about virtue, and that's one thing
that I really think plagues so many people.
It's like, if you could just realize, right,
how virtues can be, virtue cultivation,
how virtue cultivation can be so profound
and have such a reformational influence on your life.
If you pursue these virtues,
I believe that a lot of what people are coming in for,
if those individuals are not suffering
from a particular disorder that you could diagnose
via the DSM, I do believe that something
like virtue cultivation could be a serious modality
to really help, you know what,
I'm trying to think, what's the word
that Aristotle uses in eudaimonia,
to get to this eudaimonic state, right?
And that's really the goal
of all mental health counseling,
is you want the individual to reach this eudaimonic state.
You want the individual to be happy, right?
And I won't get into like the happiness that is more,
well, it's the more profound,
it's more joyful than it is happy, right?
The eudaimonic, you want people to be joyful.
And yeah, I do believe that one way
that we can reach joy is by the cultivation of virtues.
And so yes, your work, I think,
in a lot of what you've been doing with the beating crisis
and what you've been doing with aftersacrities,
and what you're doing in general
is really in alignment with what I'm doing.
And I would hope to use your work
and to pick your brain a lot now and in the future
to help you with this endeavor.
Right, wow, that's a very well-explicated
and thoughtful answer.
There's a lot in there.
So I'm gonna ask a question
and it might sound like a challenge,
but I honestly, it's not.
So one thing that's happened in response to,
and I agree with all the stats you were laying out,
the particulars might be move around a bit.
I think the general point, I think, is well-stated.
So one of the ways in which there's been a response,
and I know people that do this, like Rick, Rick Rapetti,
they've taken up philosophical counseling
as a way of trying to address the people
that are coming in, not because,
I mean, the slogan is they're not pathological,
they're confused, and they're not sick.
They're finding that they're being too foolish in their life.
And those are not the same thing.
And of course, there's nothing that prevents them
from both being comorbid either.
Often you can have both and they're making each other worse
in really obnoxious fashion for the person.
So are you planning on getting any training in
and incorporating the philosophical counseling
into what you're doing?
It sounds like it would also be helpful for you.
Yeah, no, I've most definitely looked into it.
And I think it would be helpful.
And I've already been tapped on the shoulder by a few
to pursue things like become maybe a union analyst
or to, like you said, maybe journey down that avenue
of what we would consider philosophical counseling.
And I'm sure many people who are watching
don't even realize that there might be
like this very specific type of counseling.
Yes, it is.
This thing is a philosophical counseling.
And usually the individual who is the counselor
usually has a higher degree in philosophy.
And it's almost like this, I always think,
I tell people, I've told many people this before,
I think the greatest counseling relationship
that we've ever seen in human history
has been the counseling relationship
between Virgil and John today.
I really can't believe that that is quite frankly
the most beautiful vision
of what a counselor should be.
It's like, hey, I'm going to help you get here.
Realize though that I can't go with you to that.
I can't get to that same place that we need you to get,
but I know that you need to get there.
And I have to leave you behind.
And it's going to be sad, right?
When we terminate, that's like the counselor,
counselor or lingo, when we terminate our relationship,
it will be sad.
And we have learned a lot from each other
and we may not ever see each other again.
But realize that again, this relationship
has been reformational, that it's like this beautiful
like vocation that we have journeyed on together.
But to answer your question more directly,
yes, I have thought about pursuing it,
but here's my only issue with that.
I want my, I was talking, so it's actually funny
because I was actually approaching this question
with my wife literally last week.
I was like, hey, because, you know,
it's all about the particularities.
It's like, okay, well, there's some very
practical things that we have to do, right?
So like, I'm going to open up my own business.
So you got to take out a small business loan
and yada, yada, yada.
So it actually does, you know, this is,
it's not just a me decision.
It's a family decision.
And how is this going to affect my wife and my kid
and all these things we were talking.
And my vision has always been working
with very high insight individuals with high insight.
Right? So individuals who possess high insight.
And when you do philosophical counseling,
you're usually working with individuals with high insight
because who is going to a philosophical counselor
other than that, other than the individual
who has probably is somewhat learned in, you know,
Western, more than likely Western continental philosophy,
right?
And so I was telling her this and, you know,
she said, you know, very wise, she said,
well, you're really just missing the mark then
at that point, I was like, what does that mean?
She's like, you know, you virtue cultivation
is not just for the intelligentsia.
It's not just for those in an academic side, right?
Virtue cultivation sometimes is needed more
by the individual who don't,
who doesn't realize that you cultivate virtues.
I mean, people don't even know
if we were to go out on the,
what our respective cities, sidewalks,
we said, what's virtue?
Who the hell would be able to, I mean, really,
I have a hard time myself answering that
without the help of great thinkers, right?
Like, there's stuff.
So, I mean, so it's not even like my,
so I even sometimes have a difficult time
finding the correct language that I have to rely on
great thinkers of the past.
So, given that, I mean, stemming from that,
who realizes that we have to cultivate it?
People just think, oh, this is,
people have a very odd relationship with virtue
because they just, they just,
they don't understand that it's a vocational call, right?
That virtue, I believe that virtue truly operates
in the beautiful.
It's like, the beautiful is the car
and virtue are the parts of the car.
So, they're very connected,
but you can also make the distinction, right?
So, I'm not gonna say my steering wheel is my car,
but I will say, like, yeah, beauty's the car
and I do believe that virtue is the steering wheel
because they function similarly, right?
Because the beauty and things that are beautiful,
the things that are beautiful allow the individual.
It's like one of the only things in our life
that allows us to not be content with how things are.
Yeah, so it's like, we are not content with our lives
and philosophically, but even like,
put that on like a lower rung of the scale.
Maybe I look at my bedroom and it's a mess
and I'm like, ugh, why?
So, beauty really orients us towards the good, right?
But it also allows us not to be content.
And it calls us, right?
Beauty calls us to achieve or go up a rung of understanding
and seeing reality more vividly.
And that's what virtue does too.
So, this is why I really do believe that.
Yeah, I agree.
That's a very platonic argument you just made.
Very platonic.
That's a very platonic argument you just made.
Right, exactly, exactly.
And I do believe that,
Henri de Lubach talks about a saturated phenomena.
And I do believe that,
I believe that virtue is also operating
as a saturated phenomena.
Again, I do believe that virtue,
again, being connected with beauty operates in the erotic
because it's something that calls,
it's something that pulls you.
It's something that is insightful.
And I once read this great book,
I don't know if, I mean,
knowing that you have spent much time studying
Buddhist philosophy,
I read this great book in college once by the time
because I also, I was a religious studies major,
but most of my time was never actually spending,
well, I was never taking Christian classes.
I was taking Buddhist classes.
And I read this book called Alone with Others
by Stephen Batchelor.
Yeah, yeah, I teach that book.
Okay, yeah.
I taught that book for years.
I've met Stephen and had dinner with him, yeah.
It's a great book.
And I also, and again, it's nothing about,
the book, by the way, is about,
it's mostly on a particular Buddhist philosopher,
a Buddhist philosopher's connection with Martin Heidegger,
but the book is called Alone with Others.
And that's another way I think that virtue is,
that virtue functions,
is that it's an individual pursuit,
but you aren't gonna realize it
unless it's practiced with others, right?
So...
So, let me make sure I'm not losing the thread here.
So, you took a look at philosophical counseling,
and there was an appeal there,
but your wife said something very insightful about,
what, you know, maybe what you're called to
is to bring virtue to people
who are not awakened to the quest for virtue.
And you wanna learn how to awaken them,
and one of the functions of beauty
is to awaken them to the quest.
And then, and this, yeah,
and beauty is wanna,
virtue is one of these, Alone with Others,
we roll with it because it's a virtue
if you have Gaiji's ring and you're alone,
but it's because you're responsible to other people.
I get all that connection, and that was very eloquent.
So, how does this beautification,
how would the beautification and the awakening to virtue
come into sort of the psychotherapeutic practice?
Now, first of all, I give you the caveat.
Like, if somebody's coming in disordered pathological,
that has to be, that's exigent,
that has to be addressed and dealt with.
We're talking about this other group,
the people that are coming in
existentially confused, meaning crisis.
So, tell me what, how you're,
like, how you're getting an optimal clip on that.
This is where a lot of my thoughts are,
I'm ruminating on most of these.
So, if my answer isn't as developed,
please, you know, show me some compassion,
but I'll kind of like that.
Of course, of course, of course.
I was in my own, so I see, you know,
part of my program is that,
and I think every good counselor,
every good psychotherapist should see their own psychotherapy.
Oh, totally, totally.
I'm very critical of people who practice,
who have never gone through therapy.
Right, sad.
It's like being a priest, but never going to mass.
Yeah.
And it's funny, I mean, I don't really mean
to make this very direct joke,
but as a Catholic, right?
Sorry, one thing I struggle with,
I think I would struggle with this without it.
I thought it was being Catholic,
without being Catholic or not,
but I have a lot of guilt, right?
So, that's one thing that I have in me,
and I don't, and we're,
huh, getting into my particular sessions,
I'm trying to figure out,
I'm on my own quest right now,
of figuring out if this guilt is a personality trait,
where this guilt comes from,
why do I have this guilt?
And it's also, yesterday I had a great,
I had a great realization,
but it was also very embarrassing realization that,
you know, a lot of my identity,
a lot of my identity that I exude
is still the identity that I had,
you know, when I was in middle school,
and that's very embarrassing, right?
But it's like, it's like,
it's like these characteristics,
these personality characteristics
that I obviously just haven't processed correctly, right?
And they're not bad,
and they don't necessarily get in the way,
but they make me for a lot of reasons
without getting into my psychology, right?
I have a lot of guilt, like I said,
so I feel guilty for not,
why am I telling you this?
Well, I'm telling you this because I think
with people of high insight
who would come in for this particular type of counseling,
maybe something that they would also feel is shame or guilt.
And so usually high insightful people
will do something very menial, right?
Could be menial.
Like I lied to my spouse about, I don't know,
I mean, maybe I lied about how many beers I had at the party,
or I don't know, maybe I watched pornography
and I feel really bad about that.
Maybe I bullied a friend,
I jibbed a friend a little too hard,
when we were in our group text message,
or, and you could think of whatever,
to just take that, right?
I feel guilt, okay?
And then, unfortunately nowadays,
I mean, how everyone who feels guilt
like four times in a week,
am I a narcissist, am I this, am I,
no, no, no, let's take deep breath and let's sit down
and let's take this.
What if it's not guilt?
What if it's not shame that you're experiencing?
What if, again, because like virtue is a call, right?
It's something that calls you.
So what if virtue was a call?
And what if the fact that you were able to admit to me
that you lied to your wife,
or you did something dishonest,
you did something that wasn't courageous,
you did something, you know,
you did something that, again, you just didn't enjoy.
The fact that you're able to sit here
in a counseling session and tell me
that you have guilt and that you didn't enjoy it,
maybe that's not guilt at all,
and maybe that's your conscious telling you,
or maybe that's virtue, right?
Trying to signal to you that you should pursue this further.
The fact that you were able to feel that,
the fact that you knew that it was wrong to lie,
the fact that it was the fact that, you know,
you were being deceptive, that you were being surreptitious,
that insight right there might allow you to realize that,
no, no, I don't need to feel guilty,
but the fact that I was cognizant of my fault,
maybe that's actually virtue communicating with me
and inviting me to indulge
in a deeper relationship with virtue.
Well, I see, I see.
So you're reframing it.
I saw, it's very high agarient,
which Stephen would love, Stephen Batcher.
Yeah.
You know, the conscience is the,
there's an existential version of conscience.
There's a psychological version of conscience,
which is basically your internalization of certain norms
and you punish yourself as a way
of redirecting your behavior, guilt and shame.
They're not the same thing, but they're sort of working.
But then there's an existential sense
where conscience is the call to authenticity.
But you're saying conscience could be understood
as the call to virtue.
So where does the beauty come in?
Is that trying to see the beauty of the life
that you could be called to?
Is that the idea?
Yeah, that's precisely it.
And even trying to, you know, again,
like I think if you pursue and try to cultivate
and therefore try to live a virtuous life,
I do think, yeah, in that process,
I mean, life automatically becomes more beautiful, right?
So what's a more beautiful vision of life
that I'll complete as hard as it could be
a complete honest relationship with your wife
or dishonest relationship with your wife?
And what's more beautiful, right?
What's a higher form of that?
Right, so yeah, so yes, what you said precisely.
Oh, that's very interesting.
So like, yeah, I could see how a lot of the work
that I do would be relevant to that project.
And so how does, you know, true the good and the beautiful
David Schindler, who I get to talk to, you know,
these are the transcendentals,
they're the transcendentals because they apply universally
across domains, but the idea is their ultimate unity
is in the one or God, your Catholic.
So I'll say God for your benefit.
How does that sense of the transcendence,
you know, Plato, the symposium, the cult of,
the love of virtue is not the final love.
We move beyond that to the love of the source
of intelligibility or the possibility of virtue,
except the ground of being, the ground of life,
the ground of wisdom.
That sort of vision that's articulated
and Aquinas Maximus, how does,
so now given all of that sort of explanation,
how does God show up in this for you?
Yeah, I mean,
you're a Catholic, so it's fair to re-ask that question,
I think. 100% it's fair.
So again, like, this is why I bring up,
this is why I say that Dante and Virgil
is such a good model.
It's, you know, in a counseling session,
I don't know if I would, I mean,
unless the individual is comfortable with bringing it up.
You know, then I would talk about God, but,
you know, I mean, you almost,
I think and challenge me and push me further,
but I really almost think that, you know,
you gave the answer in your question though.
And when it's, you know,
all these things are in submission to the one, right?
Virtue and beauty and the true and the good.
And I don't, you know what, I'm having a hard time
trying to order three transcendentals in my own life.
I would love to get your take on that.
It's like, you know, what's,
it's like, what's, you know,
everyone tries to say, oh, you pursue the good
and that opens up the beautiful and that gives you truth.
I don't necessarily think that it matters
how you orient the three transcendentals.
For me personally, I believe, like I said,
that beauty is the most approachable because-
Yeah, that's what Clayton thought.
Cause beauty is the one that reaches so readily
and obviously into the sensual aspect of our being
in the way that truth and goodness don't.
We can see and touch beauty in a way in which we can see
and not, we cannot see and cannot touch truth and goodness.
So I think I should,
David Chindo talks about it as, what is it?
I might get it wrong,
but something like the primacy of beauty, it comes first,
but the centrality of truth.
And then I think the ultimacy of goodness
or it could be those two the other way around,
but they each have a superlative, but in different ways.
I think, I think speaking temporally,
I think beauty comes first.
But what we have to remember
is to not human beings have a proclivity to this, this error.
We have, we shouldn't confuse that with,
that's what David's trying to address.
We shouldn't confuse temporal priority
with ontological priority.
Just because beauty comes first,
doesn't mean it's the first of the transcendentals, right?
They're all first in different ways.
Beauty is temporally first.
I think the true is central in some way,
but they have different priorities.
Like I say, kind of remember which way David does it.
It's really good.
His work on that, on the primacy of beauty,
and then he talks about primacy, centrality, and ultimacy.
And so I think truth is the ultimate actually,
and goodness is the central,
but I could have them think around.
That's because I have a slightly different notion
of goodness is perhaps making me confused.
So I'm just admitting I'm confused,
but the point that I'm not confused about
that I think is well taken is to not,
is to recognize that each transcendental is ultimate,
but in a different way.
Each transcendental, there's firstness,
and there's centrality, and there's ultimacy.
These are all superlatives,
but in fundamental different ways.
And just don't, so learn to differentiate
the different ways in which they're ultimate,
but also learn to not confuse them.
And give each one its proper due.
It's profound.
Yeah, and I, you know, just because of my background,
you know, I, my undergraduate degree is in art history
and religious studies.
My master's work is working with
my favorite Catholic theologian, Von Balthasar.
So obviously, if anyone wants to see.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
You've got to read some Schindler, amen.
He is the person that has made Balthasar like accessible.
And I think clearer, and also he's developed.
David's just done amazing work developing beyond Von.
And I mean that in the way a good student
goes beyond their teacher,
but he's gone beyond Von Balthasar in just profound ways.
Of course.
Oh, this is great.
Okay, this is great.
Oh man.
Okay, yeah.
Well, now I have something to do.
And I do want to say one thing though,
back to your question about, you know,
where does the one and where does God come in an office?
Yes, please.
This makes me a bad Catholic.
I'm sure.
And I'm worried about sometimes like,
yeah, I always have a hard time.
I always have a hard time trying to know,
or I have a hard time knowing
where I fit in in these circles.
I watched that video that you and Paul Vander Clay
and Jonathan Peugeot and forgive me,
I don't remember the woman's name.
It was the first time I interacted with her virtually.
What was her name?
Who's on?
I'm sorry, let me give you the title first.
On a Spiritual Home.
It was on-
Oh, that's Catherine.
And there was John Ben Dunke was there as well.
Yes.
Wonderful.
Well, it's kind of funny,
because you know, as someone,
I mean, obviously as someone who's Catholic,
I still somewhat don't feel like I have a spiritual home.
The reason why I prefaced this is this.
In my counseling,
you know, my goal is never to make in life.
I mean, in life, this is very hard to admit.
I'm not necessarily concerned
with converting people to Catholicism.
I don't think you should be when you're in therapy.
I think that's just-
I think that's too-
Personally.
Even personally.
I'm not necessarily, you know,
and that's for my own personal reasons,
and that's because, you know, I'm basically not,
I mean, I'm a cradle Catholic,
but I'm also a revert.
And I had, you know, a long bout with atheism,
and I, as I just expressed to you,
I mostly studied Buddhist philosophy and undergrad,
and I have deep compassion for anyone
who has that proclivity.
And so it's not my goal to make any one Catholic,
but it is my goal to, and I'm not a relativist.
I want to make that very, very, very-
Very, okay.
It is my goal, though, to unite the individual
with the one God, right?
And I won't necessarily get into the-
Yeah, I understand what I just said was loaded,
because then you can, again, you can-
Oh, what is he saying that, you know,
what he's saying is that like a relativist thought,
and I don't necessarily want to get into my spirituality
or, you know, things that I subscribe to.
I really enjoy the more mystical teachings of Catholicism.
But yeah, it's never my goal to make anyone anything.
My goal is, the only goal I have is,
like I stated before, is to help the individual
pursue the path to eudaimonia, right?
And that's what I want to do.
So I think that's a good clarification and specification.
So let me make my question more precise then.
My question is, well, first of all, proposal.
I propose that getting people into right orientation
towards the one, towards ultimacy,
is how you can best help them explicate, articulate,
and respond to their, and here I'm being tilled,
their ultimate concerns,
and that part of what is underneath their confusion
is very often they are confused
about what they ultimately care about.
That's one part of the confusion.
The other can be, what is ultimate,
such that I should care about it as ultimate,
is another thing that people are often confused about.
We often pursue evil, not because we're pursuing evil,
but because we pursue a lesser good
at the expense of a greater good.
Oh, amen, yes.
Yeah, yeah.
So what I meant was, you know, how, yes, I get it.
You're not proselytizing.
You're not trying to surreptitiously convert people.
That would be duplicitous.
So I think it would be vicious, in fact.
But there's a sense in which, if what we're talking about,
again, not the pathological people,
but the deeply confused people,
if we're trying to bring them clarity,
then I think the orientation towards, you know,
what's real, what's most real,
and how well connected am I to it,
is a fundamental question about meaning in life.
Of course, and that's where your,
I mean, and that's exactly where your
specific project comes in.
And it's like, okay, well, now,
how do I make this a psychological modality, right?
I don't sit them down, hey, in today's session,
we're gonna roge episode four of the Meeting Crisis.
Of course not.
That would be utterly ridiculous.
That sounds like a weird sitcom to it
that could be done or something.
Yeah.
Right.
But it's, again, it's like, yeah, how do I distill?
And again, I'm not, and you know this,
you are not the only individual who has written
or thought about this extensively, right?
Oh, yeah, many people do.
So it's not just you.
It's you in accompaniment with other great thinkers.
It's you in accompaniment with spiritual teachers.
It's you in accompaniment with,
simply just like already like empirically proven
psychotherapeutic practices, right?
So it's like, and it's also in accompaniment with my own,
with who I am as a person, right?
My own.
Yeah, yeah.
Yeah, so it's like, how do I put,
it's how do I get all of us to converge?
How do I create this tapestry of all these voices?
And that's what's difficult because it can't just be.
Right, so this is the thing.
I mean, counseling is not what we are seeing on YouTube,
right?
I mean, this is, in a way, this is nice.
And I've had many counseling sessions
where it has just been a dialogue.
But how do we transform the dialogue, right?
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
And so that's the question that I'm struggling with,
quite frankly.
I mean, so again, there's more skin in the game
because this is not just a theoretical,
I'm not just like having this conversation with you
just to kill an hour.
It's like, no, this is quite frankly,
like a livelihood that I might have, right?
This is also, this has economic implications, right?
Yeah, I get it.
So it's like, well, what's a model that, what's the model?
And so yeah, this is the thing that I'm tirelessly thinking
about every day.
And it's like, yeah, I'm reading a lot
and I'm thinking a lot and I'm reflecting a lot
and I'm watching a lot.
I wanna know this when, like, I'm not demanding it now,
I get it, it's a work in progress.
So don't mistake my, like, I want notes from the front
or something.
I wanna know, like, how this is, how you are doing that,
how you are translating that into, this is very important.
I mean, it is something like, I mean,
part of what the Verveki Foundation is trying to do
is collect, you know, relevant psychotherapists
and counselors and philosophical counselors
who can deal with people who are wrestling
with not just sort of the pedagogical struggles
of taking on an ecology practices,
but a, you know, a therapeutic slash existential dimension.
So, you know-
We'll look at it after you're right there, even.
So, I mean, part of it is also just not trying
to reinvent the wheel, right?
Yeah, yeah.
I mean, who the hell am I?
Not that much, right?
Who the hell am I to say I'm gonna create
this new psychotherapeutic model, right?
No.
How am I going to have,
how am I gonna personally put my ego aside for a second
and I'm going to submit myself to the great thinkers,
to visionaries of the past.
And I, again, I interact with them
and I transcend time and space
and they come into that session.
So, it's like, yeah, it's like, how do we,
okay, so part of it is I'm wrestling with kind
of this hybrid CBT existential model
because there is, because there,
you do need to involve some type
of cognitive behavioral therapy and-
Of course, of course.
You need people reframing abilities.
You have to.
Exactly, because you can give everyone
the existential jargon and someone's gonna say,
you know, you can talk about, you know, like I said,
use I, you just throw out, like it's like a word box,
oh yeah, I, the relationship or, you know, whatever,
like you can't do that unless you have to first get
the individual to a place of insight.
They weren't there, it wasn't there before, right?
And the only way you can get there is through the,
you know, and we should be,
we should be in, we should have much gratitude
towards the individuals who really developed the CBT model.
And I do believe, you know, one thing, it's funny.
I talk about never knowing where my footing is.
It's like, yeah, I tend to, in the psychological circles,
I tend to hang out with the more existential psychologists,
right?
Like there's a lot of like good existential psychology
happening right now.
Even from, you know, my institution where I'm at,
Clay Rutledge over at Dakota,
he's doing a lot of great work in terror management
and nostalgia and just more existential things
that you could actually trickle down to using that
as like a therapeutic modality.
But, so what I'm getting at is that you have
the existentialists on one side and just being like,
sometimes it's weird how we just like group think.
And they're like, no, the people who subscribe to CBT,
that's just a bunch of bullshit.
It's like, no, it's not just a bunch.
I mean, they can't be a bunch of bullshit.
It's not just that, it's not that simplistic.
And basically-
And the evidence is the effectiveness of CBT is going down
because as it's been abstracted and extracted
from therapists who had a much broader philosophical base
and could bring in and address existential issues
and sapiential having to do with wisdom and virtue issues.
Yeah, when you take it out and you abstract it
and you just have it as a separate method,
like it looks like it's effectiveness
as an evidence-based therapy is actually going down.
There's a lot of reasons for that.
And just like the, yeah, like it's unfortunate how much
your basic, sorry, your average clinician
who is working in the modality of CBT
might not actually have a keen of an eye
and they might not understand CBT.
So what ends up happening is you go back
to third grade vocab class and you just get a work.
Yeah, I have a stronger critique.
I think, yeah, yeah, it's,
I think the way to address this is that CBT
and other people have said this, Robinson and others,
CBT needs to be resituated into inside stoicism.
Wow.
Which it was derived
because what needs to be offered is not a technique
but the cultivation of virtue
within the aspiration to a good life.
And that's what's missing from CBT as a framework right now.
So I think CBT was more effective.
The people who invented it were deeply educated
with stoicism, right?
And then that has fallen away
because of psychology's proclivity
to forget its philosophical past.
Oh, amen.
And that's why I say, and that's why,
to get to the point or to get to the genesis
of this sub-conversation.
Yeah, you have to bring in the existential psychotherapeutic
techniques are the most approachable of that side of the coin.
So you do need to have this blend of cog and existentialism
and you need to blend these two together.
And I think, I personally think if this enmeshing happens
then we can borrow that and use that
for this vision of counseling that I've been discussing.
Interesting, interesting.
It's very interesting.
So, I mean, virtues often have to do with two other things,
emotions.
So, I mean, I've done training also in EFT,
Emotional Public Policy, and also inter-conflict
and inter-parts work like IFS and other things
are really good for learning how to also internalize
the dialogue inside the psyche and not always make it.
So, I'm wondering, do you think those other two?
I mean, I don't want to accept you on an education.
By the way, Joe, just get educated on this
for the next 20 years and then,
but it seems to me, I guess I'm making an argument.
I agree totally with the proposal of integrating CBT
and existentialism and therefore getting some
back to something like stoicism.
But we also know stoicism and should be put into dialogue
with Buddhism because all kinds of evidence
that combining CBT and mindfulness together
is synergistically helpful, right?
So, I'm just wondering, and then you want the inter-dialogue
work to overcome inter-conflict
and how to internalize dialogue and IFS is good for that.
And then, dealing with emotions
is very, very important part of the call to virtue.
I mean, Aristotle said,
it's not about being angry or not,
it's being angry at the right time for the right reasons
to the right degree for the right person, right?
Amen, yeah.
And this is where a lot, I'm even thinking about now,
and forgive me if I don't directly answer your question,
but now I'm just brainstorming and just,
again, they're not, again, please have compassion for me
because they're not developed thoughts yet
because I'm spending a lot of my time thinking about this.
And so, it's like, you know, how, to what effect will,
to what effect does psychoeducation even have
at this type of therapy?
It's like, you know, you said, I forget exactly,
I know you talked about mindfulness,
but even just like the differentiation between
teaching someone what the difference
between mindfulness and contemplation.
Meditation, yes, yes, yes, yeah.
Right, so it's like, how often do we conflate these?
And we conflate these and then we think that,
and it's just confused.
So if we don't understand the meaning of words that we use,
well, then we have, we don't understand our very selves
because like the person is like a word.
I mean, we are like letters.
I mean, it's all these things are connected, right?
My friend Spencer Clayton,
he writes about this in his newest book,
and he talks about how one thing that's been lost
is the meaning of words, right?
I mean, with structuralists.
So, you know, we think that words can mean
whatever the hell they want, but it's like, no,
like these things, these symbols engender something, right?
And once we believe that they don't,
well, then we get in a really weird place.
And okay, so how are we like letters then?
Or how are we like words?
Like, well, our forms engender something.
And if we believe that they don't engender something real
or true, or how about this?
That we all engender possibly the same thing,
getting back to the notion of the one to God.
But when we stop believing this,
we get into really weird places.
And it's so funny that you brought up stoicism
because I was thinking about how, you know,
the Stoics naturally, and again, even with the Buddhists,
right? So the Stoics, you take a Stoic
and you can naturally start ushering them
into the Christian ethic, right?
It's so, it's not easy, but you know.
You do it via Neil Platonism.
That's how you do it.
Right.
And so, yeah, I mean, so, because in Stoicism,
it's obviously, I mean, people nowadays,
especially individuals who might be going to counseling
who aren't necessarily religious, right?
Taking those more Stoic practice,
people are going to,
people are going to automatically feel more comfortable.
Yes, very much.
Yeah, very much.
Rather than if they begin to sniff that,
oh, what you're saying?
I remember kind of hearing a very watered down version
of that sometime in like in Christian school,
or that's mildly religious, right?
So, yeah, it's, yes, it's trying to be
as approachable as possible.
But no, when you were talking about, you know,
the regulations of emotions and trying to figure out,
I mean, yes, that, I think that that very much so
is going to be a big part of this.
Again, it's just like, and I,
and part of this conversation,
which I didn't necessarily expect it to be,
but I'm really happy.
It is, it's trying to talk with, you know, individuals.
So I'm also talking next Thursday,
I'm a busy schedule.
Her name is Nancy Snow.
I don't know if you're familiar with her work.
Nancy.
Snow?
No, sorry.
No, it's fine.
And so I wasn't that familiar with her work either
until just due to my own perspective.
So Nancy Snow is now at the University of Kansas,
but she previously was at the University of Oklahoma.
And so from 2000, from 2015 to 2018,
Nancy, in collaboration with other academics
in the psychological field,
they held experiments just on,
like on this topic of virtue cultivation, how to,
yeah, how to,
and I'm so sorry, I don't have the exact name,
but you should look her up after this,
is yeah, Nancy, Nancy Snow.
And what their goal was in this three year project
was to discuss how you can use virtue cultivation.
Can we make this,
can we give this like some empirical backing, right?
Because no one in the psychological field
is gonna care if you don't have empirical backing.
Yeah.
So yeah, part of it is having conversations,
like with you, next week, Professor Snow.
And hopefully what I end up doing is I take all these voices
and I, like I said, I put everyone into a company, man.
And maybe we'll talk in the future, I don't know, but.
Well, I'd like to know when you find your voice
from all of these voices,
I'd like to know what that was like
and how you did it
and what is properly idiosyncratic to you
and what is properly shareable with other people.
Yeah, I would very much like to know that.
Yeah, so we're on the journey together, I guess, you know?
And that's the really beautiful thing.
So yeah, you know, and I did it,
I'm kind of like going off the path a little bit.
I did wanna ask you a question though
that I've been thinking about.
I was just gonna say,
I think we should turn things over to you
now asking me questions.
Okay, let's do that.
Okay, so how about this?
Well, we'll probably stay on this path.
Well, I have a couple of questions I'm gonna ask you
about virtue and about play
and about male and female virtue,
and I'm gonna incorporate yung in that,
I'm gonna incorporate play in that.
So I'll ask you some questions,
but we're still gonna be on the same.
Yeah.
If that's okay.
With all that being said, real quick,
just to answer the question,
what would you say is the gist of your intellectual project
because you do so much?
What are you really trying to achieve?
What do you want people to take away?
I want people to recover
how to cultivate meaning in life and wisdom
so they have wise meaning and meaningful wisdom
such that they can fall in love with beauty,
truth and goodness,
and ultimately fall in love with being again
and continue to do so for the rest of their lives.
Real quick endeavor, right?
I appreciate that.
Thank you.
And I will say, I mean, Sue,
you're getting bigger and bigger.
This is, I just thought of this question now,
but you know, and your pursuit is
truly the most noble of pursuits.
And your voice is being heard by many
and you're helping out a lot of people.
Has that hit you yet?
Is that hitting you now that you are getting,
that you, you're gaining some type of what
we would probably consider celebrity status, right?
You're probably getting more
into the public intellectual sphere
probably that you ever thought
you were ever going to get into, I'm guessing.
Yeah.
That's awesome.
Very, very mixed.
One part of me is deeply grateful
and I take great pains to demonstrate
and to point out that this is not me alone.
This is very much a lot of people
that I am collaborating with and in community with.
So I'm very grateful for the recognition
and I'm very grateful for the collaboration.
Very grateful for both of those.
I'm very concerned, very concerned about
undertaking whatever, the exercise
of whatever influence I garner
to do it with as much virtue and virtuosity as I can.
So that's why I've set up,
there's the Raveki Foundation,
which is a not-for-profit
and there's Ryan Barton, who's the executive director
and Eric Foster from Upfire, the director of operations.
And there's people on the board.
And so, right?
And so there's, I have an arms length relationship.
So the money and the recognition is not right here.
It's over there.
And it's, there's a lot of people who I selected
very carefully, who are very committed to a virtuous vision.
And so, and I'm constantly looking for feedback
on how not to become a guru
in the pejorative sense of the word.
Yeah.
So that's hitting me.
Because unfortunately people will do that.
Oh, they will and I don't want to.
Yeah.
And I really, really, really don't want to.
I really don't want, I want,
I really am, I deeply aspire to being Socrates.
And I really, that is the most profound thing I want.
And I don't want anything to come at the expense
of my aspiration to being as authentically Socratic as I can.
And in connection with that,
although it doesn't sound like they're the same thing,
but they're connected, all the fundamental relationships
that I value for their own sake.
So I don't want that.
There's, I'm socially phobic by nature.
This is a decade-long persona that I have crafted
that you're interacting with.
Not inauthentically, by the way.
I'm sure, yeah.
Aspirationally.
But so I was talking to Ryan last night about,
I recently released a video on AI
and the scientific and philosophical
and spiritual import of what's happening in AI right now.
And it's doing very well.
And so I get a sense of exposure
that is quite unpleasant for me around that.
But if I hadn't have done it,
like I did that, I worked really, really hard,
like almost obsessively so for about three or four weeks
before I released the video essay
because I felt a tremendous sense of responsibility.
So it's not like I can't do these things
because of the exposure,
because then I'm beset by a tremendous sense
of responsibility to the level of obligation,
about trying to do something,
try to do whatever I can to steer this towards the good
for the sake of my family and my kids, my friends,
and for the world, right?
But on the other hand, yeah, it's like,
it's a negative effect of exposure
that I also confront around it.
So there's some techniques that you do to control your id
from seeping into all of this.
So what do you do to...
Well, I do my daily ecology of practices,
and which do a lot about, you know,
that there's dialogical practices,
imaginable mindfulness practices,
body movement, movement,
the whole ecology, trying to design it,
all the stuff I'm talking about,
designing a proper well,
I enter into, you know, a dialectic into diologos,
philosophical fellowship, I do practices.
Like my patrons are becoming like,
we do practices together, which is,
and I mean this with respect,
it's kind of like going to church together.
Yeah, I understand.
Yeah, and then, like I said,
I know that we can't rely on self-interpretation
and self-direction, we have to engage it,
but we can't rely on that for getting us to the good.
We have to make sure that there are people other than us,
who nevertheless have our best interest at heart,
who we have empowered, or I'll make it personal,
who I've empowered to challenge me,
to speak on me, to keep me away from,
so I don't, like for example,
all the money doesn't come to me,
it goes to the Raveki Foundation,
and then I will take out expenses for projects,
and I also take out, you know,
a relatively small honorarium,
because, you know, my time,
I should, this is a lot of my time,
and I'm not generating income elsewhere
that I could be doing,
but it compensates for that,
but it's very much about putting in place
also the external safeguards,
where there is specific people
who have been specifically empowered
with specific duties to help keep me on track.
All of that can still screw up,
but the more and more of this,
I can make self-organizing and independent from my,
you know, personal,
my personal cognitive and emotional biases,
the better I think I can meet the demands,
which, the meeting the demands,
I do find very meaningful,
meeting the demands of doing this virtually,
and with doing it virtuously, and with virtuosity,
yeah, that's what I'm trying to do.
That's beautiful, it's hard sometimes, you know,
and I am obviously nowhere near you,
but as I, you know, this little podcast has allowed me to,
it's opened up doors.
Of course.
It's allowed me to write for, you know, a publication,
it's allowed for me to have great conversations with you
and other people, it's, I have,
I mean, I have my one, only one video,
and I don't ever want it to blow,
because I was very anxious
when I saw how many people were watching it,
but one video was 40,000 views,
and I remember, I was like, I remember like working out,
and I was at the gym
and I was just clicking to see how many people were watching it,
and I was both flattered and both,
I was getting egotistical about it,
but I was also extremely,
I was growing extremely, you know, anxious over it.
And so it's like, in all of this,
you kind of, you get this false sense of gravitas,
and so sometimes I know in my life,
that people, you made that very clear,
and you made that beautiful point,
it's like, you know, you have the individuals, the friends,
or the loved ones, or the lovers, right, that ground you,
and it's like, well, oftentimes,
now that I've been doing more,
you know, sometimes that gets into the way,
that gets into the way, you know,
sometimes with my relationship with my wife,
maybe I'm working on something,
and you know, my wife says, oh, look at the baby,
or hey, you wanna hang out,
and I was like, well, I'm writing,
or I'm collaborating.
And so that's on a teeny tiny scale.
So I, you know, I can't imagine,
you know, the, how conscious you have to be, basically.
Yeah.
On a moment-to-moment basis, which is good,
but it's also very hard,
in order to not deteriorate these relationships.
And we don't have to get into it by any means,
I'm not asking you to, I'm-
Well, I do wanna say something about it.
I mean, I was, because I was talking to,
I was talking to my life partner,
I was talking to her last night,
and it's really interesting.
I was saying how she actually becomes more and more real.
I said something to the effect is,
as some of my, you know, dreams come true,
I more and more find the woman of my dreams to be more real.
That's what's actually happening for me.
Because the ephemerality of this,
and again, please, I wanna,
I'm very grateful for the recognition.
I really am, and I'm not,
I'm not being dismissive or insulting of it.
But sometimes, there's an old Greek proverb,
that God sometimes punish us
by giving us what we want, right?
And so a lot of these things that I had,
you know, I wanted more recognition.
I wanted my work to get out there.
I wanted to make a difference.
And, you know, and to be really honest,
there's an egocentric, egotistical aspect to that,
which-
Oh, it does.
Yeah, well, I mean, because, you know,
if you totally get rid of the self-preservation strategy,
you'll die, and so,
but, you know, getting a lot of the success,
as you said, I didn't really expect the gas,
although I'd always wanted it, you know,
that weird sort of semi-fantasy thing
that we all do.
Getting that fulfilled has,
and I don't want to come off as being saintly,
because that is not what I am or claim it to be,
but it's kind of,
it salience diminishes in some important way
with respect to the things that are really
mattering in your life.
That's what I found.
I mean, I'm not saying this is universal,
but for me, that's been helpful.
It's like, wait, you know,
all of this is really cool and everything,
but what's really happening phenomenologically
is that's sort of now more background for me,
and my relationship with Sara and my kids,
and my friends, that's not really-
I understand, I really do.
I mean, I've only been a dad now for a year and a half,
but his birth and his life has coincided
with this project of mine and kind of my,
you know, this is my second career.
I was a high school teacher,
and then I had my own meeting process for a while,
and this allowed me to,
it jolted me back on this path,
and part of that jolt was my son being born
and the encouragement of my wife,
but getting into and connecting what you were saying.
I understand that he's actually more real now
than I ever have before,
and I hope that as I grow and I develop in my pursuits,
that actually allows my boy to be more vivid to me
and my wife to be more vivid to me day by day,
and it's beautiful when these things mesh
and when our intellectual pursuit allows
for our personal pursuit to become more vivid.
I hope so.
I mean, at the end of my practices,
I frequently pray a prayer that Socrates pray,
he prays it initially to,
it goes something along the lines,
a beloved pan and all God to develop in this place.
Give me the inward beauty and let the outward man
and the inward man be as one.
I probably messed that up a bit.
I don't know if that's...
Right, and like, I hope,
and I put effort into cultivating the discernment.
I could see how people could be tempted for the reverse,
the salience of the fame and other things
could actually cause that to be foregrounded
and the real things to be backgrounded.
That's obviously happened to me.
Yeah, tons of rock stars and...
Right, no, exactly, right.
Where the rock star phenomenon, there's that.
And I've also seen,
I've also seen that there's a temptation.
I don't want to totally use that in religious sense,
but I don't want to ignore the religious sense either.
So that's why I'm hesitating, but there's a temptation.
I can feel it.
Wait, this fame and this wealth,
it's not as satisfying as I thought it would be.
So the answer is I should get more.
I've felt that impulse come up to me
and it's comes up from this Darwinian depth, right?
Wait, the answer is go higher on the hierarchy.
That's surely the answer, right?
And it's like, whoa, and I've noticed that too.
So I'm trying to keep,
I'm trying to be properly like mindful of them,
not suppress it, but also not obsess about it,
like get that golden mean about it
so that I can hopefully not fall prey to that temptation.
I would like to be, if I could get what I wanted,
I would like to be, have a large enough audience
where people have to take me seriously,
but not so large that people would start to idolize me.
That's where I would like to sit.
That's a sweet spot.
Yeah, that's the sweet spot for me.
I really do hope you get there.
I think you are gonna get there
because you walk through this so precisely
and you can see it.
I mean, in my opinion, you never come off as disingenuine.
And even with your conversations,
how I and how I'm sure many people approached you at first
was through your conversations with Jordan Peterson.
You never came off as disingenuine.
You came off as real, you came off as authentic.
And I think that's why people ended up following you.
And I think there's,
I've never really, I mean, this is not a developed thought
whatsoever.
And I think Jordan Peterson is on the same path,
but there's obviously a difference between you
and Jordan Peterson.
And I'm not just talking about philosophically,
I think Jordan probably has a little more
perfectly towards the pomp and pageantry of it all.
And I don't think that's not a shot.
And I think that's actually,
that's sometimes a very good thing.
And you need people like that, right?
Because you need people who also are going to talk
to the, I mean, you said you wanna find that sweet spot
and people have different sweet spots.
And there are some individuals who just need to talk to
the culture at large, right?
And you need that.
And sometimes that actually makes you,
or that is, it's then taken on the pomp and pageantry
of that is actually a necessity though,
because it's part of the game.
So, but anyway, I mean, I think that's why,
I think that's why a lot of individuals have really linked
up with your work though, is because
it's, and I don't know the word to describe it,
I'll be honest, I'll just say authentic again,
but, and so I think that's really telling that you admitted
yourself that you wanna find that sweet spot,
where you wanna get big, but you don't wanna get big.
Right?
And I just think that's really cool to put it really cool.
I know that's like, that's not the most profound.
I just think it's really cool though.
No, but thank you, thank you.
Yeah, Jordan and I are different.
Yeah.
I mean, we have an interesting relationship.
And of course it predates him becoming like a superstar
that he is, right?
We aspire differently.
Sure.
I think Jordan aspires to being, this is half the joke.
And I think I've said this to his face and he laughed.
So I don't think it's, I don't think it's an appropriate,
but he aspires to being Moses.
I aspire to being Socrates.
And those are very different aspirations.
Those are very different aspirations.
Right, and I agree with you.
There are times when we need a Moses figure,
the prophet that will lead people to the prophet land,
lead them out of bondage to the prophet land,
the prophet's land.
I think Jordan is, you know,
I think both his virtues and his vices,
and I will admit that I have virtues and vices,
so I'm not trying to,
but I think both his virtues and his vices
orbit around that vision, right?
Whereas mine are around Socrates.
And that's a different vision.
Oh, everyone has a mediator, right?
I mean, everyone has a mediator.
Everyone has that objective desire.
And the sweet spot in life, right?
Just really quick, you know,
what Gerard would say is that everyone
is going to have mediator.
It's picking the right mediators.
That's what you...
That's exactly it.
That's about, and that's the Socratic prayer.
I want that outward and inward to be resonant,
and resonant such that my life is as virtuous as possible.
I mean,
try to manage these three things.
Virtue, virtuosity, and the virtual is sort of
what I'm wrestling with a lot,
because they intersect and really interesting
and ways that haven't been very well articulated
by previous people,
because they didn't have the virtual
as the third in those three,
which in it alters things.
Like you and I would not be speaking like this
without the virtual.
How does virtuosity and virtue show up here?
And how does the reverse,
how does what we do in virtual space
translate back into the real space
of virtue and virtuosity?
These are important questions we're wrestling with, right?
No, Amen.
And sometimes you gotta, they're hard questions.
And I think, and so they're so difficult
that we're trying to actually have these conversations
function in brick and mortar spaces.
And so it's like, I know that you are doing,
you've been doing conferences
and that there's another conference coming up.
And me and my good friend,
Marcus, who runs the channel more Christ,
we have an event coming up in DC
with Michael Martin and Paul Vander Clay.
And, you know, we hope our goal actually,
one of our goals is that we plan our vision.
Marcus, don't get mad at me that I'm talking about our vision,
but our vision is, you know, we plan on having conferences,
hopefully multiple times a year.
Now, Marcus is in Ireland, I'm in Cleveland.
So it's obviously far away,
but if we could do like a European thing
and maybe an American conference,
another thing that we're thinking of is, you know,
doing conferences, it's a conference camp
where a group of 15, 16, 20 people,
it's actually a camping trip, right?
And that projects you into a different headspace
and conversation is...
Oh, yeah, living with people is just important.
We, yeah, Ryan and Eric and I need to talk more about this.
We're of course doing lots of events
and trying to get regular events going
and regular communities in practice.
But yeah, we need, we also need,
we need to have retreats where people live together for a bit.
When I went on, we turned to the source last July
with Rafe Kelly and we're living with these people
and pushing yourself to the horizon of horror every day
for spiritual transformation as an impact on you.
Joe, I've got to go soon on it.
We've sort of shifted to you being the host.
Is there any final thing you'd like to ask me before I leave?
There is, but I don't know how far we would get into it,
but I'll pop it in there.
Maybe this will leave us for a conversation in the future.
Really quick, want your opinion on this?
Physical beauty, is it beauty?
Are people's physical selves beautiful or just not ugly?
That's to ask the part, if I were to answer it
from like a platonic framework is,
can physical bodies, them and shine with beauty?
Yes.
Beautiful.
That was a question that was on my mind
and I thought that was going to get me a one sentence answer.
So you gave it to me.
I appreciate that.
One of the most interesting things in my relationship
with my current partner is,
by objective measures, she's a physically attractive woman,
but so I want that understood,
but I was really attracted first,
and this had not happened to me before.
I was really attracted first,
and I'll speak a little bit poetically,
because it's appropriate.
I was first really first attracted to the beauty of her soul.
Yeah.
And then I noticed in conjunction and as a function
of that, I noticed how physically beautiful she is.
And that has been really important for me.
That was like a,
that was a wake up moment for me.
And I think we have to be open to very often,
and you know,
many people who argue this play don't famously said,
we start with physical beauty and then we get into physical beauty.
But it's happened that the reverse has been the case for me.
Really importantly.
And I just wanted to note that.
I just wanted to note that.
I think the question of beauty is very much.
It's not, it's not, it's not,
it's not unidirectional is what I'm saying.
You can both be drawn through the physical to what is beyond,
and what is beyond.
The physical can, can,
can reach to you first and then draw you in attraction to the
physical.
Yeah.
All right.
That's so true.
It's bad.
Like gave me goosebumps when you said that my wife is.
Absolutely gorgeous.
I, and I would say she's absolutely gorgeous.
And I would say by.
Side of me, she's absolutely gorgeous, but you know,
there's always those times where every woman and every man will
get insecure.
And you know, my wife sometimes ask me, you know,
why, why me?
I tell her, because you really have the most beautiful soul that
I've ever encountered in my whole life.
Yeah.
And you, you admit it the same thing.
So I just think that's really, it's wonderful.
Absolutely.
Yeah, it is.
It is.
And.
Yeah.
I think that's a great, and I think that's a beautiful place to
end.
It is a good place to end.
It is a good place to end.
Thank you, Joe.
This has been really wonderful.
Yeah.
Thank you for having me.
Oh, thank you for having me.
And I will.
I'll send you a copy of this for your channel.
And we'll talk again soon.
Thank you so much, Jen.
