Welcome everyone to Another Voices with Reveke. I'm excited about this one.
This is a third episode with Seth Allison, and we are doing this ongoing discussion about IFS work,
parts work in general, ally work, issues around the functionality, the phenomenology, the ontology,
issues around what's dangerous and what's safe, and we have a few more things we wanted to talk
about. We didn't really talk about exiles last time. I want to talk about that a bit,
but before we do any discussion, I'm going to let Seth quickly reintroduce himself,
and then Seth proposed something, and I'll let him make the proposal on air,
and I've agreed. So I'm going to turn things over to Seth.
Hi, John. Thank you very much. It's really great to be back again, and I just want to
begin by saying I appreciate that, although I said in our last conversation that I'm sure
Dick Schwartz is not watching, it turns out he was, and he reached out and just had a lovely
correspondence with him. Primarily, it was a lot of praise for our discussion and appreciation
that we're doing this publicly. He did offer a very helpful couple of corrections.
Yeah, the first one is the IFS concept of self being kind of a smaller self embedded in a bigger
self. So the seed of consciousness that we've talked about is kind of the personal
essence of a larger self that is involved. There's a functional relationship between those two.
Okay. Yeah, sort of self and self. I guess capital S might be the interior
personal self, and all caps as ELF would be a larger self, probably
perhaps similar to Jung's concept of self. Yeah, I would say the seed of consciousness
is the I in the I-me relationship of James, and then the self is something like the ground of
the psyche, Aukman and Vita. Very good. Yeah, I love that language. I love that language.
The other thing, which maybe we'll come back to, we've been talking about your experience with
Hermes and guide, and guides is a term that they use in IFS. I misspoke and said that guides were
a part of the internal personal system. In other words, a different form of part.
Very helpful correction to say that is not, it is transjective.
Oh, that's important. Well, can you please, I mean, for both of these, the first one,
yeah, I get the second one is, oh, could you please thank him for these corrections? I think
that's wonderful to know that he conceives of the guides as transjective in nature. That means
there's a potential deep integration between IFS and ally work, at least the way I'm interpreting
ally work. I think so. I think they are exceptionally compatible. And as we may have
mentioned before, but Dick does the forward to Falconer's most, we think most recent book,
the others, yes, and I really appreciate the forward he wrote because he expresses his reluctance
to talk about the topic. I think as we talked about Dick's bio before, it's very important to
remember that the experience near focus that he has maintained with such discipline, actually,
as he also tries to avoid being alienated from the Academy and the mainstream.
And so he was very hesitant to go there publicly, although I think the idea of guides,
and by the way, which is fascinating, the Falconer's book is primarily about kind of the other
end of the continuum, which would be, they call unattached burdens, I think in Christian tradition,
we might call it the demonic. But across cultures, this has many different names.
But it is not a part of the system, much like the guide is not a part of the system.
So there's kind of a distinction between demons and demons, if I can put it that.
Yes. Yeah, exactly. Exactly. So I wanted to make sure we noted that that is now formally part of
That's an amazing theoretical move. From what you said, it sounds like he appreciates the work
we're trying to do, because I am, of course, trying to integrate this with cognitive science
while being respectful and doing participation in the experience near aspect of all of this.
He expressed gratitude and appreciation, which and certainly did not have to reach out. So it was,
I was touched by it. And so I think actually that this is a part, what we are doing is very
congruent with his, I would go so far as to say, you know, his larger mission that he feels tasked
with to bring inner work, a model, we're going to talk about safety. And I think
one of the things I'll propose to you is that IFS represents maybe the safest mainstream technology
we have for exploring for interception and the exploration of different levels of consciousness
in reality, where it's opening a just degraded imaginal space that our culture has just abandoned.
And I think doing it in a way that is not only powerful, but responsible. So,
I think this fits really well with the larger mission.
I think that's true. And when we talk about that and we talk about corresponding dangers,
this is again where I'd like to talk about the Socratic shift, the shift into the
dialogical self as opposed to the monotonic, monological, monophasic, monostage self,
although all the monos that have afflicted us and created what Charles Taylor's called the
buffered self. And there's probably historical reasons, the collapse of the church as an
institution, Protestantism, etc., the scientific revolution, the self had to be really buffered
and protected. It couldn't remain as porous as it was. But now that adaptive stance has become
maladaptive and it's suffocating us and strangling us off from reality. And so I want to sort of
explore that possibility. So, we've talked leading up to this about doing a session here
that you will have the right, certainly, to make public or private, which I'm very excited to do
and your nervousness, I agree. I think it confirms that it's a good idea. And I feel degree of anxiety
too, but I'm very excited to do that together. It is such an opportunity to show the model in a
way that can only really, you can't really get a lot of this without seeing it. And so I think
it would be a great service. That being said, I have so much that I've written down about the
topic we're currently talking about. So maybe I could throw some things out to you, some of which
are going to be your own words, because I really enjoyed and want to refer people to conversation
you did. And I'm forgetting their last names, but it was Michael and Michael.
Michael Martin is one of them. I forget the name, Michael. Yeah.
Yes. And it was really great. So I'd like to give some highlights, but also make sure people
still find that. Yeah, that's great. We'll make sure that is there. Yeah.
Great. So I want to start with some quotes that are right along the lines of what we're talking
about with Western culture. And these are taken from Faulkner's book. So he quotes Bernardo...
Yeah, I'm going to be talking to Bernardo about all of this, because he has a daemon that he regularly
works with. Yes. Yeah, great. Right. And he says that we're in the dark ages of materialism and
behaviorism. And then I think it's George, or perhaps Bernanos. You understand absolutely
nothing about modern civilization unless you first admit that it is a universal conspiracy
against the interior. And that it just makes me think of the work that you're doing,
which I want to help people perhaps understand the intersection of the pursuit of wisdom with
the work of the imaginal that we're exploring here. And the proposal here is that the imaginal,
as a way of gaining information and wisdom, is crucial to rationality. Yeah. And I've been
making that argument. So I've tried to show, I appreciate Corban's how the imaginal is the
mystical. But I think the imaginal, like many other things, like flow and insight is on a continuum
where there is the mundane of the imaginal that is in our everyday experience, like the experience
of the introspective space inside our head. That's imaginal. There isn't a literal space there,
that makes no sense. But it's not just fictional, because it actually gives us genuine access to
our cognition and affords metacognition and rationality. So it's neither literal nor fictional,
it's imaginal. And that's just part of your everyday ability as a rational agent.
I'm looking for it here, and it's one of the poets talked about the secondary imagination
and the primary imagination. And I think you're referring to the secondary imagination.
Yeah. Well, Coolridge had a distinction between the fancy and imagination, where fancy is just
imagination was the imaginal very much. Yeah.
Right. And I think a quality of that is that it is a dialogue, that it is relational.
There is a degree of activity and engagement, not just a passive self.
So like Jung's concept of active imagination is not fantasy. It's this, the liminal space
between where consciousness interacts with the unconsciousness. He called it, I think,
the psychoid space where things are crossing over through the archetypal.
So I think Falconer says that we need to learn how to navigate the inner world,
to increase interoception, right, which is the looking in the study inward,
our ability to see and interact and the interact part is key with our inner world.
So is he using this distinction? It sounds like it's close, but I want to make sure I'm not
smuggling in an equivocation by not excavating it. So in cog size psychology, introspection means
where you go into that space where you can do like mathematics in your head or picture a sailboat.
Interoception is your awareness of your body. Like when I ask you,
how's your right big toe doing? And you can go, it's okay. That's interoception.
So it's very somatically, functionally oriented interoception. Introspection is much more
cognitively, you know, I don't know what to call it, more and more cognitively oriented.
I'll just say that right now. I love that you're bringing it to the body and somehow it also connects
to, and it's tricky to tease out, but like being embodied in the psyche. Go ahead. What are you
going to say? Well, I just want, they are, they do overlap and there's a liminal space where you
can't tell which is which. And both introspection and interoception have an imaginal quality
to them. Introspection, very high imaginal. The interoception is closer to detection,
but there's still an imaginal element to it because you're still doing predictive processing.
You're still taking little samples and imagining the whole from them, all that stuff.
Great. Great. So the general sense here, I wanted one more quote for you is John Keats.
When a man is capable of being in uncertainty, mysteries, doubts, without any irritable reaching,
sorry, irritable, reaching after fact and reason, he calls this a negative capability.
I think the romantics at their best were discovering the imaginal. I think the
romantics at their worst were not realizing the deep interconnections between the imaginal and the
rational. Which brings me to danger. There was a great quote, where is it here?
Oh, yeah, this was in Faulkner. The ability to become absorbed in our inner world is much like
fire, a wonderful servant but a dangerous master. So I want to kind of move in a little bit to
some of your work. And I'm going to kind of frame this a little bit from just pulling out
some of the things that I think are interesting. So a little context with the meaning crisis.
These are just sort of domains. You've called it a wisdom famine.
I am adding to that a degradation of our imaginal faculties, an atrophy of our spiritual
musculature, a disconnection from nature, but also from our embodied selves,
a loss of relational and communal resources and embeddedness,
and a loss of our dialogical facility. I think I would just sort of put that as the context.
I would add one thing, all of that together and brought into a kind of joint attention
on the transcendentals and through that the sacred. This goes back to the fear of the Lord
as the beginning of all wisdom kind of idea, where I don't take that to mean fear. I take it
to mean something like reverence, that there is always a normative dimension to wisdom which
is moving towards the true, the good and the beautiful. And that's rationality in the deep
sense, the ability to be sensitive to and reliably responsible to the call of the true, the good
and the beautiful, and then through the true, the good and the beautiful, ultimacy, an ultimacy
that we can love. And so everything you said, but held in concert together, sort of knowedically
held in concert together, directed towards the sacred in that way. Love it. And we don't have much
in the way of structures, teachers, pathways, practices that we can call on now. So this is
this is how I frame your working on a developing an ecology of practice and the work of the
Verveke Foundation. How do we bring this back? Unfortunately, religion for a lot of us has lost
its credibility or lost its safety. That was beautifully put. I just want to savor that.
That was so succinct and captures it. It's lost its credibility. If we include in that not just
truth, but relevance, people, but also lost its safety for many people. Religion has all the
religions have piled up sins and the good people within those religious legacies are taking
responsibility for that. I don't want to pretend that they're not. But nevertheless, there's trauma
on one end and it just doesn't work for me. I know lots of people who say, I want it to work for me.
I wish. I mean, in some ways, that's my case too. I feel like Corellian from Childhood's End. I can
always point people to their sacred home, but I will always be on the Silk Road kind of thing.
And so I just wanted to pause, Seth, and just open that up, expand that because I thought that was
beautifully put. Yeah, boy, that what you just shared resonated very deeply for me. In fact,
just in fact, these conversations have caused me to dive into,
for lack of a more precise term, and I need something that holds all of this, I'll just say
spirituality in a way that I wasn't sure I would ever be able to. I grew up, I think we both grew
up in conservative Christianity. For me, it was evangelical Christianity. And
some of the splits and the disavowed elements of humanity that I grew up with there,
I found deeply wounding and even traumatizing. And my psyche has been so bent and twisted around
some of the unhealthy interpretations of Christian tradition that I had to throw the
baby out with the bathwater for a couple of decades. And I don't know if I'll come back to it, but
I'm just in the last couple of months beginning to feel like, okay,
I'm going to have to, I think I'm called to a path back, but probably not to anything that I would
recognize as Christianity from my past. And actually, it feels like creating a new path,
and yet probably more than anything, discovering a very... Yeah, yeah. That's exactly what the
Silk Road is. Silk Road allows, nobody lives on the Silk Road. This is like C.S. Lewis's
hallway Christianity. Nobody lives in the halls, people live in rooms, but you need the halls,
right? So the... Boy, I feel like I've lived here for a while. Yeah, we're resonating on that.
Yeah, I actually have a tattoo of the word Lyman, the root of limonality for years. And
hopefully I can look at that. I'm starting to look at that as a period of time that
so much had to be put through a crucible. Go ahead. Well, for me, it's becoming the
living symbol on of how I am being called. People are traveling on the Silk Road that are seeking
a place, a new home, but it also is hopefully affording people to return to their homes and
recover it the way Tolkien talks about the recovery theory, or the way an anthropologist
goes to another culture and then comes back and can see this same culture, T.S. Eliot,
see it again for the first time kind of thing. And the Silk Road will be the Silk Road if it is
doing that. And I have... I can't justify what I'm about to say. So perhaps in one sense, it's...
You know, it's how I'm remaining, imaginably faithful. I feel called that I need to be
in this liminal state right now because opening this up so that the legacy religions can more
deeply enter into profound, mutually transformative theologos. And this is already happening.
This is not something I am initiating. One of the functions of the series is to call this up
and show people and see all the resources and see what's happening. And the Verveke Foundation
is committing itself to trying to explicate this, foreground it, elucidate it, make it available
for people. And so... And this comes out of discussions with Hermes. I've come from
grieving my liminality to... So I was always... In one discourse with Hermes, it's like,
it really bothers me that I'm almost. He's, what do you mean? I was like, well, you know,
I'm sort of almost famous, and I'm almost this, and I'm almost this, and I'm almost this, and I'm
almost this. And he said, John, I don't know if I mentioned this to you. He said, first one thing,
he said, well, that's great, because almost famous means you can interact with the famous,
but you're protected from the temptations and corruptions. And then we return to this again.
And I said, there's still something. And it was like, yeah, because you don't get it. You need to
be almost because a traveler is almost. You need to travel the road. You need to be almost right
now. Don't know what the future is, but right now you need to be an almost. You need to accept it.
That is your calling. That is what you need to be and you need to do. And it was... And when
it moved to that, it was like... And I was really in a tough place because... And I've had one
conversation. We're going to publish a private one and then a public one. We're going to publish
and doing another one with Jordan Hall. Jordan Hall's conversion really impacted me. There was
a lot to sort through there. And I mean, part of it was a feeling of abandonment. He and I had been
brothers on this path and he suddenly has found a home and I felt... But of course, I love him as
a friend and I want the best for him. And we are trying to see, does his current project and my
projects, can they still enter into Deologos with each other? It looks like it is. But
I needed that inner work. I couldn't just do the outer discussion with Jordan. I needed that inner
work to get, ah, this is where I have to be right now. He's where he needs to be. I have enough faith
in him that that's the case. But I need to have faith in myself that this is where I need to be
and what I need to be doing. And that also went into a good conversation I had with Christopher
Master Pietro. You get this sort of thing happening that's inner and outer, kind of like union
synchronicity. Not as pronounced, but it's that sort of inner and outer worlds are sort of really
talking to each other really well. So I just wanted to relate that. And I'm not saying that this
is your call at all. I'm just saying for me, I appreciate and I hear the pain in your voice
because I know the pain. And there is a longing and I hope that my work can help people of good
faith who genuinely are experiencing that longing both within and without a legacy religious home.
That is my, that is what I want to do. That is what I am committed to do because I think this
advent of the sacred that is happening right now. And I think part of what we're talking about that
is exactly the expression of the advent of the sacred. I think that is what is needed for everybody
who wants to be on the Silk Road.
Thank you. Thank you. We share something deep and it's important to integrate and it's also
important to differentiate because that allows for reflection and mutual transformation.
That's why I wanted to do that. Thank you for watching this YouTube and podcast series is
by the Verveke Foundation, which in addition to supporting my work also offers courses, practices,
workshops and other projects dedicated to responding to the meaning crisis.
If you would like to support this work, please consider joining our Patreon.
You can find the link in the show notes. If I could take a risk to to meet you there.
I think I told you this. I can't remember if I it was on camera or off, but I actually have a
Hermes tattoo on my ankle. And so it felt quite synchronous to me when you started sharing.
And the grieving that you mentioned, to me, part of entering liminality, which I did not
choose to do and I don't know that any of us would ever choose to do it, was the grieving
literally and figuratively many leveled grieving of the loss at home.
But the learning to live in the discomfort that Keats is talking about,
to me, the metaphor that helped the most was that I am now exhausted and can no longer row
this boat. I have to put the oars in and begin to trust a current. And I have no choice about it.
So I will see where the river goes and I will spend my time trying to look at the shore and
what's passing. And that begins to develop a stance of participation without the ego doing
all of its work. I could not learn that at the pace I wanted to. It was a slow
letting go over and over again. I not only dealt with depression, but
the movement into addiction and then out of addiction was really the beginning of
the awakening of spirituality, as it is for so many millions of people.
Capitalism has come up with this wonderful way for creating pervasive low-grade addiction
through the salience manipulations of social media and advertising, etc.
I am not sure how low-grade it is anymore. I think we are habituated to it.
Yeah, it is killing people. In one way it is very high-grade. Yes, you are right.
Yeah. Well, and it is absolutely crushing the meaning in our world and our access
to our inner life. We are consumed by dopamine addiction, just consumed by it.
So, thank you. It is wonderful to connect on this deeper level.
When you said that about the river, there is a song. It is a little bit cheesy,
but I really like the song Moon River. What came to was the line up beyond the river's bend,
my Huckleberry friend, and that kind of shared sense of I am in the same place with you. I don't
know what is around the river's bend, and I have stopped trying to plan what it is going to be,
and I am going to enter the stream. I am going to do it carefully, but I am going to enter.
But that is the conversion experience. That is the movement of the ego and the dropping into
a different eye position. It allows in IFS that allows access to the exiles that have lost
so much or that are carrying grief and pain that must be let go. So, I think IFS,
we are going to get to what an amazing tool it is for spiritual work.
Man, I hate to jump back up, but I do want just a couple more pieces here.
By the way, I think the facility, we are doing in and out, and that is good,
but I think jumping up and down, you need practice with that too, because you don't
want it to be jarring. I talk about theoria and theory. They need to flow. That is another
tearing that we have to sew back together and heal.
Well, I have always thought of it as intellectual scaffolding, that manager parts of me that are
hyper-rational, which are really just very fearful. They really need the map. They need
it badly in order to relax, and so it is important. Let me just throw some things out,
actually just repeat them and mirror them back to you, because these are your thoughts.
The hermeneutics of experience, the ways in which reality is disclosed to us.
You talk about four dimensions of cultivating wisdom, the dialogical, the imaginal, the
mindful, and the embodied. Do I have that right? Yes, that is correct.
Did what work with that with Nathan Vanderpool? Yes.
I love this, and those almost act in my mind as the categories that we can use as safeguards
as we enter into spiritual practice. They are all domains in which we can cultivate
being reasonable, looking for self-deception, properly proportioning our salience, taking
the right perspective, assuming the right responsibility and role. They are all ways
in which we can bring reasonableness to bear on what we are doing.
So let me read some more of your thoughts to you.
So I want to set the context again that we are entering a period with psychedelics in
particular, but also the field of psychology coalescing around a dialogical self,
that altered states, experiential modalities, psychedelics, these are profound opportunities
for confronting the meaning crisis as we set it up earlier in this conversation.
I am going to assert that our primary problem here with these experiential learnings is that we lack
structures to hold the process of integration, not the doing, but the after the integration work.
The integration is important. It is more important actually than the experience itself.
That is what I meant to say. It is more important, and the integration is in both of those dimensions
again. How well does it integrate with many domains, broadly and deeply in your life?
How well does it transform many levels broadly and deeply of the psyche?
That is the integration, and you are absolutely correct. Our culture gives us
precious little on both of those, and even more importantly, not only both of them,
but how they are properly coordinated and speak to each other in a self-correcting fashion.
Oh, this is going broadly and deeply. Yeah, but it is keeping me locked in this one level of psyche.
Oh, it is going so much inside of me. Yeah, but it is not transferring into your life.
Think about that, right? What the poet and the artist do is they have the equipment
and the musculature to dive deep the canaries down in the coal mine of the psyche,
but to excavate and bring back for us. I think my experience with psychedelics is
it gets you down there. It gets you down there, but the challenge of bringing it back up
is profound. It is easy to take psilocybin that is not difficult. It is very difficult
to bring back what you learn and integrate it. Yeah, I agree. Again, super salience of the
intensity of the experience that can be consumed, very little attention to the cultivation of virtue.
Right, so you have these two axes of intensity. We talked about this back in our attachment talk
of the cogside processing, but the linear integration of if this, then this, then this,
and so bringing this and this together is hard work. You need a framework.
And it cannot be done. It cannot be done alone. And so whether it is the intellectual framework,
or even better, is a relational dialogical framework in community, I think is the safest way
to proceed with this stuff. I call it a sapiential framework because I don't,
I think the word intellectual, it's the right word if we use it the way the neoplatonist used it
for noesis, but we don't use it. Sapiential? Yeah, having to do with wisdom. It's an actually
word, it's an archaic word, but I'm trying to bring it back because we need an alternative word to
both intellectual and spiritual. And this word, I think is, it is a real word.
I'm going to add it, I'm going to add it to my verbate dictionary that I'm beginning to write.
So let me, let me give you some things that you said with Mike and Michael that you laid
this out really well. You quoted or summarized Drew Highland, Platonic scholar. We are simultaneously
finite and capable of transcendence. If we embrace our finitude, or if we only, sorry,
if we just embrace our finitude, we fall prey to despair and servitude. Love that.
So I think that's our current state in many ways. And then we have, I think in some hyper-religious
communities, we have the opposite. If we just embrace our transcendence,
we fall prey to inflation and hubris. By the way, it's not just in religious communities.
There's a real danger in psychosis. Oh, totally. Totally. People think they
become the voice of God. Yes, I know. Yeah. So that's the extreme of inflation and hubris.
If we hold them together in tension, tonos, we will properly realize our humanity. I want to
say that again. If we hold them together in tension, our finitude and our transcendence,
we will properly realize our humanity. The middle path is to live in tonos.
And I think your work is, I think that's a wonderful summary of what I am experiencing
in your work as being aimed at. So here's how I think you framed the opportunity at this point
in time in our culture, or the challenge at which you said earlier. How do we metabolize
mystical experiences or experiences of the numinous? So you said opening to other dimensions
of cognition in the psyche is epistemically and morally a pursuit that we are called to.
There's this huge family of phenomena and this scientific investigation into it,
not just practices, but participatory knowing, which I think feels scary.
Proper, careful, rigorous, reflective study from the outside and the inside. Love that.
We have a moral, these are your words, we have a moral obligation to ask what is a proper framework
to bring to bear upon these experiences so that people could metabolize them
and realize them as the cultivation of virtue and wisdom. And I like this part,
and not spin them off into narcissism or inflation and go down rabbit holes of their
own personal magical medicines. I don't know, you spun that one off, it was great.
I mean, there's the idea of inflation and hubris, right? And you talked about the scientific gaze
and Michael had concern about the scientific gaze and you said it's not a dissecting gaze,
but the intention is to afford the flourishing of this practice.
So I thought I'd pause there and let you, I mean, do you want to reiterate any of that? I'm just
summarizing, I think, the big picture. No, no. I think you've made judicious choices in so far as
they capture the gist of what I was arguing for. I don't have any significant revisions or amendments
to what you've brought up. Other than the ones that have spontaneously been occurring between us.
I just, I'm happy this, I'm having this conversation, these series of conversations with you,
we get into genuine Dea logos. I'm appreciating the relationship that's growing. I just want to
say that I think that is, like you said, that is a proper safety framing of working with the
numinists in an important way. Yeah. Yeah. Thank you. I had some hallmarks of safety,
but I think we've covered a lot of it. And I'm looking at the time and just wanting to make
sure we leave space for a dropping in and an embodiment of a practice of IOS, which you have
courageously been willing to kind of join me in this. I wouldn't be doing this
if I didn't have that sense of calling. This is not, this is very, not what I'd like to do, but
I'm called. So please continue with what you wanted to emphasize. Well, I think we're called
together. I feel called to this too. Yeah, I agree. I agree. We're called very friend,
we're called together. Yeah. Yeah, that's right. Very nice. So the way that I often ask people
to enter in is to close their eyes and to check in with their body. So if I will say this before
we start to the people watching that I would encourage them to bring curiosity and compassion,
you and I hold this energy together right now. But in some weird, unexplainable way,
I think the energy of the audience matters too. I think we're both going to be a little bit,
parts of us will be afraid. Very much. And we're going to try to, you and I will try to sit with
that. And I think the more we sit with those parts, the more others will be able to and I just want
to voice my faith in that because I've seen that with you. Yeah, so let me walk you in. We'll walk
in together if you close your eyes. Check in first with your body and in the spirit of EFT,
I want to just be responsive to any areas that feel tight or unsupported,
any stretching or adjusting that needs to happen. You want me to remark on that at all or do you
want me to just do it internally? No. Yeah, just internally. In fact, most of this
is your relationship to what's happening internally to you. And I'll guide you about when
to report to me. I'll just follow your lead. Yeah, so you check in and you're just noticing
right now. So one of the things that I like to do to get centered is I like to imagine that
my ears are like my eyes. And so as I take a deep breath,
just a cleansing sort of deep breath, I bring my attention to my ears and to the soundscape around
and John, I want you to just imagine that the soundscape is much like looking at a sunset or
a painting that you're picking up the colors and the details.
You may notice things outside of your office or cars or planes or you may just notice silence.
And I'm going to ask you a trick question.
Focus on one of the noises, one of the objects that's moving through space and time around you
and ask yourself the question, is that thing that I hear right or wrong?
And of course, it's neither right nor wrong. Is it good or bad? It's neither good nor bad,
it's just there. And the spirit that we're looking for is a spirit of observation, just noticing.
We're going to bring that same attention to your inner world now.
And I want you to just take a moment to notice what you notice.
Parts may be up and about.
And parts communicate visually, images, memories, scenes. They communicate in the body with sensations,
emotions, and they communicate with words.
And then you may experience right away the presence of parts.
And I just want you before we move anywhere to just notice them and
take a deep breath as if you're breathing for the whole system, like a little bit of a gift.
And in a gentle inner voice, and if you'd like to place your hand on your chest,
I always enjoy using touch as a way of communicating, but you don't have to.
Allow your hand to be a symbol that says to them that you're here.
And in an inner voice, you can even say the words, I'm here.
I'm present. My hand is a symbol that I'm not going anywhere. This is the attachment frame that
you're available and you're present to all the parts that want to come.
And just notice how that feels before we go any further.
And I'm going to check in with you now and you can leave your eyes closed and your hands
where they are, or you can move and adjust. But just tell me a little bit about what you're
experiencing. I'm experiencing a presence that's very familiar. It's the, yeah, yeah,
guy, yeah, yeah, yeah. This is all bullshit. It's just going to be over soon. This is just a waste
of time. That voice and trying to not be put off by its arrogance. I'm trying to remain open to it.
And there may be an even another part that's put off by its arrogance. I'm trying to just
hold that aside for now. Just ask it, just wait possible. I want to hear it. I want to hear more
of this, yeah, yeah, guy. Wonderful, John. I can tell that you've practiced. I have a yeah, yeah,
yeah, guy too. And he's got a foot on the brake. And then there's another part it sounds like that
has a foot on the gas. And let me just suggest that we turn from the yeah, yeah, yeah guy for a
moment to the part that is a little frustrated with him. Can we do that? Can turn your attention.
I was going to ask over here. But I can sort of feel me. I need the gesture, but I can feel me
bringing it sort of center stage. Wonderful. Now just take a moment slowly to be with that part.
And the first question I want to ask you as you notice it is how do you feel towards it?
How do I feel?
Yeah, I feel how do I feel towards it? It's kind of a blending. It's angry at arrogance. I can't
tell that anger is the parts anger or my anger at the part. Perfect. So I want you to ask the
angry part of you to just take one step back so you can enter into dialogue with it.
Is it willing to do that? Yes. It's going to step sort of over here. It's not going to go far. It wants to watch,
but it's going to yeah, it's it's giving me a pro tem opportunity. I'll give you a bit of time.
Great. Before we pivot, I want you to say thank you to that part. We want to stay with it.
And then before we leave it, I want you now to just ask it a question of
how is it here to help you? What is its job? And just notice what it says.
Don't analyze. Just listen. Yeah, it says I'm here to prevent you from talking up because of your arrogance.
Thank you. Yeah.
Would it be willing to soften with you if it knows that you're going to turn and deal with that part
so that it doesn't have to? Would it be willing to trust a little bit? It's there's hesitancy.
But you know, does it make sense to you that it would be hesitant, John? Yeah. Yeah, it does because
there's this part here feels something tremendous about around arrogance. And this part is saying,
you know, that tremendous that that takes you got to be careful about that. And you got to be
very hard and fast reactive. That's what the anger is for. React hard and fast because this is big,
very good. So that's why it's like that. But it's it's
there's a little bit of I'll give you a bit of time with this. That's all I can get.
Excellent. So thank you. Let's let's make sure we just say thank you. And I would like to I'll let
that part know if I could speak to it. I would say that that's all we need is a little bit of space.
And that I invite it to watch. And I can hear very clearly how important its role is for protecting
John. And if it could just agree to not flood you for when we're trying this, I would like to try
an agreement that if it needs to get your attention, it would just ask and not flood you while we're
trying. Is that okay? Yeah, that that's okay. It's as long as yeah, as long as I keep my promise.
It's so there's doubt, but there's willing there's a bit. Yeah, of course. Of course,
there's doubt. How could there not be? Right. So thank you. I want you to pivot your attention
back to the yeah, yeah, yeah part now. And I want you very right off the bat to just notice
how you feel towards farther away now. He's more to you notice a little more distance and he's
sort of over here, more on the periphery. If I turn to him, he moves a little closer, but
yeah, he's sort of there now. He, I don't know, he doesn't seem quite as powerful.
Yeah, so he's, his intensity is coming out of that. He's, he's been de-escalated a bit just,
just by having some space here. Yeah, I'm now more open to practice me.
Yeah, good. Yeah, I do. Yes. Yeah. So could you stay with him? Yeah, yeah, sure. And
and bring some curiosity here, John. I want to listen to him and I want to understand
what it is he's worried about. Could you just ask him in here? That's easy. He's the yeah, yeah.
Because, right, he wants to dampen things down so we don't have to have all the,
he wants to make things boring. So I don't have all the intense emotion of this other stuff. He
calls it this other ship. He's a little bit still. So he's, yeah, well, I like him salty and he's
direct. And he's saying, he's saying that he's essentially his job is to protect you from being
flooded by all this intense shit. This stuff. That's what he, that's what he means. That,
oh, that's what he means by bullshit. He means anything that triggers this in some way.
Oh, this is great, John. Can I, what I want you to do is kind of like a therapist,
reflect that back to him and just say, do I have it right in your inner voice?
Yeah, yeah. Yeah, you got it. Yeah. Okay. Good. How are you feeling towards him now?
Kind of fun. Yeah, uh-huh. You appreciate it, right? I do. I used to get annoyed with him because I
felt he was just trivializing things that were important. Oh, he didn't like it when I brought
that up. So I, now I'm, oh, I want to apologize to him. I want you in your inner voice to notice
that you have some sadness and that you feel for him and let him know, as you apologize,
let him know what you feel towards him. Yeah, I'm just letting him know that I didn't treat him
fairly. I'm sorry for that. Yeah. Yeah. And having something important. Now I feel,
I feel that, I feel a little bit, I feel regret and a little bit of grief. Yeah. Yeah, let him know.
I am, I am. Yeah.
Yeah. He softens with that. It's like almost like my grief is a water that's softening things
between us.
I'm going to share something I'd love to hear his response to this. He hasn't felt an emotional
bond with you in a long time. And to know that his pain affects you and you feel pain
really feels reassuring and comforting to him. Yeah, that lands. There's, yeah, he feels
more trusting is all I'm getting. I can't make it clearer than that. That's right.
Yeah. I think the relationship between the two of you is healing a little bit at that moment
where I realized and it brought up genuine regret, even grief. That was completely unexpected.
Yeah. This is the, the relational component of IFS happening. It's very real. It's very real.
And it is embodied and you felt an emotion and you feeling that emotion for him. He felt that.
And the connection deepened and both of your bodies relaxed. I could see that.
Yeah. It's interesting. He, this is the part where I was talking to you about,
I don't mean it abstractly. There's, there's a capacity for self reflection. He's appreciating.
Oh, lovely. He's appreciating the capacity for self reflection.
Yeah. He's sort of, he's, so he's a little bit sorry too.
Yeah. I see expressing that too. Yeah.
This is, we're hugging each other.
It's beautiful John.
Just telling that I'm, I'm telling him I really care for him.
Yeah. That's really beautiful.
He's wrestling with something. There's strong emotion coming up between us and
his grammar, if I can use that language, is to try and resist strong emotion. So he's struggling.
Yeah. I'm just, I'm not, I'm just trying to just be with him like you are with a friend who's going
through something. I get the struggle.
Yeah.
I don't want to impinge because I feel like a lot is happening.
Well, he's going through a lot. He's like metabolizing. There's this,
this is this call to integrity. Like it's when the part,
yeah. Yeah. I want to invite you to just stay with him in whatever way you can,
whether that's visually staying close to him.
Yeah. We're just close and he knows that he's allowed to do this.
Good.
So there are a couple of questions that you don't have to answer because there's a connection
that's happening that's more important, but you could ask him what he needs from you
and see what he says right now. It's just stay with him. He says, just be with me.
Good. Just be with me. Do you feel you can do that? I mean, it's, it's tricky because
like I'm trying, I'm finding it hard to find the point of discernment between
empathizing with his pain and bleeding into it. And
so it's a little trouble with the boundary. I'm, I'm, I'm afraid that I'm owning something
that belongs to him or vice versa. So perfect, John. We're not going to leave him. He can stay
connected to you, even if it's just like holding a hand or just staying right by,
but I, but I'd like you to pivot your attention from him
to the part of you that's scared right now, scared that you're doing it wrong or scared
that you're blending, right? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Can you find that? That's rational man.
Yeah. So rational man. Now, same thing as before. Ask him to take one step back so you can dialogue
with him and then take a moment to just take him in and observe him. What does he want you to see?
Just ask him, what would you like me to witness and see what he does?
Well, his initial response is there's not enough theory here. That's what he initially says, right?
Of course. Of course. So theory is the way he keeps you safe.
It's not enough theory here. This is going off in all these directions and he's starting to do
this very analytically, starting to list. Yeah. So how do you feel towards this?
I have a friendly relationship with him. That's why when he came up, it was, it was funny.
He does a lot of good work for me and I'm appreciative. I like, I owe part of my job
to him, right? If he doesn't come in and play, you know, I can't do the work I do. So I like him.
We like each other. But he, yeah, but yeah, he, but he, like I said, he's a little, can you,
I love the relationship you have and you feel a lot of self-energy with him. It's a very,
very good relationship. So I think he's just perhaps wanting to touch base and check in with you.
Can you ask him if he needs anything from you? No, he said, he just said what Seth said.
Okay, great. I love his efficiency. Okay. So if it's okay with him, then we'll turn back to
the part we were with. Good. There's just, I'm still holding on to him over here.
There's still this very localized though, sort of processing, metabolizing, sort of
reef pain reunion. That's still running over here. That's interesting. It almost has a life of its own
over here. Yeah, the relationship continues even if you're not paying attention to it.
That's a great observation, John. So let's check in with him.
And is there anything he wants you to witness now? He's crying, but he's telling me it's good.
It's good. He's actually telling me not to get upset, which is interesting.
He's still, he's still trying to take care of you. Yeah, he is. He still cares about me,
and that's nice. And I tell him I really get the struggle he's in. This is the core of who
and what he is, right? His job. It's really clear. His job is to prevent intense emotion,
yet he needs to connect with me, and that has intense emotion attached to it. And so he's,
like, I get, like I'm telling you, telling him, sorry, I switched to talking to him directly.
Yeah, I get it. I really get it. I get what you're wrestling with, and I'm here. I get it.
So good, John. So good.
I'm going to just play a hunch and ask a question, and it could very well be no.
But would he be interested in going with you to a safe, secure, different place inside of you?
Yeah, he doesn't want to do that.
If he wants to stay where he is, okay. No problem.
He's on the edge of what he can handle.
Perfect. So I want to let him know, and you, that we are going to respect his boundaries,
and when he feels like he's at a point of saying stop, that is totally what we're going to do.
All right, I've let him know.
Okay. And I'm just going to hold this space with you, and allow that to take whatever course
it wants to take inside.
He's tired.
He's processing and bound up. He's tired and got that sense until now. He's really tired.
I find myself imagining that he's been great. He wants me to sit down too,
so I'm sitting down with him. He's really tired.
Does it make sense to you that he's tired?
Yeah, he's just been carrying this for a long time, and then confronting with this on top of it,
sort of this self-reflective awareness. It's exhausted, really tired.
His job has been exhausting.
His job has been exhausting, and he's telling me he's not upset about it, but
getting him to, like, connecting with him is also exhausting. He wants it, but it's exhausting.
So he's been in a bit of a double bind.
That's exactly it. Boy, that landed, and he feels like he's struggling. He's been struggling against
that. That makes sense.
Yeah, there's a little bit. I can hear a little bit of intensity on there, his voice.
Powerful for him to have that.
Yeah, it's like, there's this image of almost like, I can't quite draw it with my hands, but like,
there's this rope, this twisting upon itself rope thing that's binding him and I and himself
in this, like, he's trying to articulate it with an image.
That double bind is exactly right.
Good.
Oh, I feel a lot of compassion for him right now.
He's smiling.
What's coming up?
When I said that, he smiled.
Oh, some of the negative affect is calming a little bit.
Yeah, he continues to calm.
He's sort of settling in. He just wants to be with me, very calm and just be with me without all
that, without all that craziness.
What I'm getting, John, is that maybe for the first time, it feels safe for him to be connected
with you and to not be scared of getting flooded by all the intense stuff.
Yeah, there's a bit of a sense of confidence.
You said that it was the negative affect grows a little bit,
but it didn't go, it just went and it sort of hit that confidence, that shared faith.
He likes that.
He likes me saying that.
One of the things that is done in the IFS world is to, if possible, if he wants to,
where there was all that angst and fear and intensity,
a space might clear in him where he could take in calmness and confidence
and breathe that in and feel it.
Yeah, and he wants to get up and move around a little bit.
Wonderful.
He's sort of dancing.
He still hurts a little, but he's dancing.
Breathing in creativity and expression.
He's returning.
He wonders what's next.
He's returning to play.
Now that he's free of the job he wasn't supposed to have,
he can become embodied as a natural being that has its own organic nuclear agenda.
So what does he want?
Well, I had to hold rational man off for a sec.
He came in.
Sorry.
Yeah, I think I brought him in.
This needs a label.
This needs a name.
We've got to put some concepts on this.
I'll give you time later.
That's right.
That's exactly right.
He's going to come and get his turn in a minute.
So if he could step back.
He did.
Like I said, he and I have a very good working relationship.
Yeah, and when he stepped back, again, even more calmness here.
He's considering, I don't know how to put this.
So this isn't quite right, but he's considering,
can you just like putting down his job?
Like he's really open question.
Is that possible?
Yeah.
I don't like it.
So he's contemplating it.
I just go ahead.
I said, I think it is.
I'd like to help.
Yeah, he's, yeah, he, he's really, huh, he's in that state of, huh.
That's what he keeps sort of doing.
Huh, maybe.
And he's still dancing around too.
He dances and he pauses and he does that.
He does that, huh.
He's feeling into it.
Yeah, he doesn't want to rush.
That's for sure.
Well, that makes sense to me.
Yeah, me too.
Yeah, me too.
Yeah.
I, I, I just, you wanted me to forgive him.
I do it.
Get it.
Okay.
Okay.
He really needed to hear that.
Yeah, as he's considering the possibility, he's sort of sharing with me.
See all the places in your life where I was this trivializing thing.
He wants to make sure that I'm fully appreciating his job, what he's been doing.
And he's wondering if I.
Yep, that's so important.
He's wondering if I can really accept that and forgive him to that scale.
Yeah, I really can get it.
Well, he believes me, but he's still not fully settled.
Now he's sitting down again.
He wants to sit with all of this.
Yeah.
Are we getting a thing from him of that's enough for me?
I don't want to do any more.
Yeah.
Well, he has done an amazing amount of work right now.
Yeah.
I mean, really amazing.
Um, this is a point where we can just remind him that you're not going anywhere.
And that he can reach you.
He's not on the door.
On the door.
That's it.
And we want to make sure we're clear about how we can connect with you if we need to.
Through your body, through emotion, but through words would be great too.
Yeah, I'm letting him know.
Good.
So he, he's asking if I can just leave that little bit of energy running for him
so he can keep processing it.
I said, that's fine.
Wonderful.
And just, um, if it feels right to you, John, you could let him know that you'll
check back in with him later.
I'll check back in with you.
Okay.
You're doing.
And, um, you can say your goodbyes in whatever way you want to.
And then when you're ready, come on back here.
I mean, there's, well, I've always found it powerful.
That was very powerful.
It, uh, your expertise, your virtuosity was helpful.
You, you often said something that landed just beyond where I was, but landed well.
And that was very helpful.
Good.
It was pretty easy on my side to, in fact, the hardest part was just restraining myself
because the work was going so quickly.
And your system, I would say your system was very ready to do that.
So at the very end,
I had a sense of Hermes, almost like a translucent presence surrounding the whole
thing, sort of saying, well done.
That was unexpected too.
That just came.
Yeah.
Good one.
Thank you for your trust and, um, for allowing me to be with you.
Thank you.
I'd like to take the opportunity to let rational man have his, uh, his time because
there is a lot of sense making that could be powerful here,
but I don't want to do that at the expense of, um, the connection that you just established
and the experience you're having in your body right now.
So maybe we start with just checking in on how you feel.
So I really, really good.
And then right here, this little tiny sort of running that's happening and it's him.
It's not, it's not pleasant, but it's not distressing to me because
yeah, there's a moment of sort of friendship there.
I could feel this is just the metabolizing going on.
Just metabolizing, you just keep checking in with me and yep, I will, I will.
That's great.
That's great.
It's, um, I love your interception.
So, um, well, you have, uh, really developed your ability to stay relational and
dialogical and present and embody these.
So pretty good teacher.
Um, so I want to, um, take the risk and you tell me and interrupt me at any point,
if it feels like, um, it's not going intuitively where you would like to be.
Um, but I'd like to draw some things out, uh, that we've been talking about, um,
that, that I just witnessed, I think.
So the first thing I want to do is say that, um, we encountered a couple of different parts in
there. Um, a rational man clearly is a manager, um, who is in charge of keeping things safe.
And we also had this frustrated part that I think is a manager that, uh, seems to be,
also charged with keeping things safe.
Um, and I think, I think we had, uh, a bit of a firefighter there in the, uh, the bullshit detector,
who, um, both was trying to keep in a manager way, trying to keep you from being flooded,
but also responding to the flood when it would happen by kind of trying to cut it off and call
it out. Um, and what happened is as, as you brought what shorts call self-energy,
which we, we first had to clear other problems, right? We had to, we had to get them to give
you space so that you could be with him. And people will have noticed as soon as they gave
space, we didn't have to do anything. You turned back and the relationship field had changed.
He wasn't flooding you in super close. It was a little further.
Your system was deactivated and you were present and curious. And the relationship dynamics just
took hold. And I would say this is where, from my perspective as an EFT therapist and an attachment
based psychotherapist, we watched a beautiful scene of attachment unfold where it was nervous
system to nervous system. And so what I was trying to draw out was that connection that you felt
emotionally to him. And I wanted him to see it and feel that your system was connected to his.
He felt pain. You felt sad about it. Yeah. And there's a natural. So when we work with couples,
primary affect, when it comes up, when I see my partner who I love in my whole world depends on
hurting, some kind of fear comes up in me and I want to make it better. And I feel sad that they're
in pain. That is trustworthy because that can't lie. That can't be untrue. That you can't have
those automatic responses be feigned. And so that gave him an opportunity to experience something
that is truly trustworthy between the two of you. And he began to soften. And as he softened,
we had grief. But we also had the possibility of something new emerging.
And I agree with everything you said. But there's that there was and I wasn't imposing it.
There's that there's a Socratic aspect of him coming to try to live by the principle.
Like that's when he got into the double bind. That's a Socratic aporia, right? And he got into,
oh, oh, oh, oh, there was a, ah, right. And that was, that was, I thought, thought really important
too. And the part of me that didn't want to do too, I like part of what I've been learning in my
practice is to stay with aporia rather than try to, and that's rational man coming in to try, let's
get this, come on, like, and no, let's hold that back. Stay with the aporia, really stay with
the aporia, give it some autonomy, let it unfold as it needs to.
Or in this case, what I heard was he began to try to work with a symbol. Yes, yes, yes.
And that something needed to loosen and kind of become untied. I think he came to the possibility
that emotions are not inherently dangerous. It was, that's that kind of realization,
and that he actually wanted an emotional connection with me. And he was, I mean, yeah.
So that is, no, no, no, please. For me, that was, that was like, that was a real,
that felt like a profound moment because it was him, like, getting it. Like, he was like,
it's like the existential confront. He was confronted by, you know, a kind of intercontradiction,
like, no, no, I want an emotion. And it's not so it can't be that they're inherently bad.
But my job is to dampen down emotion. And that was the knot. And I felt that that, and I've had,
I'm surmising, because now we're doing theoretical reflection, that my practice
in dialectic and Dialogos of being apophatic and staying with Aporia came in to help me there,
because it helped me also keep rational man over there. And it helped me, okay, you need to,
I can't unravel this for you. Right. But I can be here with you and say, I'm going to support you
and empathize with you as you try to do, even as I'm saying that right now, this is getting calmer.
So in IFS, we'd say that's self energy, that compassion, curiosity, courage, creativity,
calmness, connected. That's the socratic spirit for me.
Well, and there are five, I always forget there are five P's as well as the eight C's. And I wrote
them down here. Patience, perspective, which I think is a lot of this, presence, persistence,
no, no, no, rational man, playfulness. This is all. I think this self energy can be helped by people
if they have a practice of internalizing a sage. I think that would help
concretize it so they can enact it better. So
this is, this is the guide idea. And that your attachment with Hermes, not a coincidence that
appears at the end, as he is, he's blessed very much. That's the word. And that's the word. Exactly.
I feel very happy right now.
Who's that lovely?
Can I just, one thing that I really want to kind of draw out here is we talked about
parts having attachment styles. And I heard, primarily I heard in it, an anxious attachment
style that, that, and the, the, oh, oh, was his dropping into security. Maybe for the first time.
I love this. I love the attitude in the IFS and attachment. I mean, the EFT and the attachment,
that's, oh, it's so good. But John, listen to this. This is the definition in my mind of
secure attachment is about the ability to process emotion. It's that emotion, emotion is not a
threat. It's data. It's data. And you and he were learning to interpret the data together.
That it is not flooding, but it can be, I can actually feel it and use it and symbolize it,
feel it in the body, symbolize it in a way it can be understood, be responded to,
feel regulated, four steps to attachment. That was beautiful. Yeah. Feel it, symbolize it,
often in language, be responded to accurately in a way that works, be soothed, that repeated,
creates a secure attachment style. And that's what you were doing with it. Yeah.
He'd never done it, John. No, of course not. He'd never done it. Of course he hadn't, right?
But you got, and we got to witness the transformation that like that kind of presence and love,
Billy. That brings sadness to me.
Did he never felt it? No. And we're, it's almost a sharing. I have,
I think my attachment style as John is one of anxious attachment. And that has caused me
a tremendous amount of loss and suffering and put relationships at risk. So that just came back
to me very powerfully. Of course. So I feel for him even more, but it brings up that sort of
anxious empathy around, yeah, I know how bad this could be.
It also makes sense to me when you say that, why he would be so
curious and scared about your ability to forgive him. Exactly. That's exactly right.
That's exactly right. He knows he's cost you. Yeah.
Yeah, that lands very deeply, very deeply right here.
But it's not his fault. Yeah. Nope. Yeah. He gets that. Yeah. Good.
And this is why IFS represents one of the best technologies that we have in our endeavors
of, you know, dealing with the meeting crisis. And it's very exciting.
This idea of creating or not creating, sorry, accessing self-energy.
I use Inventio. I use Inventio. Imaginal Inventio. You're discovering and making,
and it's a mixture. It's Inventio because it's transjective. It can't be either discovery or
making. It has to be Inventio. And it's imaginal. And in your experience, we have an even fuller
demonstration with the, with Hermes coming as a transjective object, that he brings the
eight C's and the five P's into the system in a way that maybe you couldn't access before.
And that is, that's the larger self, kind of the, he's creating this bridge to,
I was going to say, I didn't, I didn't, I make a difference between asking something from him
and invoking his presence. I didn't invoke his presence because I didn't, I wanted to,
and so I didn't do that, but I asked for his help in the practice that I could come into it as
authentically as possible. And you did? Yeah. I experienced Hermes as holding space there.
That's where he was. And that's, that's where he was in the final image. He's like, there's,
I don't know why there's sort of a hillside behind, and he's like, and it's that
translucent figure. Yeah. Very much. I didn't, I, yeah, I didn't get that until you said it,
but the translucency was a way of presencing the transjectivity. Excellent. Excellent observation
set. Ah, I love that. I love that. Yeah. Yeah. The psychopomp, the movement through that he embodies
a kind of liminal transitionality. What was wonderful about that presencing is often when
I'm working with him, we have to sort of scrape away automatic projections going on to him,
given to me by my fundamentalist past. That wasn't there at all. This was one of the,
this was like pure presence and it was quite wonderful, quite wonderful, beautiful, even sublime.
I think I'd point out one other thing that is really important, and that is that there was
such a strong relational element to the work between you and I as we did this. And that
that was not work that, you know, you were doing by yourself, but it was in dialogue going this way
and going internal and maybe going this way hermetically. And I think that creates
a picture of safety that we can reference when we talk about encountering the numinous as a way
of kind of accessing wisdom, that it is connected in all these directions. And that feels, it feels
like the container, you know, that's needed. Yeah. Yeah. That's landing very deeply for me. And for
me, I see it as containers within containers. This is the container. And then it sits into a larger
4E Neoplatonic framework. And like, yeah, there's there's these nestings. And but they're not
ossified and hard. They're like, they're like cellular membranes. I had one other question for
you about how old was he? He was a 25 to 30 year old man. Okay, interesting. He got a little bit
younger as the practice went on.
I was wondering about that because he had exile qualities. And we haven't talked about exiles,
but he was clearly carrying a lot of pain and exhaustion, guilt and anger and sadness, a lot of
like the anxious attachment stuff that, yeah, he began to release in his way.
It was interesting. I kind of wanted to go that way as John, but no, that was not,
that wasn't going to happen. That was not going to happen. He was, that's not, it was, he needed,
he needed to dwell. That's the word I was looking for. He needed to dwell here for a while.
That, I mean, reminds me dwelling at home. He needed to feel at home. Yeah.
Well, I know like 1115 was our hard stop or 1215 year time. You normally give me the last word,
but I'm wondering if you would like it. Yeah, let's break with that tradition just for this one
time. First of all, thank you for that. And I think the integrity of the practice as a container
and as a vehicle is both a container and a vehicle. I think that was apparent. It was
spontaneously there. I didn't have to force it. It had, it was Dow. It wasn't, right? And
it's important to,
important to share this responsibly. I agree with you. And all these
dialogical practices, I think, well, we'll talk about, I want to talk about them now. I want to
talk about the next one. What does that mean? Because I think they push on deeper frameworks.
That's why I talked about the 4E and the cognitive, 40 cognitive science and neoplatism,
because we're really challenging the buffered self. And I think, and I don't know how this
works. So this is a question. I want to know how these, I'll use a convoluted thing. I don't know
how these cultural spirits interact with these psychological parts. Like we've got
inculturation towards the buffered self. And we get social reinforcement and salience
incentivizing around it. And that's a deeply internalized machine that it's almost transparent.
And I think in practice, we press up against that when we're doing these kinds of practices.
But for me, I feel especially, because I bring this whole framework of
reflectively trying to philosophically trying to challenge the monadic,
monophasic, monological, mono stage self, that it's very amplified for me, that sense,
that deeper sense of what is it like. And that didn't come up here, because there was enough.
But it's coming up now as I step back from it. It's like as it's percolating through my psyche.
It's like, yeah, but like, what is it to challenge that cultural spirit and challenge
it in a way that integrates with what's happening with these psychological parts?
That's a question that I have. So I'd reflect as I feel like rational man.
And is now, you know, we talked about, I think that the theme for today was that the imaginal
is crucial to being rational. And he's picking it up. I feel like this practice you just engaged in
has clarified something for him that he now has sharper questions.
I think that's exactly right. I think that's exactly right.
Okay, yeah, that's something. Thank you for all of this. And we'll set up another
episode because I do want to explore some of these themes around danger and framework and cultural
spirit versus psychological part. If I could just coin those terms as the whole two things
conceptually different for a while. Oh, yeah. And so I invite you to come back for a fourth episode.
Jen, well, I tell you, yeah, thank you. And I would love to. It's wonderful to dialogue with you
and to gift. And I'm very excited if you choose to share it. I'm going to upload this. Wonderful.
I know this may seem like a very shame less or shameful plug.
But because the spirit of this is to, you know, promote these practices,
we are going to offer the attachment workshop and the IFS workshop again through
coming up. Please, everybody, you see what this can do. Okay. So, you know, you've got an amazing
opportunity with Seth. Please make use of it. I'm going to end the recording here, Seth. Thank
you so much. Thank you, Jen.
