All right, so we have my regular 1 plus 6t and in this box is the McLaren edition 1 plus 6t
so let's see how different they look. I'm not gonna do a really long video on this one
but just reviewed it like two days ago. Finally bought a wood knife. The box is on the channel.
Using the cut, nothing to cut. Oh, we only got to use the knife once, Lane. Whoa. That is pretty
freaking sick. Hold up, hold up here. Wow. This box presentation is pretty sick. What is under
here? First person perspective. Dedicated to those in constant pursuit of speed. Relentless. This guy,
Belgian Grand Prix. Okay, interesting. Fearless Challengers. I don't know who any of these people
are. We'll read that later for Cares. Vision of reality. Taken out in the world. Gleashing
inner champions. That looks kind of important and big. MCL 33, the Formula 1 car or something,
I think. Yeah, looks like it, okay. 1 plus 6t, McLaren edition inspired by F1. 50% of better
in 20 minutes. Interesting. Look at that. 10 gigabytes of RAM. That sounds crazy. Whoa. Oh,
what in the world. And here it is. Speed. Speed. That's cool. It's got like this little carbon fiber
thing on it. Little pattern in the glass. Oh, they do have little McLaren intro. I missed it. That
was dope. So I'm just trying to figure out if this case, it looks like carbon fiber.
I doubt it's real carbon fiber though. Like, don't get me wrong. It's lightweight and all,
but I don't think it's real carbon fiber. Little carbon fiber McLaren logo in there. It looks pretty
sick. All right, guys. So again, like I stated in the beginning of the video, this was not really
to be like another review of 1 plus 6t because it's pretty much the same phone as a couple more
gigs of RAM and double the storage. That's pretty much the only difference. The RAM, you don't really
notice it at all. Like when you're using the phone. So, you know, it's not really any different
than the other one. Now, the battery life on the 1 plus 6t as a whole is really good. It's about
on par with an iPhone 10 s max or an iPhone 10. Basically, it'll last you about a full eight hour
day of like constant use. I'll say maybe about four to four and a half hours of screen on time
with the warp charging. The warp charging is a little bit faster than the dash charging.
It comes with a regular 1 plus 6t. So it's definitely noticeable. You can get very close to
getting that 50% of about 25 minutes. So it's pretty noticeable. You know, you can definitely
tell that it is working day to day. He has a really good video if you want to see how the warp
charging really works in comparison to the dash charging. But yeah, the 1 plus 6t McLaren edition.
It is a really beautiful phone. I'm actually really glad that they came out with it. I like it a lot.
The orange accents are really nice. The touches that they put on the accessories too, like the
black and orange accessories that come with the phone, like even the headphone jack dongle,
they matched it too. Like it was really, really nice. So the whole presentation of the phone was
beautiful. Yeah, I hope that they do something like this with maybe other manufacturers. Like
I know Porsche already has like their own Porsche design phone. I think I've seen like Lamborghini,
they've made a phone with someone before. So I guess it was just McLaren's turn.
And I wonder what's going to happen next. But all right, guys, if you guys enjoyed this video,
please be sure to drop a like, subscribe if you guys are new, and I will catch you guys in the next video.
