Hi everybody, I'm Professor Alan Edelman and I'm pretty excited to be welcoming you to the very first Pluto con.
I think that what France has been doing with Pluto is innovative and exciting and I've been enjoying working with Pluto ever since I figured out how to use the same variable name twice.
So I've got about 15 minutes. What I thought I would do is tell you a little bit about how I'm using Pluto, just kind of a sample.
I think you'll see some more of that in the next set of lectures.
But here, let me sort of share my screen and just take you through some of this stuff.
Okay, so hopefully my screen is now visible and I can kind of put this up.
And a couple of things I wanted to mention, just to set the stage really.
The most exciting thing is this class at MIT that's actually live.
Some of you may already be watching this.
If not, you might want to join us.
The next lecture is one o'clock Eastern on Monday.
This is MIT Introduction to Computational Thinking and we see this as what Pluto is enabling us to do is make a live textbook.
So you can click on the sections in the chapters and go through it.
And what's really fun is that the sliders work, right?
And so here we can enable the webcam, right?
And you can, you know, these sorts of things and you can do fun things like this.
And so this is, you know, this has sort of been my dream of a live textbook and we're making it happen thanks to Pluto.
So by all means, come take a look.
You could see some of the things we're doing.
I find it interesting when I explain to my colleagues how this is different from a standard course.
And it's kind of hard to find the words to express what Pluto lets you do.
It's almost like you have to go in there and experience it to understand that, you know, normal teaching.
Well, what happens?
I mean, I think that the prototype of normal teaching is you have a lecture in front of a blackboard until the pandemic anyway, getting in front of a classroom and describing an algorithm or a mathematical idea or statistical idea, you know, whatever the subject.
And then maybe there's an in-class demo or maybe the student goes home and does the homework.
And of course, it's well known that students learn better if they engage in the subject, if they interact with the subject.
If their curiosity is aroused.
It's a whole different thing.
And there's no question, though, that students don't want to sit back and listen to lectures quite the same way anymore.
So, you know, we feel that this is, you know, allowing students to do exactly that.
They can start fiddling with things, sliding and seeing what happens.
There's my dog, Phillip.
You know, and this makes a big, big difference to be able to do live teaching, so to speak, you know, where live means that the student is engaged in the process from the very, very beginning.
So, but of course, if you're using Pluto, you already know what I'm saying.
So, you know, I'm probably speaking to the choir here, but it's really just so incredible to be able to do these sorts of things.
So, I wanted to share with you two notebooks.
One is not in the class and the second one is.
So, this one I made actually because I have a problem in my house.
Okay, I have, this is the snow avalanche notebook.
I put up solar panels a year ago.
I want it to be good for the environment, you know, all the good reasons for using snow panels.
The snow panels went up in the fall.
And then in the winter, I found out that, and I'll click on this YouTube video, that snow puddles, snow falls off the snow panels.
I'm in Boston, Massachusetts, where we get lots and lots of snow.
Snow falls off the snow panels much faster than ordinary roofs.
They actually violently fall off with an avalanche.
And I really don't want the postman or whoever might just happen to be in front of my house at the wrong time to get hurt or injured or even killed.
So, I couldn't find anything online that explains sort of the physics of it all.
So, I just whipped up some freshman physics and I drew this picture for the contractor who I was speaking to, trying to explain that, you know, here's the snow falling off my roof.
And, you know, it's going to follow this, I presume, this parabolic, you know, this is, I mean, this is the simple physics.
All there is is gravity and, you know, and, well, it's actually only gravity, right?
I'm assuming this is friction-free.
So, it's just gravity falling off the roof of the house and then seeing, you know, where it would land.
And I could tell you from experience that the snow falls quite far in front of the house.
And the contractors that I work with, they don't believe it because they don't have any experience.
You know, ordinary roofs have friction and so the snow kind of just pops down where it falls.
But solar panels are different.
So, I assume that this is probably the physics of the situation.
It's not like I did any measurements.
But before I measured the height of my house or the slope of my roof, I just made it a variable because it was easy to do, right?
And so, the defaults, I think, are what my own house is.
And so, if you click on this, you actually get the defaults here.
Well, I assume I'll get the defaults.
But in any event, and so I was able to share this with my contractor who thought that this was kind of cool anyway.
So, that was one thing.
One use I did of Pluto.
It was just so much fun.
I mean, it's not very long.
I mean, the plotting is probably more than the math.
But, yeah, this was one fun thing that I did.
And now, I'd like to sort of move over to the class and mention, I mean, there's so many fun things I could show you.
But I'm just going to pick one of my favorite, which is this 1.5, which is Transformations 2, right?
And I think you all know how to just run these things yourself, right?
I mean, my favorite way is to copy this URL directly into the Pluto box when you start, right?
And that's all you need to do.
So here's this notebook.
And I made this notebook because I often teach linear algebra, OK?
I love linear algebra.
If you guys like linear algebra, that's great.
If you don't like linear algebra, well, maybe you'll like it now.
But I think that it takes too long to figure out what the real meaning of a matrix is.
And I guess people could disagree as to what the real meaning of a matrix is.
But as far as I'm concerned, the real meaning of a matrix is the ability to change these numbers.
And I'm using one of these Pluto scrubbables.
And hopefully, you can see the picture below what happens.
So I've got this picture of three corgis.
This isn't my corgi, but it's just a random picture on the internet with three corgis.
And I change the coefficients in the matrix, the elements of the matrix, and you can see these different linear transformations, right?
And so to me, this is the true meaning of a matrix, right?
It's a linear transformation, in this case, of this image, of a 2 by 2 image, of an image in two-dimensional space, right?
And of course, you could put in the grid lines.
And so you can see the square is becoming parallelograms.
I make it so you can have a circular frame.
Here, let's get rid of the, right?
And then you can see the circles become ellipses, right?
It's very clear that the outer frame is becoming ellipse, OK?
But, you know, when you take a linear algebra class, you know what, nobody ever tells you?
Nobody ever tells you what's nonlinear, right?
Every time you take a linear algebra class, you see these linear transformations,
and nobody even shows you a nonlinear transformation.
And it seems to me that how can you understand something if you can't kind of have an example of what it's not?
And so what's nice to do is actually to take a nonlinear transformation, right?
And so here is a nonlinear shearing, right?
And so this is kind of an example of a nonlinear shearing, right?
But what's fun is I could just change these anytime.
For example, another nonlinear transformation is a warping, right?
So here's a warping, and you could see that, you know, the corgi is basically going into the washing machine.
There's the spin cycle, if you will, right?
And so it's just nice to see nonlinear transformations.
And of course, you know, you can talk about with the grid lines, you could see how these are,
the parallelograms are no longer congruent anymore, right?
You get these different, you know, I mean, they're not even small enough to even look like parallelograms.
But so you could see what a nonlinear transformation looks like.
So you could appreciate what linearity does for you, right?
So this seems like an important thing, and I could go on and explain the value of a determinant that that means the area.
And if it's a nonlinear transformation, you get the Jacobian, the determinant of Jacobian, which is sort of the local area,
you know, the factor that goes into the area.
And then, you know, another fun one is the perspective transformation, because people think perspective is linear, right?
Oh, this is crazy.
Yeah, let's let me reset these so that let's go to zero just so we can see what we're starting with.
And, you know, let's, whoops, I forgot how to reset this to zero.
But five, two, one.
Anyway, you know, let's, okay, now we start to look more normal now, right?
Almost.
Oh, this H is too small.
That's the problem.
Okay, let's turn off.
I love playing with these things.
Let's turn off the circular frame.
So there's some corgis and perspective.
And of course, because this is Pluto, you could even change the images you're working with.
So for example, the class is being taught with three professors, and you can see them here.
This is Dave Sanders.
Some of you may know Dave.
Yeah, let's bring this back up.
So there's Dave Sanders teaching the MIT class with me.
And there's my Corgi Phillip, who's the most important professor.
He's the greatest.
The students love him the most.
He gets the best reviews.
And, and then we, you know, we could talk about these, you know, perspective transformations, right?
And these are nonlinear technically, and, you know, you could get to talk about why they're nonlinear.
They feel like they're linear, but, but in fact, they're nonlinear.
So maybe I'll just conclude.
I mean, there's a lot I could show you.
This is so much fun.
But I really think that this, you know, just to repeat myself, I really think that this is a great way.
Pluto is just incredible for engaging students to really live a subject.
Increasingly, what I feel is a student could sort of experience the phenomenon before drilling down to what an object is, right?
You, you don't have to put it on the blackboard first before a student can interact and experience the phenomenon.
You can, you can live the phenomenon.
And then you can go and explain the, you know, the math, the physics, the statistics, whatever it is you're doing.
And, and that's a game changer.
I think that's just so incredibly valuable.
So very, very important.
And, and, and in any event, you know, the students enjoy it, but even more is this professor loves it.
In fact, they sometimes find myself unable to stop playing with these things because it's so much fun.
And I guess I'm hoping that, that, you know, the students feel exactly the same way.
All right.
Well, that's basically my 15 minutes.
So I'll stop sharing and funds.
I'm just going to applaud you for, you know, for, for making this all happen.
Philip wants to escape.
There's my cookie.
You know, I'm going to applaud you for making this happen.
And I look forward to all the exciting things that are going to come in Pluto very soon, especially debugging.
Right.
I want to be able to debug more.
And I want to get rid of begin and so I'll just put it out there.
It's on the list.
It's on the list.
That's fantastic.
All right.
So good luck funds and have a great conference.
Thanks.
All right.
Thank you.
Let's go on to the next talk by Paul Butler.
I'm sure to join the discord chat to ask questions.
