Most children don't even know
what the traditional virtues are, courage, for example.
These are virtues.
These are things that you can actually cultivate as habits.
And because education is supposed to be value neutral,
and it's left to people's religion
or private conscience or family or something,
most people don't get any religious teaching
anymore at home or in a church or anywhere else.
And some school teachers would be afraid
to teach any of these things for fear of being accused
of imposing their personal subjective values
or ideology on children.
So the result is there's a kind of moral vacuum.
And it's very harmful, I think.
Welcome to Rethinking Education.
Education's critical friend.
Rupert Sheldrake, welcome to the Rethinking Education podcast.
Good to be with you.
It's great to have you with me.
It's making me smile, sort of, saying that out loud
because I've been very immersed in your books recently.
I've read a few of them and listened to quite a few
and I've listened to quite a few of your podcasts
and other podcasts that you've been on.
And so it feels a little bit surreal
to be speaking with you.
So it's lovely to be able to spend some time.
So I reached out because I've been, as I say,
I've been reading lots of your work and really enjoying it.
And there were a couple of books that you wrote quite recently,
one called Science and Spiritual Practices
and Ways to Go Beyond and Why They Work.
And although they don't really speak directly to education,
it feels to me like there are some sorts of educational implications
to the things that you're writing about.
And so I'm quite curious to see where this conversation goes,
but yeah, we'll see what happens.
But what I often like to do in this podcast
is to get to know the guests and obviously for our listeners
and viewers to get to know you if they're not familiar with you.
So could you please, firstly,
just give a very sort of brief introduction to yourself
for anybody who may not be aware of your work so far?
I'm a biologist and I spent my, almost my entire career
as a practicing scientist.
I was educated at Cambridge to start with.
I did history and philosophy of science at Harvard.
Then I did a PhD in Plant Biochemistry at Cambridge
and I was a Don and Director of Studies,
a fellow of Clare College in Cambridge.
So I had a kind of academic science training and practice.
Then I felt I wanted a rather more adventurous life
than just going on being a Don at Cambridge.
And I had a job in India
in an International Agricultural Institute
working on the improvement of chickpeas and pigeon peas.
I was called the principal plant physiologist.
And I was running field experiments
and working with a team on crop improvement plant breeding
to improve agriculture
for some of the poorest farmers in the world.
When I was in India,
I was got very interested in Indian traditions.
I did yoga and meditation.
I had a Sufi teacher for a while in Hyderabad,
which is where I lived.
And then one is at Cambridge,
I had an idea called Morphic Resonance.
I'll come back to that, the idea of memory and nature.
I wanted to write a book on it.
So I left my job for a while
and lived two years in an ashram,
a Christian Benedictine ashram
on the bank of a sacred river
in Tamil Nadu in South India.
So I lived in this,
I had a very happy time living in this,
very simply in this community.
And then I came back to England basically
and worked part-time in India.
My first book, A New Science of Life
came out in 1981, was quite controversial.
Since then, I've been doing research,
mainly in biology,
but also in rather underexplored areas of psychology,
including parapsychology.
I've written quite a number of books.
I'm still very active in scientific research.
I think six or seven papers last year
in peer-reviewed scientific journals,
I'm working on two or three more at the moment.
So I'm very active in this area.
Right, thank you.
That's really interesting.
And so, yeah, you're right.
We will come back to that stuff later on.
I think that it makes sense,
in your case, to start at the beginning.
And so I'd like to take you back
to your own experience of school.
What, where did you go to school?
What kind of school did you go to?
I was born and bred in New York on Trent,
in Nottinghamshire,
and my father was a pharmacist and a herbalist.
And when I was born in 1942,
and so soon after the war,
he and a group of other parents set up
an independent school,
because they didn't think that the state one was very good,
and started an independent day school,
primary school in New York,
which I went to called Highfields,
called New York Preparatory School.
So I think I was well taught
in sort of basic education there,
sort of all the basic things you do at primary school.
And then at the age of 10,
when I've done the 11 plus and so on,
but my parents sent me to a boarding prep school,
which was the Preparatory School
for WorkSomp College,
independent school in Nottinghamshire.
So I was at this prep school called Ranby House
for three years,
which being away from home at the age of 10,
was seemed normal at the time,
but no, I think of it as really rather odd.
And then I was an all boys boarding school,
WorkSomp College,
50 boys sleeping in the same room
in a big dormitory,
somewhat military type discipline,
corporal punishment, compulsory cadet force,
compulsory rugby six days a week,
whatever the weather.
So it was a classic minor public school,
authoritarian, disciplinarian,
fagging, prefects, you know, all that sort of thing.
And how did you find that?
Because for lots of people now,
that would sound just horrendously austere
and that it might be considered to be borderline abusive.
Yes, well, I just took it for granted, you know,
I just, this is how it was.
This is in the 1950s.
I left school in 1959.
And at the time,
most schools had corporal punishment
and, you know, boarding schools.
Basically, it was soon after the war.
Many of the masters, it was a boys-only school.
Many of the masters had been in the war,
you know, the army or the air force.
And so there was definitely this post-war feeling about it
and discipline was important, you know.
And so, well, I didn't particularly like all that
and it didn't suit me temperamentally very well.
And then the emphasis in the school was on,
the highest prestige went to boys who were good at rugby
and games and it was rather anti-intellectual atmosphere.
Right. I got very well taught though
because most of the teachers,
when they found someone who was actually interested
in learning and curious and wanted to know more,
which I did,
they responded in a way that I felt
I got a really good teaching from really good teachers.
So I felt I was very well taught there.
The social atmosphere of the school
and stuff didn't suit me very well.
And, you know, wasn't very keen on compulsory rugby
on days when it was, the ground was frozen
and when you were tackled,
you sort of, the frozen earth cut into causing bleeding
and stuff.
I mean, all that stuff.
It was designed to toughen us up.
And into building they would have called it, hey.
Yes, they called it character building, yes.
And toughening us up.
And I think it did toughen me up.
You know, a lot of things in life after that
seemed pretty mild by comparison with school.
However, once I got,
I won a scholarship to Cambridge
and in those days you had to stay on for a third year
in the sixth form to do Cambridge scholarship
or entrance exams.
But as soon as I got that, I left
and I got a job in London as a lab technician
and like a gap here before I went to Cambridge.
So, you know, I had a kind of classic education
of that very old fashioned or boys type.
Yes, and was it always going to be science for you?
Was it science from a young age?
Yes, my father was an amateur microscopist.
He had a microscope lab at home.
He taught me the names of plants.
I kept lots of pets, animals, tortoises, pigeons, a rabbit,
mice, hamster, a jackdaw.
You know, I had a lot of animals, pets, budgerigars.
We had a dog.
So I was very really into plants and animals.
That's why I did biology.
And then through my, actually a kind of,
brought out kind of rebellious streak in me
because I noticed that the first thing we did
in biology classes was to kill things who were studying
and then cut them up.
There was a lot of dissection in those days in biology.
And then the job I had in the lab,
I was so keen to get experience,
I wanted to be a scientist lab experience.
For my gap nine months,
I wrote round various drug companies saying,
you got a job for a temporary lab technician.
And one of them wrote back and said, yes,
someone's just left and so I got the job.
And then I found I was the most junior technician
in a vivisection facility.
And it was my job to gas all the animals that survived
the experimentation and toxicity tests
at the end of every day.
And so I was basically operating a gas oven
for a kind of animal holocaust,
which was appalling because I'd gone
and loved animals.
And so it set up a tension in me
between kind of mechanistic science,
animals are just machines,
plants are just machines,
we're just objectively dealing with mechanisms.
And the fact I actually loved animals,
that's why I was doing biology.
So it made me much more questioning of what I was taught
when I got to Cambridge than I might otherwise have been.
And yeah, interesting.
I had a very similar experience, you know,
I worked as a lab technician while I was at university
and it was in a very sort of non-scientific role,
but it was a lab at UCL where actually
that was when I very first saw you
because you did a talk at UCL, but back in the 90s.
But yeah, I had to go and collect the animals
in the animal house and dispose of their carcasses.
And I used to see them on electrophysiology rigs,
like a rat with its sort of brain open
and loads of wires going into it.
And it's sort of anesthetized and it's really just,
I don't even know what word you could describe,
but it's sort of just grotesque.
Like it's really an unpleasant thing to see happening
and in just such an everyday thing,
you just go through dozens of animals a day in that way, you know.
Exactly. Well, you see, there's something about the,
it was like a rite of passage.
I mean, like medical students at university
have to dissect, I think they still do it,
dissect a human corpse.
It forces you to become emotionally detached
in a way that most biologists and medics
have done something they've gone through,
produces this kind of unnaturally detached attitude to life,
which is necessary if you're going to have
a mechanistic theory of life.
Well, even if you're a non-mechanistic doctor,
it's good to know the anatomy.
And I suppose doing dissections is the best way of learning it.
But the, anyway, for me, this was a,
it plays an important part.
I liked the practical exams on the whole.
I liked practical, I mean, practical, lab practicals
in physics and chemistry very much,
because I really enjoyed learning through doing.
And there's less of that in science education
now than there used to be.
But learning through doing seems to be really, really important.
Science was almost the only thing,
apart from physical education,
where you could learn through doing when I was at school.
Yes.
Yeah, absolutely.
It's something that I resonate with as a former science teacher.
We just had this brief conversation
before we started recording.
But yeah, the learning through doing,
the kids would love practicals.
They would always turn up to a lesson and say,
oh, we're doing a practical today.
And then your heart would see, thinking,
well, you are doing a practical,
but that practical involves following a series
of five instructions.
And if there's no mystery in it,
it's not really learning by sort of experientially
finding stuff out.
It's just that you're following a preset procedure
and then you need to wash your equipment away
and go and write it up in this pre-specified way.
And so the learning by doing stuff really wasn't happening.
Yeah, I agree.
That's not happening to the extent that it should.
Incidentally, the writing up thing,
again, the traditional way of writing scientific papers,
a test tube was taken, the passive voice.
Yeah.
I was taught to do that.
I learned how to do it.
But when I got to Cambridge
as writing real scientific papers,
I found that most of my colleagues
didn't do that anymore as it had gone out of fashion.
But when my son Merlin, who's now a well-known mycologist,
wrote a wonderful book called Entangled Life,
it's a school here in Hampstead
at University College School.
He wrote brilliant science reports
when he was in primary school
and when he got to secondary school,
they were all written,
they actually said a test tube was taken,
it was carefully heated with the substance in it
and then smelled.
And so, as if some disembodied being had smelled it.
And so I said, Tim, why is your science report
written in this incredibly artificial old fashioned style?
He said, that's the way you've got to write science reports.
And he showed me a specimen sheet.
His teacher had given them and he learned it.
I then took this up with the science teacher
and said, you don't really need to do this.
You know, real scientists don't do this.
And he didn't know that.
He said, what a relief.
And started teaching the active voice.
I then did a survey of secondary schools in Britain
of the heads of science, about 200 schools.
And of them, about 30% of state schools
were teaching enforcing the passive voice
and about 60% of independent schools.
And some state school teachers said, you know,
it's hard enough to get my students
to write anything at all.
He said, so I can't force them to,
unfortunately, I can't force them to use the passive voice
because they wouldn't understand what it is.
He felt he was a failure for not enforcing the passive voice.
And I showed this to the president of the Royal Society,
Lord May, who was president at the time.
He was appalled.
He said, no one should be forced to write
in the passive voice.
He said, in this day and age,
it's a sure hallmark of second grade science.
And nature started editing scientific papers
into the active voice at least 30 years ago.
And I did a survey of scientific journals.
I only found one out of 50 that insisted on the passive voice.
And that was a minor and rather obscure journal.
Isn't it interesting?
And I've noticed a similar pattern.
I now read more social science than natural science,
but that same sort of format where people, for example,
if they refer to their own previous work,
they would say Manian 2019 wrote such and such
as though Manian was somebody else rather than me.
Yes.
It feels like you're trying to create this illusion
that you are an impassive pair of eyeballs
or consciousness that is just sort of objectively
noting down reality and your own situated nature
is just sort of erased out of it.
And it just seems like it's a ludicrous conceit
and that it's unhelpful, really.
It is.
It is a ludicrous conceit.
And I mean, science is done by people.
And an experiment is something you actively do.
It's not something that unfolds in front of you
that passive observer looking at nature
through a plate glass window.
So anyway, I think one thing that there are still,
I did another survey just about five years ago
and I found there were still a lot of teachers
enforcing this, not because they believe in it,
but because they think they ought to.
And I checked with all the examination boards,
you know, ed, Excel, you know, whatever our essay
or whatever they are, the different examination boards,
Oxford and Cambridge,
and not one of them required passive reports.
They most of them said they were neutral.
And so no one's insisting on it.
Certainly journal editors aren't insisting on it.
And yet there are still a quite a number
of science teachers who are insisting on it.
Those who gave it up as a result of our surveys
and an article I wrote in the school science review
and a new scientist about this.
A lot of them gave up doing it and said, what a relief.
Yeah, there's a sort of, there's a new version of this
or there's sort of slight variation on it,
which is that there's this endless focus in school science
about independent and dependent variables
and control variables.
And we try to sort of to teach this from year seven upwards
that, you know, there's the thing you change
and that's the independent variable.
And then there's the thing you measure.
That's the dependent.
And then there's the control variables.
And as an adult, it's quite easy to grasp that.
But as an 11 year old, it's really not.
And you spend absolutely hours and hours and hours
going over this.
And, you know, I later worked at Harvard Medical School
in a big multi-disciplinary lab.
Nobody ever once mentioned like independent,
what's the independent variable in this?
It's just not what people,
it's just not the language that people talk about.
And it was just turning people off of science.
And I came across a really interesting thing a while ago.
I don't know if you've come across a guy called Ivor Goodson
who is an education social researcher.
And he uncovered this really interesting bit of history
that was in the 19th century,
there was a thing called the science of common things.
And it was very much sort of, you know,
about exploring the local fauna and flora
and just doing hands-on practical stuff,
learning by doing, like you say.
And there was Lord somebody or other.
I'll send you the link to this thing after this quality fight
because it's really interesting to read.
Who did a report and a survey and he went around schools
and he went to a school and was speaking to this young,
to this kid, not from a public school,
who had been doing this science of common things.
And he said that this child issued forth an answer
of such eloquence and insight
that far exceeded his station in life, you know,
because he was this sort of emaciated little oik
from the street corner.
And so he went back and wrote this report
and essentially said, we need to change the language
and to change the way that science education is presented.
And it's now this sort of that is watered down version
of laboratory science using things
like the passive voice like you say.
And there's lots of stuff about test tubes
and conical flasks and things that don't exist
in people's kitchens or lives.
And it sort of all became removed
and we still have that to this day, you know.
I know very much the detriment
of actual understanding of nature.
You know, one thing I mentioned,
you mentioned in our preliminary conversation is that,
you know, when learning about the stars
and learning about the heavens,
most children learn about it from textbooks
and there's pictures of rockets and things.
But they don't actually go out at night and lie down
and look at the stars.
And I suppose because it's after school hours,
but in the winter when, you know, it gets dark at four,
wouldn't be very after school hours to look at the stars.
And I was at an adult education center in Canada
about 20 years ago and they had a naturalist there
on the staff and he said, let's do a star talk.
And so I thought, okay,
I've never been to something like this.
And we went out and he had blankets,
laid down on the beach, it was near the sea
and it was a nice warm evening, clear sky.
And he just with a torch, a strong torch, like a pointer,
you know, just took us through the constellations
and the planets and I'd never had that education.
You know, I got a PhD in science
and I've never, ever had anyone explain to me the night sky.
And because most modern astronomy, it's radio astronomy
and it's all based on sums and calculations.
And I was once at a party with the then
astronomer royal at Cambridge
and there was some particularly brilliant heavenly body
that I didn't know what it was.
And I said to him, you know, what's that?
And he's an astronomer royal.
And he said, don't ask me.
I'm only an astronomer.
He said, I do radio astronomy
and he didn't know the constellations.
The only people who know it now are celestial navigators,
you know, and even they don't learn it anymore,
you know, people on yachts and things
because they've got sat-navs.
So just learning about the stars
by seeing them and being at night
and learning about plants and animals
and learning about the soil by digging things up
and looking at roots.
And this kind of basic learning
and when my children went to school,
you know, this kind of thing stopped
at the end of their reception year.
In reception, they had a nature table
and it was all right to sort of put birds' nests
that had fallen out of trees there
and things that children had found and stuff.
But from then on, it was all about the body as a machine
and you've got to learn, you know,
how the hearts are pumped and that sort of thing.
So I think a huge amount more nature learning
would be really helpful.
I mean, because then it brings it close
to real living animals and plants,
which is what biology is meant to be about.
Yeah, absolutely.
And also there's something else that we spoke about of air
which was about the atomized nature
of the school curriculum.
And we see that across the curriculum
where you have geography, history, art, maths, drama,
as though they're all separate things.
And actually, you know, in the world, they all overlap
and there's very little,
well, really not any interdisciplinary learning
that happens in schools, at least not officially.
There's an interdisciplinary university
that's just opened up, LIS, London Interdisciplinary School,
which is really interesting.
Well, that's largely absent from schools,
but we see the same phenomenon as well
within science education.
And it often is that you sort of rotate
around biology, chemistry, and physics.
So you do forces one minute and then you do, you know,
like the alkali metals, the next topic,
and then you're doing, you know,
whatever it might be, the photosynthesis.
And again, it's all really atomized
and sort of disconnected.
And I know that you've spoken before
about how you describe your worldview as holistic
or your understanding of biology as holistic.
Please, could you explain what that means
and how that is distinct
from the sort of the mechanistic model
that you were just describing?
Well, the mechanistic model,
which is still the dominant paradigm
or model of reality that's taught in science
and practiced in science,
is that nature is a machine
that basically causes it by pushing and pulling
and there's no purpose in nature,
no purpose in evolution.
The mind's nothing but the brain,
the body's a machine, the heart's a pump,
the lungs are like bellows, the eyes are camera,
like a camera.
All these things are true as far as they go,
but it just involves looking at everything
through the lens of the machine metaphor.
And it's only a metaphor.
It's not a testable hypothesis.
You couldn't do an experiment that would prove
or refute the idea of nature as just a machine.
It's just a metaphor.
It's not a scientific hypothesis as such,
but it's become deeply embedded.
Ever since the 17th century,
it's been the fundamental metaphor of science.
But it's not the way nature actually is.
And if you look at the way nature is,
first of all, it's obvious that animals and plants
aren't machines, they're living organisms.
And they do have purposes.
If a dog's hungry, it looks for food.
And it's also clear that nature's organized
in a series of levels.
If you look at the small level,
then you have subatomic particles in atoms,
nuclei and electrons.
And then you have molecules which contain atoms
in the molecule.
And the molecule is more than the sum of the atoms.
The water molecule is more than the sum
of hydrogen and oxygen.
And then you have crystals which are more
than just molecules.
Ice is more, especially a snowflake
with this beautiful six-fold symmetry,
is more than just hydrogen and oxygen atoms
or even more than just water molecules.
And then when you get to living cells,
a cell is more than the proteins and DNA
and lipids and things within it.
And a tissue is more than just the cells
because it's got more structure and organization
and organs more than the tissues.
An organism is more than the sum of its organs.
They all work together harmoniously
in an overall form with overall purpose.
And then a group of organisms like a flock of birds
or a hive of bees is more than just individual animals.
It's the whole unit functions together.
And then ecosystems and then planets.
And then solar systems.
A solar system is more than just planets and the sun.
They're all working together.
And then a galaxy made of stars
is more than just a bundle of solar systems.
It has a structure, a pattern.
So everywhere you look in nature,
there's levels of wholeness more than the sum of the parts.
And each of the parts is a whole at its own level.
So that's basically the holistic worldview.
And there are certain properties that holes have
that all holes have at all levels.
They're always more than the sum of the parts.
And the wholeness somehow organizes
and coordinates the parts.
So they work together harmoniously.
So that, I think, is the basic way nature is constituted.
And when we look at it that way,
then we can see physics deals with very small holes,
atoms and subatomic particles,
and basic forces like gravity and light.
And also with very large things like cosmology,
you know, the cosmos, galaxies, stars and stuff.
Chemistry deals with sort of bigger holes than atoms
and molecules and ions and crystals and things.
And biology deals with living holes from bacteria
and microorganisms up to the most sophisticated animals.
So I think when you look at it that way,
it's easier to see how things fit together
and it's easier to see how there's a common pattern
to the way everything's organized.
And we're used to it in, you know, when I was a child,
I used to write those addresses, you know,
our house, our street, our town,
you know, Nottinghamshire, England,
the United Kingdom, Europe, you know, the world.
The Al-Duskal album, the Milky Way.
Yes, yes.
So, you know, every child understands that there's sort of,
and each, the higher level isn't just arbitrarily a higher level
as if some level's been arbitrarily promoted.
So it's in charge like a kind of someone
who's jumped up a dictator or something.
It's a higher level
because it actually includes the low ones.
The solar system includes all the planets within it.
And, you know, a tissue includes all the cells within it.
It's not, so these higher levels
are inclusive levels of organization.
Yeah, I see.
And so let's talk about morphic resonance
and about how this sort of,
because as I mentioned earlier,
this idea of significant learning,
the big ideas that have shaped our lives,
I think that that's probably the one
that has most shaped your life.
So can we, can you take us back to the origins of it?
You said that you had the idea while you were at Cambridge.
What was the sort of the gap, if you like,
in the mechanistic world view
that you thought like there's something that's missing here
that you think that morphic resonance
is an explanation as to how things are the way that they are?
Well, at Cambridge, I was working on plants
and plant development.
The reason I was working on plants was partly
because I love plants,
but also because I didn't want to spend my career
guillotining rats and killing animals,
which research in zoology or medicine would have involved.
So botany or plant biochemistry
were for me much more attractive fields to go into.
So I was working on how plant form develops.
And I worked out, there's a hormone called auxin,
A-U-X-I-N, endolacetic acid is its chemical nature,
which is a key hormone in plant growth and development.
And I worked out how auxin is made.
And I discovered it was made by dying cells,
that when cells die, the proteins break down,
or tonicists, they have proteolytic enzymes.
And the levels of free amino acids go up
because the proteins are breaking down.
And then just a amino acid destroying enzymes
kick in and break those down.
And one of the amino acids is tryptophan.
It's present in animals and plants and bacteria.
And when it's broken down,
it's transaminated or deaminated to give endolpyruvic acid.
And endolpyruvic acid breaks down spontaneously,
or by fairly non-specific oxidases
to give auxin endolacetic acid.
So dying cells make auxin.
The main dying cells in plants are the wood cells,
which become dead, empty tubes.
And as they differentiate, they produce auxin.
And then it's transported from the shoots
towards the roots by a polar auxin transport system.
And at Cambridge, I worked out how that works too,
with a colleague called Philip Rubry.
This is in textbooks now on polar auxin transport.
We worked out the means by which it happened.
So I was very pleased and excited.
And we were ahead of anyone in animal studies.
We knew what the key chemical was.
We knew how it was transported.
We knew the chemistry of its production.
No one in animal development knew those kinds of things
at the time.
But then I realized that it's explained too much.
All plants have auxin and polar auxin transport systems,
ferns, conifers, palms, cabbages, roses, beach trees.
And all parts of the plant have the same auxin production
transport system, the leaves, the flowers, the shoots,
the roots.
Yet the leaves are different from the flowers
and a beach tree is different from an ash tree.
And so this, which everyone said,
the molecular basis of development,
everyone's hopes were pinned on auxin to explain it all.
I realized it just can't explain why they're different.
It explains why they're similar,
why there's a coordination of the tubes that conduct water,
the right number of tubes to feed the growing leaves,
et cetera.
But it doesn't explain the specific form.
Then I got interested in an idea put forward first
in the 1920s of morphogenetic fields, form-shaping fields,
that there are fields that shape form
like an invisible mold around a developing leaf
that would cause it to be a leaf shape
or around a developing petal
that would cause it to be a petal shape.
Like a magnetic field has invisible lines of force
and shapes the space around it.
The idea was that in plants and animals,
there are these form-shaping fields
which help to shape form.
And I thought they're top-down.
The field causes it's not just bottom-up molecules
bumping into each other,
somehow creating the form just from genes and proteins,
which the reductionist approach still insists
as the way forward.
But there has to be a top-down organising system,
these fields.
So then the question is, how are these fields inherited?
Because they can't be inherited by genes.
Genes just code for the sequence of amino acids
and proteins or for switching on and off other genes.
So I always thought genes were overrated.
You know, I was teaching this stuff at Cambridge.
But I was quite sorry to interrupt.
I was quite sort of pleased to hear you say that
because as a biology teacher,
my degree was biology and psychology.
And I was doing it in the late 90s
around the time of the Human Genome Project
and there was all this fanfare.
And then I was teaching this stuff
as a biology teacher shortly afterwards.
And protein synthesis, like you say,
that DNA just codes for amino acids,
which string together into proteins.
And how does that describe a biological organism,
organ systems, there seems to be like layers of organisation
that you were saying in this nested hierarchy,
tissues, organs, organ systems, organisms,
and then societal levels of that behaviour and so on.
That are just the genetic explanation
that this is the brain of the cell
and that this controls all of life.
There's just lots and lots of bleeps in that chain of explanation.
Exactly, it doesn't make sense when you think it through,
but most people still take it for granted.
So anyway, when I was trying to think,
how could these be inherited?
They couldn't be inherited through genes.
And I didn't think they could be eternal mathematical equations
because biology is all about evolution
and changes with time.
So some biologists, theoretical biologists
who'd switched from being mathematicians
believed that everything's governed
by eternal mathematical laws.
And mathematicians tend to be Platonists.
They believed that out there there's
a kind of eternal mathematical realm
on which everything depends.
So I couldn't believe that dinosaurs
had eternal dinosaur equations there
at the moment of the Big Bang and still present today,
but it was only a matter of accident
or chance that dinosaurs actually existed.
This way of thinking that it's all about the maths
didn't appeal to me.
So then I thought, well, how could they be inherited?
And at that stage, I read a book by the French philosopher
Henri Bergson called Matter and Memory,
written in 1898 or 96,
where he argued that memories are not stored in the brain
and that there's a kind of causation,
a memory causation, directly across time.
It wasn't not necessarily anything in between.
And then I realized that if there was a kind of resonance
across time, each organism could have
a kind of collective memory of form and of instinct.
And that many mysteries to do with instinct inheritance
and indeed memory itself, collective memory,
would be explainable.
So this was my hypothesis of Morphic Resonance.
The idea is that at each level,
the wholeness is governed by a field, an organizing field.
The generic name for these is Morphic Fields.
Morphic means form, so as to do with fields of form.
And these fields of form got their structure
through a kind of memory from previous similar systems.
So a giraffe morphogenetic field
be like an invisible blueprint for a giraffe
and giraffe embryo would grow in accordance with it.
And that field would be like a collective memory
of the actual form of past giraffes.
So basically, in its general form,
this idea is that the so-called laws of nature
are actually more like habits.
There's a memory in nature.
Well, this looks-
Just in case anybody,
because the first time you hear this idea,
the first time you come across it,
it sounds like it's so far removed
from the mechanistic understanding
that you say most people sort of accept
without really thinking about it,
that it's hard to grasp.
Please could you share just a couple of sort of examples
of what types of phenomena we see in reality
that this field, this idea of morphogenetic fields
explains in a way that materialist sort of billiard ball,
nuts and bolts, science doesn't.
Well, for example, the theory predicts
that if you train lab rats to learn a new trick in London,
then as soon as they've learned it in London,
similar rats all around the world in America,
in Australia, in India, and elsewhere.
Would be able to learn the same trick quicker,
just because the rats here have learned it
by morphic resonance, kind of collective memory.
And there's actually evidence that happens.
And to put it even more close to home,
the theory predicts that when the wordal puzzle,
the five-letter wordal puzzle is published
every morning by the New York Times,
as the day goes on, as millions of people
solve this particular five-letter puzzle,
it should get easier to solve.
So it should be easier to solve the wordal puzzle
in the evening than it is in the morning.
Other things being equal.
And there's an MSc student actually doing a project
on wordal from this point of view as we speak,
you know, as a test for morphic resonance.
In the realm of chemistry,
it means if you make a new chemical for the first time
and you crystallize it, there won't be a morphic field
for that crystal lattice structure.
Before, it hasn't happened before in the universe,
as far as we know.
You may wait years before one appears.
Often it takes months or years to get a thing to crystallize.
Once it's crystallized, it should be easier
for that chemical to crystallize all over the world.
And actually, there's many examples from chemistry
of where compounds are very difficult to crystallize,
but once they've started crystallizing,
they get easier all over the world.
And chemists usually say, well, yes, of course that happens,
but it happens because fragments of previous crystals
nucleate the crystallizations elsewhere
because they get wafted around the world
as invisible dust particles.
So what I'm saying is that filter out invisible dust particles
that should still happen because of morphic resonance.
So basically, those so-called laws of nature,
I'm saying are more like habits.
And although in the West,
this is a very hard idea for people to grasp,
when I was working in India,
I already was thinking about morphic resonance.
When I explained it to my Hindu colleagues,
instead of shock and horror or just puzzlement,
they said, oh, of course, that is the way nature is.
Kadama, the influence of the past,
Hindu and Buddhist philosophy
has this idea of a memory in nature.
That's just standard.
I'd meet people on trains in India after they ask you,
what is your name?
Whereas your family, that kind of thing.
They then start on, what is your view of the world
or the universe?
Indians like these conversations
and got train journeys lasting hours.
So I'd explain about morphic resonance and almost always,
people would just say, oh, yes, that is what we think.
We've always thought that, our philosophy and so on.
So it was far from shocking in India.
And it's a peculiarity of our Western world view
that this has got bakes in to science.
Yeah, it's interesting.
And lots of the questions that you ask
seem to me to be just really reasonable questions.
For example, in the science delusion
and in your TED talk, which was famously banned,
you were talking about big G,
like the gravitational constant
and how the accepted value of big G,
which is considered to be a universal constant,
the value for it has fluctuated over time,
quite considerably.
And the official argument is
that we've just got better at measuring it
and that that's instrument errors
rather than your suggesting that, well,
what if big G is actually fluctuating?
Which just seems like a really reasonable question to ask,
but people seem to be outraged by the question even.
Yes, well, I mean, some people are intrigued by it,
but people who've made science into a kind of religion,
scientism, you know, people who've made,
there are Richard Dawkins as an example
of someone who's made science into a kind of religion.
They're usually militant atheists.
And, you know, there are lots of atheists who aren't militant,
but the militant type tend to be believers in scientism,
and it's become for them a belief system
as part of their identity
and any challenge to it makes them angry.
I get this reaction a lot, of course,
because I do a lot of challenging of it.
But whether you see with big G,
yes, they get more and more precise
and the measurements they publish have these tiny error bars,
but then when someone else comes along
with a precise measurement with tiny error bars
and it's somewhere up here, you know,
then you know what's going on.
So my proposal was simply to instead of publishing
the average value from a lab over months or years,
they publish the raw data.
And it could be that all around the world,
on a particular day, big G is higher
and all around the world, it may be lower on another day.
Yeah, because isn't there some sort of,
there's a, I think all metrologists,
the people who collect all these measurements,
and then they do stuff to the data,
they average it out and they do sort of adjustments
to take account of what they think is real and what's not.
And so you arrive at this figure that, like you say,
it's not raw data.
No, oh, no, it's not raw data.
It's averaged in each lab.
And then there's an international committee,
averages for the ones from different labs around the world,
waiting ones that they think are more valid,
if it comes from Cambridge or Harvard and so,
counts more than if it comes from the Ivory Coast
or something.
So they end up with these average values.
And next time the committee meets in five years time,
the average values are different.
So they're always changing them.
In those handbooks of physical constants,
which are constantly being updated,
they have the new values of the constants.
So my point was not that, you know,
just simply that what if the earth,
as it travels through space, maybe there's, you know,
some physicists now believe in dark matter,
mysterious matter, we don't know what it is.
What if we pass through a cloud of dark matter?
This would affect measurements of G.
And maybe it's telling us something about
the earth's environment as it moves through space.
But by refusing to look at the fluctuations
because it's got to be a constant,
this is just narrowing down science.
And that's why in my book, The Science of Delusion,
I take the 10 fundamental dogmas
and turn them into questions and say,
well, what happens if we look at these scientifically,
instead of just saying they must be true?
Yeah.
And then science opens up,
it gets so much more interesting.
My favorite question is that book,
in that book is there's a chapter on consciousness.
And you were talking about like materialist philosophers,
people like Daniel Dennett,
who wrote Consciousness Explained,
but it was really sort of Consciousness Explained away,
where he said that it's just, you know,
it's not really a thing.
It's just, you know, it's almost like a Darwinian,
you know, there are things that we attend to
and the stream of attention is just the stream of winners
in that Darwinian race.
So there's nothing really to see here.
And again, that it's just this sort of ex-explaining
that billiard ball mechanism.
And at the end of that chapter,
you ask a question and you say,
so do you think that your views on materialism,
your views on consciousness are determined
on this billiard ball level,
or do you feel like you've arrived at them
through reason and argument and creativity and what have you?
And it's a really, really good question,
because, you know, they don't seem to be applying
the same principles to what it is to be a materialist.
It seems to, it sort of eats itself.
It eats itself.
You see, well, they imagine that they're on the side
of this plate glass window as an objective observer
of reality, somehow detached from it.
And they were taught to write in the passive voice.
A disembodied mind, yes.
But somehow everything else is mechanistic
and materialist and stuff, except for them, people like them.
I think that's one reason why Stephen Hawking became so iconic
for people who are not scientists,
and indeed for scientists,
because he was the closest you can get
through no fault of his own,
but through his endless fortune.
He was the closest you can get
to a disembodied mind as a human.
And he became iconic of the scientific quest.
On his book, A Brief History of Time on the Dust Jacket,
Time Magazine is quoted by saying,
even as he sits helpless in his wheelchair,
his mind soars through space and time
to unlock the mysteries of the universe.
So the idea that a disembodied mind could somehow
soar through space and time to unlock the mysteries
from a vantage point outside nature, somehow,
a God's eye view, is somehow baked into the mysterious view.
So it's not consistent.
I mean, from the point of view of science education,
you know, I think the questions that I deal with
in the science of delusion would be really good questions.
The trouble is that no science teacher I know
has taken them up in school
because it's not on the national curriculum.
It would probably do more harm than good
to, you know, A-level rankings or GCSE rankings.
So they don't do it.
I do, occasionally, I'm asked to talk
about these things in schools.
And the last two or three years,
the school that's most into what I'm doing
and where I've gotten talks are, is eaten.
And I've dressed the whole of the low six that eaten
for the last few years on the science delusion.
Right.
And they're really up for it there.
Whereas when I've tried to do this at other schools
and people are frightened of disorienting the children
or confusing them or, they've got enough confidence
to eat and to do this, I don't talk at eating
because I'm in favor of hyperprivilege.
I do it because it's the only school that's invited.
I was just wondering, I'd like to come back
to the educational implications of those books
that I mentioned earlier, but just while we're on this,
how have you found it?
I wondered a few times as I've been sort of reading your work.
You said earlier that, you know, like the toughness
of being a very austere school,
it was nothing compared to what came later.
You know, for example, you know, we talked about your TED talk,
you know, attracting controversy, your book that you said
that was described as a, there was a review in nature,
wasn't there, that said a book for burning.
Yes, an editorial.
Your ideas are considered, sorry, what was that?
It was an editorial on the front page.
Yes.
And I wonder how you found that,
like it kind of been easy to have sort of had your ideas
received in such a sort of an aggressive way.
Well, you know, first I felt this was completely unjust
because I played science by the rules.
I publish all my stuff in peer-reviewed journals.
I, you know, I make rational arguments and stuff,
and I prepared to debate them with anyone.
And so, you know, I thought I'm playing by the rules.
And then suddenly I found that actually the rules don't apply
if you try and challenge some of these dogmas, you know.
So the editor of Nature basically said that my work
should be, you know, in the end he said the book
shouldn't be burned, but should put in protected shelf
of the library and that he compared unfavorably
with other dangerous books like Mine Camp by Hitler.
I mean, that was his, then basically what he was trying
to do was ex-communicate me.
And the result is from then on I couldn't get a grant,
I couldn't get a job.
And whenever I was invited to give talks in universities,
whoever invited me always had a problem
with people who tried to cancel me.
I'd been canceled many times.
Canceled culture is nothing new,
it's been going on in science for decades.
And so anyway, first I found this rather annoying
and I just thought it was unfair, you know,
because I was playing the game by the rules and they weren't.
And yet they claimed to be upholding the rules
of proper science.
Then I came to see that actually these are not evil people.
These are people who just really believe
that they know the truth.
They believe that science has revealed
to the mechanistic sciences revealed the truth.
All other approaches to truth like religion, philosophy,
et cetera are, you know, muddled superstitious old fashioned.
The only thing that's right up there
with the leading edge of human understanding is science.
And they really believe in this.
That they're basically fanatics or bigots
because of their belief system,
not because they've been bribed by drug companies,
not because they're conspiracies,
but they really believe it.
And they're really fighting for the truth.
The only trouble is they have such a narrow view of the truth.
So I'm in favor of fighting for the truth,
but I just think it's a shame if one fights
for a half truth or a partial truth.
Yes, yeah, I mean, thank you for that.
I mean, it always strikes me that you seem to deal with it
really quite well.
You seem very sort of unflappable in the face
of beliefs of contradicting views.
And you sort of say, well, you know,
here's, we were talking earlier
about that fascinating conversation that you had
with Daniel Dennett and Oliver Sacks.
And there was five or six of you sitting around a table,
Steven J. Gould, five or six of you sitting around a table.
This is about a three and a half hour video on YouTube.
And it's really, really interesting and it's worth,
but you really sort of hold yourself well
in those conversations.
Maybe those, maybe all of that rugby and stuff
and that character building stuff in your formative years
was sort of helpful in giving you this unflappable demeanor.
I don't know.
Well, I think it was partly, I mean,
I'm not totally unflappable.
Some things get at me, but not, yes, partly,
I mean, partly that character building stuff,
I think has actually served me in good stead.
Partly, you know, I'm a Christian and I pray.
I used to be an atheist when I was converted
to mechanistic materialism as a teenager.
But, you know, one of the big things about the Lord's Prayer,
which I say every day is, you know,
forgive us our trespasses as we forgive those
that trespass against us.
Well, I definitely think some people have trespassed
against me through these kinds of unfair attacks.
So I just asked for the grace
not to keep these burning resentments.
I mean, resentment is a kind of corrosive thing.
It corrode the soul.
And so every day I just try and let go.
And, you know, if you pray for the grace to do it,
I find it's much easier to do.
So I don't wake up in the morning feeling resentful
and angry and it's just a much nicer way of living.
And it's also effective in dealing with people
who are against what I'm saying.
It's more effective not to get angry.
It's much more effective to try and discuss it with them.
And I studied martial arts at one stage
and I liked the idea of sort of going with the flow
of what they're saying and trying to take it further, you know,
so that it, rather than opposing it.
Yes.
You know, when you compare the sort of brute force method
of American football with Japanese martial arts, you know,
it's a very different style
and I prefer the martial arts style.
Absolutely.
Be like water and all that.
And yes, and lots of those, the practices that you write
in those two more recent books that you wrote,
science and spiritual practices and ways to go beyond
and why they work, I imagine have sort of been very helpful
for you as well.
There are practices that you engage in.
And I know we've only got a couple of minutes to end on.
Just for the benefit of viewers and listeners,
there's a number of these ideas you talk about meditation,
fasting, interacting with animals and so on.
But there was one chapter that I think really triggered me
in terms of reaching out to you.
And that was the chapter on cultivating good habits
about virtues and about, you know,
these sort of these universal ideas
around how to be a good person.
I don't know whether you have any sort of,
it's a bit of a vague final question,
but what are your thoughts?
And I know that you mentioned pilgrimages as well earlier.
Maybe you want to end by talking about that.
I just wanted to sort of just to land on an educational note.
What do you think that education that we should be doing more
of or less of in education to cultivate these good habits?
Well, in the traditional education in middle ages,
you know, people were taught that vices and virtues
are habits basically.
They're habits, they're habits you acquire
and they become unconscious.
And the seven deadly sins are the worst vices,
you know, cultivating greed, envy, lust,
gluttony, avarice, pride and so on, anger.
These are bad things to cultivate.
And yet the modern advertising industry and social media
actually make things like greed and envy virtues
and anger and stuff.
And then they taught you the good things to cultivate
the virtues, you know, including prudence, temperance,
wisdom, you know, love, faith, hope.
So I think teaching, most children don't even know
what the traditional virtues are, courage, for example.
These are virtues.
These are things that you can actually cultivate as habits.
And because education is supposed to be value neutral
and, you know, it's left to people's religion
or private conscience or family or something,
most people don't get any religious teaching
anymore at home or in a church or anywhere else.
And some school teachers would be afraid to teach
any of these things for fear of being accused
of imposing their personal subjective values
or ideology on children.
So the result is there's a kind of moral vacuum.
And it's very harmful, I think.
But one thing to end on, I'd love to just mention pilgrimage
because there's something I'm very keen on.
And the revival of pilgrimage,
which is going on all over Europe at the moment,
and here in Britain through the British Pilgrimage Trust,
is reopening ancient footpath pilgrimage routes,
walking through the countryside on footpaths,
to holy places, which can be springs, wells,
mountain tops, and also our great cathedrals and churches
and pre-Christian stone circles and so on.
But it's a wonderful thing to do.
I do it myself, and I did it every year with a godson,
a teenage godson, until recently
when he stopped being a teenager.
Every year we went on a one-day pilgrimage,
five or six miles through the countryside
to one of the great cathedrals, Lincoln, Wells,
Ely, Winchester,
but each year we did a different cathedral.
And now one of the things the British Pilgrimage Trust
is doing is trying to open up
the idea of school pilgrimages.
There's a few schools that already do them.
There's a school near here in London,
where I live in year three,
their teacher, their religious teacher,
who's also Anglican priest,
takes them to Westminster Abbey, year four, St. Paul's,
year five, they spend three days at Walsingham in Norfolk
and visit the shrine of our lady, and they walk barefoot.
30% of these children are Muslim.
They love going on these pilgrimages,
and then year five, six, they go to St. Albans Cathedral.
And the chap who leads this, who's called Father Graham,
is very, he's quite charismatic with the children,
and he says the children absolutely love it,
because it's learning by doing.
They're learning about history.
They're learning about nature.
They're learning about sacred places.
When they get there, they light a candle and say a prayer,
their own prayer, whatever they want to pray for.
And he says, when he goes to Walsingham,
sometimes he sees school groups there
where they're dressed up in fake medieval outfits,
pretending to be pilgrims.
And he says that his children find it so much more satisfying
because they actually are pilgrims.
And I think that school pilgrimage
is a wonderful educational experiential way of learning,
and it's fun as well.
So I'm really keen on that at the moment.
Thank you.
I'm interested.
Well, there's a website called BritishPilgrimage.org,
which gives all these different routes.
So if anyone's interested, they can look at that,
and they can get in touch too,
because there's a coordinator now
who's helping to coordinate school pilgrimages.
Right, thank you for that.
I'll look into it, and I'll put a link to it in the show notes
and recommend it to my school-based friends.
And thank you for that as well,
because I think it was a recent podcast that I heard,
the podcast you do with Mark Vernon.
Is it Mark?
Yes.
And there's quite a few about these issues
and about just how sort of hidden,
how forgotten and in decline churches are.
And people don't go to churches, don't go to cathedrals,
don't go to even song, there are all these amazing things.
And I've started to re-engage with those things
in my local community.
So thank you for that,
because it's really opened things up for me.
I was raised in a Christian tradition,
and then sort of like many people like yourself
became a scientist later on
and sort of fell out of the habit of it.
But there's all kinds of interesting things
that people do, people of faith, they sing together,
they pray, they do things that are really good for you,
that those militant atheists are missing out on.
So thank you for reopening my eyes to that side of life.
Good.
Well, it's great you're doing what you're doing.
And I'm very pleased we had this chance to chat.
Yes, yeah, me too.
Well, thank you very much.
I know that you need to head off now.
So yeah, thank you very much.
I've really enjoyed this conversation.
All right, thanks so much for today.
Bye for now then, James.
Thank you.
Take care.
Bye-bye.
We have a narrow curriculum,
which places out the arts.
So let's rethink education.
There is a lack of imagination
and not enough fun.
So let's rethink education.
Children should be self-directed, showing us their way.
Let them lead.
Transferable skills should be the core of what we teach.
Learn for life.
So let's trust.
Let's be brave.
Let's do what's right and not what's disquiet.
Let's let them.
Let's explore.
Let's bring back the love to get the fear of being fine.
We're forced to wreck the children.
As often wrecks the schools.
So let's rethink education.
We have a lack of agency.
We're trapped inside the system.
So let's rethink education.
A place of transformation that embraces community.
School is the heart.
A place to dream, a place to play,
a place to think and love.
Feeling free.
So let's trust.
Let's be brave.
Let's do what's right and not what's disquiet.
Let's have fun.
Let's explore.
Let's bring back the love to get the fear of being fine.
Let's trust.
Let's be brave.
Let's do what's right and not what's disquiet.
Let's have fun.
Let's explore.
Let's bring back the love to get the fear of being fine.
Let's be brave.
