Welcome to future data podcast. In this episode, we'll talk to Peter Morgan around AI machine
learning and deep learning. So stay tuned.
So welcome everyone to future of data podcast. Today we have with us Peter Morgan. He is
with deep learning partnerships along the line of one of the very crucial area artificial
intelligence. We would learn today some of the fun stuff what the AI is what deep learning
is and Peter, thank you so much. I truly appreciate you stepping up and helping and helping our
audience understand what deep learning is what AI is. So why don't we start with your
introduction. I saw that you have a physics major and so you have a scientist from physics
background. What are you doing in AI? So love to know that journey.
Yeah, that's good. That's a good journey to describe try to describe right connected
thoughts. So I did start my life as you know, very interested in science, it was curiosity
I guess and how things work. And I guess that's carried on into AI. You know, how does the
brain work, right? How does intelligence work? So that underlying sense, I think I'm not
doing anything different really, I'm just exploring stuff that I like to explore. I've
been lucky in life in that way. I've just kept exploring where my passion is taking
me and my passion is taking me definitely into AI today. And I have been working in
it for four years. But yeah, just to go back, I did do I was working on a PhD in physics
at University of Massachusetts at Amherst and here in particular theoretical particle physics.
So a lot of math, right? So that helps me actually in AI because you know, it's quite
mathematical. You know, there's two types of AI just like any any subject is theoretical AI and
it is practical. Let's build it AI. Okay. So, you know, I am interested in the theoretical
and the pinnings of you know, how it all works. So, you know, mathematically, it's good. I can
do the math essentially, because of my strong physics background, physics and math. But yeah,
businesses want to apply this stuff too. And I do have a consulting company which you mentioned
deep learning partnership. So yeah, the hands on is something as well. That's the other side
that I need to be able to you know, bring to the table. Yeah. Interesting. So thank you for the
quick introduction. So I think one of the one of a good friend of ours, he suggested that if you
want the best data scientist, look for particle physicists, because they pretty much spend their
time looking for the tiny, tiny sort of be tiny sort of the hiccups. Yeah, that's, that's where
most of the anomalies are. And you want sort of professionals who are very focused on in finding
those sort of anomalies, because that's where that's where the big, big opportunities are.
Yeah, I think so. And it's such a new field developing rapidly. There's a lot of stuff
still to be discovered actually. So yeah, it is nice, nice area to be in.
Nice. So tell me about deep learning. Like what do you guys do from the talent of it? Like what
we are enough to know what deep learning partnership is all about?
Yeah, so that's a company I founded actually about 18 months ago in London. I've just been
over to the US. So I'm a consulting company. And I hire people and as and when, you know,
we get engagement. So most recently, I've been helping to develop a AI bootcamp deep learning
bootcamp in New York City. And it was the first of its kind in the world. So there's a lot of
data science boot camps, which I actually helped out one here in London develop as well. So this
is taking it to the next stage, which is AI bootcamp deep learning. And already that we're
seeing our competitors, other data science companies starting to offer eight week, 12 week
deep learning courses. So we're nicely ahead of the curve. So I can kind of feel a little bit
happy that I predicted something that looks like it will happen. And then we'll also do
consulting engagement into companies as well, like banking, retail, healthcare. So that's,
yeah, so it's a young company, you know, when work comes along, I try to accept it and bring
people on board to help me if we need extra people. So but in general, the market itself is big and
getting bigger exponentially. So I think we're well placed to continue training and consulting
in this marketplace deep learning. Interesting. So I have a question definitely. So why deep
learning particularly? So there's a machine learning has a lot of other areas. What brings
you to deep learning? That's a good question for you, Charles. So deep learning really is a state
of the art. And it's the one that's outperforming the other algorithms. I might even call it good
old fashioned AI machine learning. And machine learning included, you know, random forests,
all the Kaggle winners support vector machine, just throwing out some technical jargon here,
you know, names of algorithms, well known algorithms that have been very successful for
the last, you know, 30 years or even more some in some cases. So why deep learning and why now?
So these algorithms have been around since the 70s and maybe even earlier, some of the
rudimentary ones, 50s even, even 40s, I think, you know, McCulloch and Pitts wrote down, you know,
how an artificial neural, how the mathematics behind how a neuron works, right? And so
these are artificial neural networks. So it's the same math. So why now, you know, well,
basically, it's a hardware and data play. So the hardware we have all the Nvidia GPUs with 8,000
cores, etc. 100 teraflops, you can buy a server, put it under your desk, 100 teraflops. There used
to be a supercomputer 10 years ago. So we have the hardware now, we have the hardware. So now we can
throw the data. We also have the big data sets. So we have ImageNet and other million or more
greater labeled data sets. So we have the data, we have the hardware, we've always had the algorithm.
So we're just putting all three together in the perfect storm. And it turns out that neural
networks outperform all the other algorithms. And why is that? Well, there's something called
the universal approximation theorem, which says that a single layer neural network can
approximate any function to any degree of accuracy. Now, that's a very, very powerful statement,
and it is provable. And it was proven in the 80s by a couple of different teams.
And so that's why, okay, that may sound a little technical, but basically, nature's had 4.5 billion
years to trial, try everything, right? And biology and the laws of physics are such that, you know,
and the universal approximation theorem is a mathematical, you know, statement behind it all
says, here's the most efficient and effective way of processing information. Because at the
end of the day, this is all about processing information, isn't it? Whether it's business
information, science information, or any type of, you know, Facebook information, social media,
any type of information. It just turns out that neural networks are the most accurate and efficient
way of doing that. And biology is clever, right? It's tried everything trial and error, it's had
failures, it's had successes, we've had Einstein, we've had people who aren't clever criminals,
etc. But ultimately, neural networks are the, you know, the most effective way of information,
processing information. And that's deep and very fundamental. And I don't hear many people talking
about it, in fact, but really, that should be the starting point for any discussion.
I think that's definitely a very interesting perspective. I've been a big fan of neural
networks, at least from my graduation days. So I've not heard about it since then. But yeah,
I think that I have another friend in neural network space for me. So let's talk about deep
learning. So what, like for our audience, if you can shed some light on what is deep learning?
Yeah, so it's basically another name for artificial neural networks, okay, and I like it because it's
easier to say than artificial neural networks. So, you know, it's, so the deep part just means it's
more than one layer. So, you know, two plus 100 1000 layers, that's the deep part, you have many,
many hidden layers in your neural networks, you have an input layer and an output layer,
and then one or more in the middle. And if it's more than one layer, remember the universal
approximation theorem says you only need one layer, but the more layers you have, you know,
the quicker it will converge. So, and there's a lot of trade off, no one knows exactly the
right configuration for any particular data set. So this is where we'll room for success, really,
in scientifically and in business lies. That's a great opportunity right there. That's a
challenge, but also an opportunity for businesses, if they can come up with a neural network
architecture, the number of layers and a number of nodes in each layer, that is more ideal
than your competitor, then you're going to be able to process your data quicker and more accurately.
And that's your competitive edge right there. This field is changing very quickly. There's a lot
of teams on this right now in science and in industry like Google, Facebook, Microsoft, Baidu,
IBM. So every day papers are coming out on archive, you know, it's very exciting for me as a scientist
actually here in business as well, moving very rapidly. Interesting. And so I think, so let's
talk about one of the use case. So if you can sort of make it very, very sort of simple down to
maybe for a five-year-old level, right? So what is deep learning as seen by a typical use case?
So to help me and our audience understand what is deep learning, that will be very helpful.
Sure. So we can split it into two things. One is image processing and one is language
processing, if you like. So if our data set consists of images, then we would use something
called CNNs or convolutional neural networks. And the other type of neural networks is called
RNNs or recurrent neural networks. They're used to process language information, whether that's
speech or text, okay? In fact, any time series, whereas video stream, market data, text or speech,
RNNs. So RNNs are perhaps more complicated because they're having to deal with the time
series element. They have an extra time element. CNNs are pretty much a solved technology, if you
like. They're processing pixels and stationary images. So whatever use case you can think for a
company who wants to develop and get value out of processing images or processing text,
speech, market data. Now, that's any company in any vertical. It's basically unlimited, right?
So any use case you could think of, I mentioned market data. So algorithmic traders on Wall
Street are now using neural networks to get the high-frequency trading advantage.
Healthcare is a great one for me because it's saving lives and curing cancer and helping us
to live longer and better quality lives. So if, for example, radiology, fMRI scans, X-ray scans,
these are images, right? And so you have 1,000 images or a million. You can scan these very
quickly using CNNs, okay? And they can now do that more accurately and faster than any human
radiologist who get paid for $500,000 a year. And so obviously, hospitals, so there's a lot
of jobs in danger right now. We talk about technological unemployment and these are high,
you know, white-collar jobs too, not just robots and factory jobs. But yeah. So that's a side
issue, isn't it? We're getting away from technology, but this has great social and political and
economic ramifications that the fact that these neural networks are going to replace our neural
networks. Yeah, no, I think that's well said. And in fact, I was having a conversation with one of
I think he was one of the executive friends. And we had this conversation on that. I was reading
an article that the easiest job to replace by an AI is CEOs. So that's like history. So yeah,
so I think that's why and they are the, they are the ones who are paid the most in this equation.
So yeah, definitely. I can see that. It's funny how will and when will sort of, I'll have an AI
boss. In fact, I do like in my company, there's something called Tao. It's a talent. It's an AI
around career coaching. So Tao is in my boss. So I think it'll be a fun drive to see
how creepy or how cool that boss is. Yeah, exactly. So and then it brings up, so what are we gonna do
now that we're displaced for the first time in history, right? We've had blue collar displacement
through the industrial revolution and PCs, right? But now it's really, we're going to be able to
replace everybody now, including white collar CEOs, lawyers, doctors, everybody will be replaced
eventually. Okay. And it's happening now. So what, how are we going to eat and live and survive? Okay,
so people are talking about a universal basic income where the wealth is distributed because
the wealth has been concentrated more and more on a few, right, Google's, the Facebook's, etc.
And so before I used to have IBM and AT&T with a million, two million employees,
and so they were big companies, but that's the wealth was distributed amongst a lot of people.
Now, Facebook can kind of have 20,000 employees and be bigger than AT&T and IBM combined. And so,
you know, it really is the inequality is more than it ever has been in history and moving
quicker and quicker. So yeah, universal basic income is kind of, which is basically another word
for taxation and tax a rich and everything else. And that really isn't, that's a scary slope.
Yeah, but it's something we have to face is humanity, right? We do have to, and it's better
to hit face it hit on now than wait, you know, until it's kind of everybody's starving and
in the street. And I think that's, that's a very valid point. And again, I think I'll,
I'll be pulling up pushing my shameless plug here. But I think one of the things that, that,
that got us started in AI was the very fact that almost every AI is talking about
sort of slight shifting jobs, or taking away jobs, but there's no AI to actually help save it,
right? So there's, there's a, so I think where we are banking on is primarily there's a,
there's a very broad area emerging in which what if I'm an AI and I can help you stay employed.
So if suppose I'm seeing a new trend, and one of the typical use that we give out is that
say an example of an autonomous car phenomena takes a truck driver's job away, right? So what if
in we have a network of a lot of truck drivers and we see one of one of our couple of those guys
actually started doing something called traffic analytics. So suddenly sort of the network and
propagate and say, Hey guys, why don't we all have a secondary or a tertiary career
options? And, and pretty much like that this AI is anyways, it's, it's, it's, it's your assistant.
It keeps grooming you, it keeps giving sort of these alternate career options.
Yeah, because I think the whole point of tech displacement is so we can free a part time here
so we can focus somewhere else. Nice. Exactly. Yeah. So we got a question,
you know, what, what is our purpose? What gives us meaning, right? And so for a lot of
people getting up in the morning going to work and that's fine too, but that really won't be
there for much longer. So I, I'm a real optimist here and that we will find meaning very easily.
It's not something we should worry about. Oh my God, we'll never have meaning without work.
Right. Right. Replace that with something out as long as the, you know, we can eat and, and
have a roof over our heads and have an internet connection, Wi-Fi, right? Basic human right
these days will be, will be good. It just, it's a different world. We will get used to,
but we've had four shifts already. We've had farming, we've had the industrial revolution,
we've had the PC and now the AI and we've, we've always moved 98% of people used to work in farms.
Now it's one lesson of 2%. Okay. Everything's automated on farms. So then we've, we've moved
comfortably into industrial factories and then we've moved comfortably into basically PCs and,
you know, cubicles and now we're actually going to be free. It's almost like we're taking the
chains off, you know, we, we, we need to do what we want. For me, that, that, that's, that's great.
As long as there's enough that we can eat, nobody gets left behind that, you know, so
I think that's, that's, that's, that's a very noble thought. So now let's talk about businesses,
right? So let's, let's, let's sort of try to understand their problem. If I say I'm a small
business, why would I care about something called AI or why would I care about something called
machine learning? What are some of those, some of those pitches, pitch to those, those businesses
who have anyways, no technical know how, and they've been sort of getting this anxious about
this emerging keyword and jobs getting lost in all that phenomena. Yeah. So yeah, you know,
slightly flippant is because Google are using it and all of their products in there, the second
largest company in the world. So yeah, it works. Okay. Now that, that's it. That's the bottom line.
Okay. Facebook too, and all that major tech company, Baidu, IBM, Microsoft, they're all
using it. They're all just replacing everything, all their algorithms, neural networks. Okay. So
if you're not sold on that, you might say, okay, well, that's okay for the big guys with all the
tech, but it's not that because they're using it in every product imaginable HR, search, just
everything. Okay. So these big tech companies, even though they're tech companies, they have
the same functional units as any company, right? They have HR, they have legal, they have accounting,
they have all of these other departments. Okay. So that's one argument. The second argument is,
okay, so what do you guys do? What's your core competence? Okay. You're in healthcare. Okay.
You're, you're a legal company, you're retail, etc. Okay. Here's how neural networks are not,
not can be, but are being used by other legal companies right now, and, and medical companies
and retail companies like Amazon, for example. Here's how, like Jeff Bezos three weeks ago
had an interview where he said, you know, neural networks, AI deep learning, you know, he actually
mentioned those words, you know, if you're straight to the point, we're using them in everything now.
It's really is our driver, our key driver at Amazon is deep learning now. So Amazon Alexa,
Amazon XO, you mentioned these digital assistants, right? Well, that's the natural
language processing I talked about RNN. So we're all going to have one. We kind of have
them now Siri, Cortana, Google now, but they'll just get better and better the more data they're
trained on. Okay. They're like us as human beings. We were young, we get trained alphabets
and numbers and how to do math and how to, how grammar works. Okay. These things are capable
of learning and getting trained. The more data we give to them, whether it's medical data,
our own data, so they help us or if I'm a healthcare or a retail company, the more data
I can feed into it, either from external sources or internal, the more it can help,
the better job it can do at helping us. So I don't know if that's answered your question.
I've kept it very general rather than do a very specific use case, but there are, for example,
in the legal industry, there are companies now who use neural networks, deep learning is
paralegal. So they basically quickly scan all the documents much quicker than any
young 20-year-old paralegal can and more accurately too. So there's an example. So the
natural language processing, the technology is at the point where they can understand,
it's actually natural language understanding, written tech. So any company that uses people to
read and process and make decisions, I mentioned a legal one, can basically replace that process
human beings with these neural networks. Sounds scary. So your sales pitch is to these businesses
is that everyone is using it and it's actually showing some real impact in the economic structure
of the businesses and almost all the verticals, as you're saying, are seeing an impact or at
least the incentive of going in this direction. So you should try it out too. Yeah, but not say
that's more of a leap of faith, right? It's more like, and here's how. Here's how these legal
companies are using it. Here's how Cisco are using it. Here's how Amazon are using it. In real
use cases, because this information is public information. The actual nitty gritty fine points
aren't because that's their competitive advantage, but the general way the use cases are definitely,
I could Google now, you could too, anybody can, all the listeners, Google neural networks,
legal applications, and there'd be a hundred examples of companies how they're using it. Okay,
it's not a secret. Right. Interesting. So now let's talk about, I think I'll go slightly on the
technical aspect of deep learning and AI. I think one of the so-called drawbacks or one of the
right hearing in using these capabilities is analysis paralysis, right? Creating the boundaries
on where does it really end? When should the learning begins and where should the learning stops?
So what are some of your thoughts around those challenges for businesses? So if I let my AI,
like in a deep learning case, if it can create, say, multiple neural network nodes, layers,
so then it can actually, it can extrapolate and then it can sort of dig deeper than it should,
and it can connect two sort of non-related dots because somehow we are all connected,
but not really from the business sense point of view. So how would you, like, what are some
of your thoughts in that direction, if at all? Yeah, so that's a good question. It's an ongoing
area of development. So, you know, how can I, who's to say that this hundred layer neural network
with a million nodes at each layer, okay, so that's a hundred million nodes, which a GPU these
days can easily handle, okay? Ten years ago, it would have been, my God, that's going to take us a
week to feed out a million images or whatever text into it. Today, that can be done in half an hour
using a new hardware. So that's the hardware is not an issue. But so how do I know if it's
99 layers or 101 layers or 100 layers, right? And that's the fair question. And how do I know if
it's a million nodes or two million there, right? We're not really constrained by layers or nodes
anymore. The hardware is good, good to go. So that is, there's still a little bit, it's more of us
art than a science still, there's a little bit of, you know, magic in there, little trial and error,
not really magic, but trial and error for sure. You know, the guys at Google, they kind of give
you an answer, right? The guys who write the scientific paper, they've done a lot of exploration
that, you know, we haven't, but they still, it's, it's, well, you know, here's, here's, here's what
we got by trying different, it's an empirical science at the moment. Okay. The underlying
theory isn't solved completely yet. Okay. That's, that's the exciting part for me, actually, right?
Interesting, interesting. So thank you so much for first shedding, setting your thoughts on, on
that. So now let's talk about, again, get back to that, that business thingy, right? So I'm a
business. So you told me that, hey, everyone is doing it, you should do it too. There's,
there are some real numbers, real impact. Sure, I'm sold. So now what are some of the
first three steps that you would suggest to a small business that have no freaking clue?
Yeah. What that, what AI even means, let alone using it in their business. Sure. What are some
of the things that you can say, hey, maybe do these three things to get yourself sane or something?
Yeah. Well, I think first of all, education is important. You know, here's what a, here's what
a neural, here's what a deep learning network, AI network, here's what machine learning means.
You know, here's why we are here today. Here's why companies are using it. And here's where we are,
you know, honestly, state of the art. And here's some examples of how Google have used it or somebody,
you know, if they're a law firm, here's some examples of how, you know, your competitors are
using it now and really impacting them, you know, not just they're trying it out,
let's see how they go, really getting results and have been for the last two or three years. Okay.
The stuff hasn't just happened today, it's been around a while. So probably five years ago,
they call it the big bang really. So it's been around, it's not just starting today. It's,
you know, it's not a mature industry, but there are people who have had these stuff
for three years, right? So that's not new. They use it today, right?
So you're saying education is number one, that you said, like, educate yourself. What are the
two things that a small business could do to get good? Yeah, so that's education, that's number one,
that's good. And so number two, probably then, obviously, it's the same process, so new technology,
same processes, some things don't change, proof of concept, right? Let's have a little trial, let's
put a, let's run it on a small cluster, one computer, small cluster on your laptop, something,
and feed this data set in this small data set, you know, a subset of your larger data set,
if it's a legal company, let's just feed it a thousand documents, not a million, right?
And on your laptop with this neural network, it could be off the shelf open source. Okay,
a lot of this stuff's open source, which is accelerating it. So it could be TensorFlow,
okay? It could be MXNet, it could be CNTK, and that's the Google, Amazon, and Microsoft versions
in that order, Facebook use Torch, okay? So let's, as a consultant, I should know which one
probably is the better choice for your data set, actually, that's the value that I would, I would
add, okay, rather than trying them all one at a time, I could say, actually, well, you know,
TensorFlow is probably better choice than CNTK, or Weisversa, and here's why, okay? So that will
save you time and money. But that's a proof of concept. And if it helps, if it works, if you're
convinced at the results of a small data set running on a small piece of hardware, then we
could scale it up. Let's put all your data in, and this is a cluster, right? Cluster computing,
you know, not necessarily Hadoop, but the whole, you know, distributed processing
cluster computing, let's run it on the cloud, let's run it on Amazon, if you're happy with that,
or else in your own data center. So let's scale it up now from one to 100 nodes, okay? And let's
put all your data set in there, you know? Interesting, interesting. Step three, yeah.
Yeah, no, I think that that's great. So get a trial run and then use one of the frameworks.
So now, I think, and again, I'm taking slight detour, and I think because you peek my interest
around TensorFlow and MXNet and CentOS and Keras, which one is your favorite and which
and why and which was the least favorite and why? Yeah, probably TensorFlow, I like. A number of
users are approaching 50,000 on GitHub, which is the highest ever, you know, even more than Linux.
This is happening so fast, exponential, very steep. So that's one reason, the popularity,
second reason Google's behind it, and they have very good engineers, and people do respect them
for that, okay? And the third reason is that, you know, looking at these myself, evaluating,
looking at the code and the examples, you know, TensorFlow is good, it's got a good documentation.
Yeah, lots of reasons, okay? Amazon is, they have good engineers too. So that's not really a
differentiator. Why not use MXNet? Well, you can actually, it has, it has, there's always pros and
cons. And then CNTK is Microsoft, they have good engineers. And so, you know, why shouldn't I use
my, you know, it depends really, okay? And, you know, rather than get into each and every,
there's probably 12 metrics on each one. And you could draw a matrix, right? All the open source on
on the Y and 12 metrics on the X. And you would have checks in the boxes. And yeah, almost three
dimensional, then you have the application as well, dimension. So it's complicated. You have to
know your stuff. And that's where the experts come in and make their money, right? Right.
So now, which one is your least favorite and why? Oh, boy, probably the older ones. I don't know,
you know, they, they, they're all, they've all been good in their time, like Tiano,
Cafe, we're very good in their time, because they're kind of the only one, the only game in town.
But now they've been very quickly superseded. When Google announced in November, 2015, right,
that they're open sourcing, they're basically their artificial neural network, you know,
the world changed as far as I'm concerned, because then everybody had to open source theirs.
And so that, that really was a big bang. That's a beautiful thing. That's a beautiful thing.
Suddenly, Piano didn't, wasn't as competitive anymore. I'm not saying it's bad. It just,
it just wasn't as competitive. But, you know, so there's never been a bad software package. It's
just they get superseded quite quickly. Interesting. Interesting. So now,
now let's talk about, let's, let's talk about the industry as such. I think you, you peak,
you peak my interest around when you talk about these frameworks. And I think you actually
is a very interesting point that most of these vendors now they just came up and they open sourced
it to compete with sort of TensorFlow. So I think that's a beautiful thing. So what are
some of the nice things you're observing in the industry regarding the adoption of AI?
So if you can shed some light on that. Yeah, well, for example, it's been very good. It's
made everything nice and competitive and everything out in the open. So, you know,
MXNet, they keep upgrading CNTK, the Microsoft one that they went from to they just released
version two a couple of months ago with a heck of a lot more features than they ever would have if
Google hadn't have open source TensorFlow. So they've all been, everyone's been forced to
a work on it very quickly and be open source it very quickly too. So not everyone just
adopts TensorFlow. So if you look at the GitHub, I think MXNet has got over 10,000,
you know, TensorFlow is a clear liter 50,000, 10,000 CNTK 10,000, which is quite phenomenal
really. It's like, so people aren't just all going for TensorFlow. Okay, they are, you know,
they are using the other frameworks as well, whether that's a side by side comparison,
or we're just going to use it because it's better for our dataset, we're not sure. But
so, yeah, competition is always a good thing. And it really does move the field quicker.
Nice. Yeah. So now, now let's talk about people a bit. So I have heard about there's a keyword
called AI. And I have, I have heard that they have been getting industry's best salaries out there.
So I'm interested in getting myself into AI. So what are some of the two to three things you
would suggest or you would advise me to get me started? Yeah. So again, I, you know, if you're
the CTO, CIO, Chief Data Officer, even CEO in a company or, you know, the, you know, lead architect,
and you've heard about AI and you know that you're going to be left behind, you need to start reading
up on this stuff. And there's a whole bunch of stuff on the internet, YouTube, beautiful tutorials
that people have, you know, a lot of labor just put it out there for people. Okay.
And the internet, you know, can be underestimated the impact that the internet is having on all
of this technology development. So that's the platform. People are putting high quality
training out there for it. There's no excuse. Okay. It's very easy to learn. Not so many books
out there. It's too new, right? It's just moving so quick and it's too new. Stamford is open source,
same with MIT and Princeton, all the great universities of the world. Oxford as well have
a great course on neural networks, you know, by the top researcher in the world, same with
Stanford, you know, they offer CNNs and RNNs, two separate courses. You know, it's just incredible.
I mean, this stuff wouldn't have happened 10 years ago that today.
No, I think, I think yes, you are actually raising a very good point that these could,
so there are a lot of good MOOCs out there. I think definitely well said that guys should
check that out. Yeah, just dive in. That's the main thing. Yeah. Interesting. Interesting. So now
let's talk about, so you said if I'm a business, I should go and check it out. Now let's talk about
build versus buy versus, like what are some of your thoughts on also if suppose I have no freaking
clue what AI is and I've heard and I have seen the impact, what are some of the things you would
suggest for me that should I acquire AI talent or should I build and grow an AI talent? Yeah,
so that's a great question. So really you want to, you know, say let's just use TensorFlow as an
example, get your team of architects, you know, so I made a transition, I was a systems engineer
for Google IBM as a consultant, I've made a transition myself over to AI deep learning,
so it can be done if you're a techie kind of minded person and your curiosity will be driving
you anyway. I can't imagine there's any CIOs who haven't, you know, done some MOOC or something,
right? Because that's why you're in the business, you know, you love it because of that. And so
the second reason is that commercial, you want your company to succeed, be competitive and to
win even, right? So those two are very strong drivers, so you're just going to basically,
so let's say TensorFlow, I've done some reading, I'm a CIO, a curious guide, I want my business
to succeed, I've seen my competitors are already trialing it. Okay, so I'm going to download TensorFlow
on my laptop, get some data, get a data set and try it out, okay? And then, and then get my team
up to speed and three or four of us and myself will do a little proof of concept. And then if it
works, we'll get the business, we'll show our results to business and give them a business
taste, right? And if we get sign off, we'll scale it, okay? Now, that's us doing it internally. The
other way we could do it is go get an Accenture or my company or somebody out there consulting
to come in and do it for us, okay? That's going to be a little more expensive. And at the end,
you might not, if something goes wrong, you know, it's not a, you'll have to keep paying the money,
right? So ultimately, you want to gain this knowledge and do it yourself. How you get there is
you either go to an outside consulting company or you do it yourself. Probably you might,
I don't know, you know, some people, some engineers are very, very clever and I know they could do it
themselves. Others, it's not their core competence, you know, they're Walmart, they sell products,
they're not a, you know, or, you know, a small online retail company with, you know, a single owner,
you know, they're not a techie person, they want to serve people that that's what gives them great
joy and pleasure, not so much the technical side, they're going to have to get outside help.
That's interesting. I think that's, that's a very valid point. So one thing that we hear a lot
from many of our clients is the concern that market is crowded. So they're like almost every,
so one, I think one executive put it the best, he said, Vishal, you know what,
everyone is trying to sell us, no one is trying to tell us, right? So that's the problem. Okay.
So now, in that scenario, like what are some of some of the, some of the idea suggestions that you
can give to a bunch of these executives, like if I'm recruiting in a consulting firm, or if I'm
recruiting, say our contractors or whatever, what are some of the things that I should keep in mind?
Or what are some of the hacks or some of the tips or tricks that you would suggest that these
executives should know, so they can hire the best consulting team further for the job.
Yeah. So part of this is being able to sell, right? Being a good, you know, part of being a good
leader or consultant is the ability to sell, basically, and not just sell BS, but, you know,
you know, it's got to be real. So, you know, that's one of the things, you know, in the past life,
my physics, I used to be a teacher, right? So I could teach people new ideas, concepts in the
math and everything behind it. It's no different. I just get in there in front of the executive.
I think this is a wonderful opportunity for me to help improve the world, basically, right?
Because we're putting, we're driving stuff forward, automating, making everything more
efficient. So I believe in my cause, okay? That's the number one thing. You know, I have the vision,
I have the belief, and this is a good thing. It's the right thing for humanity. It's the right thing
for business, okay? It's inevitable that technological unemployment will be worked out. Okay. So let's
do the best we can. So from there, then you just, it's a matter of selling in the technology. Here's
a neural network. Here's what it looks like. Here's the architecture, layers, nodes. Here's
TensorFlow. Here's another one. Here's your data set, and here's how, here's your value proposition.
That's it. Right. So I think let me put it this way. So if suppose, see, you are the business,
right? And you want to hire a consulting firm to help your business. So what are like some of
two or three sort of things, or what are some of the things that you would consider
when hiring a consulting firm to help you? So what are some of the two to three things
that you would consider as an executive to hire for your company?
Yeah. Okay. So budget first, okay? If your budget's good, if you're a bigger company,
then you go for quality, right? You say, okay, the Accentures, the McKinsey's,
you know, the Boozell and Hamilton's, the Deloitte, you know, people with very strong
reputations that they're not strong for, they're strong for a reason. They've been around 100
years or 50 years, and you know, they've built that reputation. So it's like buying a car.
I've got money so I can go get a Rolls-Royce or a Lamborghini, right? Actually, my budget
limited. So I'm going to, I want the Lamborghini and a Rolls-Royce. So I'm going to get a company
that I can have faith in, but I can't afford Accenture right now. You know, in the future,
I will be that, you know, everybody wants to succeed. But right now, you know, so maybe that's
where I would come in. You know, I don't charge the $300 an hour that Accenture might or however much
they, you know, I don't want to boil this down to that. But it's like, okay, you know, I think I
can actually do a better job maybe than Accenture. So you're suggesting that budget is a concern?
So budget is one concern that you would consider when hiring a consulting firm or a contracting
firm. What are some of the other considerations that you think that someone would think about
when hiring a firm? Yeah, so quality, definitely the quality factor too. Okay, so, so yeah, not
every, you know, if people, the budget and quality are kind of matched, aren't they? If you've got
unlimited budget, you probably should go for the best quality. There's no real reason not to.
So how do, so is there any, is there any kind of
reputation index? Or is there anything out there that's supposed, if, how would I know if your
firm is any good or better than say Accenture? Yeah, or how like, are there, like, what are some
of the tools that I would know that for this particular job, for an industry like mine,
a boutique firm like yours, Vizaviz of Accenture, like, what are some of, is there anything out
there that I can look for? Not really. So reputation is your, yeah, you should do your due
diligence, absolutely. Yeah, encourage that 100%. So, so basically you're looking at reputation,
aren't you really? So reputation is built over time. Okay, so the boutique firm, the firm might be
newer, so it's slightly more risky, I guess. But so you do your research, you talk to the people,
pick up the phone, talk to people, look at the website, pick up the phone, have meetings with
the people, maybe four or five firms, maybe, you know, two or three big ones and two or three small
boutiques and then make your decision, right? I think that's the way people do anything, buying
a car, hiring a consultant. So it's no different there. Yeah, boutique firms might have more
deeper knowledge than some of the bigger guys, actually, that's my, yeah, I think that makes
sense. So now let's, let's talk about, we'll dig a bit further into talent. So now not really
consulting firms. Suppose if you want to hire your next hire in your consulting firm,
an AI talent, what are some of the things that you would look for in that candidate?
And what are some of the things that you would not look for in a candidate?
Yeah, technically, first of all, you know, you got to know your staff. If it's a technical role,
if it's a more of a product manager role, it'd be selling ability and presentation skills more.
But for technical roles, yeah, you got to know, you have to have some hands on on some of the
frameworks like MXNet, TensorFlow, and demonstrable hands on, maybe a GitHub account, for example,
with some neural network work on display. Okay. And it's, you know, not just from yesterday,
but from six to 12 months ago. So yeah, maybe you've worked in a company already, a startup,
or a major company, and you're looking for your next move. So it's all demonstrable. And then,
you know, just the interviewing process itself, you can normally tell. It's just a new technology.
Again, same process, different technology. So you're suggesting that they should have some hands
on on on the frameworks that are out there today. And they should be able to demonstrate sort of
their comfort level in these platforms. Yeah, because I think you you may not,
so I think that's another question. So how different are these framework from each other?
So if I say no TensorFlow, is it, do I know Keras or MXNet? Like, do I know other platforms?
Or how different how polar are these platforms from each other?
Yeah, that's a great question. So yes and no. So the underlying technology, the layers and the nodes
and in the optimization algorithms, the regularization is dropout, there's all these
techniques and methodologies that people in the industry know and know about. Okay. So how TensorFlow
implements that or MXNet or CNTK, it's going to be in there. Okay, it's going to be three lines of code,
which will be slightly different in each, you know, framework. Okay, but it's more important to
know about the optimization algorithm. It's more important to know about the algorithms. In fact,
we shall be honest. Okay. And then the coding is, oh, it might be done in Python, Torch,
what it's going to be done in Lua, C++, it's TensorFlow, it's going to be done in Python.
MXNet can do it in R and Julia and Python and C++. It has the most different languages.
That's one reason people choose MXNet actually. So the language as a programmer yourself, we know
we can pick out Python or C++ or Ruby if we have to. So it's more a deep understanding of the
algorithms and being able to understand why I would use this algorithm. Interesting.
I think valid point. So now let's spend a few minutes on chatbots. That's a massive
craze nowadays. I think it's almost like, I would say about half of the companies that I hear about
nowadays in AI, they're doing some other version of chatbot. So how is real or unreal is this
phenomena? And if you can shed some light on that. Yeah, absolutely. So chatbots are in LP,
remember, they're recurrent neural networks. So that's straight into the technical side of
the thing. So yeah, so chatbots for me, NLP images. So language, what makes us unique as humans,
one of the major things is our understanding of language. So chatbots are going to be,
they are the killer app. There's no doubt about this in my mind. Because if you understand language,
you have human level intelligence. You can plan, you can reason, you can communicate and talk
intelligently. So when Siri, I can ask Siri, what time is the next bus? Where can I order a pizza?
What's on at the movies? Tell me about the meaning of live. Tell me of the subplot of
Macbeth, et cetera, and to understand, not just go out to Wikipedia, cut and paste,
but to understand. And that's the point we're actually at right now. So yeah, chatbots,
they are AI, right? Interesting. And what's, to your perspective, what's next? Like what is,
so five year, what would be your prophecy for say, one year down the line, five year and ten
year down the line? What are some of three things that you would anticipate seeing in next year,
in next five year and in next ten years? Okay, yeah, great question. So yeah,
brave new utopia, right? Yes, nothing less, nothing less. Okay. So, and yes, it all goes
wrong. I see a world in 10 years time where, you know, automation is 50% of, you know,
people are out of work and, and enjoying their lives much, much more than they are now doing jobs.
They're not particularly, you know, and thinking that, oh, yeah, I used to looking back and laughing
quaintly to themselves, oh, I used to derive meaning out of that job, you know, and, you know,
there's a lot more to life than that. So that, that's the vision, that's utopia,
that's where we want. Okay, it's dystopia, most of science fiction movies, Terminator, are all
about, you know, the bad effects, oh, they're gonna go rogue and turn on us. Okay, we'll leave
that to one side. I have a Facebook group called AI Safety, which looks into research work.
Stuart Russell at Berkeley has just written a book, Do the Right Thing, just published on Amazon.
I just found out about it today, in fact, and I put it straight on my AI Safety.
Nice, nice. Now, he wrote the book on artificial intelligence, mine, okay,
him and Peter Norvig at Google, wrote the book on artificial intelligence and modern approach,
which everybody uses. Okay, so it's no small matter. He's just published this book on AI Safety,
okay, trying to downplay all the doomsaing bits that we get from movies and kind of gets ingrained
here as kids, and it's kind of hard to remove. Okay, he's like, okay, so, you know, here are the
theoretical limits on AI. This is what they can do. This is what they certainly cannot do,
so don't be afraid because there are limits on this stuff. Okay, there are limits. I'm a physicist
by training, the laws of physics constrain stuff. Okay, things are constrained. They just don't go,
you know, so yeah, this is a bit of a problem right now, the fear of the unknown. Okay, so
10 years, I want to see utopia. I want to see basic income. I want to see people get deriving
more meaning out of their life than just going to empty jobs. Okay, capitalism has definitely
got us to where we are. I'm not anti-capitalist, I'm pro, but you know, I'm also pro-reality as
well. Things are changing. Let's embrace the change. Let's embrace the change.
Interesting. So I think one area that I definitely want to touch slightly on before we part ways,
I think I would love to know your perspective on some of the use cases in which AI sucks.
Some of the use cases in which AI is not efficient.
Oh, none really, none. No, because what the big picture here, I think that you're missing is that
these artificial, they're basically replacing our neural networks. They're not replacing us
as human beings, okay, but they're replacing our neural networks. Okay, and that's not scary. For
me, that's a good thing because we'll be able to free up and do stuff, creative stuff. Okay,
so that's basically, so nothing sucks. Okay, you know, we had Jeopardy, we had the Chess,
we had Jeopardy, we had Go, and now we're having them beating poker. Okay, Carnegie Mellon recently
beating poker. One by one, they're beating us at everything they shall. So don't ever think that,
oh, they sucked, they're never going to work. It's just not true. Okay, things fail, right?
Experimentation, you know, taking risks. You know, people who take risks
do so because they have to. Okay, Richard Branson, Larry Page, Bill Gates, they have to
entrepreneur Steve Jobs. He didn't have to do the iPhone, but he had to. You know,
something in him had to do that. Okay, it's the same with AI. You know, we can't stop it. The
researchers, mistakes are going to happen. But so what, in any take? But I think so,
I think you raised a very good point. So one area that you suggested was, okay, so now AI is
taking away three, so that we'll get more time to do arts. So now, for something like art,
do you think AI can do art? Yeah, that's a great point. Okay, so the bit I skimmed over was that we
are still going to be here as humans, us, we're whole, you know, we have a certain amount of
intelligence, there are eight, nine different types of intelligence. There's rational math,
okay, logic, that's one, but only one, there's eight more, there's creativity, you just mentioned,
painter, music, writing, okay, there's language, there's social interaction, there's introspection,
right, that's a form of intelligence, understanding ourselves, understanding our environment,
understanding others, those are three types of intelligence. There are others as well,
there's commercial business intelligence, you know, we're not all Bill Gates, okay, I haven't
got 90 billion because he's better at it than I am, okay, and you have to admit it, Einstein was
better at physics than I am, okay, so there's all these different types of intelligence, we will
still be us with our, we're starting to understand by developing AI and getting thrashed at chess
and go and being humbled completely, right, by these AI neural networks, that yeah, we're limited
now, we used to be the center of the universe, Galileo displays that, oh wait, no, we go around
the sun through careful observation, and then, you know, slowly but slowly our egos are being
brought down to size, it's like, you know what, we're the best that biology can do is intelligence
on this planet, that there's probably many other planets out there, okay, as a physicist again,
cosmology is a big part of my, right, I think that's a very good point, and
I think last month I was talking to one of the executives, and the conversation went into this
idea of, so this is my theory of what's happening, right, so I'll give a quick bit, yeah, so I was
pitching this guy, there are two things, there's art of doing business, and there's the science of
doing business, right, so science and art working together makes a business, right, so my pitch to
them was that the computational part is the science, science is predictable, right, science is
formulative, science is something that sort of can, so, but the art, art is you, art is a bunch
of people working together to create an outcome, right, those phenomena, it's a very sort of
non-calculative, very qualitative phenomena in many aspects, so the discussion went into the
side of that, so the technology like AI, right, they push the limit, so they say they are doing
such a beautiful job at science, somehow we are confusing them with art, right, so now imagine
a business that says okay, I will do less and less art, because science to me is almost like an art,
right, and then with the next upgrade, your entire core competency washed away, right,
because your core competency is based out of a partly of art and a partly of science,
so what's your thinking, what's your thought on that phenomenon?
Yeah, okay, so where we're at now is we've kind of solved all these narrow
intelligence, we've beat chess, we've beat go, we do a lot, we've image classified images more
accurately than a human being can, amazingly, okay, it's taken most people by storm, including Sergei
Bryn who said I never saw this guy, right, you know, so yeah, if it can take him by surprise,
it can take everyone by surprise, I guess, but it's taken me by surprise, it's happened very
quickly and Google DeepMind at London is 350 PhDs in physics and neuroscience and computer
science and language. That's I think that's a fascinating, so thank you so much again, Peter,
I think before we part off, I would love to have you have a closing statement on that, so yeah,
okay, okay, yeah, so let me just go back to age I then so yeah, the key goal now is to develop
general intelligence, which have the what you mentioned and all of the ones I mentioned,
introspect, ability to introspect itself, ability to communicate, understand other people, emotional
intelligence, there's people working at MIT on exactly that, and so this general intelligence
is not solved, we have bits and pieces we need to either come up with a more underlying theory
of intelligence, which might come from understanding how the brain works more, in other words,
through observation, if I'm right, exactly how the neurons all work, the different types of neurons,
and then replicate that, which is a little bit what artificial neural networks do, they're
you know, replicating the basically how the biological neuron does it integrate and fire,
actually, so that's where we're at, we're very good at certain types of tasks, and we want to
make it general, we want we want an iPhone that can drive a car, talk to you emotionally,
intelligently, just like having a passenger beside us, okay, we want to build that, but
it'll be smarter, faster, and quicker, okay, science fiction, no, not really, we've had so many
developments that we can forget about science fiction, it's going to happen, whether it's five,
ten, we don't know exactly, and it will keep improving on the S-curve, Ray Kurzweil talks
about the singularity is near, right, that's that's when we do get AI, EGI, so that's it, that's the
goal, that's what I get out of bed in the morning for is to push that board and companies and then
just keep putting in the latest algorithms and TensorFlow, okay, and other learning frameworks,
but ultimately, you know, the bits are being added to make them more general, so and so that's
exciting, and that keeps me going, we're just they call this the fourth industrial revolution,
I'm happy to be a part of it. Thank you so much, Peter, I think we haven't said any better, so
and again, I do truly appreciate you sharing your wisdom, I think a couple of things that
we learned from the conversation is study, it's everything is out there, there are good courses
if you want to equip yourself, what's going on, if you need to hire some consulting look,
do some due diligence on them, and definitely there's thanks to very vibrant open source community,
almost every framework out there is blessed with a lot of support, and there's no sort of clear
winner, they all are sort of playing their clear role, I think that is really really helpful to
know, and definitely we wish you all the luck with your consulting firm, and love to probably have
you back sometime and share your story and success and failures, and share with our audience, and
good luck, and thank you so much for your time. Thank you for having me, yeah, it's been fun,
it's been great. Awesome.
so worthless is the mic on I don't know how to work this inside I'm breaking down I hope I'm not
