Thank you Anastasia for talking to us this evening. Anastasia and my collaboration I think
goes back to about 2017, yeah, and through Ezrad and she has educated me in what I like
to call the Russian School of Dialectical Thinking, which has been a revelation really
because the Russians have taken a slightly different approach to what you might call
the Basikas and Laskian approach to dialectical thinking, starting at the opposite end of
the age spectrum. Anastasia is a researcher and a teacher at Moscow City University and
Moscow State University, I believe, and her particular interest is in creativity. She
wrote the chapter on creativity in the Rutledge International Handbook of Dialectical Thinking
and of course she was a co-editor of that book, so she worked very, very closely with myself
and with Mike Moskolo and I'm sure she's got some interesting things to say today to tell you
about creativity and it will give you a little bit of an introduction to the work in the chapter.
So without further ado, I'll hand it over to you Anastasia. Yes, my name is Anastasia. I'm from
Moscow City University and today we are going to discuss creativity and dialectical thinking.
So the name of my presentation is written on the title. It's the engine of the creativity,
how dialectical structures can help to solve open-stat problems. I guess then the expression
open-stat problems could sound a little bit maybe strange, maybe mysterious, but I will explain
everything to you a little bit later in my presentation. Now I would like to attract your
attention to these pictures. On the left side, I can everybody recognize, can recognize the well
known famous sketches by Leonardo Da Vinci, so it's a scheme of his famous flying machine
and on the right side you cannot recognize anything because it's no name, no name piece of
art. It's just a piece of art made by some urban unknown, no-name artist. And for me,
these two pictures are very much about the opposition of big C, big creativity and little C,
little creativity. So about creativity of genius and creativity of ordinary people.
And I would like to say here and underline it that if we discuss creativity in terms of dialectics
and especially in terms of structural dialectics, we can say that this opposition big C and little C
doesn't make a lot of sense because the structure of the creative act is universal
and in terms of structural dialectics, yes, if we discuss creativity in terms of dialectics.
The structure of creative act is universal and it's a overcoming and transforming contradiction
through operating with oppositions, opposites. But in my presentation today,
I will try to use more example and I will try to rely on this little C creativity and
almost all examples that I will use and I will show you will be from the creativity of ordinary
people like you and me. Yes, so and the starting point for our discussion for today is the slide
about Joy Guilford. I think that almost everybody knows that more than 70 years ago, Joy Guilford,
American psychologist, suggested us the concept of divergent thinking, divergent thinking as an
alternative to convergent thinking. And in fact, he suggested to research the new type of tasks,
tasks with open end, yes. So in my title, it was tasks with open start and Joy Guilford suggested
us to research tasks with open end. So as an alternative to tasks with one correct answer,
yes, one correct answer, open end tasks are with multiple, multiple answers.
And we know that more than 70 years past already. Yes, now it's 2024. But if we would like to find
in the literature some typical definition of creativity, widespread definition of creativity,
we will find something like this, something like this definition which is written above.
So creativity is typically defined as the combining, synthesizing or bridging of ideas,
information and knowledge to generate novel, original and appropriate solutions. So
and I would like to why I'm saying that it is starting point for the discussion today,
because I would like to say and to highlight that to my mind, there are at least three problems
with this typical definition of creativity. So the first one is the fact that this definition
highlights almost only combinatorics. So this definition regards the creative process almost
only as combining, combining, bridging and synthesizing here, combining combinatorics.
And after Guilford, of course, you know that Paul Torrent suggested this psychological
psychodiagnostic measurement tool to measure creativity and suggested this famous for
parameters, criteria, fluency, originality, flexibility, liberation.
And I would say that all of these criteria are quantitative, quantitative, not qualitative,
but quantitative. And it's very understandable because if your definition highlights combinatorics,
so we will have quantitative, quantitative criteria, it's unavoidable. And
it's the first problem problem with that. The second problem to my mind is the fact that
the tasks that are suggested to the respondents don't reflect the specific situation when a
person needs a new solution. And you can just remember yourself at the moment of your life
when you really need a new creative solution. I'm sure that it's not about combinatorics at all.
I'm sure that it is something that you found yourself in some problem mess,
a mess of uncertainty and you should to cope with it. And the third problem that I see
in this definition that it ignores a huge part of creative process before solving,
before solving. And to my mind, it's a very important, very important aspect and we don't have any
right to ignore it. And when you really need a creative solution, yes, so what do you do?
You cope, try to cope with uncertainty, to cope with that problem mess that's surrounding you.
You frame the problem as a contradiction. And then you convert an emotionally
stressful, maybe painful, emotionally strong experience of tension, of contradiction,
into intellectual work with oppositions, with opposites. Here in this slide, you can see two
pictures. I like both of them in pair. So it has the same name. The name of both paintings,
both paintings are called torments, torments of creativity. And I would say that both authors
catch that very moment when a person tries, within the creative process, tries to cope
with uncertainty and tries to cope with that emotionally painful experience and to convert it
into some intellectual work, intellectual work with opposites right in this very moment.
And on the left side of this slide, you can see some typical tips for teachers.
All internet is full of such tips and all methodological literature for teachers is full of
such tips, typical tips for teachers how to train creativity. Yes, for example, add more ideas,
generate many ideas, right, find more than one right answer, push past the first response.
And of course, these tips are based on that typical definition of creativity that we saw
earlier on the first slide. And of course, they are also about combinatorics, about generating
more and more and more ideas and combinatorics combining them. And I would like to ask you
to imagine now, if somebody, for example, a teacher, come to this person, for example,
from the first picture or from the second picture, and tell him, hey, find more than
right answers, generate many ideas, adapt to new uses. Yes. So how do you think, what do you think,
what these men will, persons will answer to these teachers? I guess that nothing good,
nothing good. And that is because such tips are not relevant to the moment, not relevant to the
moment, because it's not moment when we are just combining or bridging the ideas. It's the moment
when we, human being tries to cope with uncertainty and frame contradiction.
And here on the top of the slide, you see that I asked the question, how,
no, this slide, on this slide, sorry, I asked the question is typical definition of creativity,
really helpful for educators today. And now I would like to suggest you a theory of examples.
It will be dealing with connected to global research PISA. So I know that not many of you
work with the school level of education. But so I'm not sure that you know well about PISA,
but I can assure you that everybody in the world who work with school level of education
knows about know about PISA. So PISA is a program for international student assessment. It's the
most reputable, most global research, which try to try to investigate the academic results of
school children or 15 years old teenagers. Usually they deal with reading skills and
mathematics skills and something about biology. But two years ago, they made research
about creativity, about creative thinking, because it's one of the competence of 21st
century, you know, and they decide to make global research about this soft skill, as they say,
creative thinking. And they, as a methodological base of their research, they used the Guilford
methodology and that typical definition of creativity that I showed you on the first slide.
And they also speak about literacy creativity, creativity of ordinary people.
The next slide, I just would like to show you the how many countries participated. It was more
than 80 countries, really global. And a lot of thousands of teenagers participated.
They always, PISA researchers also always do ratings. You can see that Singapore
career Canada leaders, but it doesn't matter now. It's not my point today. My point is the
procedure of measurement. So I was very interested how they measured what kind of task they suggested
to teenagers all over the world to measure their creative thinking and to make this global
research. Because, of course, everybody understands that the results are very, very
depend on the measurement procedure. So, and if we go deep into details and we analyze
what they measured, in fact, we immediately recognize those four parameters, flexibility,
originality, and to others. And here, I would like to suggest you one example, I will explain later
why it's important for me to explain it in details. So, for example, the task on flexibility.
They, on the right side of the slide, you see the picture. And they ask their respondents
write three different titles for the illustration on the right. Yes, for this illustration with
book and tree and bench. And on the bottom of the slide, you can see their scoring system.
How did they give scores? And you can see here that, for example, you have student A,
student B, and student C. And student A has no credit. Yes, so zero score. Student B was the best.
And the student C, more or less. Yes, and why, why so? Yes, why such scoring system?
Student A told us the big book, the giant book, the large book. So, okay, according to Torrance
Diagnostics, so the same object, the same characteristic of the same object, zero points.
Yes, so the student B, the lonely tree, the written trail, the perfect story. Maximum score,
why? Because the three different objects and three different characteristics. So, it's about
flexibility. And student C, the freedom of a story, a life with a story waiting to be read,
the power of a story. I think that you feel that the answers of students C are a little bit more
interesting than of student B. But it will be partial credit. Why? Because the freedom of a
story and the power of a story, it's about the same object. It's not so flexible, according to
strong strict rules of psychodiagnostics by Torrance. One more example about originality.
So, it's an example of a task, another task. Respondents are asked to come up with a comic
strip. Comic strip, so look at the illustration on the right side and come up with a dialogue,
comic strip and dialogue in it. Yes, dialogue between the sun and the earth.
I would like to attract your attention here that they demand humor. Because it's not
accidentally, because humor is a really significant and serious characteristic of cognitive,
highly developed cognitive structure. That is why I think they demand humor here.
And what did we do with my students at the university? I don't see if some of them are here,
maybe, because I can't see everybody now. So, we did a small research.
I asked my two full few this piece of creativity tasks.
All of them, because they're in open access and they're published, some typical, of course,
not everything, but some typical tasks are published and you can go deeper into details.
And I would like to check, we would like to check if artificial intelligence will call with it.
And yes, expectedly, to tell you the truth, I didn't expect anything else. So GPT chat was the
best student according to all these, in terms of all these combinatoric tasks. Why? Because they
are about combinatorics. If we are dealing with only with the combinatorics within the creative
process, of course, computers will be better than any person. It's very strange to accept something,
to expect something else. And you can see here the examples that were invented by GPT chat. So,
for the first task is whispers of imagination, pages of possibility, boundless chapter,
the way through literature spaces, the world broad inside the volume. So you see that it's
rather interesting answers. And of course, they will get maximum, because maximum score, because
it's about different objects and about different characteristics. So artificial intelligence
is very flexible in terms of torrents, diagnostics. And on the right side,
you can see the comic strip. And artificial intelligence also can do something funny.
I won't say that it's very, very funny, but a little bit yes. So there is some humor here,
as it's a dialogue between the sun and the earth, who is the most important here.
This definition is to shell. And you see here the picture of iceberg. And I would like to
say that this definition is just the top of this iceberg, is just the surface of it. And
this definition does not give us any idea what is deeper, what is deep in the water,
what is deep in the structures of creative process. And I'm sure that all over the world,
and in all countries, the problem of using artificial intelligence is discussed very
widely and very often. And they usually say that artificial intelligence can replace
human beings only when we deal with algorithmical processes. But when we deal with creativity,
no, never. None of GPT charts and artificial intelligence computers will replace human beings.
And I agree with it. In fact, I agree with it that really the creative process, creativity, is about
specifically human ability, human feature. But we should revise, rethink,
reconstructualize the definition. Because if we would take, if we would give in this definition
only the aspect of combinatorics, so we will lose this competition for sure. And
just a moment. And to go a little bit deeper with you today, I would like to suggest
to your attention one classification of problem situation that I suppose is very fruitful. For
me, it was very fruitful to understand how to catch this very moment of really human creativity.
So this classification was elaborated by Padyak Filiseenko. It's two Russian
psychologists, but they, in their tone, they used the methodology of Dietrich Dörner.
It's a German psychologist, German psychologist of the end of 20th century. And he made great
researches in the field of computer games and logical thinking. And so what do they suggest?
So the first type of problem situation is closed, closed. So closed start and closed end. Fixed
set of premises with single correct answers. So it's the majority of tasks that we meet
at school or at the university or in any stage of official system of education, for example.
Closed open, closed beginning and open end. So multiple possible answers and fixed set of
premises. And that is, for me, is about something like torrent diagnostics and those PISA tasks
that I have just shown you, shown to you. So it was like open end tasks. But the problem is that
the set of premises, sorry, set of premises are fixed. And the third type of problem situation
that we suggest to take into account is open, open. An open start or open beginning and open
end. Multiple possible answers and open set of premises. As for the examples of such
type of problem situation, I put here the example from old Russian fairy tales. So in some funny
picture about it on the bottom below. Yes. So when Russians want anybody to do something
impossible to order there, to order somebody to do something impossible, usually Russians say
something, go there, I don't know where, where to bring that. I don't know what. So it's the
typical, typical task, which we can call open task. Open, open task, open start problem.
But as for ordinary life, as for our everyday process, I would like to say that open start
problems, almost each ordinary situation can become open start problem. For example, to write a book,
to make a painting, to compose the music, to make PhD research, to make a presentation about
creativity and dialectical thinking. So all this problem, all this situation could be
open, open, could be considered as open, open. Because they have the space for personal
free goal setting. So in this task, they are so wide that I can put my agency there. If we are
speaking about ordinary life and tasks that we meet every day, so almost each situation can be,
can become open, open problem. All these, all these tasks could be, could become
open, open task, task with open start. Why? Because they have enough space, enough space
for me as a person to set my free, personally important goals about free goal setting.
They have enough space for me to put my agency there. And that is why there are a lot of number
of open start problems. We should not invent something special, but we should define them and
the challenge is how to catch them and how to use this third type of problem situation in the
procedure of measurement and in the procedure of educational and in different educational practices.
So if we will have time after the presentation within the discussion, I can give you some more
examples, examples from educational practice because my older daughters study design, game design,
and they use, I feel that they use open, open, open start problems. It's quite interesting and
really provoke creative process in students. But now, now I would like to give you another
theory of examples and it will be examples that have many, that has very much in common with
open start problems about this type of problem situation. I think everybody remember COVID times
and everybody remembers that everybody was isolated. Yes, and social media at that time
became extremely popular. And in Russian part of Facebook, at that time, during maybe three
or four months, was extremely popular and well-known flash mob or such Facebook activity
when during, about art, the name was art is a little bit different in Russian, but it doesn't
matter now. So, and during three months, thousands of people, thousands of people
did the same task. I would say that it was open start problem task.
So, choose any piece of art, any piece of art, rethink it and make it out of the materials
that surround you. So, we remember COVID times, we don't, we cannot go anywhere. So, we have only
materials that surrounded me and in our apartment or in our house. And so, it was thousands of
people participated in here. And for me as a researcher, first of all, it's about little
sea. So, it's about creativity of ordinary people. And this boost of explosion of creativity,
of people creativity was a response as a response to this open start problem.
Then, I didn't participate myself, but I looked through thousands of pictures and I noticed
that we can define different strategies that people use, that people use when
doing this task. And it will be three strategies, three strategies I will share with you,
my remarks and my comments. And then, we will see what it gives us. So, why it is useful.
So, here you can see straight to G1, I would say it's beautiful or aesthetic coping,
coping, just imitating. Yes, you see that you should choose any piece of art, some original,
and do something from materials that surround you. Yes. And this coping, this beautiful,
aesthetic coping was about 80% of total amount, I would say. The first strategy. And as for
general message that I hear from the authors of this picture, so look at me, how beautiful I am.
Yes, so it's a bit, it's very much about myself and me as a person. Yes. The second strategy
I would say playing with materials. 15 or maybe 20% of total, percent of total amount.
And for me, it's very much about originality. So, look how original I am. I would like to show
how original I am. I would like to do something that will be different from the rest of
items. And here, strategy three. Strategy three is about humor very much. And you remember that
humor is an important thing for us when we are discussing creativity. It's about humor and
it's a little bit about bringing some author's vision here. So, and there was no, a lot of such
works, not a lot of such items, maybe 5, 10% of total amount. I didn't, it was not my task to
count them, but something like this. Yes. And what, usually when I do this exercise and discuss
this exercise with my university students, we do it as a game. So, I told them that imagine
you are, imagine that you are HR and you have three vacancies, open vacancies in your company as
the company leader, secretary, and the design of retail space. So, and instead of ordinary CV, you
get such a strange portfolio. So, you have candidate one, candidate two, and candidate three. And
how will, what will you decide? And usually students say that this one will be secretary
because it's about accurate, accurate decision, accurate fulfill the tasks and imitating
not very creative, secretary should not be very creative. So, this is about designer
because it's about originality, it's about the ability to, to attract audience attention. And
this will be the company leader because it's about author vision. It's about something my,
some my personal new vision role I showed to my students this picture. And to tell you the truth,
to tell you the truth, when I was looking through those thousands of pictures, I wanted,
I tried to find something like this. So, I tried to find some, some item which could be really
called as the creative, real creative act. And I would say that this picture for me is out of
strategies and beyond everything that I showed to you before. Why? Because the author of this,
of this picture of this item would like to discuss with us something that is important for
her personally, not to show us how beautiful she is or how spotty she is or how flexible she is,
I don't know. But there was a text below this picture. It was about the story of the author.
So, it's a lady a little bit more than 50 years old and she survived from the car accident.
And he had a lot of problems with her back and she did a great job to recover. She could not
move, but she did a great job to recover. And now she would like to show us, to show us
that the beginning, the start would take place, can take place at any moment of life.
So, the name of original photo is the beginning or the start. Yes. And
for me, it's outstanding. Why? I understand that discussing art is always very thin ice
because it could be very subjective. Yes. But when I work with my student, I always ask them,
could you imagine that you look to this picture below separately, independently,
without any original version, without any information about this Facebook activity,
without anything, just an exhibition. And each time they say, yes, we can imagine it. So,
this lady was successful to do real independent author statement about
problems about the topic that was, that involved her deeply. And what is important for us here?
And it's very much about ordinary people's creativity because she's not an artist,
she's not a sportsman, she's just a lady who would like to speak with us about
important things, deep philosophical important things. And why it's important for us now,
in terms of new definition of creativity? Firstly, she did it as a response to open start problem.
Secondly, personal meaning. It's very, very important. If we speak about human creativity,
the essence of human creativity, personal meaning is a very important aspect. So,
it is not affordable for any artificial intelligence. Then dialectical structure.
You see here a lot of pairs of oppositions, of course. So, black and white,
dark and light, shadow and light, end and start. So, a lot of pairs that she used,
that she's operating in order to give us the idea of this, of her
concept of life, yes, of life and death, and that life can
start at any stage of, in any age, at any age, at any stage from zero point.
And I would say that it's unavoidable. When we're, when we talk, when we start talking about really
complex philosophical problems, we can't avoid dialectical structures. We don't have any chance to
not to use them. Of course, we structured this uncertainty which is surrounding us with
extremums, with these extreme points opposite one another. And symbolic space,
symbols, they're also very important. And you see here the symbol of ag, the symbol of ag is the
beginning, beginning, start, and show also uses.
And here, this slide for me is very important in terms of future research and future educational
practices, about creativity and dialectical thinking, because it's very important to understand
then that when a person dealing with open start problem, the decision maker
firstly make an idea, a model of this problem. And even if the task initially formulated as open,
a person can simplify it and start solving as if it was closed one. Because, and for us,
for researchers and for educators, it's very important to my mind to catch this very moment
when it's happening in the mind of person. So, because as for the first strategy, in spite of
the fact that the task was the same, and it was open, really open, has really open structure,
the first strategy organized as if it was a task with right answer, closed, closed,
task with right answer, with one right answer, because when we imitate,
we don't have any opportunities, we just have right direction.
As for the second strategy, it's also a simplification for me. And so, these people tried to
deal with this open start problem as if it was closed open. So, it was about something about,
like in Torrance Diagnostics. So, they also imitate the original piece. So, it was also fixed
premises for them. But they were playing with materials and did something original with multiple
answers. And this very lady, she was successful to make, to use the original piece of art only
as a reference and did her own, her own author statement, her own author vision independent piece,
independent item. And we can, we should understand that nobody asked her about it.
Nobody. That was she who decided to do it in such way. So, and it means for me as a researcher that
imagine that it was three persons, yes. So, it was three different models in person's mind
when they start solving this problem, which has a space, which give us a space to set our free
goals there, to put our agency there. And I would say that the challenge is
to study, for me, for us as researchers, to study, to use this type of problems and to
study how to introduce them into first of all development practices,
to catch this very moment of modeling the problem. And here, my favorite quotation from
Nikolay, from Nikola Veroxa. So, because I belong, as Nikolay already said, I belong to
Russian School of Structural Dialectics. And everybody who belongs to this school have
a favorite quotation from Nikolay. So, my quotation is the following. So, it consists of two parts.
And it's about the fact that thinking is universal and unique at the same time.
And it's about the problem of structure and content of thinking. And in the first part of
this quotation, I need this quotation now, because it's conceptualized on theoretical level
everything that I said through the series of examples below. So,
in the first part of the quotation, the idea is about oppositions. And Nikolay explains them
why oppositions are so good units to analyze thinking, because oppositions belong to the structure
of thinking. And oppositions can be found on any meaningful material. And that is why I
told you in the very beginning that it doesn't matter for structural dialectics if it is Leonardo
or it's no-name artist. So, we can both, and Leonardo and no-name artists, both of them
overcome contradiction. They met contradiction, overcome it through operating with oppositions.
But on the other hand, speaking about the unique character, not universal now, but unique
character of mental act and of creative act, a person always
chooses the pair of oppositions of opposites, which is both promising, the most promising
from the point of view of transforming contradiction. And each time we can choose
what to do with this problem mess and what to do with this
situation of uncertainty, which pairs of oppositions will be more helpful for us.
And I would like to sum up now. I would like to sum up. I hope and I think that you still remember
that I started my today's speech with some typical definition of creativity.
Yes, and there is still my point how to define creativity and this alternative definition
of creativity is published in that Routledge Handauk on dialectical thinking together with
this scheme. And it based on, of course, Nikolay and Olga Dichenko ideas
when they wrote about it a long time ago. So, creativity is a capacity to actualize a complex
of cognitive and defective mechanisms, including dialectical, formal logical, and symbolic structures
in order to define and transform problems that contain a high degree of openness and uncertainty
at the start. So, here you see the scheme. Maybe in some times we will see some version two,
version three, but it's at the moment. So, it's a look like this. So, it reflects
different types of mental tools that we use, formal logical thinking, symbolization,
dialectical thinking, which are actualized in person's mind when we, when he or she is coming
from point A to point B from problem mess, from the mess of uncertainty to the number of creative
solutions overcoming contradiction and operating with oppositions. And here I repeat the picture of
Iceberg again. And I think it's more or less relevant. So, we can say that
I'm not going to say that the typical and accepted definition of creativity is not correct.
It's correct, but it's shallow. It's not enough. Yes. And of course, the synthesizing, combining,
bridging the ideas is a part of a creative process, but it's not in the structure of creative processes.
And I would say that maybe it can look something like this. Here it's a big conversation. I'm not
going to go deep into details here, but I would just would like to say that
here in Russia when we develop different educational practices, we try to support
these schematas, this structure, try to support all these mental tools and dialectical thinking and
symbolic spaces. Here you can see some pictures from our kindergarten work. But not only kindergarten,
I think you remember Igor's report some months ago about positional methods. And he told everybody
that the positions have three groups and also normative. It's about formal logic,
normative positions, dialectical or transformative positions. It's about dialectical thinking and
symbolic group of positions. It's about symbolization. So, the most problem point is school, of course,
as usually. But we will think what to do with this. And to finalize, it will be my final slide.
So, it's a quotation, this time my favorite quotation from Lev Vygotsky.
And it's about, it's not so well known as the rest of the Vygotsky ideas, but for me it was
like a boost, like a push. When I read it in the Thought and Language, his book, Thought and Language,
it was my starting point to invent, to come up with my psychological, psychodiagnostics
instruments, heroes in the city and training. They are described in the Black Book,
described in the Routledge Handbook on dialectical thinking. So, I won't, that is why I didn't
say a lot about this point. It was more important for me now to give you some
vision, vision of the problem. But it was the starting point, yes. And this quotation is about
the following things. So, let's read it together. For the emergence of a real productive
act of thinking leading thought to a completely different point, discovery. It's necessary that
X, which is the problem of our thinking and is a part of structure A, suddenly enters structure B.
Therefore, the destruction of the structure in which the problem point X initially arises
and the transfer of this point is completely different structure, completely different structure.
Other main conditions of productive creative thinking. So, and I put here this illustration
again, because for me it's a straight illustration to this quotation, to this idea, because you can
see here the old broken metal construction. Yes, it's like an advertisement billboard,
billboard just in the street. And you see that we can analyze it as a structure A.
And we see this broken element on the right, this broken element. It will be our X,
which is the problem of our thinking. It's really problem of our thinking because
it's broken element and because of it, we should throw this metal construction away. We cannot use
it. But imagine that somebody, some no-name artists, maybe me, maybe you, is passing by this
metal construction and look to it. And suddenly something happens and this person
see this new structure B. This problem point X suddenly enters to the structure B and this
garbage turns to the piece of urban art. Because he added just one thing, just one thing, just
this yellow fighter who pretends to break this metal construction and all this picture
now makes sense, make additional sense. So, and I feel that, and I would say that Lefrogodski
left us a key to understanding the creativity, the essence of human, really human creativity.
But we should invent how to use it, where that key holds that we can insert this key
in terms of educational practices and measurement procedures. So, some additional slides, these
are books. On the left side, it's a Routledge International Handbook of Dialectical Thinking
that we just published on the left side. On the right side is a yellow book that we are
waiting to be published in February. It's about our work with Igor and Olga and a lot of other
authors here. It's described our work with kindergarten and how to develop dialectical
thinking and creative environments, creative abilities in kindergarten. Some articles in English
with links. Context, thank you for your attention. Thank you. Anastasia, thank you so much. That was
wonderful. Thank you. And thank you particularly for battling through bandwidth problems,
translation problems, and just keeping going. That was very, very interesting. I thought your
images were extremely striking and said a lot about the differences in terms of originality of
thought that goes into these different ideas of creativity. I'm sure people would have some
questions and I'm happy for them to put them in the chat or to raise hands and take people in turn
if they do. I would like to kind of just offer one of my own to kick off with if it's okay
with everybody and simply to ask you if you could say a little bit more about
the role of emotion in creativity because you talked earlier on about the the torment
of creativity with those two those two pictures. To what extent is is emotion either negative or
positive an important part of the creative process? You know, it's not so trivial questions,
I would say. And me and Nikolay, we have an article about complex emotions and dialectical
thinking in preschool age and we had a research which showed us that dialectical structures and
complex emotion, what does it mean, complex emotions, it's about a mixture of emotions. Like, you know,
light sadness or maybe, I forgot the whole English word, sorry, but a mixture when you mix
different emotions at once, yes, not simple like just anger or just fear, yes, but such
complex and variable cocktails, cocktail shake of the emotion that we feel that human being can feel
and we understood then that we made this research that it's more or less one age
when a human being started to understand, to catch dialectical structures,
contradictions, and this emotional intelligence also developing, developed.
As for me, as far as I understand it, emotional component is important.
And Bogotsky told us about the unity of effect and the intellect and effect.
But the problem is that almost everybody can feel the mixture of emotion and to feel contradictions,
but not everybody can convert it into intellectual work to produce something new.
So I'm not sure that it's possible to create something really important without any emotional
involvement. No. And the sign of real perfect is your strong emotions towards it. So I love my
presentation today, sorry, for example, I'm strongly involved emotionally. But I would say that
the opposite conversion is not always possible, if I try to answer, if I answer it.
Well, I think you're entitled to feel great about your presentation and say, yeah.
Thank you. Igor had a question, I noticed your hands up Igor.
Yes, thank you so much. About the first one, when we really need the creative solution,
what are the signs? Yes, what are they? How can we understand that we really need?
So to my mind, maybe I'm not right, but to my mind, I suppose that
that is our subjective feeling of discomfort and uncertainty. When you found yourself
in the middle of problem mess, you feel discomfort. And that is the very moment that you really need
creative solution. It doesn't matter that you will find it, but you really need. And
to tell you the truth, I don't know other predictors, yes, other signs. I can't say,
I can't tell you anything besides it. But I feel that this one about uncertainty and about problem
mess, about that you understand that you don't manage it somehow now. Something will happen,
will be disaster. But it could be subjective. For other people, it couldn't be not a disaster,
but something. Yes, but for you personally, it will be, it feels like this. And it's
returning us to Nick's question about emotions, because emotional component showed you that you
really need. And the second, your second question about what should we do? What to do to scaffold it.
I don't have any exact answer, because as you know, I'm just planning the
experiment with our within our master program with some students about it.
But I'm trying to find, I'm trying to find this way of scaffolding it.
For example, the last week, I was at some private school where one of our master students
work, is working the new school. And she conducting the classes with clay, with clay, with the first
grade, seven years old, yes, seven years old, first grade. And she conducted is a game.
They do what they want, everything they want. And for me, challenges, not to destroy their
ecological, the ecology of their situation, this game, not to destroy it, but to input there,
to put into some work, which will be some work with thinking, which could be name the
work with thinking. And it's really, it's really not trivial, it's a difficult way, because it's
very easy to catch from children conversations, something about oppositions. For example, the
time it was sculpture and monuments, yes. And of course, I could once everything, yes, and to
discuss with children about about the suppositions and so on. But it wasn't my task. And now I'm
inventing how to scaffold it very, very gentle way to preserve this ecology of the game,
but not to destroy, but to use those situations as a problem. And so we are starting now this
work, but how to do it in spontaneous process. But I think we, all our team and you and Olga, we
do a lot in these scales, when we were doing these scales, and there are a lot of indicators,
which can help educators to, to scaffold it, for example, to discuss the positions, not to,
so I would say in such way, we don't understand precisely what to do, but understand what not
to do. So what we shouldn't do. Yes, so not not to miss oppositions, not to be afraid of contradictions,
to fix openly, if you see here, the oppositions and these opposed points to show the whole structure.
So it's understandable, but the challenge is especially with children, but with teenagers
also, I would say, how not to destroy the motivation, the ecology of the situation and so on.
The role of emotion, I think, yes, you understand, it's what I meant. Thank you.
