So the title of this evening seminar is Vertical Stage Development, Real Bullshit Both or Neither,
An Inquiry into the True but Useful. I might notice that we're looking at the not the true
but partial but the true but useful question mark. And that kind of in that question, true
but useful sums up the stance towards vertical development theories at large that I would
like to propose and I suppose I view myself as a proponent of. And of course, this is a
contentious issue, the entirety of the of the topic, maybe this invite, I'm not sure, was
sparked by an exchange Nora Bates and writes on her Facebook page that the stage theory is
bullshit and it's colonial as hell. And there are other major, major names who are turning
kind of the time right there were the last 120 years. Developmental theory in anthropology,
for instance, and in psychology have gone in and out has gone in and out as a as a well in and
out of fashion, several times, right. And now there is a time there has been a tide to reclaim
developmental theory and place it at the center of people's people's attention and make it a
salient part of our understanding of the world. And now there's increasingly felt backlash against
that. There are certain things to tease out. So I won't be talking about theorists and different
stances. I'll be talking just about just about a certain way that I would like to go about to think
about this. To begin with, we'll go through five steps, five steps, which I feel are, you know,
in my view, increasingly productive views, ways of viewing. So it's a bit of it. I wouldn't say
it's a stage theory, but it's a sequence, an evolving sequence, what I feel of different
equilibria of stances towards vertical development, as an area of concern, or as a scientific
inquiry. So I mean, the general discussion often gets stuck at this, it's the truth, says, say,
a lot of people who are investment theories, who have researched them, who find that they
logically, they're logically coherent and so on. And then there are people who say, no, it's not
the truth, or it's, if it is the truth, it's a very partial truth, much more partial than you're
getting credit for. And it's more dangerous than you think, right? So if we disentangle from that
discussion for a while, there are certain more productive ways to approach the topic, like, yes,
look, is the truth to somebody? Well, yes, maybe, but is it useful? So then we're stuck in the,
in the, in the, then we land in the space of balancing the partially true with a partially
useful. So it might be true, but partial, but it might also be partially useful, useful for whom,
for what, when, under which circumstances. And we have to distinguish then, and then reintegrate
the two different aspects of stage theories, vertical stage theories. One is, it's science.
I mean, it's research with, with real data and so on, and or interpretations of those data.
And, and a scientific, it's a set of certain scientific programs or research programs,
at the same time, it is a cultural trend, or like it's a cultural practice, you kind of subscribe
to these developmental theories, it's kind of worldview that comes with them, or a set of
interrelated worldviews. And these stage theories need to be evaluated on both accounts, right?
And we need to see which one we're evaluating at which point, right? To have really productive
discussions about this. So, so we'll take a look at how these two, these two strands intermingle
in these different steps, and what I feel would be the conclusion, the concluding step.
So, step one out of five.
Or, and I have already kind of summarized my conclusion. So, so if you lose track, just remember,
I'm trying to take this both-and perspective, this both-and perspective, being critical of stage
theory, viewing it as a partially useful, partially suspect set of practices, right?
So, step one would be where, if I just look at my own life, where was I at before I countered
stage theory and kind of, you know, got hit like a bus by it, and just felt really changed, or really,
really, well, you know, some transformation, some matrix awakening, red pill, or something, something,
right? And, well, I was a social scientist, and there are many other ways of understanding
phenomena in the world. Yeah, but you can, if you don't yet know about stage theories, or you
haven't seriously engaged with them, or they appear at just as something weird at a distance,
you can still look at structures and power relations through statistics, or whatever.
You can look at behavioral reward and punishment incentives, you can explain things by, this is
Polish culture versus Swedish culture, there's a certain cultural dynamic of this company.
You can look at things in terms of pathology and health. This is a healthy expression,
this is a pathological kind of behavior, it's a kind of sickness or a deviation
from what is, for good reason, establishing norm. You can also, like the Marxists think in terms of
ideology, well, there are people who act a certain way because they're brainwashed by
a certain ideology, they don't quite know it, and then you can kind of red pill them or wake
them up to their class consciousness or whatever, to what you perceive to be reality. Of course,
there's always the issue of everybody trying to wake in everybody else up with their favorite red
pills, we're all shaking each other and say wake up from the matrix and so on. Well, you can use
personality psychology, it's very powerful, I could have mentioned situationalist psychology,
you have social processes of interaction in my own background, it's in sociological
sociological social psychologists, we're studying interactions, how they unfold
and explaining behavior through that is very important. You have, of course, social positions,
well, you think like this because you are this and that person in that position and that situation.
So, like the big limitation to all of these is that you always have a flat view.
There's always just one stage, one particular dynamic
and you don't differentiate between the different steps or the sequences of the social phenomena
or you kind of miss the developmental perspective, you kind of have a developmental blindness,
so to speak, so red pilling it from that perspective. And there are certain limitations
to all of these which are met by having this vertical development wake up call.
And one is you realize that from a developmental perspective, you've been having unrealistic
expectations. Let's say you're a Marxist and you explain the fact that people don't want
revolution or that they're not socialists by means of ideology. You're actually putting too much
high expectations on people. Maybe people aren't capitalists because they've been brainwashed.
Maybe there are real traits that have to do with their life conditions and that they couldn't be
another person at this point or their whole context doesn't speak to them in a way that
would make sense to you. Or Trump supporters, for instance, you start having unrealistic
expectations. Why can't you just be like us liberals? And of course, if you have unrealistic
expectations, you tend to also be possibly judgmental. There's always a crook. It might be
capitalism, it might be a certain structure, it might be patriarchy. There's something rotten
in the state of Denmark, right, which developmental theories kind of help you out of that crook theory
mindset. There's not one crook. There are many developmental pathways, right? And if there are
problems, there's often a real reason for why things have not progressed or developed further in
a desirable direction. So one way or another, you don't dispel evil. And that, of course,
you don't dispel the notion of evil. And however many layers you put around it,
and you call it neoliberalism or whatever, right, you're still kind of, I'm the good guy,
there's some evil thing up. Either it's a person or it might be a structure, it can be very
depersonified, but it's still, there's still something wrong with the world, right? You need to kind
of fix it, right? And that's what the flat view, many times, that's what the world looks like when
you don't have this extra, this three-dimensional view of seeing things through the developmental
layers. So that would be the first step. And when I first encountered a developmental theory,
I hated it, like most people do, right? I was reading Ken Wilber and I was like, well,
I kind of like his holistic views and how we put things together. But now, no, no, no, no,
I'm not buying it. But at one point or another, I kind of clicked, right? So it's kind of the
second great step. I've mentioned some of this already. You get the great aha of stage theories.
And I think many of us who are present here have had that, that aha moment.
And it's such a huge aha, it's just a gift that keeps on giving over years. And aha,
people can only be expected to display behaviors according to how they have had the opportunity
to develop. So that if somebody didn't have the opportunity to learn about critical theory,
for instance, you can't expect them to think along the lines of critical theory, for instance.
Or aha, there are non-arbitrary directionalities to sane and healthy development of people and
societies as one thing builds on another. So when you download the basic code or the basic
schema of vertical development, there's a sense of purpose or directionality, aha,
it appears as though this thing that we're in together, and maybe myself as a
sense, sensing individual being are developing in a certain direction. And there's aha, people
can be supported in this development. There's the aha, that there's no reason to judge anyone.
Or if I can't succeed to eye to eye with family members, for instance, I can think, well,
they're in another world view, in another place on the developmental map, and there are strength
and weaknesses to that. And there's no point in me getting upset and wanting to like, why can't I
reach you with this? Why won't everybody understand me? Why do I feel so alone? You can kind of,
well, be a little bit more understanding. And given that you see that the stages are always
there, that they don't sink away or disappear, everything builds on something else, right?
You also notice that there is always, all of the stages are ever present. The way Jean
Gephseer talks about the ever present origin is parallel to that, not the exact same point, but
they're ever present. And as such, they can never be depreciated. Each of them are wells
of eternal, of unlimited generativity or knowledge or insight. As such, indigenous knowledge,
modern physics, postmodern critique and so on, you're never done with it, right? They always
have something more to give you. And that's, well, that's a pretty liberating and enriching insight,
where it feels like it anyway. And it feels kind of hopeful too. Yeah, you notice there's always
a price for development. There are always beauties lost. You get technological development,
for instance, and you can have all the songs in the world on Spotify, but we're no longer
singing together in the fields, as a group or family, just tilling the soil or something.
So song is gone and music gained, right? And with that, of course, community is lost,
like sharing songs or tagging one another on Spotify is just not the same thing.
Well, there are always stages beyond where I'm currently at. So that kind of opens up.
There's always a wider horizon than the one I'm currently seeing. You always know that
if you're in the development framework as a mode of thinking. And very importantly,
problems of society are very often due to developmental imbalances. I mean, the most
famous one is this, Ian Wilson, right? Paleolithic minds, medieval institutions,
and godlike technology. One thing develops ahead of something else that doesn't quite
jive according to a corresponding logic. Then you have all sorts of imbalances or
all sorts of things that don't add up or interact in ways that are harmful to the whole.
So you get so, we could go on each of these insights, have so many applicabilities.
But this second step feels incredibly enriching. And it's difficult to
to overstate is value for a thinker and agent in the world. I would argue,
or this has been the sense in my life, and I think in many others that I have observed.
Step three, stage theories are bullshit. Oh, yeah, in this parenthesis,
after titanium manning the counterarguments, I was going to write Nora Bateson and David
Graber and David Wengrow, who are both like major voices now, questioning that
stage theories can or should be applied at all, and that they're just falls from the get-go.
And I want to say a couple of words about titanium manning. There's this guy in the
in horse fares, generally speaking, is called Ryan Makata or something. And he wrote an article
on medium that stronger than steel manning is titanium manning, is when you bring out
something from the other arguments that really gives something, you take the counterargument,
you extract a point from it that is more abstract and gives more to the whole discussion
than the actual counterargument does. So it's a very high bar for steel manning,
it's trying to go beyond steel manning. So attempting that, not saying this is necessarily
successful titanium manning of the counterarguments. Well, one thing is
developmental theories can and are used for domination and oppression. You could easily
make historical parallels to eugenics, to colonialism, and of course, all sorts of
dominator hierarchies. And this is very real. I mean, right now there's a whole cult thing
exploding a little bit in Germany, where people deliberately use developmental theories, including
drawing on some of my own stuff and inviting my co-author to speak, etc.
to prop up basically, well, those who are highest stage, which they themselves are
determined, should rule over those at lower stage and those at lower stage should be
entirely subservient. And of course, a lot of very not good things came out of that.
And right now, actually, I'm hacked on three different channels, so Google
search for meta-moderna is hacked, my web page is hacked, and also my Amazon account,
where we sell a book is hacked. I don't know if it's related to the fact that we
pissed off this cult or that my co-author did, but it feels likely that all of this happened
within days. So there are many complicated exceptions to the stage theories, like you
have savant kids, for instance, how do you explain that? If there are these big
these big discrete steps, how can certain individuals be so advanced in certain areas
before they have developed more holistically as a person that would speak against
the findings of developmental psychology or developmental stage theories? You could also
argue that there are many ways in which development of skills, for instance, is more gradual
or development of understanding. You could also see that behaviors are more context-dependent than
developmental theories would give them credit for. You could also say that reality is more
multi-dimensional, and you would want to avoid the stance of superiority when meeting others and
studying groups or people that, well, let's say you're an anthropologist, you go and see another
group of people. If you're from day one thinking these are lower stage than myself,
what kind of anthropologist are you? How are you really opening up to the internal logic
of that culture? You're doing an ethnography on it, right? Or just speaking to a person, right?
If you're in the back of your mind like, such a modernist, you couldn't possibly comprehend
the sorts of things I've been thinking about. Then, of course, that puts a little
blockage for real connection and also perhaps real learning. There's so much room for self-deceit.
You read this stuff, then you can project on to all of the developmental theories. You always
think you're the highest, right? Then whenever somebody disagrees with you, you're like,
hmm, maybe it's because you're lower stage than I. Of course, then people get into all those stupid
arguments on Facebook and they start calling each other different colors, right? Basically,
except just the superiority thing, you have just a smorgasbord opening up of excuses for
not listening to people not taking them seriously. You can do this in so many ways. Since it's not
just I'm higher stage, it's also you're stuck here and there. You only think that because of your
stage or etc. You have historical examples of obvious human costs, human and other costs for
failed stage theories. Once upon a time, people believed societies develop from feudalism through
capitalism and to communism. Turns out it wasn't exactly correct. It made that incorrect model
nevertheless coordinated the agency of millions and millions of people to the effect of many
people suffering and dying. Of course, you might say it's linear. It's teleological. It's fatalism.
It invites fanaticism kind of totality. Well, if you have the best stage model, you think you know
where this person has come from, where they're going. Well, you feel justified to push them in
that direction. Same with societies, right? Same with any social settings, same with an organization.
So maybe it's better not to show up with that framework in your mind. Maybe you'll
end up being a douchebag, right? So stage three, for a good reason, for a very, very, very good
reason or the step three here is why don't we do away with this at all entirely?
Step four, defend barricades, which is the defense. Not then against the naive
gaze of a person who doesn't know about stage theory at all, but against people who know it well
since decades, like Norbert's, for instance, when you feel that they have important points,
but it's still worth defending, right? That we're not prepared to, for all babies out
in the bathwater at this point. I think the first argument is actually the strongest.
If we concede two fairly obvious facts of the reality, which is numeroon or development happens,
things don't come into being without some radiation of coming into being. You first have
to be fetus before you become a baby, before you become a child and so forth. A tree has to grow,
right? It has to first come from a seed. It cannot just pop into being, right? So given that
developmentality exists and given that sequence exists, right? But things do not pop randomly into
being, maybe at the quantum level, but nothing beyond that. And you can see that things are
sometimes ordered in sequences, that something sometimes has to logically come before something
else. So I mean, if you do not understand addition and subtraction, it is very, very, very difficult
to see how division and multiplication would be possible. It appears to be an obvious fact of
just all of those concepts in and of themselves. If there are no words, there can be no sentences,
like there is a sequentiality to that. So given those two things, right, we can push back from
the negative, right? If we take the, and it reducts to add absurdum of the developmental
stage theories are bullshit, we can say, okay, so do you suggest in all seriousness that we
should do away with all sequentiality of all forms of understanding and analysis? I think that's the
heaviest counterargument. You can kind of from that, if you push the other position, stage theories
are bullshit to their extreme, you can notice that you end up in a fundamentally untenable position,
that there is no sequentiality and there is no development, which is a very weird thing to be
saying. So that's, I think, the strongest counterargument, whole L sort of flows through from
that. But that's just in terms of the logic or the science of it. You can look at
stage theories as a, or verticality as a cultural practice as well. And then you can notice a lot
of other things. Well, we're actually continuing a little bit more on the science side, like good
stage theories are not linear. That's an important counterargument. That's a misunderstanding.
Like sure, you can draw them on a paper and it looks linear, but they're like the whole point
of stage theories is that they're nonlinear, meaning that something adds to something,
and then there is an emergence of something radically different. But there is a logic to
that emergence. So it's the very study, vertical development is the very study of nonlinear
shifts, qualitative deep shifts, when something that is qualitatively different emerges from a
substrate, that is something entirely different from what it, from itself. And on it goes. So
the charge of linearity is actually incorrect, that very idea of developmental stage models is
that there is a genuine surprise in a stage shift. I suppose models of psychological development,
like a key instance is a very good example of this. Now there is a pattern to the surprises.
But there are surprises, you cannot predict the development, and that's why can't we do a model
with 100 developmental stages? Well, because we'd be so surprised at the shifts of each
stage, so we have to actually empirically study the stage to get what's going on.
And that's a very strong argument against the misunderstanding that these are linear models.
And as such, they're not necessarily that teleological. So about the teleology part,
and now we kind of get into it more as social practice. Yes, models can be used,
development models can be misused, but they can also be used for good purposes.
So, yeah, I mean, going into the cultural wars, for instance, it's fairly easy from a developmental
perspective to see why it's fairly meaningless to take a very strong stance in the cultural
wars. You can do so provisionally or strategically, but there's no real reason to invest. And likewise,
new atheists against the organized religions, it goes on, you kind of can see that there are good
reasons, developmental reasons for things to exist. So in prisons, it actually makes perhaps
better sense to have Christian 12 step programs from the stance of developmental psychology,
or the value means or whatever. Then it would be to teach them Sam Harris stuff about new atheism,
right, or etc. So, yeah, often actually, seeing different stages breeds humility rather than
arrogance. I think it's a very important counter argument. You know that all stages are always
relevant. And you know that there are always stages beyond my own. In my mind, that's a less
arrogant position than just say, there are those who think like me, and then those who are wrong.
It breeds understanding and more skillful communications. Given now, of course, that the
models are roughly correct. But it does make sense, right, that sometimes it's better to use
anthropomorphic storytelling with with with some people to get a point across. And with others,
it's better to talk about complexity and emergence, for instance, and interactions of multiple
various variables. And you can calibrate those things. You can see that a little bit more clearly
if you have a hunch or idea about where a certain way of thinking is coming from developmentally.
You have, yeah, and there's the there's the issue of of a uni, like that the models kind of look
clunky, they're like these boxes, and you kind of go from here to there to there. Well, sure,
models can be clunky and uni dimensional, but you can also have multi dimensional models,
it's a multi dimensional developmental models. And you have will Wilbur's talk about lines,
my own suggestion in the Hansi books has to do with, well, these four complexity cognitive
complexity code, which culture have you learned, which which language and thoughts did others
teach you state, like what's what's your subjective state and any given moment and depth,
like how much, how many different states or how much pain or which emotions have you integrated.
And you'll see that that some people are more complex and less, less profound as as people,
some people are more have more greater depth to them and are less complex, etc. And still,
they kind of balances out. So you will find often high complexity people hanging out with
high depth people, and they argue a little bit about things. But, but they end up in the same,
they resonate with the same overall pattern with the same effect with the same value mean or
effective value mean, in effect, they're on the same value even if they're different. So, so,
so there are ways to get around the clunkiness or unidimensionality. It's by building better
models. How's my scrapping all models, right? It's like putting maps within making maps that are
better at holding a multiplicity of ways of, of developing. Yeah, this is an important counter
argument. All the people who say there are no stages. Aren't they, when they make that argument,
making a stage model in and of themselves, because they're saying, if you understood this better,
if you understood it so well, that you could come to the point where you understand where
you see what I see, you would see that they make no sense. So they believe that there is
a pathway, a place that somebody else is, and a destination at which they have arrived themselves,
where you understand something that the other person does not. So that's a two stage model
right there. It's just an implicit one, and an invisible one, and one that you're not owning up
to. And it's one that doesn't allow for a third step above your own, that there's just your position
and highway. So it's actually not more humble to say there are no stage theories. It sounds more
humble. But actually, you are subscribing to a stage model. And as a social scientist, this
frustrates me a little bit, because it's a huge taboo with the social, with the stage models.
But if you read the main, the great sociologists of our time on pretty much any topic, they'll,
they'll say, well, actual religions, they have some kind of modernity in them, for instance,
looking at looking at that research. And they're saying, there was a shift. So they're basically
doing this two stage model. And then you have all of these super brains, the leading sociologists
of our time, sociologists of religion, just whacking it again, like hacking on this topic,
right? And like, dude, you could have just added a few steps, and then you actually get a model
that makes sense. But they can't, they're stuck, because it's taboo to add a third step, because
then it becomes apparent that you're doing a stage model, the stage models are bad. So just in terms
of thinking, this, this is a huge, this is a huge limitation to put on your own mind.
And yeah, last of all, hey, the research is there. Not all of it is good. Some of it is good.
I don't even like, I don't even like Robert Keegan's model. I think it's too unidimensional.
But I do think the object, subject dynamic is very important. And
but he did produce longitudinal study. And he did have truckloads of data. And he did find
patterns to that data, right? Which match the theory. Now, that's a thing, whether you like it or
not, he did produce it. So the data are there. So to in, in order to dispel the existence of stage
theory, it's not okay to say, well, they can be colonial. Well, that's an odd, not an is, right?
You have to come up with a better model to explain the data that people are finding
to be able to actually dispel this thing. So, so here we are, like, true, but partial. Yeah.
And not always useful to talk about. But you can't derive one from the other. Maybe it doesn't
exist exactly in the ways all the theorists think, there's always more to the truth, right?
On the other hand, maybe it's not always useful to talk about. But you can't say, because I don't
find it useful, talk about it, it does not exist. That's a nonsecular. It's, it's not a real argument.
Step five. But stage theory isn't everything. Believe in stage theory is not an itself,
a marker in development. That's very important to note. So you have all of these interesting people,
highly developed people, I guess you could say if you apply that kind of lens, who disagree on this?
And yeah, so neither disbelieve, of course. So among inter-realistic, metamodernist, etc., and
people who are complex minds and so on, you usually have a majority of people who are interested,
please store open to these things. This is just a majority. You have a very strong and vocal minority
who disagree. And of course, each of the theories, they don't actually all add up to a total whole
with one another. Hey, neither does physics, but we have more serious problems than putting
together a standard model of physics. And it is actually very useful to our whole transformative
ecosystem of people who are interested in these kinds of topics to both believe and not believe
in stage theories and manage to cooperate across this divide. And that's, I think, the real
test for us as a community. It's not to conquer the other side. I think it's something like 60,
40%. 60% maybe believe in some kind of stage theory development. 40% don't. But we're still
interested in the same directionalities, have the same hunches or similar hunches about
development of society and so on. The real challenge is for us to work across that and
not let this contentious issue drag us into a black hole. We can't crawl out of, right?
And non-stage theories, or I should say non-believers in stage theory,
and stances against stage theory are important because they bring skepticism
to the theories themselves, improving them. They help, they vaccinate against tunnel vision.
If everybody believes in the exact same stage model, that's probably not a good sign, right?
And they help highlight other aspects. If 60% of our community are obsessed with stage theories,
it's a pretty good thing that 40% think that's not so important. And then they look at
culture or nor is warm data or relationality or whatever other, all of those things that I
mentioned in the beginning are still there and they're still important. You still need to look at
power structures and whatnot, right? And personalities and all sorts of other perspectives,
right? And yeah, ecosystems thrive from multiple perspectives. So it's a good thing
that people both believe and not believe in this thing in this fundamental download.
And as an ecosystem, we're better off for it. And we need not worry that much about
convincing everybody else of our position, right? So note, stage theories, however,
they cannot, by definition, become a totalizing perspective or ideology of society. So I write
about metamodernism, for instance, which I view among other things as a stage in a stage model,
among other things, there are six different ways to define it. So if you think about that,
you explicitly do not want Sweden is now a metamodernist country. We will now bring up
more of our, all of our population to the metamodern stage. We can now have metamodern
states, institutions or something, something, right? It cannot be a majority way of speaking
and thinking, because the stage models all look like this. They have normal distribution.
And for definition, stage theorists, vertical stage theorists are going to identify with it.
Later stages don't think those have something to particularly important to give. And of course,
they're going to define most people as not as developed. And of course, those most people
will always, for a very good reason, be insulted and disagree. So for instance, what's his name?
There's there's this interesting passage in just read the biography cell biography of
Bill Torbert. And Bill Torbert says, was so interesting, the people who were who got
the highest stage, they all wanted to have feedback. And people got the lowest stage,
none of them wanted to have feedback and even criticize the tests. Wow, we have really found
such strong correlation here. It means that people at the higher stages are open to feedback. No,
Bill, it means that you insulted the people who were at the low stages and you and you,
of course, flattered the people you said were the high stages. And that's why they liked your
model. And that's why they wanted to hear more. And that's why the others wanted to hear none of it.
And said, your model is crazy. And there are these biases that are built into this, which
force it to forever be a minority perspective, a minority perspective in a larger ecosystem.
So the goal of the vertical development theories is to see their own impossibility as a totality,
as a totalizing perspective. There is always a larger whole beyond the stage theories themselves,
which must be socially and epistemologically related to. And I think that's really where I
want to land. That's the real crux, right? That yes, they're true, but partial, sometimes useful to
talk about, not useful always. And in the end, there's always going to be more situations where
they're not useful than when they are useful. Nevertheless, there are, as an ingredient in a
greater whole, where they do break against other perspectives, they're invaluable is my argument.
Conclusion, yin that yin. So keep asking, is it true? Somebody makes a claim about stage models?
Well, sure. I mean, you can't just buy it. You have to challenge them, you get better stage
theories. And you also get models that are actually beyond stage theories, and can explain the same
phenomenon. We're not there yet. But many, many theorists are seeing similar patterns that are
actually beyond the stage theories, which can go back and kind of reconstruct what the surface
phenomenon that we have hitherto understood as stage development. So there's a pathway here
by asking, is it true? And the second question is, is it useful? Keep asking, is it useful?
And do not confound the two questions. So it is not useful to try to either destroy all stage
theory, nor to destroy all resistance to it. There's the black dot and the white here is the
resistance to stage theory, that is among us stage theorists, and we have to deal with it,
and it enriches us. And on the other hand, there are all those people who do not like stage theory,
and who are in similar contexts either way, but who are nevertheless, actually enriched by the
existence of stage theory, because they have to push against it, they have to argue against it,
so that they somehow structure their agency, and their argumentation, somehow structured by it
either way. And that's kind of this ecosystem view that I feel is the productive stance that I
would like to be proponent of. Thank you so much for your attention.
