John Stuart, beautiful to have you here.
This is a Thelon in the series of Cutsalone Center for Applied Electrics.
This is the first part of a series where we are talking about scaffolding, metasystemic
or maybe dialectic thinking.
So John Stuart, we are very eager to hear you and your presentation.
My background that is relevant to this is that I have published numerous papers in international
science journals on evolution, particularly picture perspectives of evolution and their
implications for humanity.
Part of the material I have been developing on evolution focuses on the trajectory of
evolution and there are two broad trajectories during the evolution of life on Earth.
One is towards the formation and emergence of cooperative organisations of increasing
scale and the other is towards increasing evolvability and evolvability is the ability
to adapt effectively.
So initially evolution had a very simple method of evolvability, trial and error, genetic
mutations and so on.
The evolutionary mechanism has itself evolved and now as it manifests in humans, it is our
intelligence and our culture that drives our evolution, no longer trial and error and a
significant part of that in human beings is the emergence of a capacity to develop mental
models of our environment and of our interactions with our environment and the stage that you
are in humanity is that it has not yet developed comprehensively a capacity to form mental
models of complex phenomenon.
We are good at developing mechanistic models so parts of reality that are mechanistic, our
science is able to deal with those and develop a body of knowledge but in relation to complex
phenomenon which unfortunately is the majority of the reality that we interact with, current
model building capacity is current thinking is not adequate to the task.
So I will be talking here today about the development of that capacity to model complex
reality and I will be dealing specifically with how it might be scaffolded in oneself
and in other individuals and in groups.
I am talking about scaffolding metasystemic cognition, that is some details about myself.
I am a Melbourne based member of the evolution complexity and cognition research group of
the Free University of Brussels.
And just a quick overview of what I will be covering, first of all I will be outlining
what I mean by metasystemic cognition then why is metasystemic cognition critically important?
Where is metasystemic cognition superior to analytical rational thinking?
Then I will be dealing with how can metasystemic cognition be scaffolded and basically I will
cover that in two components, the recursive practising of model building skills and then
practises that develop the capacity to see one's thought and feeling as an object.
Then I will be dealing with how can metasystemic cognition be spread quickly and then I will
have a slide of the resources that give more detail and background to what I will be covering.
What do I mean by metasystemic cognition?
Basically, metasystemic cognition as I use the term is the development of the capacity
to form mental models of complex phenomenon as they change through time.
So it develops, it entails the capacity to build mental models of complex systems of
those systems in evolution and those systems interacting and interpenetrating through time.
It's the, what I mean by metasystemic cognition is therefore very similar to Otto Lasky's
dialectical thinking. His moments of dialectical quadrants and thought forms define a wide
range of the movements in thought that are necessary to build models of complex reality.
I point out that the reason why I use the term metasystemic cognition and not dialectical
thinking is because dialectical thinking means many different things to many different people.
As far as I'm aware, the use of it in the extremely broad and comprehensive form that Otto
uses it hasn't been used historically by thinkers. For example, Hegel's dialectical thinking and
Marx's dialectical thinking is far more limited than what's captured by the thought forms and
therefore it isn't as effective as developing models of complex reality.
Why is metasystemic cognition critically important? Well, first of all, it's by definition,
it's essential for understanding complex phenomenon. More importantly, it's critically important for
using those models to identify interventions in reality and what their consequences will be.
So if you have a complex, if you have a mental model of complex phenomenon, then you can change
elements of that model, follow through the consequences of that. So it's essential for
strategizing when one is facing complex phenomenon. The existential threats that face humanity
at present, such as global warming, nuclear war, general overshooting of the carrying capacity
of the planet and so on, they're complex issues. And to understand and develop strategies for
dealing with those issues, to solving those problems, for avoiding the existential threats,
one must also have mental models of complex social, political and economic systems because it's through
those systems that we will need to, through those systems that we will have to implement measures
that avoid those problems. So the survival of human civilization depends on the spread
of metasystemic cognition. It's that significant and it's more significant because of the fact
that very few have that capacity at present. Metasystemic cognition is a very rare capacity
amongst human beings. It's in our science and in the humanities, there are very few
metasystemic thinkers. Most science is underpinned by analytical rational thinking.
So our current cognition can't do complexity. And when I refer to our current cognition, I use
various terms, first enlightenment thinking. So the current cognition arose and spread
to significant numbers of human beings only about 300 or 400 years ago
with the first in the European Enlightenment. It also, what I mean by analytical rational
cognition, also brought it equates to formal operations thinking in Piagian terms. And as
I've indicated, it underpins current science. Whereas metasystemic cognition is a period of
analytical rational thinking, it's worth understanding this in some detail because it
indicates and forms a basis for what's missing from analytical rational cognition that needs to
be included in metasystemic cognition if metasystemic cognition is to develop and be able to model
complex phenomenon. Analytical rational cognition is largely limited to building
mechanistic models. So, and this is evidenced in first enlightenment, thinking first enlightenment
science, our current science, which focuses on models such as billiard balls interacting with
one another, seeing how they interact and how they unfold. But if you have too many billiard balls
or they form systems, then analytical rational cognition is quickly overwhelmed by that complexity
and it has to simplify things in order to build models. So analytical rational cognition
builds models that focus down on isolated phenomenon. So it largely ignores context. Most of the
discoveries of science, particularly physics, discover laws that apply and can be applied
with ignoring context, where context does not change those laws, they're context independent.
Secondly, analytical rational cognition builds models that comprise objects or abstractions
with fixed attributes. It largely ignores process, it ignores the fact that all objects
are in fact processes, even mountain ranges, for example, are processes, they're not objects.
So it leaves, it leaves, it reifies processes. Thirdly, in analytical rational models, objects
interact according to laws and they're unchanged by those interactions. So it largely ignores
how the objects or abstractions interrelate to produce whole systems and interrelate,
including by co-evolving, they both change in relationship to one another.
Finally, it represents systems mechanistically when it puts these components together.
It doesn't have models that are dynamical and evolving, it has mechanistic models.
In general, it produces models that can be thought through by analytical rational thinking.
So this is linear logic and so on. It comes up with models that are analysable. As a consequence,
analytical rational thinking works for only a very small proportion of reality,
because most of reality is complex, it's not mechanistic.
Alfred North Whitehead said about 100 years ago that current science and science hasn't changed
a lot since then, 100 years ago, in terms of its methodology, current science can only
lead to the understanding of about 10% of the things that are really important to humanity.
A manifestation of the limitations of analytical rational thinking is that sciences has failed
miserably to understand and develop effective models of political science, social systems,
and so on. In other words, the content of the humanities. The reason why the humanities
are on a different planet as CP Snow indicated to science is because the subject matter of the
humanities is too complex to be dealt with by the scientific method. Ironically, science criticises
the humanities for its lack of scientific rigor and so on, but a better perspective is to see that
the scientific method doesn't work for the humanities for organic systems and so on.
Nonetheless, first enlightenment science, underpin by analytical rational thinking,
has been very effective in limited areas. It's produced our mechanistic technology.
It's changed the planet, it's changed life on this planet, sometimes for the better.
Now, one way of illustrating and experiencing the difference between
analytical rational thinking and metasystemic cognition and the models that both of them develop
is to compare our built environment with an ecosystem. So, presumably you're all in rooms at
the moment, and those rooms have flat surfaces, meet at right angles, they're box-like, and there's
lots of books and so on in your rooms that can be thought through. They are the product of
analytical rational thinking. The built environment of humanity is an illustration
of what analytical rational thinking can do and its limitations, and you see its limitations
when you go out into a natural ecosystem and compare what's in the human built environment
with what's in that ecosystem. One can be understood by analytical rational cognition
and has been produced by analytical rational cognition while the ecosystems are far more
complex and need metasystemic cognition if they're to be understood.
How can metasystemic cognition be scaffolded? The goal of scaffolding is to
help individuals to develop the thought processes that are needed to generate
complex models and operate those complex models, simulate them in one's head and so on,
and use them to identify the consequences of changing elements of those models,
and this is particularly useful in strategizing. So,
the great breakthrough in understanding how to develop metasystemic cognition and how to
scaffold it was Otto Alasky's four quadrants and his 28 thought forms. Basically, the quadrants cover
what analytical rational thinking leaves out of its mechanistic models. Because it leaves out,
it identifies what's left out, it's directly useful for indicating to other individuals
and for ourselves where our attention has to go in order to remediate those absences,
in order to include in our mental models those things that are left out by analytical rational
thinking and therefore produce metasystemic models that are capable of representing and
understanding complex reality. I'll be outlining here that metasystemic cognition can be scaffolded
permanently by two categories of training. One is by practicing an individual practicing
whether coached or doing it themselves the implementation of the movements in thought
and quadrants to build models. To do this, as I've indicated, they're
dated by the declarative knowledge contained in the quadrants and thought forms and most importantly,
the process must involve the recursive improvement of the resulting emerging procedural knowledge
that they acquire as they practice the building of models and using the declarative knowledge
contained in the quadrants and thought forms. So that's one major component of scaffolding,
the other is practicing the disembedding from thinking and that requires disembedding from
both analytical rational thinking and metasystemic thinking. The crucial capacity that has been
developed from this is to be able to see one's thinking as object and therefore being able
to manipulate it consciously and secondly, it enables escaping slavery to analytical
rational thinking and feelings as well. The end result of those two components of scaffolding
is to internalize the interlocutory process within the individual and by interlocutory
process, I mean the kind of process that Otto has developed for an interviewer
helping to scaffold to identify another person's use of thought forms and scaffold improvements.
This process internalizes that in an individual and most importantly, it enables ongoing self
scaffolding so it enables the conscious scaffolding of one's thinking to the metasystemic level
throughout one's life. It becomes a lifelong exercise. So the first of the categories of
scaffolding that I was going to cover was the recursive practicing of model building skills.
The first thing I need to emphasize and this is very important is that practice,
the actual practice of model building is essential for developing procedural skills.
Memorizing the thought forms won't do it. Being able to pass an exam and get 100%
on the thought forms and quadrants doesn't necessarily develop any procedural skills
in an individual. Therefore, it doesn't necessarily enable metasystemic thinking.
So procedural skills have to be learned by practice. They can't be learned by reading a book
and classic examples are learning to serve in tennis or learning how to ride a bicycle.
You can't learn how to ride a bicycle or do a tennis serve by reading a book. They might give
you pointers but then you have to develop the procedural skills by actually practicing the
activity. So the first step in this practice of recursively building model building skills
is to build from a particular complex phenomenon that's of interest to the person who is
developing the metasystemic skill. In that model building, they draw on the quadrants and thought
forms but they attempt to be conscious of the process that they're going to build that model
of the complex phenomenon. That's the first step and it's important that the person does this
without first studying the field and examining the body of knowledge that exists about that
particular complex phenomenon. It's important they do it from scratch and that they do it without
reference to that knowledge because in the second step they assess their model in the light of the
feedback from others and from the expert body of knowledge where they find deficiencies in their
model. They do two things. They amend the content of their model. In other words, they make their
model better but the most important step in the scaffolding process is not that. It's to actually
modify the thought processes that they use to generate the model. So they need to reflect on
the thought processes that were used and amend their thought processes so that their metamodelling
capacity, their ability to build models now would be more successful than their first attempt.
So they identify how they have to change their model building skills in order to not
leave out the thing that they've found that they've left out from their model.
Now this process is then repeated recursively drawing on thought forms each time. So there's a
sequence of testing the model in effect against existing knowledge and testing against reality
and so on and each time identifying where the model has to be amended and then going to the
metamodel in order to change the metamodel. The goal is to develop a metamodel and skills
that enable better metasystemic cognition. The second major component that I mentioned in
scaffolding is the practice of seeing thought and feeling as object. This capacity is critically
important for the recursive self-improvement approach that I have just outlined. It enables the
conscious use of thought forms and model building skills and the recursive improvement process
because it enables you to see as object what the actual thought processes are that you're using
to build your complex models. When one first begins to do this,
one might, in my experience, you won't see much at all. So the development of this capacity,
the senior thinking as object, will develop the ability progressively to see more and more
and it'll be further built by the recursive self-improvement process. So that's seen being able
to see your thinking as object. Secondly, being able to do that provides access to right brain
resources for model building. So analytical rational cognition is all in the head. It's all in
conscious thinking, in declarative knowledge, but the model building capacity,
if it's to capture complex reality, must draw on additional resources than those that are drawn
on by analytical rational cognition, such as intuition, pattern recognition, and this enables
integration of the right and left brain of the head and the heart, anima and animus, and the
marriage of the bride and groom, which comes from alchemy. These are metaphors for accessing
these nonlinear logical resources that are essential if a model is to represent
complex reality as it seasonlessly changes through time. It's worth quickly noting that
being able to access those resources have a similar effect to walking in nature,
showering and napping and so on. In other words, those activities that many creative artists and
scientists have indicated promote insights are basically achieved by accessing right brain
resources, and these are accessed by activities that quieten the thinking mind. So that brings
us to the third importance of seeing thought as object, which is that it enables disembedding
from slavery to analytical rational thinking. Disembedding from the slavery
to analytical rational thinking is no simple thing, as is evidenced by the fact that
that the interaction between science and humanities, so researchers in the humanities
need complex thinking and complex models in order to attempt to understand what's going on
in social systems and so on. They're continually criticised by science for not being scientifically
rigorous. What doesn't happen generally is that people who are mainstream scientists
see the limitations of their analytical rational thinking in complex phenomenon
like those dealt with in the humanities because they're embedded in their analytical
rational thinking. They're embedded in the methodologies of current science and it's no
small thing to move between developmental levels. Disembedding from slavery to analytical
rational thinking is to avoid the obligate use of, is also important for analytical rational
thinkers because if one points out to them using the thought forms and quadrants, what's missing
from their thinking, they can move attention to those things that are left out, but they'll tend
to develop analytical rational models of what they've left out, not the fluid complex processes,
context and relationship that are needed to represent those phenomenon.
The seeing thought and feeling as object is also important for disembedding from slavery to emotions,
so to use Keegan's terms, one has to move from emotions having you to you having emotions.
That's what disembedding from emotions involves. It's important for being able to implement complex
cognitive strategies because to do so can often conflict and be undermined by emotional responses
and so on. This enables one to let those emotions go through to dissipate, to not control one's
behavior and therefore it gives one the capacity to actually implement complex strategies.
Ultimately, this disembedding process produces awakening and presence.
So what is the process that can train this disembedding
capacity? It's meditation like practices, so the essence of meditation, of nearly all practices
of meditation is the practice of disengaging from being embedded in thought and feeling
and doing this repeatedly. So the mindfulness meditation instructions, for example, involve
resting attention on sensations of the breath and then when one finds oneself
embedded in thinking and emotion and no longer giving attention to the sensations of the breath,
one moves one's attention away from the disembeddiness and moves it back to the sensations
of the breath. So one is practicing disengaging and this stills the mind.
Now, it's really important that to use a meditation like practice like this
in order to scaffold one's thinking, then one must be able to do it not just on the meditation
cushion, you know, in a darkened room, absence or abstractions, one must develop the ability
to do it in the midst of ordinary life. Finally, the recursive practice of model
building that I outlined will also help to develop disembedding because it involves
giving attention to one's thoughts, turning attention inwards, giving attention to one's
thoughts and being able to see them as object. So how can metastemic cognition be spread quickly,
given its critical importance for humanity and our survival in the face of existential threats
and so on? We can take advantage of the capacity of the economic system to spread anything that
increases profits. So the old saying is that build a better mousetrap and the world will be
to pass through your door. Metastemic cognition is far better than building a better mousetrap
because building a metamousetrap creates profit opportunities for a limited number of businesses.
Metastemic cognition basically is far more significant because most businesses now are
embedded in environments that are far too complex for them to cognize effectively.
They're embedded in social systems, competitive markets, government systems and so on and they
have to strategize within that environment and you can't do it with analytical rational cognition.
So most executives in most businesses apparently in over their heads as are their equivalents
in governmental bodies and so on. So if the scaffolding of metastemic cognition can be packaged
in a way that improves profit capacities for business, profit opportunities for business,
then it will spread very quickly. So one way, one form of packaging is using the scaffolding to
temporarily scaffold groups of executives to enable them to strategize more effectively
in complex environments and this can be done by a facilitator who is adept at using the thought
forms and the quadrants and who in real time can facilitate the group to see what their analytical
rational thinking leaves out and facilitate the group's building in real time of a shared
model of complex phenomenon that need to be understood and dealt with for the business
to maximize its profits. And the second way of doing it is to scaffold metastemic cognition
permanently in executives because if it's done by a facilitator with a group,
when the scaffolding is removed, in other words when the facilitator leaves, then
there will be no permanent vertical movement. The individuals will in the group will fall
back to their analytical rational cognition that they're typically embedded in. The competition
in a market, of course, drives this process because once a competitor in a particularly
industry sector develops the capacity to strategize using metastemic cognition,
then all its competitors must follow and eventually education or institutions will do so also.
So that's the resources.
There's my review of Otto's Primer which is an eight page sort of overview of
analytical rational cognition, its limitations and how these can be overcome by metastemic
cognitions. There's a page on my website with numerous links to materials about the escalator
program that was originally developed by myself and Victoria Wilden. There's a report from someone
who's undertaken the escalator program so you get a perspective from the scaffoldee
and that state page is so so it's short. Then the PowerPoint slides link and then
the Amazon link to Otto's three volume set which I understand is going to be out in early November.
Development is a process, ongoing process,
but as many many thinkers and theoreticians have concluded, there are discernible levels
that a person goes through. None of those levels are stable in an equilibrium sense,
that they're not narrow equilibria that people are locked into. So the term in complexity
science for these levels is metastable. So they're processes far from equilibrium
in thermodynamic terms but they have a dynamical stability, they're dynamical attractors.
So that's the reason why I use the term metastable. Its significance is that
they're like an equilibrium to the extent that the individual experiences them as working
as doing what they want to do cognitively. So someone who is embedded in the analytical
rational level basically thinks that all questions that can be answered can be answered by their
analytical rational cognition. They can't see outside their analytical rational cognition to
see what's missing. They can't see it from a higher level so they're locked into it
but not locked into it in a mechanistic sense but in a metastable sense. To give another quick
example, many of us have had the experience of when we get angry at our dog it can run and
hide its head underneath a couch so it can't see you getting angry at it. It thinks or experiences
because it's got slavery to its visual field. It thinks that you can't see it
and it's very difficult to get the dog out of that. It's got slavery to its visual field.
That's a Weigotsky terminology.
So Keegan I think is the term but stages are truces so they're dynamic. So
most people hopefully have seen a diagram of an attractor in chaos theory
and that is not a stable point. The attractor is a basic attraction.
People who have what I call metast systemic cognition and use that in a particular domain
so like for example Gregory Bateson in his great book Steps to an Ecology of Mind
it evidences metast systemic thinking. Baskar as well so there are a number of people not many
but who use metast systemic thinking. Does the use of metast systemic thinking tend to produce it
in others and no it doesn't. In fact there's a wonderful little anecdote that occurred in New York
back in I think it was in the 30s where there was a reuniting of Bertrand Russell and Elford North
Whitehead and they had both in the early part of the 20th century trying to develop a
rationalization of mathematics and work together and produce Principia Mathematica a famous book.
However they went their different ways after that Elford North Whitehead developed metast systemic
cognition. Bertrand Russell was a genius at the analytical rational level but never developed
metast systemic cognition. When they met on on a stage reunited after many years in New York
Elford North Whitehead told the audience he said Bertie thinks that I'm muddled headed
and I think he's simple minded so to a metast systemic thinker analytical rational fingers
are simple minded mechanistically minded and so on while to an analytical rational thinker
a metast systemic thinker is muddled headed so an analytical rational thinker reading
metast systemic the products of metast systemic thinking will not be impressed by it in general.
They won't be able because to understand it they will have to they would have to be able to build
in their own mind the metast systemic kind of model that the metast systemic thinker
used to come up with the you know breakthrough in science or the breakthrough in the humanities
or whatever so so that's the problem with spreading it it one spread simply by writing books about
it or books that apply it this is what I'm getting at about procedural knowledge what has to be
installed to use mechanistic language in the mind of a person is the actual ability
to use the thought forms in real time to build build a model and that's procedural knowledge
and you know and writing a treatise about doing that or a diary about doing that one
produced in another person either they've actually got to be embedded in an environment
where they're required to build their own models reflect on the the actual model building process
and that's the critical part of it reflect on their model building process then when they
see that their model is lacking in some respect then they need to adjust not only their model but
their metamodel their model their model of model building and if they do that recursively and you
need to do it throughout your life I mean to me it's a great day when I find that my model my
mental model of some complex area of reality such as an area in evolutionary theory which I spend my
days and nights thinking about when when I find that it's flawed and limited in some way that's a
wonderful day because it means that I can I've identified I can go in identify somewhere an
aspect of my model building process that's inadequate and I can then correct it and then you
know correct it in in the actual models I build of complex reality so yeah it's all about procedural
knowledge and how to develop that and scaffolding
yeah I think I've emphasized in my presentation that that what was what was a key in my own life
and I think it's a key in the develop in anyone's development of metasystemic cognition
is yeah the genius of your moments of dialectic and thought forms because that's it's critically
important for making object you know the actual thought processes that are needed to instantiate
metasystemic thinking so I'd learned at a young age through accidents
you're not through any you know capacity of my own but accidents of circumstance to treat
analytical rational thinking as object and to treat my problem-solving
uh capacities using analytical rational cognition as object and using that capacity to be able to
improve my problem problem solving straight strategies and so on rather than just solving
problems I knew uh what approaches I was using and I could improve them enhance them and so on
uh recursively as I developed um so the significant but however I developed an
intuitive capacity over the years um to do metasystemic thinking but I couldn't see it as object
and it's your thought forms and and uh moments of dialectic that enabled me to scaffold my ability
to see it as object and go to a metacognitive level in relation to metasystemic thinking
and it's that meta of metacognitive level which is essential for teaching it in my view
scaffolding it and others and so on so um yeah uh thanks for those foundations
thank you John um I want to summarize two things that I um I'm especially grateful to you for
opening new doors in my thinking so the first aspect is the metaphor of disembedding
so there is a bed where our thoughts flow and um how can we disembed and even if we
think we are thinking in a metasystemic fashion or maybe even if we do is could even still be a bed
so how can we again and again disembed from from these flows of thoughts that are
that we have been used to so that's the first aspect the metaphor of disembedding and the
second one is the aspect that you put on the question of meditation on a special form of
I don't know cognitive awareness meditation or something like this um and also linking it to
phenomenon that we phenomena that we are experiencing I think you shared walking
showering and napping so I think a lot of people can relate to these experiences where
they have thoughts and images and they can make connections and see things in a larger context
etc um capacities that I do not have in normal waking time and I think if we can relate people's
experiences and memories of of these small short phases of I don't know wider cognition
with this practice and training then maybe people could also be attracted and get a
get a hint get a hint or get a flavor of where we are aiming at at the same time I think you shared
started with the challenge of the global wicked problems etc of these big questions climate crisis
etc and of course my question is how can we scale how can we do this in a fashion that is not aiming
for the next hundred years but for the next three years where we have still something
some things to change so these are the questions I'm holding I'm very much looking forward to the
next salon with Otto and then the salon after that with the both of you in dialogues I'm really
hoping that we open new doors in our own thinking and then and hopefully get the snowball rolling
and running thank you so much for taking the time for participating all the best good night good
evening good morning bye
