Wonderful. Thank you so much. Good to see you, Otto Laska. Thank you for coming. Thank
you everybody for coming. This is the second part of a series around the question of scaffolding
dialectical thinking or scaffolding metasystemic thinking. In the first part, we have been
talking to John Stewart, and now this is the second part with you, Otto Laska. There will
be a third salon where John Stewart and Otto Laska will be in dialogue. I'm really happy
that the two of you, John and Otto, that you are doing this and the stage is yours. Otto
Laska, over to you. This is my topic. The evolutionary past and future of the thinker.
These are some of the things about the evolution of thought in the context of planetary being.
I will set forth a series of hypotheses that draw conclusions from a French thinker's theory
of evolution whose name is Gilbert Simondon and from CDF. I will be searching for answers
to the question of what might be the consequences of two transitions from a purely psychic to
a reflexive mind system, which you will hear about, and the transition within the reflexive
system from purely logical to metasystemic or dialectical thinking. And here is my proposition.
I think before we deal with the topic of human thinking, we need to clarify what ontologically
is a thinker as an integral part of human being. And when making evolutionary claims
regarding human being, we need to spell out what we mean by evolution and set evolution
apart from development, which is an integral part of evolution, but we don't know in what
way. This will be in two parts. The first part will be the evolutionary past and future of
the thinker. And the second part, that is somewhat briefer, will be on metasystemic thinking itself.
We owe it to John Stewart, who is present, wonderful, that we begin to ask questions about
cognitive development in relation to human evolution, not just development. Those questions are
not obvious and easy to formulate as his work shows. And I think to operate safely in this highly
complex context, we need to approach human evolution in contrast to development in the
broadest possible way, a set of human agents that are ingredients of the evolution of planetary
being. In this endeavor, we cannot split the cognitive from the social emotional and its
psychic base, which are embedded in a physical biological system. That means we need to frame
cognitive development as a substream of a much larger process. I think only then can we hope
to arrive with some cogency as a correct formulation of even pragmatic questions of how to scaffold
metasystemic thinking. There are two approaches to understanding evolution that I am aware of.
One is the what I call the Anglo-American positivistic approach. The other is the French
philosophical approach. It comes from Merleau-Ponty, Simon Dant, Derrida and Stiegler. The first
approach, here is how they differ. The first approach focuses on scientific notions of consciousness
and its brain and formulas their processes accordingly. And to my understanding, it does
not question the conventional Kantian notion of individual as the carrier of mind. The second
French tradition is critical of treating human being as a substance with evolutionary and
developmental properties. For the reason that it wants to understand how the physical brain
opened a path for mind to emerge from within a physical biological system. And why is this
system at some point had no choice but to extend itself into the psychic and as I will
hypothesize further into a reflexive system. I'm speaking about four systems which I will show you
in a few seconds. In this tradition, Jimon Dant offers a notion of evolution that critiques the
Kantian notion of individual and thus also of thinker. He is putting the emphasis on individuation
of reality, not just human. Proposing that evolution, which he calls de Vinay, leads from a
pre-individual to a trans-individual phase of being such that the individual, the human individual,
which he refers to as a subject, which I will explain, is the bridge between the pre-individual
and the trans-individual dimension of reality. Here is a diagram by which I'm trying to show you
what this implies. The figure depicts human evolution. As you can see,
pre-individual reality, which is not only pre-individual, but not individuated,
there are no individuals in this reality. So that's why it's called pre-individual.
Pre-individual reality is a set of deep potentials that reside in tense,
meta-stable fields unfolding in real time, setting forth progressive individualization.
So what you see here, the human, I'm discussing the human case of evolution,
so that what you see here, the physical system of being extended itself into a biological
system. And together, they extended themselves in what Simon Dorn calls a psychic system,
psychic taking in the Greek sense of Psyche. And my addition is here this, that I think,
if I understand Simon Dorn correctly, that he failed to spell out what I call a reflexive system.
These together make up the individual mind. Now, as these systems evolve, one after the other,
they are all of them in a trans-individual reality. Or you could say they are on their way
to a trans-individual reality, which is no longer focused on the individual mind,
but is focused on the collective, which I call social being. And that is what I'm going to detail.
As I go further. So we are talking about evolution out of a pre-individual reality
that individualizes itself into these human subsystems,
some of them forming the human mind, the individual mind,
which extends itself based on reflexive being
into the trans-individual reality. That means that the way I approach cognitive development,
especially the transition from logical to meta-systemic or dialectical thinking,
is to ask, does meta-systemic thinking gets us into a trans-individual reality?
Or do we remain stuck in the individual mind?
Now, this extension of psychic into a reflexive system of which I spoke
has a transition from the pre-individual reality as a set of deep potentials
into a trans-individual reality. What can we say about that?
If we assume with CDF that the psychic system is a need-press system,
and that the reflexive system is based on the polarity, if that is the right term,
I'm still not sure what this relationship is of social, emotional, and cognitive development.
Then what can we say about this extension of the psychic into a reflexive system?
If we look at the individual systems composing human being as problem solvers,
we can say that there came a point in evolutionary time
where they could no longer handle the tension in one of the subsystems
and had to move on to the next, which means that one can hypothesize, which I do,
that the social-emotional component of the reflexive system
derives from what in need-press is called ideal-press, whereas the cognitive system
within the reflexive system derives from what in need-press is called actual-press,
and here is why. Ideal-press in the need-press system, or let's say in a need-press system,
has to do with the pressure that an individual imposes on him or herself.
That's why it's called ideal. It has to do with values, and so, for instance, if you work in a
company and your value system is very different from that of the company, you get into conflicts
because you are imposing on yourself your own values, and that leads to ideal-press on your ego,
and so then you end up with the same question that is social-emotional
thinking, functioning individual ends up, namely, what should I do?
So there is a homogeneity between ideal-press in a need-press system and social-emotional
development of functioning. The same is true for actual-press, which in a need-press system
has to do with the external social pressures on the ego exerted by social and physical forces,
which ultimately lead to the cognitive question in CDF, what can I do? What can I do about these
actual pressures that hinder me from doing my work, that hinder me to develop, and so forth?
So while this would occasion many, many more thinking and explanation, I will leave it at what
I hypothesized here, that I see the social-emotional component of the reflexive systems evolutionarily
deriving from ideal-press in a need-press system and the cognitive system from the actual-press.
Let me ask what are the thinkers or asynchers evolutionary prospects?
I told you that Simon-Don speaks of CG, subject, and that for him is a broader concept than the
individual mind, consisting of these two systems, because CG, or subject, comprises all four
dimensions, the pre-individual reality as a set of potentials, the psychic system that activates
these potentials, the reflexive system which further activates these potentials and leads,
according to my hypothesis, into the trans-individual domain. So we can call this CG, these four
dimensions, we can call the thinker. So a thinker has a set of potentials, has a psychic system,
has a reflexive EDCD system, and is on its way to the trans-individual domain, which
appears in reality as the social world in the broader sense, or as a collective in the more
restricted sense, and I will not have time to go into the minutia
of the relationship of trans-individual system to social and social being and collective.
So this leads to an interesting question.
Present cognitive development theory conceives of a thinker in the Kantian way,
or even the Cartesian way, as a substance with developmental attributes. I emphasize substance.
Substance here means something thingified, and that is why these wonderful theories of the
Colbeck School can only describe development from the outside, but they cannot explain development
as it unfolds. So we hear about human being as a substance having a social-emotional dimension,
a cognitive dimension, that there are stages, phases, whatever, but that's, you know, that's
facade and cléteral in terms of Heidegger. We are climbing up a building, we're looking into
the windows, but we are not describing the building as in process of being built or being
lived in, and that's exactly what Simondon wants to change. He wants to explain
de venir becoming itself. He does not want to explain and think it's a wrong way to go
to try to explain how a substance like individual evolves. Now this is a tall order, as you will
realize. So in order to bypass this reductive approach of the Colbeck School and many, many
other schools, psychology, whatever, anthropology, I have conceived of the thinker here as a bigger,
as bigger than an individual mind, namely as a CG that comprises a pre-individual and trans
individual dimension. What does that do? It opens up to questions of where does psychic
reality and reflexive reality, including thinking, come from? How do they actually unfold
evolutionarily and in real time so that we don't just describe them from the outside?
It gives rise also to a very interesting question, namely does an individual thinker
or a cognitive collective she joins as a subject at a particular evolutionary point
carry sufficient pre-individual potential to develop its functioning into a trans
individual functioning? And to what extent does metasystemic thinking lie on the thinker's path
toward trans individuality? That would be my evolutionary core question.
Some questions that this leads to, maybe we'll just pick one or two.
How exactly, number two, how exactly does human cognitive development towards metasystemic
or dialectical thinking extend the psychic into the reflexive system and the reflexive
system into a trans individually functioning one? What is the function and what are the limits
of a thought-form dialectic in reshaping the human reflexive systems, which also includes
social-emotional functioning, enabling it to function in a trans individual domain?
And what in evolutionary terms is the impact of a reflexive system capable of metasystemic thinking
on its associated psychic or need-press system? And what are the psychic and reflective resources
of human collectives that take the form of social systems that are part of
trans individual reality? And to what extent can social systems be part of trans individual
reality, which I would see as a question about communication
beyond Habermas. I will talk about that more. Communication, including scaffolding.
I come to part two. Maybe I should, as an urgent question, I will now go into dialectical
or metasystemic thinking more directly and see it as an individuation of the reflexive system.
So I have set the stage for looking at metasystemic thinking ontologically and epistemologically
and have proposed to think of that kind of thinking as a further individuation
of a cognitive system and thus a reflexive system, but also a social-emotional system.
So the term individuation, you cannot quite translate it simply into differentiation,
but it has to do with differentiation. I mean, most strictly speaking, individuation really means
creating an individual out of a reality that is not individualized or individualizable.
And Simone D'Or distinguishes between individuation and individualization,
individuation and individualization. What happens in bringing about systems to emerge?
He speaks of individuation, but within systems there are progressive individualizations also,
which you might say have something to do with stages or phases.
Or even with particular movements and thought, which could completely reorganize a particular
cognitive system. And I will go to that.
So there are two notions of Simone D'Or, which I think are useful in the context I have created,
namely transduction and metastability. Transduction is a term taken from thermodynamics,
which Simone D'Or considers as useful for explaining the evolution
to Kuhl, or the evolution of physical, biological, psychic and social individuals,
as they emerge from an unindividuated or pre-individual reality, as I showed you initially.
This movement is transductive. Transduction is anchored in the
correlativity of structure and operation, and is a critique of any thinking in terms of substance.
It is about flow, it is about development, it is about evolution, it is about process.
And this correlativity of structure and operation and evolution, including human evolution,
works in such a way that operations generate structures, which could be thought structures,
which in turn give rise to new operations, as long as the trans-individual dimension
of being and thinking is not realized or has not been entered into.
So, what we have is a continuing process of individuation based on
structures, on operations generating structures, which again generate new operations.
And these transductive operations draw on a set of deep pre-individual
potentials that trigger continuing evolution, as they foster operations
that generate new physical, biological, psychic and reflexive structures.
Importantly, pre-individual potentials can only survive in what Simonon calls meta-stable fields.
A meta-stable field is a field of unrelief tension.
And in such fields, potential set forth what he calls structural germs that give rise to
operations, such as social-emotional development or movement and thought,
that generate new structures and thereby individuate being's psychic and or reflexive system.
So, we can look at the human psychic and reflective system as a phase of being,
as is true for the physical and the biological system that these systems are embedded in.
That means also, as phases of being, they cannot be turned into substances
defined by properties. That essentially means one cannot think about them logically,
or in other words, logical thinking is incapable of understanding phases of being,
because it does not understand transduction, nor does it understand meta-stability,
because logical thinking turns a meta-stable field into a stable field of substances.
I will say more about that.
And that's exactly the difference between logical and meta-systemic thinking.
Meta-systemic thinking, in my view, is able to keep meta-stability alive in the mind,
in the communication between minds. And that's a situation which collapses
if that meta-stability is approached with logical, with purely logical thinking.
Let me speak of some ramifications I'm almost at the end of the notion of transduction,
following him, Simondo, closely.
To simplify, I would say that the concept of transduction translates into meta-stability.
Transduction can only happen in a meta-stable field, which translates into energy in the sense of
in-formation, which has an emphasis on formation, or taking form, round reform.
So, it's not the usual positivistic notion of information as a set of data. It's a process.
It's an information. And that information is not causing, but I don't need to go into that detail.
So, in short, transduction is informative, in the sense of formative, inducing systemic resonance,
which is one of which causality, this is actually not correct. The overriding term
in Simondo regarding a system is resonance. And causality is only a subform of resonance,
a special form of resonance. And that too is different from people who think logically.
So, we can say that in this theory, transduction is a liberation of potential energies that in
here meta-stable fields, feeding on each other in steps of amplification, meaning the cognitive
functioning, we can see as an amplification of a social-emotional functioning. And the social
emotional functioning, we can see as an amplification of psychological functioning.
And as I said, these amplifications are going on as long as there are sufficient
potentials in trans-, in pre-individual reality to carry evolution.
So, my conclusion at this point, let me see, is there another one? Yes. My conclusion,
temporary conclusion, I think, would be that meta-systemic cognition as all cognition
is a transductive process in the following sense.
Human movements in thought are operations that produce structures called thought forms,
starting from structural germs that could be logical concepts.
And these structures or thought forms give rise to new operations or new movements in thought,
for instance, as elements of internal conversation that generate new thought forms.
And that's what essentially what we do in internal conversations. We're going from one
thought form to another. The emphasis here is that we are creating these thought forms.
We're not looking them up in a table. That's only, that's an illusion. We are generating them as we
think. So, in real time, movements in thought, in real time, as you know in CDF, are said to
follow a point-elaborate-link sequence or the PALS sequence
that activates fields of reflexive energy and creates resonance in a cognitive system.
So, for instance, if we start with a concept like
a thought form even,
such as unceasing flow, thought form number one, we have the option of elaborating or a
thinker that we listen to has the option of elaborating this thought form. And the concept
that he, the thinker, the interlocutor might have used, might be everything is in flow,
everything changes rapidly. For us as a listener who is DTF-schooled, we see that as unceasing
motion thought form one. As we do this elaboration and linking of thought forms,
broadening our mental field, conceptual field, we are creating internally resonating networks
of concepts that intrinsically presuppose each other and co-create each other. So, we're dealing
with a kind of galaxy where we go from one star to the other. And the world changes as
we go from one star to the other. Not only our worldview changes, but the world itself changes.
I would also say in this context that being transductive cognitive processes can be called
self-scaffolding, which means they are running on their own energy. They don't need to be
scaffolded other than by themselves. It's only for beginners that we need to scaffold
their self-scaffolding. So, in that sense, these cognitive processes that are self-scaffolding,
they can't be taught. They can perhaps be modeled, I think. But fundamentally, they need to be
elicited in oneself and interlocutors so as to generate what Adorno referred to as untrammeled
thinking, untrammeled, unobstructed thinking. Now, how far a transductive cognitive field
can remain meta-stable rather than crashing into logic, rather than stabilizing itself by
getting sucked into purely logical concepts, is a function of psychic, epistemic, and social
emotional preconditions that need to be fulfilled in both the scaffolder and the scaffoldee
in both parties. I will end with some thoughts on the paucity of meta-stable fields of communication.
My conclusion is that only in a mind that is in a meta-stable equilibrium,
rather than stabilized on account of purely logical thinking, can transductive cognitive
processes unfold that create new conceptual structures and networks that resonate dialectically.
Sadly to say, there is presently an absence of social supports for creating meta-stable
fields of communication, especially in educational and organizational environments.
There is also an absence of knowledge about the interactions between the psychic and the reflexic
system of a human being, by which I refer to this relationship,
which makes it difficult
to harness these interactions as potentials that nurture meta-systemic thinking and scaffolding.
So, there is an absence of certain social realities that would be helpful to have,
and there is an absence of certain kinds of knowledge about the psychic and the reflexive
system of human beings that would also be helpful and are also missing.
My thought is that there are many different ways of bringing an interlocutist mind into
a meta-stable non-logical equilibrium, which is a function of utilizing the unrealized potentials
available to the human psychic and reflexive system in both the scaffolder and the scaffoldee.
My thought is that we are at a point of human cognitive evolution
where engaging social, that means trans-individual, collective forces in the enhancement of meta-stable
environments of communication has become an urgent necessity for the sake of human survival
in the context of the common of the present global crisis.
One warning, whether we become victims of human exceptionalism,
meaning that our cognition will save us when counting on the reflexive rather than the psychic
system remains an open question. Maybe the amoeba that has no logical and not any meta-stable,
meta-systemic thinking will be so survivor, not us. Cognition has been shown to fail in many
historical, social circumstances, as you know, history is full of the failures of cognition.
That's what I mean by human exceptionalism. So we are sitting between John Gray, who is a pessimist
as to human survival, and Stephen Pinker, who is an optimist, and we don't know quite where to go.
However, we can speak about how we can contribute to creating meta-stable fields of communication.
I think that Habermas was pointing in this direction, but from a very abstract,
rationalistic position. But I don't want to go into that. I'm not saying that CDF has
any more chances of being helpful. My question is what I heard, and please correct me if I got
it wrong. What I heard is if I would be a beginner, then maybe I would really need another person to
start my scaffolding. But once I'm started, like an engine, like a system, then maybe I find I have
enough germs within me that I become a system that is self scaffolding. From the other side,
my question would be what is it that we can do to support ourselves in self scaffolding, but
also others to kind of start their system so that their self scaffolding mechanism, engine
and organism starts to work.
Yeah, thank you, Werner. I think these questions would be
better addressed in a dialogue between John and me, but I will be glad to also give you
input to that. Let me emphasize, I have not really given you any practical solutions
as to cognitive development, scaffolding it. I have set forth a ontological
foundation on which to address those practical questions, since I believe all these practical
questions we have, and that you just formulated some of, have deep theoretical preconditions.
And if we don't address these preconditions, we cannot answer the questions or we can fool us
as having answered them. As I was saying, as I said, in this approach, which
is a critique of Simon Dorn, but relies on his earlier, on his work, he has been dead since,
I think, 1889. I've spoken of the pre-individual potentials that carry planetary being and human
being, and thus also our physical system, our biological system, our psychic and reflexive
system, which I have introduced as an extension of the psychic system.
So these potentials, I have always maintained, theoretically and practically, in my teaching,
that every human being has a full potential to become a dialectical thinker,
whether he or she will become such a thinker, has, involves many, many factors, more than I can name,
but the potential is there. And Adyajad was saying kind of the same thing, and Michael
Passages was saying that. So that I'm not disputing. The question is, what is the nature
of these potentials? How do they surface in a psychic system as against a reflexive system?
So what does it mean for us to say that they surface and show up empirically speaking?
And only when we have answered those questions, these are theoretical questions,
can we then begin to address practical questions as to what John has called scaffolding.
Scaffolding actually is not maybe the best term, but I've taken it over. I will tell you my
reservations regarding the notion of scaffolding. A scaffold is a construction you put around a building
to repair it or to build it. And so it's something static that you climb up on and look
into the windows of the building you want to investigate. And that's what Heidegger called
façade and clatterai, you go up a façade, a building. So you don't get into the building.
Now, what we want to do in what John called scaffolding is actually getting into the building
and getting into the building as Edgar Schein always reminds us has to do with understanding
our interlocutus mental process before we can do anything at all. And how we do that, whether we
do that in an orthodox way, in a scientific way, through developmental or cognitive assessment,
or informally, if we don't like the means to do that, we will always as scaffolders
act from our notion of what is the mental or the reflexive system and the psychic system
in the interlocutor that we are dealing with. And we can address that question theoretically
and practically and pragmatically, and I guess also politically and socially and so on.
I don't know, I don't think I have answered your question, Berger. Can you help me by pointing
out what was not answered, what element I did not address?
What I find interesting is this idea of kicking off an organism or supporting an organism to
spread. So I'm a hobby gardener, and so some things I need to plant, and then I can support
their growing, but I cannot make them grow, grow by themselves. But I could kill them,
and I could give them not enough water and too much sun, etc. But they need to grow by themselves
if they want to grow. And so my question is, how can we be gardeners? And even if we talk about
scaffolding, interestingly, my picture was that of ivy or beans growing up a scaffold and not a
building being built. Okay, so very good. Yes, thank you. So we all know from our own experience
how long it has taken us to get to logical thinking, namely between 10 and 15,
and nobody has pushed us to go beyond that. There is no social forcing function
to go into meta-systemic thinking. But there is, psychologically speaking, external pressure,
actual press to speak with the NP system to do so. And that is actually, I think, the psychological
root of attempts to develop beyond logical thinking. There must be psychological or,
to speak with Simone, psychic pressures, where the psychic system not only needs to extend itself
into a reflexive system embracing social, emotional, and cognitive development, but also
to solve its problems and to stay alive and to survive. The human system, the human being,
must have, is compelled to evolutionarily advance to a higher level of its functioning.
And what Simone D'Or calls that is a trans-individual system, by which she is referring
not to society in the sense of Margaret Archer or Baskar or Adona or anybody else.
And it's somewhat difficult to explain, but it has to do with collectives, that collectives
give rise to trans-individual functioning that is also thinking, where people can think beyond
their individuality, not only their ego, but their developmental persona. And we don't really
know what that looks like. We are hoping that something like that might emerge
if we keep scaffolding or if we run into a real catastrophe that forces us to forget,
that will scaffold us. The catastrophe will be the scaffolder. So that's all I can,
that comes to mind right now. So we can ask, do we want catastrophe to be our scaffolder,
or do we prefer a human collective to do that for us, of which we can become a part of?
Yes, exactly. That's what I was referring to also by the term of human exceptionalism,
meaning that thinking ourselves as homo sapiens with cognitive capabilities,
we may overestimate what even the highest developed thinking can do.
Exactly. So those people, wouldn't you say are already in a trans-individual
reality? Thank you. I have written somewhere that one can see that I would see
dialectical or metasystemic thinking as an attempt to recapture the infant's
embeddedness in the world as a whole, however
more differentiated. But I think it's in volume one, it doesn't matter. That when the child develops
language, the whole world breaks down, that it has been part of, according to,
I think the author is called Stern, who wrote a wonderful book about that.
I forget the first name, but he was saying the development of language brings to an end.
You could almost say a pre-individual reality, the infant has been living in
that now is increasingly
logified, conceptualized in what we call the school system. And so this notion of the infant that
we can only kind of hypothesize because we are not infants anymore, this holistic
perception of the world gets lost. And I saw it early on that the best notion of
dialectical thinking might be that of a way of recapturing that wholism, that systemic wholism,
but in language. And so the question, in a way, is can we save, can we rescue
in language what we lost when we began to speak? That would be my question.
Yes. That's why for me, it is very important for me, for my interlocutor,
whether he's an interviewee or a colleague, to be aware that they are operating in language,
that they are operating, that they are speaking at this moment, speaking,
tossing around concepts that are substances in a logical fashion, but not aware of the
resonance of the network that their concepts are part of. And that's what for me scaffolding
would be, to open up what seems to be just a concept into
resonating, internally resonating network of concepts that we are led to by thought forms
from one to the other.
Now, that depends on our notion of scaffolding and of external forces. So I can only think in terms
of an example. I think that if we are, if I find myself scaffolding, scaffolded, I could experience
that as an external pressure. And that would not be helpful for me to me.
Yes. No, not of scaffolding, but of cognition. I spoke of actual press in a knee press system
being the predecessor of cognitive functioning. That's what I meant.
I think the question is, do we need the catastrophe to develop or is there something
before that? It's up to us. Unfortunately, it's up to us.
