Good day, I'm Norman LaBurger, and today is a very exciting video for me because it's
a combination of quite some years of interrupted thought.
So it's a point of view towards arithmetic, and in fact algebra, which is based firmly
on a data structure point of view.
But it's not sets, it's rather multisets.
So what I'm proposing to do here today is to create a new framework for arithmetic with
natural numbers, first of all, and then with polynomials, and then we'll see that we'll
be able to extend this arithmetic beyond to more complicated things.
And so we're going to end up with a vision of arithmetic in algebra, which is perhaps
somewhat unfamiliar to you, and seems to extend in vast new directions.
So it's really interesting, and if you're interested in exploring, this is a great topic
for thinking about and exploring.
It turns out that this point of view that I'm giving you is actually quite parallel
in many ways to what happened in the early days of set theory, when set theory was being
used to try to create a structure for the foundations of mathematics.
And the empty set played a very important role then, as it does for us now.
But the critical difference is that we are moving away from sets to a more general approach
to data structures.
So I talk a lot about the LOMS system, representing lists, ordered sets, multisets, and sets.
So for me, sets are just one of these four basic types of data structures.
And while a computer scientist is going to be leaning towards lists as fundamental objects,
and that's fine, for us, we're going to be thinking about the multisets as an unappreciated
kind of framework for thinking about mathematics, which has a lot of potential and a lot of
power.
And in some ways, it's sort of unfortunate that the history of mathematics circumvented
multisets and focused all the attention on sets.
So in case you haven't watched a lot of my videos, the idea that mathematics is based
on set theory is, in my view, a complete distortion of what's really happening.
So we need to have a much more broader point of view.
And along with that, we need to be much more solid, and we need to be much more explicit.
We need to focus on what we can actually write down.
So forget about philosophical pronouncements about what happens when you go to infinity
or do an infinite number of things, which you can't actually do.
So we're going to be always looking to avoiding that kind of talking, which is essentially
a kind of a vacuous talking, not supported by explicit computation.
So real number arithmetic is a fantasy, as far as I'm concerned.
Fundamental theorem of algebra is just wishful dreaming.
You could evidence yourself that by factoring x to the 7 plus x minus 3 into quadratic and
linear factors, just do it, or admit that you can't do it.
And you'll see that the fundamental theorem of algebra is not really true.
So there's all kinds of really serious problems with the foundations of mathematics, as I,
of course, talk about very often in this series.
But today I want to make a start at another kind of approach, which is in some sense parallel
to things that I've done already.
I've talked a lot about marks, even from the early days of this series, marks and anti-marks
and so on.
So this is another point of view that's sort of parallel, sort of competing, has a lot
of overlap, but it's a little bit different.
I would like to say also, first of all, a big thank you to my Patreon supporters.
And in particular, I benefited by having some reactions to a previous video that I posted
in this direction.
My Patreon supporters, especially Lucas Lufaro, gave some interesting suggestions and encouragements.
So big shout out to all of my Patreon supporters.
Okay, so what we're going to do is we're going to use this data structure point of
view to get a new framework for arithmetic and then ultimately algebra and everything's
based on multisets.
And what is a multiset?
It's a way of collecting things in an unordered fashion where repetitions are allowed.
And I like to think of this as like boxes.
This is really box theory.
So here is a multiset.
Okay, it's a container.
Okay, I can open up the container.
See what has in it.
Okay.
Oh, look, there's a few things in it.
There's this plug.
There's a couple of markers.
These two markers are pretty well the same, these two red ones.
So duplicates are allowed.
Okay.
And then there's this other thing.
What is this?
Well, actually, this is another container.
Okay, here's another little container.
It's a little plastic container that has a sand disk drive inside.
So it's actually, this is like a little box inside this bigger box.
And that's a key point, right, that we can think about boxes or collections or multisets
of multisets, of multisets, et cetera.
Okay.
And the containment relations between these boxes or multisets becomes really interesting.
Okay.
So we start off at a very simple level by considering not something complicated like this, but something
rather simpler like this, an empty box, okay, an empty box or an empty multiset has the
potential to put lots of stuff in there, but currently there's nothing in it.
This is going to be our fundamental mathematical object.
It's the starting point of our mathematics.
Okay.
So we're going to denote it by a pair of brackets with nothing inside.
So that's the empty set or for us better, the empty M set because it has the potential
of putting lots of things inside it.
We'll give it a name.
We'll call it zero.
And sometimes in diagrams, we'll represent it by a box or a square like this or a rectangle
with the possibility of putting various stuff in there.
So this object just by itself is already a type.
We can say we have a type of object, zero type.
It's only one object that has this type, the empty set or the empty M set or zero.
So this is going to be our starting point.
And in some sense, we're just going to use this thing over and over again and put boxes
inside other boxes to create arithmetic and algebra.
And we'll be able to go quite far just in this one lecture as you will see.
So even if you're very used to arithmetic and algebra, you're going to be introduced
to some exciting new things in this video.
Okay.
So the next step up, natural numbers.
So a natural number is an M set of zeros.
The type of natural number, you noted N18 at the type.
Here's some examples.
Here's an M set of zeros.
Does it have any zeros in it?
Well, it has no zeros in it, but we still consider an empty set of zeros to be an M set
of zeros.
That's an important point.
Let me just talk a little bit about that.
Okay.
So here is our, as an M set, okay.
Currently it has some M set of markers.
Okay.
It's an M set of markers.
If I take one of these markers out, it's still an M set of markers.
If I take another marker out, well, it's still an M set of markers.
It happens to be the empty M set of markers.
So the empty M set is actually, or zero is actually a very flexible object, but in particular,
it is also a natural number for us.
So this new type of object includes the former type zero.
Okay.
And then we give these things some names, the obvious ones.
So the set or M set with just a single zero in it will be called one, the M set consisting
of zero and zero will be called two, and here is three, and so on and so forth.
And in diagrams, if we wanted to represent this another way, maybe simpler for primary
school kids, we could maybe use some other symbol, maybe like small circles to represent
zero.
So what we usually call 13 then could be illustrated to a primary school student by a box, or in
this case, a rectangle with 13 little circles.
So these little circles are sort of playing the same role as the marks, the sort of elementary
marks that I've talked about earlier, but there is a distinction because now these basic
marks are not sort of elemental things, they are actually empty M sets.
Okay.
So we have a definition of what a natural number is, it's an M set of zeros.
So those of you who have watched a lot of my videos will know that I like to approach
polynomials and polynomial algebra in terms of what I call poly numbers, which are sort
of more data theoretic.
I use these extensively, even in the algebraic calculus course, these are sort of workhorses
for doing algebra.
So here we're going to introduce them in a slightly different way, but it's really the
same thing as we've already been talking about, but just from a slightly different point
of view.
So what is a poly number in this context?
A poly number is an M set of natural numbers.
So we're going one step up further, starting with zero, the natural numbers, and now poly
numbers, and the type, poly.
Okay.
So here is a poly number.
Why?
Well, it's an M set and what does it have in it?
One, one, two.
Those are all numbers.
So this is a multi-set of natural numbers.
It is therefore a poly number.
Here is another poly number.
And okay, admittedly, there could be a little bit of confusion depending on how much space
you think there is here.
This is meant to be 13.
Okay.
These are sort of like the adjacent.
So this is a multi-set with just a single number in it, but in particular, it's a multi-set
of natural numbers.
So it's a poly number.
Here's another poly number because it's an M set of natural numbers because remember,
zero is a natural number.
The type of natural number included the former type of zero.
So zero is a natural number.
And in fact, this thing here is also a poly number because it's an M set of natural numbers.
How many natural numbers are in here?
Well, there aren't any, but it's still an empty M set of natural numbers.
So in particular, this thing, which is, of course, zero, is also a poly number.
Okay.
So we have zero, the type zero contained in the type, not contained in the type of poly.
And now something, one level further, which is a little bit fancier, okay?
And it will take some getting used to, you know, what this actually means, but it's sort
of a natural thing to do.
We sort of have this natural hierarchy now, we can just sort of keep on going.
So a multi-number is, by definition, an M set of poly numbers, an M set of poly numbers.
And there's the type, multi.
Okay.
So look at this thing here.
There's an M set.
What's this comma doing here?
Oh, no.
So here's the M set.
Okay.
Here's the M set.
Yes.
Bracket's here.
And what's inside this M set?
Well, it has this object.
What is this thing?
This is an M set with numbers in it, one, one, so M set of natural numbers.
So this is a poly number.
Here's another poly number.
These two happen to be equal.
So this whole thing is an M set of poly numbers.
So this is a multi-number.
Here's another multi-number.
It's an M set, which happens to have one poly number in it, the poly number consisting
of the multi-set three, five, and 11.
How about this thing?
Is this an M set of poly numbers?
Well is zero a poly number?
Well, yes, we just said it was.
So this thing is zero and this we said is a poly number.
So this is a poly number.
So this is an M set of poly numbers in particular.
It's a multi-number.
What about the empty set?
Well it's also an M set of poly numbers, the empty M set of poly numbers.
So it also includes.
So again, multi includes poly, which includes NAT, which includes zero.
So we have this inclusion, inclusion of types.
So NAT, poly, multi, each included in the other in the following sense, in the sense
that if you have an object of this type, then it is automatically an object also of this
type, therefore also an object of this type, therefore also an object of this type.
And I hope that it's sort of obvious that the way we're going from one step here to
another is directly generalizable.
We could easily imagine just keeping on going.
Once we've defined multi numbers, we could define some higher objects, which are M sets
of multi numbers.
Okay, and later on, we're going to be thinking about that kind of thing.
But already here, we have a very rich framework for arithmetic and algebra.
All right, but if we want to have arithmetic, we need operations as well as numbers.
Or objects.
So there is a fundamental operation in this world of multi sets, which is very, very
general and it's addition.
So this is the beauty of the multi set framework, which distinguishes it from the set theory
world.
In the set theory, there's no such thing as addition of sets.
But in the multi set world, there is a crucial to understand and to appreciate the importance
of this operation, this very general operation.
So how do you add M sets?
You just combine their contents into a single M set.
Let me show you physically.
So here are two M sets.
They're boxes.
It is a little box that has a sand disk in it.
And here, this one here, what does it have in it?
Oh, it has two markers in it.
Shall we add these two M sets?
Add this M set and this M set.
I'm going to show you how to do that.
We need another box.
Okay, hey, here's a box.
So what am I going to do?
I'm going to take this box and this box here, these two boxes, and I'm going to combine
their contents.
I have to do this one at a time because I only have two hands.
Okay, and there's the sand disk.
That's also going in there.
Okay, there are the original boxes.
I don't need them because I put everything because I put everything in this new box.
And so there, I hope you can see, there's our new box.
It's got the sand disk in it.
There it is there.
And it has our two markers, okay?
That's how you add M sets.
Let's have a look at some examples with the kinds of objects we've been talking about.
So here we have some objects, okay?
And notice that in this case, I actually have three things, okay?
And what are these things?
Well, these things are what?
This is a poly number because it's a multi-set of natural numbers.
Here's another poly number.
So this is here.
This thing here is a multi-number.
Here's another multi-number.
Here's another multi-number.
But in particular, these are M sets.
So we don't require that we just have two M sets.
We could do this with more than two M sets.
We could have several M sets and add them at the same time just by dumping all their
contents into a box.
Actually things are unordered and repetitions are allowed so there's no need to fuss around
and remove duplicates as you would if you were working with set theory.
It's just absolutely simple-minded.
Just dump them on the box and there you go.
But in particular, it's not intrinsically a binary operation.
So how do you add these things?
Well, you just get a bigger box represented by those brackets there and you put the set
three in, the M set four, the M set one, one, two.
The M set four, zero.
That's also a natural number.
So in particular, it's a poly number.
So there's the zero and four is there and the one, two, one is there.
So we're just dumping the contents of these three M sets into a single M set.
That's how you add them.
The operations name will be the usual addition.
So if we have, you know, if this is A, B and C then the sum is denoted A plus B plus C.
And note again that it's not intrinsically a binary operation.
It applies to all M sets.
It's not just that we can add numbers, right?
We can have M sets of anything in principle and we're still able to perform this addition
operation.
It's really important that you digest the fundamental aspect of this operation.
Okay?
This is something that is so elementary but maybe has slipped by your consciousness because
you're not used to thinking about M sets as being fundamental.
But it's a crucial erythmetical structure that's actually working in the entire world
of M sets.
Okay.
It's now easy observation that the natural numbers are closed under addition.
In fact, one step below that, the zero, the zero type is also closed under addition.
Let me show you that, okay?
So here is now an empty M set.
I've dumped everything previously out.
And here's another empty M set, okay?
So suppose I wanted to add these two M sets.
Well, I'm going to get myself another box, okay?
And I'm going to dump the contents of this one here and also dump the contents of this
one here.
Okay, there I've done it.
I've dumped all the contents of the two boxes and you can see it's still empty.
Okay?
So empty set plus empty set equals empty set.
So zero plus zero equals zero.
So somewhat less obvious, but still pretty obvious is that if you have two natural numbers,
so three plus four, say, okay, there's our picture of three.
It's an M set which has three zeros in it, zero, zero, zero, represented by these little
circles because it's a picture for primary school students.
Here's a box representing four.
You dump them out into another box.
Well, obviously you're going to get, there's the first three and there's the next four
and you're going to get what we call seven.
In terms of the more familiar notation that we've been talking about, three is actually
officially this thing here, the M set, zero, zero, zero.
Four is the M set, zero, zero, zero, zero.
We put them all in an M set.
So these guys go here and these guys say go here and then we can check that that's actually
seven.
Note that poly is also closed under addition.
Okay?
Here's a poly number because it's an M set of natural numbers.
Here's another poly number.
Here's another poly number.
Here's another poly number.
If we add all four of them, dump the contents, dump the contents, dump the contents, dump
the contents.
You get three, three, three, four, zero, seven and this empty set doesn't contribute.
And this is another multi-set of natural numbers, so it's another poly number.
So if we go up one level to multi-numbers, we see that also it's closed under addition.
For example, here's a multi-number.
It's an M set of poly numbers.
That's a poly number, poly number.
Here's another M set of poly numbers.
That's a poly number, that's a poly number, that's a poly number.
We add them.
Well, obviously we get that one, that one, that one, that one, that one.
We get another M set of poly numbers, in other words, another multi-number.
Okay, so we have addition.
Now we want to go up a step, okay, and this is a really important step.
We're going to go from addition to multiplication, okay, and it's really important to watch carefully
what I do.
It's like magic, okay, a very simple kind of magic, okay.
We're going to create multiplication out of addition.
So how are we going to do that?
Multiplication of M sets of M sets, so strictly speaking, in the M set world, you need M sets
of M sets to make this work, okay.
As it turns out, all the things that we've been talking about are, in fact, M sets of
M sets, so strictly speaking, this is not really necessary.
I just point this out that if you were working with M sets with other kinds of objects, you
really want to restrict yourself to M sets of M sets, but this is not really a restriction
in the world that we set up so far.
Okay, so to multiply M sets, what you do is you form the M set of sums of elements, one
from each M set.
So we're going to use addition to define multiplication, okay, so look carefully.
Here is an M set, and we're going to assume that the contents A and B are themselves M
sets.
Let me remind you that that is a condition that's automatically satisfied for all the
objects that we've been considering.
Here's another M set.
All of its elements are also M sets, so we're assuming that.
Okay, how are we going to multiply this M set with this M set?
We're going to take pairs in this case, because there's two of them that we're multiplying.
Pairs, the elements from this one with elements from this one.
We're going to take this pair, and we're going to add them.
This case, A plus X, we're going to form A plus X.
This is an M set, that's an M set, so A plus X makes sense, that's addition of M sets.
This is another M set, and we're going to take A and Y, we're going to add them, A plus
Y.
Take A and Z, add them, get A plus Z.
Take B and X, add them, get B plus X.
Take B and Y, add them, you get B plus Y.
Take B and Z, add them, you get B plus Z.
So we're getting another M set, which has new M sets in it.
These new M sets are created from the original two M sets by taking sums of elements, one
from each.
That's how you multiply M sets.
All right, let me illustrate this multiplication at each of the levels.
So at the zero level, zero times zero.
What do we get?
Well we have to form an M set, which consists of what?
Which consists of the sum of all entries of this thing with entries of this thing.
Well there are no entries of this thing, there are no entries of this thing, so there are
no possible sums that we can make.
So the result is empty, fine.
That's telling us that zero times zero equals zero.
Now let's go to natural numbers, okay, which are M sets of zeros.
So there's an M set of zeros, there's an M set of zeros.
So how are we going to multiply these two things?
Well we're going to take all possible combinations, entry here, entry here, or element here, element
here, okay, and we're going to add them.
We can add them because the guys inside here are M sets and so they can be added using
M set addition.
Okay so let's do that, so this zero plus this zero, there it is there.
This zero plus this zero, there it is there.
This zero plus this zero, there it is there.
This zero plus this zero, there it is there.
This zero plus this zero, there it is there.
This zero plus this zero, there it is there.
Have I done all the pairs?
That's done all the pairs.
Now we have to evaluate these things.
What is zero plus zero?
Well it's zero.
So each of these are zero.
So we get 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0.
And in ordinary Hindu-Arabic notation, we've computed that 2 times 3 is 6.
Okay, let's go to poly.
Let's multiply poly numbers.
So here's a poly number.
Here's another poly number.
These are poly numbers because they're m sets of numbers.
That's a number, that's a number.
Here's another m set of natural numbers.
So to multiply them, we have to take pairs, combinations, and add them.
So how do you add the number 2 and the number 1, first pair?
Well, you get 3.
And then 2 plus 1 is 3.
2 plus 0 is 2.
And then 3 plus 1 is 4, 3 plus 1 is 4, 3 plus 0 is 3.
So we get the m set, 3, 3, 2, 4, 4, 3.
It's another m set of natural numbers, so that's another poly number.
Poly number times poly number equals poly number.
And let me show you that this is not restricted to having 2.
We can multiply, in principle, a number of different m sets.
So now I'm going to multiply 3 m sets together sort of at the same time.
So the m set 0, 3, the m set 1, 4, the m set 2, 7.
These are all poly numbers because they're m sets of natural numbers.
So what do we need to do?
Well, we need to take combinations where we're taking one element of each one of these.
So let's start with the 0, 1, and 2.
What do I have to do with those things?
I have to add them.
They're m sets.
So the addition of m sets of these three is well defined.
I don't have to specify which order we're doing it in.
There's three things, we're just dumping them out.
So 0 plus 1 plus 2 is 3.
0 plus 1 plus 7 is 8.
0 plus 4 plus 2 is 6.
0 plus 4 plus 7 is 11.
Okay, I have to keep track.
I'm going to pick all possible combinations.
How about 3 plus 1 plus 2?
That's 6.
3 plus 1 plus 7, that's 11.
3 plus 4 plus 2 is 9.
And 3 plus 4 plus 7 is a 14.
So we've multiplied these three poly numbers to get this poly number.
Okay, now one more step up to the multi numbers.
So let's do this.
Okay, so here's a multi number.
Why is this a multi number?
Well, because this thing inside it is a poly number.
And here's another poly number.
It's a multi set of natural numbers, therefore a poly number.
Here's another m set of natural numbers.
Therefore a poly number.
So this is an m set of poly numbers.
Here's another m set of poly numbers.
Note that 2 is indeed a poly number because we've seen that natural numbers are included
in the type of poly numbers.
So what do we have to do?
Well, we have to take all possible pairs, elements here, elements here, and we have to add them.
Okay, so let's take this element here and this element here.
These are m sets.
There's an m set, there's an m set.
How do you add them?
Well we just dump the contents into a box.
So we get 00211.
There, that's the result of adding this m set and this m set.
How about this m set with 2?
Okay, well we get 002.
What is this thing as an m set?
Well 2 is really the m set 00 if we want it right that way.
So we could put another 00 there.
Now we've added 2.
How about this thing and this thing?
Well then we're going to get, I better write smaller, 0029.
And now this one plus this one, that's 3811 and we also need down here, 38, we're adding
2 so we have to add 2 zeros.
And finally this one here, 389.
So that's the end, so there's the big bracket at the end.
So we're getting 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, just to check, okay, 6 different constituents or elements
that make sense because this one has 2 elements, this one has 3 elements so we should end up
getting 6 elements.
So we can do multiplication in each one of these types.
Okay, so a little bit of thought and just doing some calculations along the lines I've
shown you reveals that each one of these type domains, zero, inside NAT, inside poly, inside
multi, is closed under both addition and multiplication.
And moreover, the usual arithmetic laws that we're familiar with hold, namely we have commutative
law, a plus b equals b plus a, a times b equals b times a, a plus b plus c equals a plus b
plus c, that's an associative law for addition and here's an associative law for multiplication.
And distributive laws, a times b plus c equals a times b plus a times c, where we use the
usual convention that the multiplication takes precedence over the addition, that means you
have to do this product first and do this product also before you add them together.
And over here, a plus b times c is a times c plus b times c, okay, so it's a great exercise
to check these and sort of convince yourself that these are valid.
And you see that it's a very general kind of arithmetic.
It's not just arithmetic with numbers that we're doing here, we're doing arithmetic in
a broader context.
Alright, so I want to finish the lecture by clarifying the meaning of poly and since that's
a term that I've already used quite extensively, I want to connect with the former usage and
convince you that these are pretty well the same things, although there is a slight difference.
So we can do that by concentrating on the sort of simplest object when we're going from
natural numbers to poly numbers, which is not itself a natural number.
So if we take the set consisting of zero, that's a poly number, but it's also a natural
number, that's one, okay.
So the simplest poly number, which is not a natural number, is this one.
It's the m set consisting of a single one.
Let's call it alpha.
Okay, so let's do a bit of arithmetic with this alpha.
Suppose we look at alpha plus alpha, okay, which we could call two alpha.
What is that?
Well, you have to take this thing and you have to add it with itself.
So you have to get a box and you dump one one in and then you dump another one in.
Well, you're going to have two ones in the box.
So it's going to look like this.
Okay.
What about three alphas?
Well, dump one in, dump another one in, dump another one in, you're going to get this thing
here and so on.
So multiples of alphas, it's clear sort of what they correspond to.
How about multiplication?
Suppose we take alpha times alpha.
So there's alpha, there's alpha.
How do you multiply them?
Well, you have to take the sums of corresponding elements, one from each one of these.
Well, there's only one element here and one element here.
So you have to take one plus one and one plus one addition, natural numbers, that's two.
So you're going to get the m set consisting of a single two.
And if you take alpha cubed, that means you're going to multiply this thing by another one
of these, then you're going to have to compute one plus two, which is three.
So you're going to get the m set consisting of three.
So powers of alpha are sort of naturally corresponding to those sort of singleton m sets that just
contain a single natural number.
And so that allows us to interpret some more complicated poly like this.
Okay.
So here's a more complicated poly number.
It's an m set of natural numbers, zero, zero, one, one, one, two, three, three, three, three.
So to make sense of this, to organize it a little bit, we can write it as a sum.
So this is the sum of the m set, zero, zero, and the m set, one, one, one, and the m set,
two, and the m set, three, three, three, three, three.
Okay.
What is this thing?
This is the number two.
What is this thing?
Well, this is what we've said is three alpha.
What is this thing?
That's what we've said is alpha squared.
And what is this thing?
Well alpha cubed was three.
So two alpha cubed will be this plus itself will be the m set three, three.
And having four of them, that'll be four alpha cubed.
So this is a representation of what in ordinary algebra we would write as the polynomial two
plus three alpha plus alpha squared plus four alpha cubed.
And in my preferred poly number language that I talked a lot about in other videos, I would
represent this with a list, a vertical list like this, okay, with the coefficients two,
three, one, four.
So we're seeing that this sort of former definition of a poly agrees with this sort of new definition
of a poly.
They're really the same.
But what's the difference?
The difference is that this is a list.
This is a list.
And this thing here is of course an m set.
And there's a crucial distinction between these two things that's really useful to appreciate.
So remember when we were looking at polynomials or poly numbers like this, there was a certain
amount of ambiguity because we could add a zero below here and we agreed that was going
to be the same thing that did not change the poly number.
We could add in fact any number of zeros below and that's not going to change the poly number
even though officially as a list it's kind of changing.
There's a little bit of ambiguity there.
It's a general rule that when you have that kind of ambiguity it's because the list that
you're considering is really more fundamentally to be thought of as a multiplicity list for
an m set.
So this is an m set of zeros, ones, twos and threes and since the natural numbers are
naturally ordered, zero, one, two, three, we can represent such an m set or maybe make
it more concise by just counting how many each we have.
We have two zeros, we have three ones, we have one, two and we have four threes.
So this is a list that is the multiplicity list of this m set.
But I would like to suggest to you that actually, formally, officially the m set is actually
more fundamental.
It's at the heart of things and now we see that this list object is really just a secondary
object that sort of makes it easier for us to represent this m set but what a poly really
is, is an m set of natural numbers.
Great, so we've accomplished a lot, of course a question that will be on your mind is okay
but what about these multi numbers, what's their significance?
So I'm going to tell you about that in the next video and we're also moving towards an
alternate view of this thing which is even more in spirit for computer scientists.
So this topic is going to move really, really closely to alignment with modern computer science
as we'll see.
Maybe mathematics will end up being a topic in computer science.
I'm Norman Bobbaker, thanks for listening.
