Hi, this is Phenomenology, and I'm Mark Thorsby.
Welcome back.
I hope you're doing well.
In this video, we're going to be taking a look at the introduction to Martin Heidegger's
seminal text, Being in Time, or in the German Sein und Zeit.
So welcome back, everyone.
I hope you're doing well.
So what we're going to be taking a look at here is, so far in this course, we've looked
into Edmund Husserl's text, Ideas 1, or an analysis of what pure phenomenology looks
like.
And we've chosen that.
We chose that text, or I chose that text, because I wanted you to get a nice and a solid
understanding of what phenomenology is in its most basic and originary conception.
We're going to see here that really starting with this video is we're going to be looking
at phenomenology after Husserl.
Now, there's a lot of phenomenologists who follow Husserl, but probably the most important
and certainly the most impactful of these philosophers was Martin Heidegger.
Martin Heidegger not only studied directly with Husserl, but he even, his magnum opus
text, which here is Being in Time, he actually dedicates to Edmund Husserl.
But we're going to see that Heidegger, I think, really goes beyond Husserl and succeeds
his master, as it were.
And we're going to see that whereas Husserl's attitude and his philosophy we looked at was
really about the articulation of phenomenology and laying bare the science of phenomenology
as he saw it, in terms of what phenomenology does, how it operates, et cetera, et cetera.
And what's up in the principal themes and discoveries that phenomenology can offer us.
We're going to see here that for Heidegger, who's a phenomenologist, phenomenology becomes
a method for addressing the most important question for him, or the most forgotten question,
which is the question of Being.
And so we're going to see that he really radicalizes phenomenology in a way that is so pivotal
and so that really impacts a philosophy.
In many ways, I think one could argue, indeed, people have argued that Heidegger is really
one of the most important, if not the most important, philosopher of the 20th century.
I don't know about the most important, but certainly I think he's up there at the top
two, in my view.
Him and Wittgenstein, I think, are the most important philosophers of the 20th century.
And so I'm really, really looking forward to Heidegger, these series of lectures.
And I hope that you'll be reading along with us as we go through these.
Now, I want to be honest with you, as we're reading Being in time, you're going to find
that Heidegger's language is very difficult.
I think it's difficult in a different way than Husserl.
Husserl, I think part of his difficulty, or at least the part of the difficulty I have
when I read Husserl, just simply consists in terms of his terminological distinctions
and the many, many interrogative statements he seems to put in there.
I think Heidegger is a much cleaner writer.
It's much more beautiful.
But we're going to find that the difficulty with Heidegger's text concerns the very concepts
he's trying to lay bare, because Heidegger, we'll see especially in the introduction
here, believes that our understanding of phenomenology, and ultimately our philosophical understanding
of being is itself hampered by all of the philosophical vocabulary and all of the philosophical
language that we become accustomed to that is sort of sedimented and accumulated over
the last couple centuries, and over really a couple millennia.
So Heidegger has a more radical task, I think.
But I think you're going to see is that in one sense, once you're able to understand
what Heidegger is doing and being in time, it opens up and it actually becomes very clear
and I think quite beautiful.
So there's something really, really powerful of this philosophy, and I think you're going
to enjoy it.
But you're going to have to struggle through it.
I'm not going to lie to you there.
So let's start off with a sort of quick introduction to Martin Heidegger.
And in terms of his life, you see, I sort of have put together sort of brief timeline
of some of the elements of Heidegger's life just to give you a sense of who he is.
He lived from 1889.
Well, let me show you a picture of him here.
Here he is.
It's not the best quality picture, or at least the highest quality, but here is Heidegger.
You can see he's maybe not the most beautiful man, as it were, but he certainly looks like
a serious thinker.
Now his life, he lived from 1889 to 1976.
So really, he spans the 20th century, most of the 20th century, his life.
And he actually lived, of course, he never met, but he lives at the same time.
He's born at the same time in which Nietzsche is alive.
And we'll see that, although later on in the course here when we talk about the history
of philosophy, we'll see that Heidegger is strongly influenced, or at least he recognizes
the importance of Nietzsche's philosophy.
Nietzsche died in 1901.
Now in 1909, Heidegger received his bachelor's degree.
And initially Heidegger had prepared, he was Catholic, and he was preparing to enter the
priesthood, and he attended theological seminary.
It wasn't long after he began attending that he really became convinced that he didn't
really want to do theology.
He was really interested in doing philosophy, rather.
And by 1913, he pursues a doctorate in philosophy, and in 1913, his doctoral exam is completed.
His doctoral exam was on the doctrine of judgment and psychologism.
So it's pretty interesting because when we read Husserl, if you recall, Husserl made
a sound critique of psychologism, and Husserl wanted to demarcate phenomenology from psychology.
And Husserl, of course, was attacked for creating a sort of psychologism, especially regarding
the publication of the latter volumes of the logical investigations.
And there's a debate here, especially you can think here of Frege's critique of Husserl
as really providing sort of psychologism of mathematics.
So it's interesting here because Heidegger is sort of primed and ready in this sort
of discussion by studying psychologism and thinking about what it means to make judgments.
In 1915, Husserl Heidegger, rather, completes his doctoral dissertation on the doctrine
of categories and the signification in Dunskotis.
Now many of you may not be aware of who Dunskotis was, but Dunskotis was a medieval philosopher
who in many ways begins to articulate an early conception of intentionality, and he starts
to lay bare some early conceptions that bear a strong resemblance to phenomenology.
So there's something very, very interesting there in Heidegger's dissertation, though.
I by no means can talk about it really in this course.
In 1916, Heidegger meets Husserl and eventually begins to study with him and under him.
Eventually, later, you'll see he succeeds Husserl.
In 1918, Heidegger became a private in the military for a year, but by 1919, Heidegger became an assistant
professor of philosophy at the University of Freiburg.
In 1920, he begins teaching courses on phenomenology in particular, and we'll see that like many
of the German philosophers from his time, Heidegger is heavily influenced
by a classical reading of Greek philosophy.
You're going to see as you read being in time, the Heidegger is consistently referring back
to the Greek here.
This course is not in Greek philosophy, so we're not going to spend too much time on
that, but I do encourage you to brush up a little bit on ancient Greek philosophy.
Take a look at, for instance, some of the lectures and metaphysics that I've posted
of Aristotle's metaphysics on the YouTube channel.
In 1923, Heidegger moves to the University of Marburg, where he accepted a position at
the University, which is where Husserl was located.
In 1926, so in those three years, Heidegger is teaching vigorously, and Heidegger becomes
very, very popular professor.
One of the things that was required, though, and still is required, you probably heard
of publisher perish at the universities, is that Heidegger wasn't really publishing
lots of books, despite his enormous popularity, and you'll see not only does he follow in
the footsteps of Husserl as a phenomenologist, but he really begins to radicalize some of
the problems the phenomenology can address.
In fact, one of the important lecture courses he gave, and eventually it gets published,
and you can read it, is called History of the Concept of Time, which really is, if you
will, sort of first draft of being in time.
But in the meantime, Heidegger was working on a draft of his sort of major work called
Zein und Zeit, Being in Time, and he was forced, eventually, by the university to publish it
ahead of time, and so one of the things that's interesting is that being in time was actually
never fully finished, which raises some interesting questions for us.
In 1926, Husserl, Heidegger presents Being in Time to Husserl at his 67th birthday party,
and in fact, the book itself is dedicated to Edmund Husserl.
So the two are very, very close friends in 1926.
In 19, now, over the, between 1926 and 1933, there's a lot of amazing work that Heidegger
would do, and Heidegger continues to do, really, I think, amazing philosophical work throughout
most of his life, but in 1933, he was elected director at the University of Freiburg, but
in the same year, Heidegger joined the National Socialist Party in Germany, that is, he became
a Nazi, and he joined the Nazi Party, and what's more than that, Heidegger actually
gave a series of speeches and a series of talks arguing in favor of the Nazi Party,
especially regarding his, Heidegger especially denounces the Jewish conspiracy in Germany,
and he supported the new laws that the Germans had been, that had passed under the Nazis,
but it dismissed intellectuals, Jewish intellectuals from serving within academia at the University,
and it's at this time that Husserl was forced to retire for racial reasons.
Husserl was actually a Protestant in terms of his religious affiliation, but he was Jewish,
in terms of, he was Jewish, and so he was forced to retire, really quite tragic, and
unfortunately, there's a big question here about Heidegger's relationship to Husserl
in 1933, which you really see a sort of breakdown, unfortunately, and of course, I mean, I'm
not, this isn't a course on German history, and so I won't go into all of what happens
between 1933 and, of course, 44, but everything basically goes wrong in German culture.
One of the philosophers who actually studied under, and who's also a phenomenologist, who
studied under Martin Heidegger is Hannah Arendt, and Hannah Arendt actually was also
Heidegger's lover too, she was Jewish and she was also forced to flee Germany despite
being German herself, but she writes a book that I encourage you to take a look at called
The Origins of Totalitarianism, which she looks at, she gives a phenomenological reading
to a certain degree, she has more other texts which are more phenomenological in nature,
but she looks at the question of what it means for the Germans to have moved into this sort
of racial programming, essentially, so take a look at that text, it's quite interesting.
Now in 1934, though, Heidegger actually resigned his rectorship, and he actually stopped taking
part in the Nazi Party meeting, so after 34, Heidegger's not, he doesn't, he's not official,
he's still an official Nazi member of the party, or official member of the Nazi Party,
but Heidegger, his role in terms of the Nazis really diminished, and of course, this is
many, many years before the genocide of the Jewish people, and the genocide of others,
so we can't, we're not going to associate Heidegger, at least I don't associate Heidegger
with genocide, though it raises important ethical questions regarding his affiliation,
especially because Heidegger refused to recant his Nazi involvement in fact his entire life,
he never regretted being Nazi, and it's hard not to be critical of Heidegger, and I think we
really should be critical in this regard. Now in 1938, in the midst of World War II, or the
beginnings of World War II, Husserl dies, and it's really quite tragic because Husserl was prolific
writer, a prolific and important philosopher, and he really created a whole realm of philosophy
at the center of which is Heidegger, but when Husserl dies, only two professors attend his funeral,
he was really shunned because of his Jewish heritage, which is evil, I think, and tragic.
In 1945, Heidegger survived the war, people weren't sure if he had survived the war,
but he did survive the war, and a series of denazification hearings begin,
in which the Nazi party is disbanded in Germany. Carl Jaspers, who's an important phenomenologist
actually, and a contemporary of Heidegger's, at one point Heidegger and Carl Jaspers had had
a series of correspondences, but Heidegger dropped them off. Well, Jaspers writes a report on
Heidegger's involvement detailing how you might say Heidegger's, his anti-Jewish work and the
sort of the negative things that Heidegger had done. The University of Freiburg faculty debate
Heidegger's involvement in 1945, and by 1946, Heidegger actually suffers a nervous breakdown
that year, but the University of, faculty of the University of Freiburg ultimately decide to grant
Heidegger faculty emeritus status, which means that he's still a member of the faculty, retired as
it were, but he's barred from teaching, so he's banned from teaching any more lectures, and really
it's because of his involvement in the Nazi party. By 1951, the ban on teaching is lifted, and Heidegger
then begins to give a series of lectures throughout his career, and throughout the rest of his life,
he would continue to give a number of really important lectures that are worth reading.
Stragically, as I mentioned before, Heidegger, at least in my view, it's tragic,
Heidegger refuses to recant his Nazi involvement. In 1976, Heidegger dies, and just a couple days
after Heidegger dies, Der Spiegel, which is a very important publication in Germany, publishes
an interview that they conducted with Heidegger, and one of the things in that interview was they
asked Heidegger point blank whether or not he regretted his involvement as a Nazi and with the
Nazi National Socialists, and Heidegger says no, and it's shocking. The question for us is,
how could a philosopher who really provides us fabulous insight philosophically into the question
of being, and really pushes phenomenology into a whole new domain and becomes really
so critical to the rest of the 20th century and 21st century philosophy, how could such a
philosopher become so blind so as not to even regret his involvement with really one of the
darkest stains in human history, politically and especially within German history. So it's
quite shocking there. I don't really want to spend a lot of time talking about Nazis or
National Socialists in this video, but it raises for us some fundamental questions regarding
is there a relationship between Heidegger's philosophy and his Nazism. Heidegger actually
claimed that there was a certain relationship regarding his conception of historicity. We're
not going to go into that right now, but on the other hand, or is his philosophy really separate
from this. I think it's important to recognize that Heidegger is not giving us Nazi philosophy.
I think that is a misreading of Heidegger's work, but that does raise for us ethical questions, and
in the early 80s, French phenomenologists raised this question explicitly regarding whether or not
Heidegger's involvement with the Nazis, and especially Heidegger's involvement regarding
Husserl's forced retirement, whether or not that's something we can forgive,
and how we should understand that. So there's something we're talking about here, and maybe
at some point in these series of videos we'll talk about it, but you're going to see really what I
want to do in these video lectures is really just take a look at Heidegger's understanding of
phenomenology and in his introduction to being in time. So let's sort of take a look at that.
We're going to focus really quite heavily on just giving a really detailed reading in this video
of the introduction to being in time. I imagine this video is going to run long,
so feel free to pause the video, take a break as you go through. Let me take a drink off here.
Now, being in time, the German, of course, is Sein und Zeit, was first published in 1927,
in the Jahrbuch f체r Ph채nomenologie und Ph채nomenologists for Schuhn, which is a journal
that was actually edited by Edmund Husserl. So being in time here is first published
by Husserl, actually, if you will. Of course, the book is dedicated to Husserl. In a key,
and I mentioned this previously, a key preparatory text. There is no doubt that
being in time is a difficult text to read. If you would like, I encourage you to take a look at
Heidegger's lecture, A History of the Concept of Time, which is now published, which really is,
if you will, sort of first draft of being in time. Because one of the things we're going to see in
being in time is that Heidegger jettisons our ordinary philosophical vocabulary, and really
jettisons the language that we saw Husserl using completely in order to articulate a new and a
fresh and, I think, a more originary conception of Ph채nomenology and the question of being in
particular. There's a lot of other great texts that can help you in great text and commentaries
that can help you understand the history of the concept of time. My own, I was, there's a great
philosopher, contemporary philosopher, Simon Critchley, he's actually the editor of the New
York Times philosophy blog and column called The Philosopher's Stone. But Simon Critchley has a
great text on Husserl that was published just a couple years back on being in time, which really
lays out, I think, a really, really fantastic explanation and commentary of Heidegger. And
of course, I was previously friends with Simon, with Professor Critchley. And that's my reading
of Husserl is very much influenced by Professor Critchley. So take a look at that. There's some
great stuff in there. Now, what's the structure of being in time? Well, the basic structure is
there's an introduction. That's what we're going to be looking at in this text. Part one is called
the interpretation of Dawson in terms of temporality and the explication of time as the transcendental
horizon for the question of being. By the end of today's video, you'll have an understanding of what
this is talking about, if you've never read or read Heidegger before. And then the being in time
is actually structured into two different divisions, the preparatory fundamental analysis of Dawson.
I'm sorry, part one is divided into two divisions, the preparatory fundamental analysis of Dawson,
and then division two is about Dawson and temporality in particular. Part two of being in
time was actually never completed. In fact, the majority of this book was never completed,
partially because Heidegger was forced to rush this into publication in order for his career,
publish or perish. You're going to see that Heidegger really structures being in time in a very
similar and definitely a very Germanic way, similar to Husserl who got a series of sections.
Heidegger organized the text as a series of paragraphs and then sections within those.
And this is how Zion Insights is organized. So let's sort of jump in here and you'll see that
before the book even starts, there's a brief title page in which there's this quotation.
And we're going to see that although this is a course in phenomenology, Heidegger is not writing
a book on phenomenology. He is interested in the most important question for him, which is
the question of being. And of course, we know that the philosophy is concerned with lots of
things. But at the core, philosophy is concerned with what it means to exist and what it means for
us to understand things in existence. All of this ruminates around this concept of being. And we're
going to see that this is the most important question for Heidegger. So let me tell you,
I want to read this passage from you just because this is directly from the title page here,
or right after the title page before he begins the introduction. And it's quite beautiful,
but it sort of gets to the heart at it. And so let me read this to you. Heidegger writes,
For manifestly, you have been aware of what you mean when you use the expression being.
We, however, who used to think we understood it, have now become perplexed. Do we in our time have
an answer to the question of what we really mean by the word being? Not at all. So is it fitting
that we should raise anew the question of the meaning of being? But we, but are we nowadays
even perplexed at our inability to understand the expression being? Not at all. So you can see
here, he says that on the one hand, we don't even understand the question of being what we mean by
this term being. But on the other hand, we don't even care, right? Now our aim in the following
treatise in Zang und Zeitz is to work out the question of the meaning of being and to do so
concretely. Our provisional aim is the interpretation of time as the possible horizon for any
understanding whatsoever of being. But the reasons for making this our aim, the investigations,
which such a purpose requires, and the path to its achievement, call for some introductory
remarks. And so you're going to see this is the beginning of the introduction. And you're going
to see that really, Heidegger is interested in the question of what being is. And he doesn't
even think we even understand what being means, or we even know how to ask the question of being.
And so really being in time is less about being, and it's about what it means to ask the question
of the meaning of being itself. So you're going to see him articulate all of this
in the introduction. I'm going to follow the introduction as closely as I can,
section by section. I should emphasize that there's a lot to the introduction, and there's a lot of
arguments that Heidegger makes that I'm not going to be talking about simply because I will run out
of time. We're already 24 minutes into the video, and we're only now getting to part one. So
I'm not going to cover everything. And so I encourage you to read this carefully and probably
to get a commentary text to help you along as well. Now the introduction begins with paragraph one,
which is the necessity for explicitly restating the question of being. Now the question of being
here in the German is called the Zeinsfrage. And that just means question of being, right,
the being question. And what he wants to say is, he's number one, is that the question of being
is a forgotten question. It's not even something that philosophers are talking about. Notice,
particularly that Edmund Husserl never really talks about this. Husserl talks about ontological
structures and this sort of stuff. And Husserl talks about existence, and he talks about actuality,
consider, for instance, how Husserl, in our previous lectures here, he talks about the
suspension of our general positing of actuality. Well, what is actuality, right? That's not a
question that Husserl asks. And he doesn't think that any of the philosophers are asking this.
This is a forgotten question. So what exactly is the Zeinsfrage? What is the question of the
meaning of being? All right. And Husserl starts off, I'm sorry, Heidegger starts off by saying
that the question of being is what is stimulating this ancient Greek research of Plato and Aristotle.
And here, of course, there's in our introduction to philosophy video series, I give a very sort of
cursory analysis of Plato's theory of the forms. And in my history of philosophy course, we talk
a little bit more about Aristotle's metaphysics in more detail. But we're going to see here that
at the core of both Plato and Aristotle is the question of what it means to be, right? What it
means to be. And Heidegger actually would go on to give very specific concrete lectures about
Plato and Aristotle with regards to the question of the meaning of being. We're not going to really
review those. But we will, if you do, you will find that Heidegger has a very, I think, unique
analysis of Plato in particular, who he doesn't think that we understand Plato correctly. Anyway,
I'm not going to go into that. But the meaning of being is the question of what it means to be
is at the source. It's at the core of ancient Greek philosophy, right? But things are even worse
than we realize because the original contribution of Greek philosophy, Heidegger argues, has actually
sanctioned the neglect of the question of being. That is, the Greek philosophy is generated out of
this question of what it means to be. But because we have all of these contributions from these
Greek philosophers, all the way from the originary pre-socrats like Parmenides, all the way up to
up through Hegel, right? What we see is that we've neglected the question of being. Now,
being on the one hand has been said as the most universal concept. And here I encourage you to
take a look at the work of Thomas Aquinas, who actually focuses quite heavily on the question
of being. And Thomas Aquinas argues this too, is that being is on the one hand the most universal
concept, but it's also the most empty concept, right? Because on the one hand, everything that we
experience and everything we see is a form of being, right? Which means that everything has been.
But since everything has been, we don't really know what we're talking about. It's the sort of old
idea that if something is everything, then in a certain way, it's nothing. And that's to say that
existence clearly is something, it's so universal, but because of its universality,
it's an empty concept. In fact, it looks like being just simply resist every attempt at definition.
But everyone seems to use this term, and they seem to understand what being means, or as Heidegger
would say, they're so it would seem. We don't really know what we're talking about, though we have
some sort of general intuition, right? We have some sort of provisional obscure average understanding,
but it's insufficient philosophically, right? In section two, and by the way, in all the video
here, whenever I have a pagination, I'm using the original Heideggerian pagination. Excuse me.
And so it's page two here, Heidegger says, in this way, that which the ancient philosophers found
continually disturbing as something obscure and hidden has taken on a sort of clarity and
self evidence such that if anyone continues to ask about it, he's charged with an error of method,
right? So we sort of think that we know we have a handle on what existence and being means,
to the point that, for instance, if you ask a philosopher, they can rattle off a series of
arguments, right? For instance, though Heidegger doesn't mention this at all, think about the
ontological argument for God's existence, right? And think about the use of existence and the use
of being in that, in that discussion, in which it's taken as self evident what it means for
things to exist. So philosophers are not really thinking about this question, especially when
Heidegger is writing. Now, of course, we're going to see that phenomenology as prepared by Edmund
Husserl provides us a way in which to begin to access this question. But consider the fact that
all of the philosophical work that's going on really around the world at this time,
no one is asking this question, not in the way that Heidegger will ask it, right? And Heidegger's
argument here is that there's so many philosophical prejudices that we have that they're really too
numerous. There's too many of them that we can adequately deal with the beginning of being in
time. So we can't really start off and really understand what the meaning of being is or even
what the question, the Zeim's Fraga of being is, the question of being, because we just have so
many philosophical prejudices. Recall when we looked at Edmund Husserl's work, Husserl talked
about the idea that we had to bracket off all of these theoretical concepts we become accustomed to,
and we're going to see that Heidegger not only agrees with Husserl, but he doesn't think we go
far enough because we can't really uncouple ourselves from them. So all we really have is a
clue to the question of being. Now, in the introduction of being in time, Heidegger begins
by sort of signifying, we have this clue about what the question of being is, but let's lay out what
our prejudices regarding being are. The first prejudice here is the universal nature of being,
right? And that's when we say that when, for instance, Thomas Aquinas says that
being is the most universal concept, well, what does that mean here? And Heidegger sees this
as a prejudice, which makes it difficult or really rather impossible for us to begin to
think about what we're even talking about. The first thing here is that Heidegger emphasizes
that being is not a universal genus, right? You'll recall that when we laid out the distinction
between genus and species, right, the genus is always a higher category that subsumes
particular individual categories, right? But the idea here is that when we say that being is
universal, we don't mean that being is a universal genus. We're not talking about a category at all,
right? And this is the difficulty here. For instance, Heidegger mentions that the
medievals refer to being, and they use the term transcendus, right? Or at least in the
Latin formulation, I'm not giving you the Latin here, but it transcends, right? And of course,
to transcend is to go beyond. And it's important here to recognize that the being goes beyond
categorization itself, right? So being is not a categorical intuition as such, right? Now,
He also mentions that, for instance, Aristotle understood the universality of being really
as a form of analogy, right? So when we say that being is universal, we're saying something
analogically, right? Because being is here, and we have genus and species and universality is the
type of genetic category. But the idea here is that, for at least from Aristotle's perspective,
is that this is not saying it's not a genus, this is an analogical relation here, right?
And then in this section, as Heidegger discusses the universal nature of being,
he talks about Plato and Aristotle, and he really goes all the way up through Hegel,
he talks about how in Hegel, being becomes an indeterminate, something that's indeterminate
in an immediate sense, right? And you could, and of course, I'm not going to go through Hegel's
logic here, which is actually quite complex here. And also remember that Hegel has a work in
phenomenology too, not the phenomenology that Hustrel describes, but the phenomenology of spirit.
And so being is an important category within the phenomenology of spirit. But here it's
indeterminate in the medium, right? What exactly does that mean? Basically, Heidegger's contention
is that we don't know because the history of philosophy has actually resulted in making
being the darkest of all the concepts, right? It's not just one genetic category among others,
it's something completely other than that. But the history of philosophy is essentially
shrouded our conception of being by making it a sort of genetic universal category.
Section number two, the second major prejudice here that Heidegger identifies
is the indefinibility of being, right? Think here about what he just mentioned about Hegel, right?
Here it's important to recognize that being is not an entity, right? And this will become
an important thing for us when we talk about the existence of something, the being of something,
right? Being in and of itself is not a something at all, because every something is a something
only in virtue of its having being or participating in being or in some way being infused as a being,
right? So, but being itself is not an entity. So we're not talking about a thing at all, right?
Being is on the one hand, it's not derived from some higher concept, because if you will, it's the
most universal, right? But analogically, but then on the second way, being is not presented
through these lower concepts either, which means that we can't uncover our concept of being by
looking at conceptual relations. So a taxonomy of concepts, or for instance, a logical analysis
of conceptual relations in terms of will never give us insight into this problem of being, right?
There is no definition of being in the ontical sense. This is a mistake here, I apologize.
Let's just say ontical. And we'll talk about what that means in a moment here. Heidegger will
actually lay out specific definitions for these things. And the idea here is that when we talk
about the indefinitability of being, right, indefinitability demands actually a thorough
examination of being because what does a philosopher to do when a philosopher doesn't
understand something? It means that they should examine it even closer, right? And we'll see
that this is going to be Heidegger's insistent approach, right? The third prejudice that Heidegger
lays out regarding our inability to think about being regards the self-evident nature of being,
right? When we talk about in our experience about things having actuality, well, it just seems
that it's self-evident, right? And what's important here is that the way in which we comport ourselves
to being, or let's put it this way, self-evidence, when I look at something and think, oh, it's just,
it exists, it's self-evident, right? This actually takes us back to a way in which I'm organizing
and comporting myself in consciousness towards being, right? And of course, comportment here,
a way in which we can talk about this, is think about language. We're constantly in our language
referring to being. And here, think about the copula. A copula is a logical category, which
is the category for being, right? So for the example, the sky is blue, is, is the copula. And
what is the copula? Well, the copula is a demarcation of being, right? So when I say that
I am holding a coffee cup, M refers to being, right? I'm saying that there's, that I'm saying
that the coffee cup has being in my hand. Well, what does it mean to demarcate being exactly?
What exactly are we talking about, right? Obviously, I'm talking about a comportment in
consciousness, but we're going to see significantly, every comportment is itself a form of being,
right? So the comportment towards entities always uses the concept of being. And this presents us
with what Heidegger calls an a priori enigma, that is, enigma that comes before our experience
itself, right? A mystery that needs to be addressed. So self-evidence here is a dubious
procedure to say that something self-evident is really a way at avoiding the question and the
mystery of the demarcation and the significance of being. And it's a way to dubiously ignore this
a priori enigma, right? Not only is there no answer to the question of being here, Heidegger says,
well, not that there's not an answer, but not only do we not have an answer to the question of
being, we don't even know what the question is, right? And so, for instance, is if as I'm talking
through this video lecture, you're thinking, what is he talking about? What does it mean to ask the
question of what existence of being means? You don't know because we don't even have a grasp on the
question of being here itself. And you're going to see this is this is in the introduction of
being time, because being in time is meant to give us really a path towards eventually being able
to just understand what the question of being is, just to get us to the point where we can understand
what the Zeinsfraga is all about. Now, paragraph two of the introduction concerns the formal
structure of the question of being, right? So on the one hand, we don't know the content of the
question of being, we don't really know what we're asking. But we can recognize that to ask a question,
every question has a structure, right? Because every question is something that always asks for an
answer, right? So what is the four? Can we formulate this question? And then we can ask what belongs
to the form of any question? Well, Heidegger says, right, is that every inquiry, because a question
is to inquire, right? Every inquiry is a seeking, a sukin, right? Every inquiry is a seeking, and
every seeking is always guided by what is sought, right? So imagine, if I'm looking for my keys,
right, I'm seeking my keys throughout the room, looking, and what is guiding my seeking is what
I'm looking for, right? So that means that the question of being, whatever it is, right, it's
a seeking after being, and it has to be guided by being itself, right? So seeking for what being is,
and that means we have to seek in regard to the manner of being. So we can start to, as a word,
so Heidegger's argument here isn't that the design's frog is an impossible question. It's
rather that we have to work our way out of our categories, and we can start by formally understanding
the answer and the question of being itself ultimately has to be guided by being, right?
So the form of a question always includes A, that which is interrogated. This is what Heidegger
does not use this term, and I think you would object to my using this term. What you might say
is that the question always, right, moves towards, is looking for a specific object, right? It's
guided, and it includes that which is interrogated, but it also includes that which is found out,
and here I want to talk about the essence here. The reason I've included the object and essence
here is because I want you to see that there is a linkage between the Husserlian categories of
phenomenology and ideas one in what Husserl Heidegger is doing here. Heidegger, for reasons we'll get
to here in a moment, specifically does not want to use this sort of language, but it is, it is,
I think, helpful for us to, and for at least in this course, I want you to see the lineage of
what Heidegger is doing traces back to Husserl, right? Now, inquiry to inquire itself is a particular
manner of being for a being that inquires, right? So remember here is that since, so to just ask
any question to inquire itself, only beings which can inquire can ask questions, right?
And that means that when I, as a being that can inquire, when I make an inquiry, I'm actually
taking on a particular manner of being, right? I'm existing in a certain sort of way, right? Here
you can think about maybe Husserl's categories of noesis, it's a type of noema, for instance,
inquiry, right? Now, Husserl is not, Heidegger is not going to follow Husserl along those lines,
right? But in a certain way, you can see here, there's a sort of tragedy regarding Husserl's
view of what phenomenology was to become, because in a certain way it gets dismantled to some degree
by Heidegger, right? But back to the point, inquiry itself is a particular manner of being for a
being that inquires, oops, let's go back there, right? Now, since we have some access to the
concept of being, because we do have the copula, we do use these concepts, that means that there
must be a way to inquire about it. You can see this is what Heidegger will call our average every
day of vague, oh, it's right here. This is what we call a vague average understanding or an average
every day understanding of being. So what is being? Well, Heidegger says, what we need to do is we
need to know what the horizon for that very question is, right? And by horizon here, think
about the language that Husserl used here to talk about the conditions for the possibility of the
question, right? What we do know, for instance, about being is that being determines the entities
as entities. So anything can be an entity, everything from the coffee shop to the mirror behind me
to me, right? All of this is being. And we know that being is what determines an entity as an
entity. So you can't be an entity if you don't have being, right? But being, like we said earlier,
is not an entity in itself, right? So what does this mean? Well, it means that the Zionsfraga
is not a question is designed to address the Zionsfraga. It's not a question of trying to tell a
story or trace an origin. Why? Because only entities have origins, right? So this is so we're
not going to be trying to link it back to some sort of start with an entity and work our way
backwards to the question of being in a certain way. This is a way in which you might, for instance,
understand the defunct nature of the problems regarding first movers and all this sort of
stuff that you may have heard of, or you can take a look at regarding, for instance, Thomas
Aquinas's Thomas Aquinas or Aristotle here, right? In which there's a sort of tracing towards
origin. And Heidegger explicitly says we can't do that here, right? On six, he says, hence being,
as that which is asked about, must be exhibited in a way of its own. And this is essentially
different from the way in which entities themselves are discovered, right? So that means we need to
find a way to understand being that is, that remains faithful or has a fidelity towards being
itself, right? So that's why we can't tell a story because you can only tell stories of entities,
and we have to be faithful to being as itself. Now, what are the different ways in which we
recognize being? Well, everything we talk about, right? Everything we have in view, all of the
things we comport ourselves towards, right? We're being how we are is being, right? The
inquiry itself is a manner of being. When we talk about something having reality,
we're talking about being, right? And think here about, I can talk about the reality
of that which is outside of me, but I can also talk about the reality of the presentations I
have in consciousness, for instance, all of those are real, all of those have being, right? That's
something is, and we're talking about reality, what is present hand, right? Before me. What
subsistence means? Even validity is a way in which we recognize being. And think here if you,
if you want, take a look at my series on introduction to formal logic, and we talk about
the validity of argumentative propositions, right? Or for instance, quantificational validity.
To say that something is valid is to demarcate a form of being, right? Is to say that something
is, right? So when we talk about there being something is or talking about something given,
we're always recognizing being. So whatever point of departure we're going to make towards being,
we have to recognize that these different manners, right? So from which of the entities is the
disclosure of being taken? What has the priority? Well, Heidegger says to understand being,
we have to understand how we look at being. In other words, we need to uncover the nature of the
being that we ourselves are, right? Because since being is something that's recognized by us,
and that recognition is a form of being, we can't answer the, we can't understand what being is
in itself. We have to first begin and uncover what being means for the being for whom being is a
question, right? We're going to see this is an explicit reference to an important concept of
Heidegger's. Okay, now this, and this is the concept, Dasein, right? Heidegger writes on seven,
this entity, which each of us is, is himself and which includes inquiring as one of the
possibilities being, we're going to denote by the term Dasein. Now in German Dasein,
you can see here, design is the term for being and da means to point, right? So here it means
something like to point to being. And what he means to say is that we're going to call ourselves
Dasein. Now later on in just a minute, Heidegger is going to really say, and this is what I want
you to memorize here, is that whenever you say what is being, what is Dasein? Dasein is the being
for whom being is an issue. Now that means that all human beings who can ask the question of being
and who can recognize being are Dasein. So he's talking about us. Dasein is his term for the
human. Now he doesn't use the term human here, because by using the term Dasein, he's signifying
the, the being of the person who inquires after being, right? So he's giving this new term, this new
language. In many ways, you're going to see that being in time operates almost lexionographically.
It operates as a lexicon of concepts for thinking about how what being is and what it means for us.
Now, Heidegger recognizes there might be a problem here. That is, is there circularity? Because
are we really just saying we're going to understand being by understanding being, right?
And, and Heidegger's response here is, well, that factically, there is no circle at all, right?
That is, when we look at the actuality of ourselves, the facticity of ourselves, and we'll see later
in the book, Heidegger will explicitly define facticity, though I'm not going to do it now,
is when we look to how we actually exist, we recognize that we can determine the nature
of an entity's being without first formulating the meaning of being itself, right? That is,
it's not circularity, but it's a relatedness between the backwards and the forwardness of our
inquiring nature of being as beings. This stuff is difficult, I know. So I hope this is helping,
and I hope this, this is at least laying clear some of these concepts. Now, paragraph three is
known as the ontological priority of the question of being. Now, what he's going to argue here,
and you'll see the ontology is going to play an important role here, and we'll get to this in a
minute. Now, when we talk about this question of being, we can ask, is the Zionsfrog or the question
being a matter of speculation? Or is it a matter of the most basic and concrete of all possible
questions? Of course, he doesn't think it's just speculation, he actually thinks it is a concrete
question. The problem is, it's a concrete question, but it's so concrete and so basic, and then
coupled on top of it with the history of our theoretical concepts and philosophy,
we just don't know what that concretizing thing is, right? So the task here is to understand
the constitution of entities, because every entity has being, and so the constitution of any entity
ultimately must trace back to being, or as it were, right? So the task is to understand the
constitution of entities in their most basic sense, and this is what a science is doing ultimately,
right? And Heidegger here actually discusses the role of the sciences, and he talks about the
crisis of science in his day, or in I think would still be today, and he mentions, for instance,
the crisis in mathematics, we can talk about formalism and intuitionism, but he goes on to talk
about mathematics, physics, biology, the historical human sciences, theology, and so forth.
All of these have a crisis, and what's the crisis? The crisis refers to the idea that none of these
sciences are able to articulate what it means to evaluate the things themselves, right? So for
instance, mathematics is looking at mathematical concepts that have validity, right? That's a type
of being, but what exactly is that mathematics can't tell us the same things with physics and
center, right? He has a quotation here, 10 quote, basic concepts determine the way in which we get
an understanding beforehand of the area of subject matter, underlying all the objects the science
takes as its themes, and all the positive investigation is guided by this understanding.
Only after this area itself has been explored beforehand, in a corresponding manner, do these
concepts become genuinely demonstrated as grounded. So you can see here is that what he's going to
say is that the sciences today are in crisis because they have no grounding in their understanding of
the copula, right, of being, of continuing on. But since every such area, every science is itself
obtained from the domain of entities themselves, this preliminary research from which the basic
concepts are drawn, signifies nothing else than an interpretation of those entities with regard
to their basic state of being. Such research research must run ahead of the positive sciences
as Andy can. Here are the work of Plato and Aristotle's evidence enough, right? You can see
that Plato and Aristotle without any science, any conception of modern science or any of the
the work that was laid out by the later scientists, right, they're able to begin to address this. So
we can in fact begin to try to understand the grounding of the sciences by looking at being
other philosophers have done so, and we too can do it, right? And this would hold for theology as
well. Now, the crisis if there's a science is requiring examination of what it means for something
to be as they're given. Now, this is the discussion of ontology, right? And in a really
general sense, what you can say is that ontology is the is refers to the logic of being, right,
ontos being in Greek there, right? And so what you might say is that ontology refers to the
relations that beings have with each other and with themselves. Now, Heidegger is doing a fundamental
ontology if they or he wants to get to a fundamental ontology with the science frog. Now, Heidegger
makes a distinction here between ontology versus what he calls the ontical or the ontic, right?
And this is sometimes referred to as the ontological distinction, right? The ontology refers
concerns being itself, whereas the ontical concerns entity, the being of entities themselves,
right? So if we're talking about ontology in its most radical sense, we're talking about being in
and of itself. If we're talking about ontics, we're talking about the being of specific sorts of
entities. So for instance, you can say that if we go back to Edmund Hustrel's discussion of
consciousness, all of that was ontical, it wasn't ontology proper, right? And the same thing would
go for any number of philosophers we can name, right? Basically, all ontology, no matter how
rich and firmly compacted a system of categories it has at its disposal, remains blunt and is
perverted from its own most aim. If it has not first adequately clarified the mean of being
and conceived this clarification as its fundamental task, right? So all the things that the ontologies
we've seen previously were actually ontical, because the ontology itself, being itself,
the meaning of being is never answered or clarified. Okay, so now we're going to move to the paragraph
four where Heidegger discusses the ontical priority of the question of being, right?
Now, science in general refers to the totality of established interconnections of true propositions
within a specific domain, right? So that's what science is, and you're going to see that
Hustrel, the Heidegger is giving a science here, but he's giving an originary conception of what
a science means. A science in general is this totality of established interconnections of
true propositions. The question of establishment here ultimately goes back to the type of science
we're looking at, right? So how a chemist establishes true propositions and their interconnections
differs from how a mathematician does, right? But they're both doing the same thing in a general
level as it were, right? But the science of beings, but what about the, but science has the
being of its entities, and that is every science ultimately also includes the manner of being
of which is the, of which is the occurrence of the inquire or the scientists themselves.
In other words, that the science has an ontical theme, which is determined by the
scientists, because the scientist is the person who's doing the inquiring. So remember we talked
about inquiring as a manner of being, well, that filters into science, which means that the science
has the being of its entities, that has its being of us or docile. So what distinguishes docile
ontically is that, that is that being is an issue for it, right? Or being in such a way that one
has an understanding of being, right? Now the kind of being that docile can comport itself towards
is designated by the term existence. So when I comport myself towards the coffee cup here,
right? That comportment is designated by existence, right? That's what I mean by existence,
right? And think here about when, if I don't know something exists, I don't know it exists,
because I can't comport myself towards it, at least in a sort of kind of concrete fashion.
Heidegger writes, Dawson always understands itself in terms of its existence. In terms of a
possibility of itself to be itself or not itself. Here, of course, I think it's Shakespeare to be
or not to be. Dawson has either chosen these possibilities itself, or got itself into them,
or grown up in them already, right? So, so how exactly Dawson gets in this, we're not sure,
but there's these different ways. Only the particular Dawson decides its existence,
whether it does so by taking hold or by neglecting. The question of existence never gets straight
out, except through existing itself. And here's quite fascinating, right? This, the idea here is that
one cannot recognize existence, except through a manner of existing, right? You can see here,
it's a similar sort of question to this problem of being. Now, Heidegger is now going to start to
give us a range of categories and lay out what these categories are. The understanding of oneself
by existence is called what he calls the existential, existential, right? Let's see,
let's move here. And here's a list of categories, right? So, existence here refers to
that which Dawson comports itself towards, right? The existential is the understanding of itself by
Dawson. Existentiality refers to the structures of existence. And existential refers to the analytic
of existentiality, right? That refers to the analytic of the structures of existence.
And the understanding of itself by Dawson is existential, right? So, he's sort of laying out
these terms, which can be confusing, but I hope you'll see there's a rigorous formulation to what
he's doing here. At the end of the day, what we can say is that being in the world is something
that belongs to Dawson existentially, right? That is, the analytic of the structure of existence
for Dawson is that Dawson is a being in the world. All of us are always already thrown into the world
as it were, right? We're living in a world and we can't separate ourselves from that. And so, if we
want to understand Dawson's existential, right, then we have to recognize that Dawson is a being
in the world. And we're going to see later on in subsequent videos that this will, this, this
insight of our being in the world as a preliminary structural category for Dawson
is going to allow Heidegger to lay out structurally his formal analysis of Dawson, okay?
So, on 13 he says, therefore, fundamental ontology, right, remember the ontological distinction,
for which alone all other ontologies can take their rise, must be sought in the existential
analytic of Dawson, right? That has to be sought out in the way in which we are beings in the
world, the way in which we have, we're a manner of being towards things that exist, right? Now,
that means that Dawson takes priority here in terms of articulating the meaning of the question of
being, right? And so, Heidegger lays out, he says, really, when we talk about this priority,
there's three things that go along. On the one hand, there's the ontical priority,
where Dawson is an entity whose being has the determinant character of existence, right? So,
Dawson is something that is existing. But there's the ontological priority in which Dawson is in
itself ontological, because existence is thus determinative for it. Remember, Dawson is the
being for whom being is an issue. And then there's the ontical ontological priority, in which Dawson
also possesses, as constitutive for its understanding of existence, an understanding of the being of
all entities of a character other than its own, right? So, there's these sorts of three categories
that Heidegger is going to use within the text. Now, let me give you here this great quote from
Heidegger here, which is, quote, if to interpret the meaning of being becomes our task, Dawson is
not only the primary entity to be interrogated, it is also the entity which already comports itself
in its being towards what we're asking about when we ask this question. So, let's get moving here.
Okay. Now, this is section two of the introduction, and I've already gone an hour,
so here's what I'm going to do, as I'm going to stop right now. And in the next video, I will
complete our understanding, I will complete the video on the second part of the introduction
of being in time. Thanks again for watching, I look forward to seeing you guys online. Bye.
