Welcome, welcome, welcome to my stream.
Hello everybody.
Our chair over here.
And we can sit down.
We're not really that visible though.
We can maybe tilt it down a little.
We're going to write on the whiteboard.
Let's wait for some people to get in here.
Good morning.
We don't subscribe.
We're only chat.
We don't even subscribe.
We're only chat.
We're only chat.
We're only chat.
We're only chat.
We're only chat.
We're only chat.
Good morning.
We don't subscribe.
We're only chat.
We don't even subscribe.
We're only chat.
Thank you for subscribing.
Is this setup working?
We have the whiteboard today.
No computer.
Only whiteboard.
I did a lot of thinking about the last stream.
I did a lot of thinking about the techno pessimism argument for the last one.
It was brought up in a few things and we can discuss crisis of meaning.
Maybe you've heard this phrase.
Who thinks it's true?
Can everyone see the board?
No one can see the board.
I need to write way bigger.
I need to write way bigger.
This is not big enough for the board.
Wow.
Now I understand what you guys always say with the font.
We're just going to write the word meaning in big letters.
Everybody suffers from this.
You think, you think, oh, oh, did I spell it right?
It's not a crisis of skill issue.
A crisis of meaning is actually incredibly stupid when you think about it.
I was in New York for the week and I'm thinking about this.
My markers.
We've got lots of markers to choose from.
Thank you.
I'm not going to wear black anymore.
I always dress in black.
I'm going to bleach my hair blonde and I'm going to wear brightly colored clothes.
Not brightly colored, but white because it's time.
The tides are turning.
It is 2024 and the tides are turning.
We thought that marker was bad.
This marker is even worse.
Someday they will invent good markers.
I like big shirts.
No, it's the other way around, bro.
The Fs are white.
The zeros are black.
Come on.
Wear earth colors.
No, it's not about the meaning of life, right?
You guys know that I'm not kidding when I say what is the meaning of life, right?
Only is only one answer that makes any sense and that's to win, right?
That's it.
Win.
No one can see anything.
This board doesn't work.
It's too shiny.
Okay, so how do you win, right?
I just like here we are.
Look around, right?
You are in an open world MMORPG, right?
Here you are with all these people.
Now, how do you win at World of Warcraft?
How do you win at Zelda, right?
How do you win it?
Wow.
How do you win at Zelda?
Why do you think it's different?
Why?
This is what just comes to me about the crisis of meaning being so incredibly stupid.
It's like, have you had a crisis of meaning in Zelda ever, right?
What am I even solving these shrines for?
Okay, I guess it's nice.
I guess it's nice that you can click that button and it says at the top, you know, destroy Calamity Ganon, right?
I'm going to stop saying right.
I realize I say right at the end of things and it's bad and I'm not going to do that anymore
because it's a new year.
It's 2024, even though you can't see it and it's in green marker.
When it felt real, I understand that.
But what do you think feels real anymore?
I go to New York every year and the things that used to feel real don't feel real anymore either.
We can't go back.
We can only go forward.
Only forward, not back.
So you have no problem with this objective in World of Warcraft and Zelda.
And there's lots of different things you can do in these games.
You can join a guild.
You can go gather mushrooms in the forests.
But you don't have a crisis of meaning in these games and why not?
Why do you have a crisis of meaning in this world but not there?
I'm sorry the game is hard.
I'm sorry the game takes a really long time to beat.
I can't tell you how to quit procrastination.
Is the world...
Okay, can everybody...
Harvard.
Can everybody read this because we're going to put a big no sign for it.
These people have led us wrong for the last 50 years.
For the last 50 years we've been listening to idiots.
We don't have to listen to them anymore.
Harvard's over.
We're free.
No, we don't.
We don't.
There has been a group of people since...
We'll put the year up here.
Since 1971.
That has been...
This is the year the money became fake.
This is when everything seemed to go awry.
We just don't have to listen to them anymore.
Can I draw my best integral sign?
Go!
You're the reason we're going to go subscriber only.
No, no, no.
Don't trust me.
But this is the problem now.
Okay, so we destroy Harvard, right?
Everyone loves being...
Was it Robespierre?
Everyone loves being the guy who's going to storm the Bastille and kill the Nobles.
But the question is what do we replace it with?
You can't replace this with a bunch of hack and hide conspiracy theories and libertarianism and whatever.
You can't do that.
You need to come up with a new epistemology, sort of.
I mean, not really.
It's been there the whole time.
It's been there the whole time.
It brings me back to this point, which is how do we win?
So, you've played...
You've played Breath of the Wild, right?
Some of you have?
You know when you're on that little island with the four...
You get the four shrines and...
You get the four shrines and then you get your paraglider and you can leave the little island?
Look at the universe.
We haven't even left the little island yet.
Here.
Here is Earth.
Earth.
Right?
And here's a sun over here, right?
And space is like...
We'll make it a little bigger because it's the sun, right?
And space is like that big, guys.
To be fair, there's not going to be beautiful little quests in every corner of space.
This game is harder than that.
Reality is a hard game.
It's not to scale.
Not to scale.
Not to scale.
Okay.
So, we're going to talk about a few...
Its name is Sol.
Okay, fine.
Sol.
Sol.
Sol.
Sol.
Sol.
Sol.
Sol.
Sol.
Sol.
Sol.
Sol.
Sol.
Sol.
Sol.
Sol.
Sol.
Sol.
Sol.
Sol.
Sol.
Sol.
Sol.
Sol.
Sol.
Sol.
Sol.
Sol.
Sol.
Sol.
Sol.
Sol.
Sol.
Sol.
Sol.
Sol.
Sol.
Sol.
Sol.
Sol,
Sol, Sol.
Sol.
Sol.
Sol.
Sol.
Sol.
Sol.
Sol.
Sol.
Sol.
Sol.
Sol.
Sol.
Most of these companies are not technology companies.
And if they do technology,
it is mostly kind of as an aside, right?
Like there's some interesting stuff happening at Metta,
interesting stuff happening at Apple,
interesting stuff happening at Google,
Amazon's a logistics company,
Netflix is a stated media company.
But this is not technology,
and you shouldn't associate that.
When you think technology,
the best thing to think about is foreign, right?
You guys watch, you know what's cool?
Clarkson's Farm.
Is this Clarkson's Farm?
Farming is the best thing to think about
because humans have been growing food for many, many, many years.
And, oh man, if those first agricultural guys
who were trying to get like a mule to pull a plow
saw a tractor, oh they flip a shed, man.
Y'all a big tractor coming through the field,
you know, tilling all the soil,
planting all the seeds, right?
Chopping all the wheat.
Man, they flip a shed.
So, can anybody sit right here now
and say that things have not gotten better?
Yeah, there's some great like crisis of meaning stuff.
All things used to have meaning,
used to have to rely on a neighbor,
things used to be better.
Dude, if you want things to be better like that,
leave America.
You can go, you know, I love watching these,
this is YouTube, or best documentaries,
and you watch Africa documentaries.
I love Africa documentaries.
You can see right now, if you wanna go live in a world
where people still need each other and food's hard to get,
and there's a sense of community and tribalism,
you can go to Africa and live this life, right?
If you wanna, I said right, I gotta stop doing that.
But like, do you wanna be, you can opt out,
you can opt out at any point.
The Luddites can opt out.
But for most people, come on, let's be real here,
do you want to be pulling the plow,
or do you want the tractor?
I don't wanna rely on my name.
Yeah, it's true, it's true, like something's lost, right?
I'm a technology guy, I'm not a philosophy guy, you know?
And it's a shame that philosophy guys
all came from, you know,
terrible institutions like this.
There are smart ways to think about philosophy,
you just don't see much of them.
There are, there is a real liberal arts education out there.
But unfortunately, we are a lost generation.
Unfortunately, for the last 50 years,
what has been called liberal arts is nothing of the sort.
What you will get in a liberal arts,
you know, hey ho, hey ho,
Western culture's gotta go, come on.
And it's not, it hasn't gone anywhere.
It's still there, you can still find it.
There's people out there, and I love when I meet them,
people out there who are still incredibly educated
on the humanities.
But these neo-Marxists, like, you know,
I've met some smart Marxists, I've met some smart Marxists,
and you can talk about Marx in smart ways,
and it is true that they still do
produce some decent Marxists.
But I don't think Marxism's really the future.
I think that it had some good points a while ago,
we tried it, and hey, you know, we got the Soviet Union.
All right, Marx was a Jew.
So what?
What?
I'm streaming, what's up?
What's up?
I got COVID.
You got COVID?
Yeah.
Oh.
All right.
Uh, I'm streaming, do you wanna bring me?
Yeah, I'd love to see.
Ah.
I don't know.
Ah, all right, yeah, uh, yeah.
Should we go?
No, I don't think it's made COVID.
Oh yeah, the flu is just whatever,
the flu is just whatever happens to be the,
the, the, the thing that goes around.
We call it the flu, we call it a cold,
we call it whatever, coronavirus is a cold.
Okay, I don't have COVID.
Let's not get distracted by that.
We got distracted.
Let's, let's, let's go back to where we were.
So yeah, there is a real liberal arts education out there,
and I hope some of you, you know, only people who comment,
you realize the internet commenters,
always remember that the internet commenters
are a very small subset of society.
Oh, I was commenting about your Marx as a Jew.
So what, man, come on, let's move past racism.
It's 2024, and we can all agree that racism,
especially systemic racism, like affirmative action,
systematic, systemic, what the system does it,
like affirmative action is evil,
and there's no place for racism going forward.
So let's, let's, let's stop doing that, right?
And if you're not on board with the no racism,
you can maybe go to Harvard.
I think they like racism there.
So, you know, maybe you'll fit in, maybe you'll fit in.
Jews hate white, come on, stop with the racist shit.
Like it's still racist.
It doesn't matter at all, white power, black power,
the focus of it's all racist.
Racism is stupid.
Okay, you want to win or not?
You know, even, even, even Link had to work
with the, with those fish people.
Yeah, you had to work with the fish people, all right?
All right, you're imagining it was racist
against, but stop being racist.
All right, can everyone,
can everyone stop being racist in 2024?
That's a good, come in.
Oh, I know, I know, I know, it's not,
we're telling everybody that there's no room
for racism in 2024.
You mean $135?
Well, help yourself, help yourself
to my pile of money.
I have some in my wall too, I think.
We're on a stream right now.
You need to just money right now,
but it's like, it's like Tony's brand stuff
and buying me a shake as well.
Yes, that's what it's made right now.
All right, I got some 20s here.
It's sort of strict, but if you can go there.
Every time I get dollars,
I put them in the pile over there.
You want to show them my dollars?
This is insane.
Oh, here's some dollars.
What is happening?
Here, you want some dollars?
I got dollars, here you go.
Are you liking me about your activities?
How upset will you be
if I make it rain right now?
Wait, I wouldn't be upset, I'll pick it up.
You'll pick it up?
Yeah, I'll make it rain!
I mean, I have to feel bad for the guys
to count it all.
He's been, I think, I came from a stripper.
Always remember that we're having more fun
than the other side, right?
These cells having no fun.
Accelerationists have fun.
No, it's true though, it's true.
I've learned this, I've learned this from protests, right?
Like, you look protests, you know,
like the leftist protests used to have the energy
and who's ever got the energy,
but can we have a protest where we, we stop?
Like, I don't know.
You know what, you know what infuriated me last night?
I watched that video about housing in Japan
and it turns out we really are just all getting scammed.
Like, there's no reason housing should be expensive.
This is a deliberate policy made up by people
who own real estate.
To make their real estate bad, stay expensive.
It's just a scam.
And like, you all are affected by this scam.
My rent for this apartment's $4,000.
This is insane.
Get this in Tokyo for a grand.
No.
I'm sorry if you're a homeowner,
but your bags are gonna tank, bro, get out.
Get out while you can, no legit.
If you are in this scam, get out today.
I'm warning you right now.
Michael Burry's tweeting it.
Yo man, you guys know Michael Burry is, right?
I'm not saying you gotta do protests.
I'm saying you gotta be where the energy is.
Who's ever having a good time wins the future.
And who's ever having a bad time loses the future.
Wait, no, but the housing market's actually gonna crash.
It's just a question of when perception is reality
until it's not and the market can remain irrational
longer than you can imagine.
It's not and the market can remain irrational longer
than you can remain solvent, but not me.
So, you know, I want to print an mRNA at home too.
That's right.
You've heard this shit for decades now, yes.
But let me tell you what is different this time.
Okay?
There is one thing that changes.
Does anyone know what that one thing is?
Not Bitcoin technology, okay?
What does it take to build a house?
What if we just had a machine that could print houses?
It's like, there's a great, I think it's a Hayek quote
at the end of the, you know, the WTF happened
in 1971 page that says the only way
that we're ever gonna make money real again
is if we figure out how to make it something
that they can't quite see as money.
I'm sorry, they see Bitcoin as money.
Crypto failed, okay?
Now that doesn't mean that technology is going to fail,
but this, like, oh, we're gonna get crypto in
before they notice, I'm sorry, no.
Like imagine Uber took the path that Bitcoin took, right?
Uber worked, Uber exists today
because it turned out that all the congressmen
were taking Ubers to go to Congress.
The congressmen are not using Bitcoin
to buy coffees and they don't give a shit about crypto
and until crypto people understand this,
until crypto people understand how to make normal people
depend on their thing, there's no future in crypto, okay?
I say this all the time, like, you wanna succeed in crypto.
Stop trying to make ZK snark bullshit and make triangle.
It's like square, but you can pay decentralized
with crypto, right?
And you know, you can, there's a lot of,
I think there's actually a lot of energy
like this in New York.
I love New York, you pay for everything, the cash, it works.
Right, and they all have, they all have signs
that say 4% fee for credit cards, I love that.
I mean, you have to pass it on to the consumer.
The consumer has to feel the pain of those merchant fees.
Check out DIMO, no.
Yeah, yeah, you know what I just said with James?
This is unfortunate.
But this is what your bags and housing
are gonna look like if you don't get out.
This is what your money is gonna look like
if you are a socialist.
Oh no, this is India, or democracy.
Yeah, that's what happens if you do democracy.
So when someone was angry at my last video
saying I embrace fascists, who, Peter Thiel?
Who's the fascist, man?
I took this crazy to me, that's like,
man, you wanna like give people freedom
and make things cheap, that's fascist, man.
You can't just do that, right?
Like we need like one world government
and surveillance state so we can save democracy.
Yeah, right.
No, we don't need another war.
Can we do this without war?
Come on, World War II is actually gonna suck, guys.
Like you think it's gonna be cool
and you think it's gonna be some call-duty shit,
but like it's not, okay?
It's just gonna suck.
Everyone's a diss to now.
How many houses does my family own?
Yo, 100% inheritance tax, who's on board?
You gotta build yourself up.
A war is kind of essential.
I'm not an anti-war, I'm not pro-war.
I think that war is appropriate in certain circumstances.
World War III, I mean, I love cold wars.
Cold wars are the best.
Cold wars are the best possible outcome of wars.
Nobody dies when technology gets better.
I love the US, China cold war.
Maybe we can have AI skirmishes
where drones destroy each other over the Pacific Ocean.
Now, that's my kind of war, right?
We can get behind that.
Now, warm war is sucked in the climate.
The worst kind of war, like World War II was awful, okay?
And the worst kind of war is a war
that wants to get the citizenry involved, right?
Like a total war where your citizenry
have to contribute to the stupid war effort sucks, okay?
None of us wanna live through that.
A nice war between US and China
where we fight over some uninhabited island
to just like a tech pissing contest.
That sounds sick, man.
That's the kind of war we want in the future, okay?
It's not like nice war, right?
It's an understanding that both sides could nuke each other
and turn everybody into rubble, right?
We sort of do this with proxy wars.
It's a little upsetting that people still have to die.
Imagine we had proxy wars where we just sent robots.
And we can all agree to some Geneva 2.0 convention
where we all just send robots to war.
And then anyone who sends people to war is a terrorist.
How about that?
Tech bro wants war.
No, I do want that kind of war there.
I think every year we should have drone combat with China
over to take control of an uninhabited island.
Rules, you can't send people.
And maybe there's a,
no, there's not to be a budget cap.
It's like the Olympic Games, but with technology.
I think that'd be sick.
That's a huge waste of resources, bro.
Bro, what are we gonna do?
Help poor people in Somalia?
Come on, come on, drone war sounds sick.
George, you can't do that, that's fascist.
Okay, well, that's like your opinion, man.
That's my new phrase for like,
that's like your opinion, man.
I think it's from the Big Lebowski.
I think it's good.
War on the moon, let's go, right?
The thing about the moon is almost everything you do to it
improves the place.
You explode a nuclear bomb on the moon.
I bet you it gets better.
Have I seen for all mankind?
No, it's that.
Is that like seven genes?
True religion?
Space rays, except you can shoot at other spaces.
No, no, no, no, no.
Let's have the PVP zones of space
and the PVE zones of space.
I was saying that about crypto, right?
Like we like that, that'd be cool.
No, no, no, no, no.
I did like her to think about it.
But, you know, I think we're gonna compliment Mark Andreessen.
I think Mark Andreessen does bring up a really good point
about these sort of radical, radical Luddites.
And if they really believe that this technology
is going to destroy the world,
if you're gonna destroy the world and you think,
you know, if you really think that your neighbor
is working on a project that's gonna destroy the world,
killing your neighbor is the right thing to do, right?
And they're gonna become violent.
You know, hopefully not.
Hopefully they see the light before they do.
But I think this is one of the smartest things
Andreessen said and it is sadly something
we have to watch out for.
But the good news is we have drones and they do not.
I am a Christian.
Look, guys, I can't believe I was duped into atheism,
but also evolution is real.
So yeah, like Christianity, I can see,
I do sort of see a bit of a resurgence of Christianity
among younger people.
I'm a Christian.
I believe in evolution.
My belief in evolution does come above my Christianity, right?
So if you say you can't, you know,
if you say Jesus didn't die for your sins
if you believe in evolution,
well, that's like your opinion, man.
So, but no, when it comes down to a lot of the,
again, wokeism really showed me the importance
of Christianity and the importance of forgiveness.
Wokeism is original sin without forgiveness.
And we can't have that.
We have original sin, but we have forgiveness, okay?
That's Christianity.
I like it.
Everyone should get on board.
It's a nice religion.
We love everybody.
Come to a church.
I don't know, church is kind of boring.
Someone's got to make cool churches.
Actually, the churches in the South are cool.
If I lived in the South by like one of them,
like, I went to like Seacoast Church in South Carolina,
and it was good, and I'd probably go every Sunday.
You know, the low-budget Catholic church
doesn't draw me in every weekend.
Not hate, and it just doesn't draw me in every weekend.
The rock bands are cool, right?
Like, I think this is good.
Like, all right, fine.
They finally caught up to the 1970s,
but I would love to see a resurgence of the church,
that a church that embraces technology.
Because if you do not embrace technology,
you will lose.
How do these people who say they don't like tech,
like, do they have a sustainable plan for the future?
Do they have like, have they thought about
what the future is gonna look like?
People who don't like tech are like conservatives.
We're gonna rip on conservatives.
Everybody knows conservatives suck.
The kind of conservatives who like,
in the 90s, really didn't like gay marriage.
And today, they really don't like trans people, right?
But gay marriage is fine.
And then in 20 years, well, trans people are fine,
but we have to do something about pedophiles, right?
Like, it's gonna be, these conservatives
are always losing because they have no principles.
It's just a backlash, a backlash to the backlash
to the thing that's just begun, right?
So don't, don't be a conservative.
Don't be a Luddite, unless you like losing.
Who's the worst, who's the worst football team in the NFL?
I was saying this, I was saying this
to a friend yesterday, you know,
there's some people who just, I gotta stop saying,
you know, and I gotta stop saying it right.
I'm self-aware about this stuff, right, you know?
The Jets aren't pedos, oh, he's better.
I don't like pedos, but like, again,
oh, I don't wanna get into this, come on.
Let's, let's, let's,
ah.
Let's, let's, let's not get into this,
but I think there is a destination of where this stuff goes
and it can just, culture was stupid.
The culture was stupid.
There's only one war that matters,
and that's, are you on the side of technology
or are you against technology?
This is the new dividing line.
This is the new dividing line in society.
We don't have conservatives and liberals anymore.
We have Excel and DeCell, okay?
DeCell and Excel.
And which side are you on?
Are you on this side or are you on this side?
Now, this side is conservative.
So we'll give him a C, all right?
And this side is progressive.
We'll give him a P.
And if you've been listening to the last five minutes,
you realize that the C's always lose
and the P's always win.
So do you wanna root for the Oakland Raiders
or do you wanna root for the Patriots
when they still had Tom Brady?
Look, it's a P, right?
So it is kind of still conservatives and liberals,
but this is really the dividing line.
Now look, embracing technology does not mean embracing.
Every single piece of every single technology
and it's all good,
even if there's negative effects,
that's not what it means.
That's not what it means.
I think the most pure way to distill this down,
and every metric can still be perverted.
Every metric can be perverted,
good heart's law,
but I think the most pure way to look at it is energy use.
This is energy use up and this is energy use minus.
Do we want to use more energy in the future
or do we want to use less energy in the future, right?
Humans, population.
Do we want there to be more humans in the future
or less humans in the future?
Some people might put a plus there and still be conservatives,
but really it's all the same thing.
Energy use in humans, what's the difference?
Humans use a lot of energy.
Well, you can't use the energy for that.
No, right?
Are you a progressive or are you a conservative?
Now there's people out there who are conservatives
and I don't mean to hate on the individual
who's a conservative.
The conservative who wants to be left alone
and live their own lifestyle,
we need to totally respect that.
I totally respect the person
who doesn't want to allow the new technology
into their lives
and that's fine and you should.
You should be left alone
and that's the moral duty of these people.
The moral duty of these people is to,
people who want to be left alone,
people who don't want the technology to come for them,
it absolutely should not come for them.
People should totally be able to opt out of this.
Otherwise, you're just asking for a fight
and I think that's a real,
I think that's a mistake that the current progressives made.
So if you want to opt out, you can opt out.
What you cannot do is prevent this.
If you're on this side and you want to exist, that's fine.
But if you're on this side
and you want to try to stop this,
that's where we have a problem
and these are the people who need to be soundly defeated
in every poll, in every ballot, in every democracy,
in every war, in every everything.
War is the fundamental decider.
We don't, doesn't have to come to war.
Let's hope it doesn't have to come to war.
Let's hope these people realize
that if you don't embrace technology, you lose
and you don't even have to fight.
Now let's give them good surrender terms.
Let them surrender peacefully.
Let them live out life on their farm.
Let them reproduce, right?
This is animal conservation.
It's the same thing.
We like animal conservation.
We're progressives.
All right, so everybody in 2024,
welcome to the progressive team,
welcome to the accelerationist team.
We love technology.
We want to see more humans.
We want to see flourishing.
We don't want to see deceleration.
We don't want to see housing not being built.
We don't want to see power plants being knocked down.
We don't want to see one child policies.
We don't see anything that looks like this.
It's negative.
It's negative.
We've got positive energy over here.
See, I'm not dressed in black anymore.
It's time.
It's time the future is ours.
Wow, is this, is this just me
with the same same accelerationist and recent manifesto?
Come on.
So coming back to here, coming back to meeting.
Look, what is the existentialism of the 21st century?
I don't know.
I'm not that great at liberal arts.
I'm not.
I'm a good programmer, I'm a good security guy.
I'm not, I like the stuff.
I'm a hobbyist, but when I meet people
who are genuinely good at this stuff,
the people who know like all of the Sartre books
and the Camus books, the people who've actually read
like being in time and who like, I understand it.
What was on my book?
Kant's, what's Kant the, oh, critique of pure reason?
Like the people who've actually read critique of pure reason,
I just, I can't do it.
But there's people out there who have.
And this is a serious role in the future for this.
Figure out what the existentialism of the 21st century is.
I don't know.
I don't know.
But there's answers here.
And the closest I can come is thinking about winning.
I don't know, I mean, winning over other people.
I mean, winning over nature.
We are in this great open world universe.
And, well, do we wanna win or lose?
Let's win.
Well, you could stand in the same place.
You could play Zelda, you could just stand there.
But why would we do that?
You could play your little,
you could play your little minigame,
go around, catch horses by that one stable all day.
But why would we do that?
Let's progress.
Let's get to the end of the game.
We're gonna be tired of winning.
Little it's so much, gonna be tired of winning.
Jesus, Trump 5 in 2024.
What a, what a sad, what a sad state.
But it doesn't matter.
It doesn't matter.
This is the new line.
This is the new line.
You're either on this team or you're on this team.
No racism, okay?
I don't see any racism.
2024, if you wanna be racist, go to Harvard, okay?
They gotta, let them have racism.
And they can be stuck in 1971
and let them have racism.
Charlie, she was out of his time.
Harvard is racist, yes, yes, they are, they are.
They have, they, they, so look,
let's just come up with a very simple definition of racism.
If you are looking at people's race,
if you are making decisions based on people's race,
you are a racist.
Pretty straightforward, right?
So if Harvard looks at people's race
when they decide who to admit, they are racist.
And because Harvard is a powerful corporation,
that's systemic racism, okay?
Should I teach, should I teach oppression studies?
Does everyone like this?
Systemic racism.
When a government or a large corporation
uses race to discriminate.
Systemic racism.
Is a doctor racist then?
A doctor doesn't use that to discriminate, right?
If a doctor were to look at someone's race
and charge them a different amount based on their race,
sure, if you, you, race affects your medical, yeah,
but come on, we live in a society,
we live in a Christian society,
where we're all equal under God, okay?
Everybody has the same moral value to God.
Now, that doesn't mean that everyone's gonna
have the same stuff.
That's just, that's just the economy.
That's just, we live in a free world.
You make choices, you have free will.
You also unfortunately are somewhat trapped
to your genetics, but that's just life.
Sometimes the ball comes up red,
sometimes the ball comes up black.
Should we make roulette illegal?
No, but we should remove the zeros from the wheels.
One zero is plenty, three zeros is really egregious,
and someone needs to do something about this.
Is all racism bad?
I think so.
Okay, now I do think race does correlate
with certain things that you may wanna discriminate based on.
You may wanna discriminate based on culture.
You may wanna live around people
who have similar values to you.
This is all very different, and this is not racism.
Racism is literally, racism is asking the question,
what race are you?
This is not a real category.
This is bullshit.
It singles out a few pieces of DNA that don't.
This is your color, your skin.
Come on, man.
This is, we are progressives here.
We have moved past this, okay?
Racism is over, it's back at Harvard.
How do we build the protect future?
I mean, it's not gonna be easy,
and it's not gonna happen overnight.
There's gonna be a big struggle.
Okay, so let's get, let's move fast.
Racism is a stupid topic.
Let's move to a good topic, okay?
Housing, right?
This is Peter Teal's thesis,
and I've come to believe that it's very true.
If we can fix housing,
we can fix a lot of other problems in society.
So housing, you basically have two groups.
You have land owners,
and then the renters, right?
I'm in this class, so we have two classes.
Now, let's say rents were to come down 75%.
The renters would be happy,
but the landowner class, the homeowner class,
would be unhappy.
Their bads would become smaller.
Look, you gotta give them a way out.
You gotta give them a way out.
I don't know what that's gonna be.
I hope people smarter than me,
or at least thinking about this more than me,
are working on this,
because you do have to give them a bag out,
but this is what needs to happen.
You're going to get continued,
very strong opposition from this class.
This is why this won't happen,
but if we figure out how to either satiate,
swindle, whatever it is we do to this class,
I don't know, I'm all for diplomatic solutions here,
but something's gotta be done.
This is class warfare, this is Marxism 101.
They really try to distract you with race as bullshit,
but we are the 99% boys.
We are the 99%, and something's gotta be done
about the damn landowners gouging everybody,
because they don't just gouge everybody
by charging a lot for their properties.
They vote in elections,
and then they make it illegal to go on housing.
Basically, I hope everyone understands this now,
and hope everyone sees that it doesn't have to be this way.
I think the simplest way to get people out of this,
and into this, is to show them
that the future can be better than the present.
If you live in a world
where we're in pretty much decline since 1971,
it's hard for them to believe
that the future can be better than the present.
Look up, look up, trust in the US government.
Look up, trust in the US government,
and peak to Kennedy, and it's gone downhill since.
Little Spike at Reagan, little Spike at Clinton,
but mostly it's gone downhill since.
We need to convince people things can be better,
and they can, thanks to technology.
Because everyone can agree that a tractor is a lot better
than plowing the field yourself.
So eat the rich, I love it, I love it.
Let's team up with AOC.
We gotta get AOC on this team, right?
We gotta, how do we get AOC on this team?
We can do it, because these are the good guys.
Ha ha ha ha.
I know Uncle Ted wouldn't agree, but like.
It's not good, it's not good.
We gotta move past that,
we gotta move past that ridiculous way of thinking
that somehow meaning is being stripped from the world.
All right, let's talk about, let's talk about,
let's talk about Ted Kicinski, right?
Guy love nature, wild nature.
Guy did not like uniform housing projects.
I don't like uniform housing projects either.
The things that we can build in the future
look more like nature.
There's a Pirate Wires article about this.
The reason that houses are boring beige boxes
is because the manufacturing technologies
of the last 100 years allow us to build boring beige boxes.
As we get control of, as we can use
and the manufacturing technologies,
as we can use biotech to build,
that's the look at species A472.
That's the future, like a fusion of biology
and the things in the future
are going to look more like nature,
not less like nature.
We will exist in more harmony with nature
with more technology.
Things today are, when you think about,
I just want you to imagine an appliance from the 1950s
and how sketchy it looked.
The thing was a fire hazard.
The thing was, think about like a transformer
and you're putting things through
and your coils are vibrating at 60 Hertz
and it's scraping the enamel off the coils.
Now compare that to a MOSFET.
Think about it.
Think about a beautiful little tiny MOSFET
switching a kilowatt.
You switch a kilowatt with a MOSFET.
You know, 50 volts, 20 amps is a kilowatt with a MOSFET.
I don't know, it's like it's the MOSFET symbol.
I will draw the transistor.
Compare this.
This is also not to scale.
Compare this to what I got to build a relay.
What am I going to do?
Build a relay and like pull a magnet on here
and then have like a little like electromagnetic coil here.
Oh, oh, the solid state.
It's the technology gets us closer
to like beautiful pure things.
The relay and the transformer
last a way shorter amount of time.
I know that's not a MOSFET.
What's the MOSFET?
What's the MOSFET symbol?
Well, you know what?
I'm going to label them gate drain and source.
So therefore it is a MOSFET.
There we go.
Take that electrical engineering.
Actually, this is this, right?
The drain is the emitter.
The source is the collector.
I don't know.
Is that right?
I mean, I think, yeah.
Because usually your drain is like,
if you have like a, it depends.
I think it depends if it's N type or P type.
Um, yeah, we could go into.
But it's this stuff.
I was watching a, you watch a Superbowl from 1995.
You watch like the Superbowl show
and you look at these large halogen lamps
that you can't switch on and off quickly.
How would you even do that?
How would you even switch it on and off quickly?
Today we have LEDs switched by MOSFETs.
Come on, that's cool.
So drain, source, and drain.
It's gate, source, and drain are the three things.
But I forget that one.
That's this NPN because I do the arrow that way.
PMP is the other way.
And I come from a pre MOSFET.
Small transistor uses less energy.
Out arrow is N type, yeah.
Okay.
MOSFET and heat sink.
Yeah, but you need a tinier heat sink today.
You need a tinier heat sink today than you do in the past
because your, so a MOSFET has a resistance here.
You have some, you have some basic,
like the model is that it's a semiconductor
with some resistance, actually this resistance that matters.
So you have some drain source resistance
when your MOSFET's fully saturated.
And these things are becoming,
this like, it's, I think it's beyond 99% efficient today.
Meaning that for every, for every,
you wanna switch a kilowatt,
you only need to sink 10 watts.
I bet they're even more.
I bet they're even more than 99% efficient today.
If we had computers, we could look this stuff up.
But the future is so bright.
I agree.
So this is a separate problem.
And we need real liberal arts majors to work on this.
We need people who actually understand
what was called the liberal arts for many, many years
till it was perverted by a Marxist cult.
Right, is this controversial?
I think, I think that one kinda gets in there.
What can us as engineers do, okay?
Stop, and I say the same thing I always said.
Think about what you're working on
and what the convergent endpoint of it is.
Think about where your technology is going
and how your technology is going to change the world.
What group of people is it going to benefit?
Is it going to benefit?
If you are at a physics research lab
researching MOSFET's with lower drain source resistance,
you are doing good for the world.
If you are working on a, you know,
I don't have a name to have to give examples.
You know the kind of things that I'm talking about.
If you are working on, if you work at TurboTax
and you are lobbying the IRS to make the tax
go more complicated, that's my favorite example.
But there's many forms of that.
If you are working to slow down any of this technology,
if you are the person who made Elon strap a seal to a board,
you're the bad guy.
So what can you as engineers do?
I mean, think about who you work for.
Do you work for people who look like this
or do you work for people who look like this?
A lot of these sort of people still want technology.
The New York Times has somebody making their website.
Don't do that.
The New York Times actually isn't that bad,
but you know the ones who are bad.
If they're not, if the ownership of your company
is fundamentally against technology,
stop working for them and start working for people
who like technology and want the future
to be better than the present.
Yeah, Fang and John Deere are probably
on the left side of the board.
Uh, I mean, I think, I don't look,
I don't know that much about John Deere.
For Fang companies, yeah, I mean, I wouldn't work at Google.
I think Google is fairly anti-technology today.
I think that it's less clear for companies like Amazon.
Of course they rely on tech.
And look, just like, just like welcome to the,
you know, welcome to the, welcome to the,
welcome to the 2020s, the lit 2020s,
where we used to come, people used to quit
because they're, they're, you know,
oh, my company doesn't support like,
my company isn't pro-choice, I'm gonna quit the company.
Right?
That's right.
You know, I respect these people right to,
to stand up for what they believe in.
And all the engineers out there, you know,
stand up for what you believe in, right?
It's the same thing.
But I think, you know, it's, it's,
if your, if your company doesn't share a pro-technology
set of values, stop working there.
Stop helping them with technology.
Meta is, these companies are large.
They have many different divisions.
They have many different teams.
I think that I can promise that all of my interactions
with Elon match up to what you think Elon is.
Elon seems to be complete.
Like there is no, there actually isn't a filter.
How Elon behaves is what Elon is.
I can't say the same thing about Mark Zuckerberg or Jeff Bezos.
I'm not sure.
I'm not saying that they're not.
But what I'm saying is it's not completely obvious to me
and see if you can find somebody who would vouch for them.
You know, someone who's, someone who's,
someone who's spent time close with Mark Zuckerberg.
Does he actually believe the kind of stuff he's saying now?
And then there's also a question of do these people have,
you look at someone like Jack Dorsey on Twitter,
it turns out Jack Dorsey was just cut out
of everything on Twitter.
So sometimes you might even have,
the question is do they have control
and do they have good values?
So come on, we all learned.
We all learned from the SJWs in the 2010s.
Some of their tactics are good.
Some of their tactics are good.
Don't announce them because they're SJW tactics.
But always make sure that you are having fun.
And if you're not having fun, you're gonna lose.
Right, if you see this all as drudgery
and this is what I said on Twitter,
I'm like, if you don't love technology, quit technology.
Right, it's gonna be a party.
And that's the kind of energy that was,
I loved Occupy Wall Street back in the day.
That's the kind of energy that works, that's sustainable.
Everyone here is having a good time building the future.
What's the name of this cult?
It's not a cult man, it's the future.
It's the progressivism, it's progressivism, all right?
Progressivism, we believe in progress.
We're boogieing, right?
Electric Boogaloo, I love that, the Boogaloo boys.
See, they're having a good time, man.
How is Excel the good side if the doomers are right?
What are the doomers right about?
Everybody can say AI and they can say doom, okay?
What exactly, how exactly does AI lead to doom?
I was trying to get Yudkowski to explain it
and it's just like convergent endpoint.
You know what else a convergent endpoint is?
The heat death of the universe, okay?
The heat death of the universe is coming.
And if we have any chance of answering the last question,
we need AI.
So currently, we are on a trajectory to doom.
I want everybody to remember that.
You know, some people have those clocks
that like how long you have in your lifespan?
Well, how long do we have before the heat death
of the universe?
All right, right, right?
I gotta stop saying that.
I gotta stop saying that.
I gotta stop my verbal tics.
It's 2024.
It's like it's more than a few billion years,
but the heat death of the universe is coming.
And in order to beat the heat death of the universe,
we need AI, maybe.
Maybe you can't beat the heat death of the universe.
We don't really know.
AI leads to doom when the government
uses autonomous robocops.
With all technology, there's challenges.
With every technology in the past,
with all this new surveillance technology
that now exists, there are challenges.
Is AI a pure, unalloyed good?
No, is technology a pure, unalloyed good?
When you have a gun pointed at your head,
you do not think technology is a pure, unalloyed good.
But on balance is technology good.
And the answer is, I think, obviously,
with things like HVAC and cheap food and cars.
Look, like, I flew here,
I just flew here on JetBlue from New York, right?
I could talk shit about JetBlue,
but imagine flying in that, like, right flyer too.
Yeah, at least that was on A321.
I'm against progress of technology.
They no longer provide benefits.
That's not true.
We are unfortunately, like, you've been scammed
by a group of people for the last 50 years.
The reason things have gotten worse
is largely not because of technology.
I also just listened to Corey Doctro on Jim Rutt's podcast.
And, like, we have been scammed largely
through government inaction against these tech companies.
I saw someone in the comments, like,
George, you don't even know you can download
other browsers for iOS.
I just, someone says something like that,
I want you to think, I want you to think,
do I not know how browsers work on iOS or are you wrong?
When you download Chrome on iOS, it uses a web view,
which is actually just Safari,
because nothing else on iOS is allowed to mark pages RWX.
RWX is a permission built into the kernel
that only the Jits allowed to bypass.
There is a 5% chance I'm out of date on that information,
but I don't think so, okay?
So you'd think who you're talking to, right?
We went from a world where Microsoft couldn't bundle
Internet Explorer with Windows without getting sued.
And now we live in a world where Apple,
not only bundles Safari,
but doesn't let you install anything else.
So this is not due to technology.
This is due to failure of government.
This is due to regulatory capture.
Technology itself.
When you think of technology, don't think of Fang.
Think of a MOSFET, a very simplistic model of a MOSFET.
You put in a little current here
and massive currents flow here.
It's a switch, and that has changed.
That's why everything's so small and good now.
You have a phone that can charge.
I got my phone charger on here, 67 Watts.
Putting 67 Watts into something this big.
You think you can do that without MOSFET?
You can use a transformer?
So everybody, don't think of Fang.
What do you think of technology?
Think of the MOSFET.
All right.
That's where I was now for the Mac.
Yeah, for the Mac actually can install firmware browsers.
Thank you for watching today's stream.
It's the end of 2023.
Make sure you're having a good time.
If you're not having a good time,
if you're angry, you're probably over here.
And might I consider switching to the,
you know what the P stands for?
It stands for party.
You're joining the party side.
Happy 2024.
Everybody have a great New Year's.
Unalloyed, tech optimism.
Someone's gotta solve this.
Someone's gotta solve this.
Let's create an alternative to this
that can produce real liberal arts scholars
who can solve the meeting crisis.
I'm not smart enough to come up with it,
but I'm smart enough to read it and understand it,
so I would appreciate that if you were out there.
Happy New Year, everybody.
