What's so weirdos? Is it fun to kidnap a woman? I'm not saying he kidnaps her, but that's what
everybody online thinks, because Ballerina Farm is like this scandal that has blown up,
but the scandal is just this person's marriage and how this husband treats his wife. If you don't
know the account, Ballerina Farm is like a family TikTok account. She's got nine million followers,
it's Hannah's account, and it has basically become like the queen of Tradwives. Like anything that
is about Tradwives is like her. She is 34 years old, and she has eight kids, and she gave up her
entire life to raise those kids on a farm with her husband. But what's crazy about it is that an
article came out recently that basically exposed and talked about how that wasn't the life that she
wanted at all, and she just got kind of suckered into it and trapped because of her husband. Her
husband is named Daniel, and he is a trust fund billionaire baby boy. His daddy owns airlines,
and this is how he dresses. When we started to farm, I was swept up in the beauty of learning to
make food from scrap. That is definitely a man who was born to a billionaire and then decided,
oh, I'd like to be a little bit of a cowboy. I'd like to get a woman who's on an upwards
trajectory into reaching fame and fortune and all of her dreams, and I'd like to trap her with
children and then bring her out to a very remote area of America where she can mother those kids,
do nothing else, and be my pretty little plaything while I put on a cowboy hat and play dress up as
a Western boy, even though my dad is a billionaire who owns airlines. You have to be very rich to
own a plane. He owns airlines, and his son is out here dressing like Tucker Carlson, trying to be
a common man. Listen, we're gonna get into it, but I'm just gonna say my dad grew up in Arkansas
actually as a farmer, and when I've gone back and visited, I have been like on a cattle farm,
and I can tell you right now, his clothing is far too pressed and his hat is far too clean to be a
real cowboy. But that's not the point of this. Let me give you a little bit of backstory about how
these two met. In the article, the author writes that Hannah Nealman, but we'll just say Hannah
from now on, was the eighth of nine children born to Mormon parents near Salt Lake City. So
automatically, the odds are stacked against her to have any sort of life outside of this one. But
it says right here that Hannah gravitated towards ballet at 14. She went to summer school at
Juilliard. At 14, she was at Juilliard. Juilliard is like the art school. It's so exclusive. It's
so hard to get into. Like Ivy League is hard to get into. Juilliard is harder to get into than
Ivy. I think. That, no, that's true. I'm gonna stand by it. But at 14, she went there for summer
school, and then she returned for her undergraduate degree going for university, and she paid for
that by competing in scholarship pageants. Remember pageantry, because pageantry is something that
comes up later. The beauty pageants sometimes offered academic scholarships or tuition money to
the winners. Point being, she is a ballerina, but not just somebody who likes doing ballet.
Like this guy likes being on a farm near cows. She is actually good at it. She is great at it. She
is excellent at it. She got to Juilliard because of it. Now the article goes on to say that Daniel
also grew up in a Mormon family, one of nine, and he's the son of David Nealman, billionaire
founder of a number of commercial airlines, including JetBlue. Like I said, and the author
throws in that his upbringing was moneyed and suburban just to really emphasize that this whole
like, I'm a cowboy. It's like him trying to be different from his dad when really it's just like
you're playing dress up, but you're also bringing your wife along with you and stifling all of her
dreams. The journalist for this article also asked him, this life was this what he always wanted?
He said, yes, I expected Hannah to be more at home with the kids. But she said, I watched my
parents working together. And so whatever we do, we got to do it together. This life of living on
a farm with eight children is the life that he expected. It's just he expected her to be doing
a little bit more actually. Now cut to an earlier question asked in the interview where the journalist
asked Hannah, is this the life she always expected? And her answer is a little bit different. And
that's what this whole thing is about. Because people, including the journalist, started to notice
that she talks a lot differently when her husband isn't there. And the answers that she gives in
her backstory really seem to indicate that she was kind of trapped into this life. Look at this.
So they're out right now, the journalist and Hannah and the writer says, we drive past the
dairy cows looking out across a river valley and the arid mountains beyond. Was this what she
always wanted? I ask when we get a moment alone while Daniel checks on the animals. So they're
alone. Daniel's not in the room. At other points in the interview, he is in the room and her answers
are very different. Was this life what she always wanted? And she answered no. I mean, I was like,
she pauses. My goal was New York City. I left home at 17 and I was so excited to get there. I just
love that energy. And I was going to be a ballerina. I was a good ballerina. She pauses again. But I
knew that when I started to have kids, my life would start to look different. I was a good ballerina
is one of the saddest things I've ever read when in the context of her actually like achieving
excellence, getting into Juilliard and then getting trapped to this life, which fine. But she just
said that's not the life she wanted, but she's a good Mormon wife. She's going to say, well, it's
fine. But how they met was he was 23 and she was nearly two years his junior when they were introduced
by a mutual friend at a college basketball game. Daniel says, I saw her and I was ready to go.
Sign me up. I was thinking, let's get married. But she wouldn't go on a date with me for six
months. Now, when you really want to date somebody and they say, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
no, no, no, no, no, no for six months straight. That's your cue to leave her alone. But Daniel,
the trust fund son of a billionaire said, but I want it. I want it so bad. I want it so bad.
Little crybaby prince. And so one day she mentioned to Daniel that she was getting the five hour flight
from Salt Lake City, Utah to New York City, back to Juilliard, back to ballet, the life,
the dream, all of her future, all of her hopes, everything she's ever wanted. But
she didn't realize his dad owned the airline. This is so creepy. They're saying it like it's
a romantic story. It is so creepy. She says, so Daniel was like, I'm on that same flight. I remember
checking in and them saying you're five a and you're five B. I just thought no way. That's crazy.
Then Daniel smiles. I made a call. He had pulled strings at JetBlue and so began their first date.
She said, no, no, no, no, no, no, I really don't want to date you. I really don't want to date you.
No, no, no, no, no, you're actually really lame. You're actually really corny. I actually have
dreams. I have a future with ballet. I don't want to do it. Actually, matter of fact, these
dreams and hopes are so important to me. I'm actually flying back from my home right now in
Salt Lake City, Utah to go back to Juilliard. And he said, how about I call my dad and make
sure that I can sit right next to you at stocking? Is that not stocking? That is. It's only okay
because I guess she was fine with it. Uh, Daniel, bro, that is insane behavior. That's so weird.
She goes on to say, back then I thought we should date for a year before marriage so I could finish
school and whatever. And Daniel was like, it's not going to work. We've got to get married now.
She wanted to finish school. She wanted to continue her ballet dreams. She wanted to focus on her
future. And he said, actually, that doesn't work for me. Even though you rejected me for six months
straight, I'm going to get on flights with you. I'm going to pull strings. I'm going to stock you.
And we have to get married now. I don't care if you want to finish your school. I want you more
than I want you to be happy. By the way, the fact that she said, so I could finish school and whatever,
as if she doesn't care. But if you look at the videos on her page, it is so clear that ballet
is her one true love. By the way, her name on TikTok is ballerina farm ballerina before farm.
She views herself as a ballerina. And now when Daniel is in the room with the interview where
she has to say stuff like, yeah, I just wanted to finish school or whatever, like she doesn't even
care about it. Obviously she does. Anyways, Daniel was like, it's not going to work. We've got to
get married now. After a month, they were engaged six months of no. And her saying, well, we're
going to date. It has to be a year before we get married. And it was a month and they were engaged.
And in two months after that, they were married. So instead of not dating like she initially,
and then after he stalked her on the plane, you know, I guess he didn't stalk her, but that is
what that is if she hadn't liked it. And are we sure that she I don't listen, there's a whole
other layer of this of they're both in like Mormon families and he's from a powerful family. It's
like, that's such a dynamic that it's like definitely playing into this. But even once she's
there and she's trapped and she's like, okay, I guess we have to date. I guess we're dating because
you're going to follow me around for the rest of my life and I can't take a flight without you being
on it next to me. Because imagine that, by the way, if she rejected him and was like, no, and then
he gets on the plane next to her, it's like, I guess romantic, but also kind of a threat of like
anytime you're on a plane, I could be there next to you. So you better not reject. There's like
subtext there, you know, but even then once they're dating, she's dead set on a year before we get
married. And then three months, they're married. Then they move into an apartment. Daniel rented
on the Upper West Side. Oh my God, he's such a country boy. He's renting a second place on the
Upper West Side with his daddy's money. You're not a cowboy, dude. You're an oil bear. You're
not John Wayne. You're HR Pickens. The ones who know know. But yeah, they're on the Upper West Side
and three months after that, she was pregnant. The first Juilliard undergraduate to be expecting
in modern history. That's how unprecedented this is. This is how dedicated people are when they get
to Juilliard. Nobody gets pregnant in modern history in Juilliard. Do you realize how crazy that is?
I don't think that that's an exaggeration. It doesn't seem like they're writing it as a joke.
He's saying that the first Juilliard undergraduate in modern history to be pregnant is her because
everybody else is so focused on their dreams like she was until HR Pickens over here came in
and tried to crush her and turn her into oil. Sorry, he's an oil baron. He's an oil baron,
not a cowboy. And now she's pregnant. Remember earlier in the conversation when she said,
I was going to be a ballerina. I was a good ballerina. But I knew that when I started to have
kids, my life would start to look different. This is not a, oh, you know what, in the future,
after I'd been doing ballet for a while, it ended up that I'd rather have had kids. She actively
was trying to not be with this man. She was actively rejecting him and saying, no, no, no,
this is more important to me. I actually really need to focus on my dreams. I actually really
want to be a ballerina. This is incredibly important to me. And he said, well, my daddy has a billion
dollars. So your dreams of being a ballerina, it's like your little hobby, but my dad's so rich
that I should be able to own you. Oh, you're going on a flight. Guess what? I'm going to call my daddy.
That's literally, literally what happened. He had pulled strings at JetBlue and so began their
first date. He called his daddy and said, this girl doesn't want to date me because she wants to do
ballet. And then his daddy got him a seat next to her so that she would feel like she just has to
do this. And then he got her pregnant so that she wouldn't be able to follow her dreams anymore.
What a caring husband. Fuck off. Look at her. This is her doing ballet. Look at this. Look at this.
She's enjoying herself. That's 2010 in China. Sorry, I'm getting heated. I got to have a
diet root beer. This is what a real cowboy looks like. Take notes, Daniel. Diet root beer in a
mason jar with a handle glass. Not your freshly steamed black cowboy hat in your pressed white
shirt. You're not a cowboy. You're a cosplayer. And by the way, the reason anybody cares about
this in the first place is because she really blew up in like early this year, January, February,
because she won a Miss American pageant. You know how I was talking about pageantry is really
important. She was pregnant and she won a pageant. And there was this article written about it with
the, who wrote this? The New York Times. Or I guess, oh wait, no, no. She gave birth two weeks
prior to it. But like all of her training, she was pregnant. Look at her. This is her competing at
Miss World right here in Vegas. And when that happened, she faced a lot of backlash from people
like, listen, I made a Nara Smith video where I was talking about how people feel really inferior
when you present yourself as being the perfect person because Nara Smith was like objectively
making her videos as if she was actually doing the things like making all these things from
scratch. Like that's something that she does. But then people started making fun of her and now
she's like doing it ironically and kind of poking fun at herself. I think she's totally fine. And I
think Nara Smith is like, honestly smart for like rebranding and kind of being self aware. I think
that's totally cool. But as the tried wife discourse really exploded and people were really upset,
Ballerina Farm, Hannah was definitely one of the people at the epicenter because it was like,
you have eight kids or I guess seven at this time. Was it seven and I must have been eight kids and
you're winning beauty pageants and you are a objectively very talented Ballerina and you're
milking cows homeschooling these kids in this and this and this so much that people were like,
it's like, she's just making it look like it's that easy and it's not that easy. And people got
mad at her. But now that this article has come out and you can see that her life is not at all
what she wanted it to be, people are having a lot more empathy. And I want to show you one video
specifically where she was given a birthday present from her billionaire husband. Oh, his dad's
the billionaire. Okay, I'm sorry. He just has $800 million. And then when his daddy dies, he's a
billionaire. Just watch this video that they posted. I cannot believe they posted this video
of her opening her birthday present. It's her birthday present. She gave up her entire life,
sacrificed all of her dreams, all of her futures, all of her hope to be this man's wife and raise
this man's kids. That's really what happened because she did not ask for this life. And he did.
Remember, he said, this is what I wanted, except I wish he would do more or I expected her to do
more. This is the birthday present. Just buckle up. Okay, this is my birthday present from Daniel.
Their tickets to Greece. Where's it from?
Hoping their tickets to Greece. You know, I am the wife of an extravagantly wealthy man who could
buy anything for me. It's my birthday. I've given my entire life and my entire future to him. I'm
saying I hope their tickets to Greece because clearly I've been talking about it a lot and I really
want to go. So, plane tickets? A hat I can wear in Greece. She said, I hope their plane tickets,
then she opened it, saw their not tickets. Maybe it's like something kind of cute and it's like a
hat that he's going to say I can take to Greece because clearly I am actually expecting this
because I've communicated it to him and I really want it and he can make it happen because, oh,
I don't know. His dad owns a fucking airline and he can buy me plane tickets to wherever the
fuck he wants. He can just ask, uh, daddy, can I have a plane ticket to Greece for my me and my
wife and daddy will say yes, son, my handsome little boy and watch what it is as she opens it up
and takes it out of this package because, trust me, she's not taking this to Greece. What's that
hat? It's not. Oh, my egg apron. He did it. It's great. They can gather eggs. It's really cute.
You see her disassociating there right here? Yeah, that's definitely me when I'm extremely happy
about the egg apron that my billionaire husband got me. I'm being filmed right now. This is a great,
great disappointment. An egg apron. Hey, wife, who's given her all to me? Everything about her entire
being is under my malleable control in a ranch in the middle of nowhere and there's no way out.
You know what you're going to get for all the sacrifices you've made? A little tool so you
can do more work for me. I want you to have a little tool so you can do more work for me. And
by the way, I said to the journalist just a little bit ago, I wish you would pick up the slack a
little bit around the house. I thought you would do more for the kids. So, you know, yeah, happy
birthday. Hey, Daniel, I just want you to look at me right now. What are you thinking? Look at me,
Daniel. What? It is unreal. How can I know hardly anything about this marriage and immediately
know what I could do for her birthday better than her fucking husband who she has eight kids with?
If she's talking about wanting to go to Greece while opening a present, clearly she's talked about it
a bunch before and actually expects it. Dude, dude, dude, you're a billionaire. You're a billionaire.
It's my birthday. By the way, my birthday has already passed by the time this comes out,
but it's my birthday tomorrow. And if Sophia gets me an egg apron, all I'm going to say,
it's going to be a big problem, big time, big time problem. Oh, fuck. She might have got me
egg apron. I'm speechless. Daniel would say, as you should be, you're a woman. That's what Daniel
would say. That's what not what I would say. Hey, you want to sip some diet root beer? Grip it like
a real cowgirl. Just immediately gripping it like a princess, not a cowgirl. That does not taste
like toothpaste. Get the fuck out of here. Sorry for saying fuck. Get the hell out of here. I love
you. Daniel, be nicer to your wife. Come on. Her in that video versus look at how she is when
she's dancing. Me when my billionaire husband buys me a tool to do more work for him for my
birthday. She's actually really good. Like that's a really good ballet. Obviously she's really good.
She was in fucking Juilliard. This is her 2018. She's out of the blast. But you compare that to
how she acts when she's with the man. Look at this. And for me, like my main responsibility,
yeah, we're raising the animals. We're taking care of the ranch. I really feel strongly that I
have to support Hannah and we have a lot of kids. I can't expect her to take care of the kids all
day and also produce the content that she wants to produce as an artist. And so I just have always
felt that if I take care of her needs and what she needs, that she can produce her content. And
honestly, the business side takes care of itself. I'm just trying to support her because she can't
do everything that I want her to do. I really want her to take care of all the kids. But it's
like she has one little nugget of creativity and freedom where she can occasionally film herself
doing a little ballerina dance. And it's like, yeah, I wish instead of doing that, she would just
sit there and fucking parent like a good mom. But it's fine. It's fine. It's fine. It's fine.
That's what he's saying while he's sitting out there with his freshly steamed black cowboy hat
he's wearing indoors cosplaying as a Western cowboy because he wants to feel like a man because he
grew up in his father's shadow. The only reason that you have your wife is because you called
your daddy for a favor, Daniel. You're not a real man. You're a little tumor that fell off your dad
and you're just suckling at him trying to get back. When you're milking a cow, does it feel
like you're milking your father, Daniel? Does it? Does it? Does it? Does it? I just hate him. I hate
him. I'm sorry. I hate him. Aside from all the stuff that he's done even to his wife, when I see
a fake cowboy, I'm sorry. A rich man acting like a cowboy. You're not. You're not. You're not. You're
not. You know, you're out here on the farm. We're doing all of our things. You rented a department
in the Upper West Side while you were stalking your girlfriend trying to make her your wife,
but even though even though she rejected you and kept saying no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
because you were such a little baby that you just needed it. That's not cowboy behavior.
Why are your boots so clean? Your boots are a little bit too clean, Daniel. Do you have your
wife shining them for you, Daniel? Real cowboys let their boots get muddy because they work in them.
And I know it feels like you're working when you have your six men that you've hired to actually
take care of the farm and they take you as a little ride along, but you're not. I don't know
if that's even true, but I think it is. I honestly do because look at him. He's not a cowboy. Now,
if you think that's it, trust me, there's more. Listen, you might be thinking, okay, well, they
have eight kids. He can't stop putting kids into this woman's body so that she has to give birth
to them. He can't stop. So at the very least, because of their vast wealth, he's at least providing
some amount of child support, which by the way is the reason that a lot of people upset with him
at first, because like, obviously they have to have child support. It'd be insane to not have
child support. I mean, childcare, like nannies and stuff. To do this without nannies is kind of crazy.
But check this part of the article. They have a cleaner, but no childcare. Neil Min, Hannah,
does all the food shopping, kids in tow and cooks from scratch. They don't do ready meals. Cool,
cool. Hey, I know there's 10 of us in this household, but I actually don't do things that
are ready made. And I need you to make everything from scratch, including the bram. Despite the
more traditional aspects of their relationship, the article continues, Daniel is a hands-on father
yet because he doesn't have anything else to do. He is so rich, he doesn't need to be doing this.
He better be hands-on. He takes the kids out to the farm doing all the laundry. The children appear
to look after each other well too. There are so many ways that they seem to have become an almost
self-sustaining entity. Still, Daniel says, Hannah sometimes gets so ill from exhaustion that she
can't get out of bed for a week. His wife gets so ill from being so overworked and so exhausted by
this lifestyle that he has forced onto her that she can't get out of the bed for a week sometimes.
And the birthday present he gave her was an apron and apron and apron. That is a level of,
I'm going to say, douchebag that I can't handle. So when people were like, well, this seems like a
fake front that they're putting up where she's actually not doing all this, but she's presenting
it as, oh, no, no, no. She is. She just didn't want this. And it's actually really sad that she's
doing this. And she would probably benefit a lot from some nannies or some help with child care.
But Daniel doesn't do ready-made meals and wishes his wife did more, even though he pushes her to
the brink of exo- not to the brink, pushes her to exhaustion so that she can't get out of the bed
for a week. But actually, I wish she did a little bit more for me, actually. Shut the fuck up,
but what happens next in the article is potentially my favorite part. And I highly recommend you go
read it. It reads like a spy novel where this journalist is trying to like get Daniel out of
earshot so we can ask some questions to get the real information because if Daniel's in here,
she's going to not actually answer how she actually feels. Look at this. She says,
I just love having them at home. It's so quiet talking about giving birth to her eight children,
although Henry and Martha were born in a hospital and people got mad at her for that because they
said, well, I thought you were a tradwife. Who gives a shit? But she says that she gave birth to
them without pain relief. The interviewer says, not at all. She shakes her head. Why? asks the
interviewer. She says, I don't know. I just have never loved taking it. She stops herself, except
with Martha. One of the girls was born in the hospital. I was two weeks overdue and she was 10
pounds and Daniel wasn't with me. Daniel, the husband wasn't with me. Dot, dot, dot. She lowers
her voice. This is so dramatic. Daniel is currently out of the room taking a phone call. She continues
so I got an epidural and it was an amazing experience. Hiding the fact that she got an
epidural from her husband because she doesn't want him to know that she got pain relief.
So clearly the reason that she hasn't had pain relief before is because he's been there and
he doesn't approve of it because she described it as an amazing experience and she lowered her
voice so he wouldn't hear. The journalist asked, where was Daniel that day? She says,
it was shipping day for the meat boxes and he was manning the crew. Yeah, by the way,
the crew. I have a hard time believing manning the crew means anything other than standing like
this. Well now put that meat over there, boys. I love being a cowboy. Get that cow facing that way.
Way to go, gentlemen. I'm a real cowboy. By the way, why is the framing like this from fucking
Long Legs? Let me in now and it'll be nice not once, not twice, but you guys know Long Legs?
I think I already did that in a video. Damn, it just really stuck with me. I'm scared of that
movie. Not as scared as I am of Daniel because check this out. Anyways, it was shipping day for
the meat boxes and he was manning the crew. The journalist goes, but the epidural was kind of great.
She pauses and smiles. It was kind of great. And then the journalist says, I want to ask her about
birth control. He's not saying this to her. He's saying this to the article that he wants to ask
her about birth control, but that they're surrounded by so many of her children and Daniel
is back in the room now too. So the journalist, by the way, Megan Agnew, shout out Megan Agnew.
Megan can sense the tension when Daniel is in the room and how there are certain topics that
shouldn't be talked about. Megan is picking up on that, but she says, do you I pause and look at
her fixedly plan pregnancies? What happens next? Daniel says no when he says no. I guess that means
when God says no, no, we don't plan pregnancies. When God says no, we don't have, I guess that's
what he said, but Hannah responds gently. It's very much a matter of prayer for me. I'm like,
God, is it time to bring another one to the earth? And I've never been told no, Daniel says,
but for whatever reason, it's exactly nine months after a baby that she's ready for the next one,
he says. Daniel says it's a matter of prayer, but somehow it's exactly nine months. Megan Agnew,
the journalist continues, the Nealmans have strongly held Mormon beliefs, which they mentioned far
more in person than they do online. That's interesting. The Mormon Church emphasizes
heterosexual unions and sexual purity. It opposes elective abortions, allowing for exceptions
only when the pregnancy results from rape or incest, or when there is a threat of life to
mother or fetus. By the way, love it when somebody spells it like photos, because for real, that
little nugget is an op. Get out of here. Get out of here. Not a fetus. You're a photos. Anyways,
moral of that story is they have a kid every nine months. Whatever reason, it's exactly nine months
after a baby that she's ready for the next one. Okay. Have you considered Daniel a condom? Daniel,
listen, you have made your wife do everything for you. Have you considered potentially wrapping
that little bad boy up so that your wife can potentially pursue even one of her dreams?
Have you considered that? Have you considered taking it out, maybe trying to do anything other
than impregnate this woman so that she can't do anything other than foster your children and
do nothing else with her life? Have you considered that potentially, and I know this is going to
sound crazy to you, Daniel, she is her own woman who might want to do something other than raising
your kids? I don't know. I don't know. Have you considered the fact that she didn't even want to
date you for six months? And the only reason she did is because you called your daddy and got a
plane ticket to sit next to her like a fucking creep. And then she said, for a year, I don't want to
get married. And then three months later, you were married to her. And then three months after that,
you had a kid and she had to give up her ballet life and then move to a farm to raise these kids
with you. Or sorry, raise these kids for you, although she's not doing enough, but you are
doing the laundry as we read earlier. And then you can just give her another kid the second that
she's done. Maybe probably the whole time she's like, okay, but once this is over, once this kid
is over, I can't wait to get back to ballet and I'm really going to be able to pursue it. Oh,
bam, another kid. Then she's like, fuck, this is really shitty, but you know what? Honestly,
it's great to be a mother and I love this. It's such a beautiful life, but I can't wait till this
one's over and I can focus more on ballet. Bam, another kid. And then five more times. Daniel,
we do not need more of your progeny in this world. And I'm not saying that in a bad way. You have eight.
Eight is plenty. Eight is more than enough. You can stop. You can go snip, snap. Oh my god,
your wife is 34 years old and she has eight children. So the moment that she started dating you,
her life has been nothing other than filling the mold that you have created for her. And when she's
with you, we see her faces like this or egg apron. I really wanted to go to Greece. It's really
cute. And when she's doing ballet, she's looking like this, you know, actually believing in herself,
loving herself, having a great time. Hey, have you considered Daniel that the joy of your wife
kind of matters a little bit? No, obviously not because you're acting like it doesn't matter at
all. Meanwhile, the entire reason that this incredibly talented ballerina with a full ride
scholarship to Juilliard, I cannot emphasize enough, a full ride scholarship to Juilliard,
she had a amazingly bright future in ballet ahead of her. You said, actually, I have so much money
and I'd rather she stay here while I get eight real cowboys to do the work in front of me while I
man the crew. Hey, pick up that shovel. Hey, you pick up that pitchfork and start digging in the
dirt a little bit. Get that cow to face that way. I'm a cowboy. Right on, baby. That's you, Daniel.
Do you think that that life is actually better and deserving more respect and care dedicated to it
than somebody who got a full ride scholarship to Juilliard? Buddy, you are so fucking rich. You
should have fueled her entire life and all of her dreams with your fucking money, because clearly
you have nothing other than a desire to get out of the shadow of your own dad when all you could
do is ask him for favor to get yourself everything that you could ever fucking want. Have you
considered that maybe your desires and your dreams are a little bit selfish and just focused on
getting out from under your dad's shadow? And even when you're doing that, all you're doing
is hiring people with daddy's money to do the real work for you so that you can cosplay as a cowboy
while somebody who actually has talent, who actually had a future and doing something amazing and
unique that not a lot of people are able to do, you took her and you trapped her in your life where
she has to raise your kids on your farm in your life. You are the son of a billionaire. The only
thing that you should have been doing is saying, oh my God, I'm glad I'm so rich. Let me put all of
this money behind you so that you can pursue this career in art fully happily. And you would do that
if you loved her more than you loved yourself. Daniel, you are such a little loser boy. And the
fact that she is so scared that she can't even say that she got an epidural around you because
she's scared that you're gonna judge her and get upset with her for that, bro, fuck off. Fucking
fuck off. You're just a loser. You're a loser. Sorry. Everybody who's watching this video understands
that we're all on the same page. It's not hard to be a better husband than that. Like it really
isn't. Most people are. It's not even like me on a high horse being like, I can't believe you're
like this. You suck objectively from an average point of view. If you, as a person, were average
and treated your wife averagely, imagine how much happier she would be. But instead, you suck,
Daniel. Sorry, you suck. But that's my opinion. Now, Daniel, I'm gonna ask you to do one thing to
turn your life around. Fire your crew for one month and genuinely try to run the farm by yourself.
Prove that you're doing that and then maybe I'll respect you as a cowboy, but I will never respect
you as a husband or a father. Hey, and if you love this video, hey, all I'm gonna say is please
subscribe. Hey. Man, I for real love, I love diet root beer. Listen, there's no calories in it. What's
the problem? Oh, there are studies that suggest overweight people drink a lot of diet drinks.
Yeah, it's because if you're overweight and you're trying to lose weight, you're gonna drink diet
drinks. Doesn't mean that it's not good. Doesn't mean that I should just start getting regular ones
with the calories in them when I like it so much when it's diet. I love diet root beer. Everybody
say it with me right now. Diet root beer, diet root beer, diet root beer, diet root beer, diet root beer,
diet root beer, diet root beer.
