Hi, welcome. My name is Kimia Grigoriev and I'm the founder and president of HESPSS. Before
we get started, I just wanted to take a moment to thank you all for being here. And I also
want to thank our amazing team for working tirelessly to put this event together. I also
want to thank Dr. Michael Levin for agreeing to do this event with us. We are incredibly
honored and could not thank you enough. It is my honor to introduce Dr. Max Krasnow.
He is a highly respected and esteemed professor, speaker, researcher and we're fortunate enough
to call him our wonderful faculty advisor for the Harvard Extension School Psychology
Student Society. We are truly honored to have his invaluable guidance, support and advice.
With a decade of teaching experience at Harvard in the college, Graduate School of Arts and
Sciences and in the Extension School, his expertise is vast and invaluable. Prior to
joining Harvard, Dr. Krasnow earned his PhD in psychology from UC Santa Barbara with a
focus on developmental and evolutionary psychology. His background and expertise make his insights
incredibly valuable to our society and its members. Additionally, Dr. Krasnow is known
for consistently going above and beyond for his students to ensure their academic and
professional success. Please help me welcome Dr. Max Krasnow.
Thank you Kimia. So it is my privilege today to introduce Dr. Michael Levin. Michael Levin
attended Tats University where you received dual bachelor's degrees in computer science
and biology. He earned a PhD from Harvard University for the first characterization
of the molecular genetic mechanisms that allow embryos to form a consistently left-right
asymmetric body structure in a universe that doesn't distinguish that for them. This work
is on nature's list of 100 milestones in developmental biology of the past century.
He's the distinguished professor and Vannevar Bush Chair in the Department of Biology at
Tats University where he also serves as the director of the Center for Regenerative and
Developmental Biology. After a career as a software engineer in the field of scientific
computing, Professor Levin earned his bachelor's in both computer science and biology like
I said before coming to Harvard for his PhD. Later in his postdoc and up to his current
positions, he's won numerous other awards that I won't take more time to mention, nor
the journals that he serves as editor for and so on and so on, because I'm too excited
to get straight to letting us all hear from him. Let me present to you now Dr. Michael
Levin who will be telling us all about bioelectricity, body intelligence, and the future of regenerative
medicine. And I'll say that right one of these days.
All right. Thank you so much. Really appreciate the opportunity to share some ideas with you.
I hope you will see how all of this relates to psychology because I think it really does.
So if you would like to find any of the materials, the software, the papers, everything is at
this website, please feel free to get in touch with me afterwards if you have questions or
ideas or anything else. So I want to start off with this idea that all of us made this
amazing journey from quote unquote just physics to cognition. We were all at one point an
unfertilized oocyte. So a little blob of chemistry and physics and through this amazing
process of embryonic development, we became one of these complex body structures or in
fact maybe a complex metacognitive human being. And so this is really important because for
this reason I think that developmental biology is maybe one of the most remarkable and magical
of all sciences because there you can see right in front of you, right in front of your
eyes, how physics becomes mind. And it's a slow gradual process. There's no special
lightning flash that turns a mechanism into meaning or anything like that. It happens
slowly and gradually. And so here we are trying to understand the process and the ramifications
of that process. And often we think, well, okay, so we undergo this journey, but in the
end, we are some sort of a unified single intelligence. We're not like these so-called
collective intelligences like ants and termites and bee colonies and so on. But actually, if we
think about it, we are also an interesting kind of collective intelligence because for example,
René Descartes really liked the pineal gland because he said that in the brain it's the one
structure that isn't duplicated. And so it's fitting that a unified human intelligence
in some way lives in that pineal gland. But if he had access to good microscopy, what he would
have found is that actually there's not one of anything. He would have found that that gland
is actually full of cells. And if he were to look inside of these cells, he would see something
like this. This is what's actually inside of most cells. And this is, of course, is only a
partial accounting of what's in there. So in an important sense, we are all collective
intelligences. And it's very likely that all intelligence is collective intelligence because
all intelligence is made of parts of some sort. So this is the kind of thing we're made of. Here
is a lacrimaria. This is a free-living unicellular organism. What you'll notice here is that there's
no brain. There's no nervous system. There are no stem cells. All of its needs, metabolic,
physiological states, anatomical control, all of its needs are handled at the single cell level.
Very, very expertly without the need for a brain or other cells or anything like that.
And so this is the kind of material that we're made of. It is not where we don't consist of some
sort of passive components. I sometimes give a talk called why robots don't get cancer. And the
answer is because current technology is largely, not exclusively, but largely made at a single scale
where the overall machine might be competent and intelligent, but it's usually made of pretty
dumb parts that don't have agendas of their own. But that's not true for us. We are made of an
agential material because we are made of components with competencies and agendas in various problem
spaces. And so that gives rise to a number of interesting biological phenomena. I'm going to
just describe a few that are kind of unique and that many people don't often think about
that will set us up for the next part of the talk. So for example,
here is a soft-bodied creature, which has a brain appropriate to driving a kind of soft-bodied
soft-bodied embodiment where it likes particular kinds of leaves and so on. And this creature,
which lives in a two-dimensional world of leaves, has to turn into this creature, which is a now
hard-bodied kind of system, completely different controller you need for that. It lives in a
three-dimensional world, doesn't care about leaves anymore, I mean once nectar, and it has a different
brain. And there are data showing that during this process of metamorphosis, which is this
remarkable process in which the brain pretty much is dissolved, most of the cells are killed off,
the connections are broken, and then reassembled into a new kind of brain, and yet memories that
the caterpillar forms are retained in the moth or butterfly. And so not only is there a very
practical question here, which be because we don't have any kind of memory medium in our
computer technology or anything else that is this robust, where you can basically take it
apart and reshuffle all the components and kill off most of it, and then you still have the original
information. Not only that, but there's really a very fundamental philosophical question here,
and people sometimes ask what's it like to be a bat or a butterfly or something else,
but this is one step further. What's it like to be a caterpillar slowly changing into a butterfly?
So this sets us up to start to think about the intersection between body shape and the
shape of our minds and our cognitive systems, and the idea that we change not only on an
evolutionary timescale, but also on an individual timescale. This happens, this amazing transformation
happens within the lifetime of this individual. Memories actually can be even more robust. So
this is a creature known as a planarian flatworm, and I'll talk much more about this in a few minutes,
but one of the things that is known is that these guys regenerate, so you can cut them into pieces.
Each piece makes a perfect little worm, and what was shown in the 60s, and this was James McConnell
found this. He got a lot of flak over it, but he was actually right. We confirmed this with
modern techniques about 10 years ago. If you take this planarian and you train them, for example,
to recognize that this bumpy region in this dish contains food as you feed them on this bumpy
kind of region, you can then amputate the brain, and they have been in fact the whole head.
The tail will sit there doing nothing for about 8 to 10 days, and they slowly regrow a new head,
and then you can find out that the resulting worm actually still remembers the original
information, so it's a place preference assay, and you can show that they still remember.
So kind of a place conditioning paradigm there, and so what you see is that memory,
first of all, is not necessarily just stored inside the brain, but also can be imprinted onto
a new brain by the rest of the tissue, and so now, once again, you have this very fundamental
philosophical experiment such as this malfunctioning transporter from Fill 101, where this transporter
that makes a copy of you and then erases the original, what happens if it fails to erase the
original? Which one is the real you? Well, planaria can do this all the time. You can cut them up into
pieces, and all of them have the memories of the original. So now, moving to a vertebrate system,
that kind of plasticity, we showed something interesting in tadpoles, which you'll know,
so this is a tadpole of the frog Xenopus lavas, you'll notice that here's the mouth here,
the nostril is the brain, and the gut, and here's the tail, and so what you'll see is that there are
no primary eyes, we prevented those from forming, but what we did do was cause an eye to form on
its tail, and when you do this, the eye makes an optic nerve, well, first of all, the cells are
perfectly happy to make an eye even though they're sitting next to muscle instead of up here next
to the brain where they belong, but also, they make this one optic nerve, the optic nerve goes,
and it synapses onto the spinal cord, it does not go all the way to the brain, and then we can show
using this machine that we built that these animals can see, so even though they have a,
we can train them in visual assays, and so even though we've radically changed the sensory motor
architecture of this creature, with no period of evolutionary adaptation to it immediately in
the first generation, the animal can use this novel configuration in its adaptive behavior,
so that plasticity, this ability to adjust to novel architectures and novel circumstances
is really critical, and we're gonna see why, so what underlies all of these amazing abilities
is in part something we call the multi-scale competency architecture, this is the idea that
not only are we this kind of nested dolls where molecular networks and then subcellular components
and then tissues and organs and whole bodies and even swarms of organisms, not only are we a set of
nested dolls structurally, but also functionally, in other words, every layer of organization has
its own competency to solve problems in different spaces, so it's not all about
traditional behavior in three-dimensional space of movement, there are also transcriptional spaces,
physiological spaces, metabolic spaces, and so on, and so the competency of all these different
components simultaneously solving these problems and interacting with both both laterally and with
levels above and below is what enables the whole body to have this incredible kind of robustness
and creative problem-solving capacities, and as humans we're very good at detecting
intelligence in three-dimensional space, medium-sized objects moving at medium speeds on our human
time scale through three-dimensional space, and so we see primates and we see crows and
things like that, and we can recognize intelligent behavior, but there are these other spaces that
we're really not very good at recognizing, and towards the end of the talk I'll show you some
tools that we've developed to help us think about this, but I firmly believe that the three-dimensional
space that we're used to is not privileged in some sense, but rather it's a construction of our
sensory motor architecture, and that if we, for example, had a primary perception of our blood
chemistry, let's say you could feel some number of chemical states in your blood, the way that we
do with vision and sight and smell and taste and so on, I think we would have no trouble
visualizing that we live in a kind of physiological state space, a high-dimensional
physiological state space, and in particular we would recognize our liver, our kidneys,
our various organs as navigating that state space on a daily basis and doing very intelligent things
to get us across various problems and novel scenarios that come up. So what I'd like to do
today is to talk about one, we could talk about all of these, they're fascinating examples in them
all, but I'd like to spend today talking about morphospace, which is the space of possible
anatomical configurations, it's a kind of a pick a body structure or in fact the entire body,
and you can think about the space of all possible variants of that structure and how they topologically
relate to each other, so let's talk about this. In order to talk about that and in particular I'm
going to propose this idea that we can fruitfully think of morphogenesis of the generation of biological
shape as the behavior of a collective intelligence of cells in anatomical morphospace, in other words,
embryonic development, regeneration, cancer suppression, remodeling, metamorphosis, all of
these kinds of things are a kind of behavior, they're a kind of behavior of a collective
intelligence that navigates that space in the way that we typically think neurons are a collective
intelligence that help us navigate three-dimensional space. So let's ask this question, here's where
we end up in morphospace as adult humans, here's a cross section through a normal human body
in the torso, look at the incredible order, the structures, everything is in the right place,
the right size oriented correctly relative to the right thing, amazing degrees of order,
where does that order come from, where is it recorded, and many people at this point would
say well it's in the DNA of course, it's in the genome, but we can read genomes now and we know
what's in the genome, it's protein sequences, so the tiniest hardware available to every cell,
the genome doesn't have a plan of a large-scale anatomy as far as which side is left, which
side is right, how many eyes are you going to have eyes, all of these things have to be constructed
on the fly by cells that use the hardware given to them by the genome to make all kinds of
computations, and this structure is no more quote-unquote in the DNA anymore than the structure
of a termite colony is in the termites DNA or the shape of a spider's web is in the spider's DNA,
it's all an emergent computational process that requires a lot of collective intelligence
from the pieces, and so as workers in regenerative medicine we would like to know if a piece of
this is missing how do we get the cells to rebuild and repair, for cancer we might want to know how
do they know when to stop building, and as engineers we'd like to know what else is possible,
what the cells from the exact same genome, what else are they willing to build if we knew the
right signals, and so these are all the kinds of questions that we're interested in to understand
that navigation through morphospace. Now as we think about what would a finished solution in
this field look like, we don't know what's the end game, when can we all go home, I think it's useful
to visualize that, right, what does it look like when it's solved, and I think what it looks like
is something we call an anatomical compiler, the idea here is that someday you'll be able to sit
in front of a computer and draw the plant or animal that you wanted, so you could draw this
schematic of a three-headed flatworm, and so you would draw at the level of anatomy, not at the
level of molecular pathways or anything like that, and if we had such a thing, if we knew what we were
doing, the system would compile our anatomical description into a set of stimuli that would
have to be given to specific cells to get them to build whatever we want them to build. Now
this is really important that this device would not be a 3D printer,
the point isn't to micromanage the position of every cell, the point is to communicate your
anatomical goals to the collective intelligence of cells and get them to build. Why is this important,
besides the basic importance for developmental biology and evolution and so on? Most problems
in biomedicine boil down to the control of shape, in other words, if we had a way to tell groups of
cells what to build, we would simultaneously be able to solve birth defects, traumatic injury,
cancer, aging, degenerative disease, all of these things would go away if we had some ability to
communicate anatomical goals to cells. Now one issue is why don't we have such a thing, I mean
molecular biology and genetics have been around for a long time, amazing progress, why don't we
have this yet? Well I'll just give you a very simple example, so this here is a baby axolotl
and baby axolotls have little four legs, this is a tadpole of the frogs and a baslavus at their
stage, at this stage they do not have any legs, one thing we do in our lab is we make frog
allotls, so these are a combination of some axolotl embryonic cells, frog embryonic cells
and you get a frog allotl. And so now I pose the question, we have the axolotl genome,
we have the frog genome, so you have all the genomic information and so now I ask,
could you tell me if a frog allotl is going to have legs or not? And the thing is that we can't,
we have no idea because while we're pretty good at the molecular machinery, we really do not
understand how collectives of cells make decisions, we don't know if frog allotls will have legs,
we don't know if they do have legs, we have no, there is no theory that will tell you
whether those legs would consist of frog cells or only axolotl cells, these are all completely
open questions. So where we are in biomedicine is this, we're very good at manipulating cells
and molecules and we make models like this of which proteins and which genes interact with each other,
but what we'd really like to do is to control form and function. And so I'm going to make the claim
that where we are in medicine today is roughly where computer science was in the 40s and 50s.
And so you can see what she's doing here, she's programming this computer by
physically rewiring it, back in those days you had to interact with the hardware,
that was the only option. And I think today molecular medicine, so CRISPR, genome editing,
protein engineering, all those kinds of things, all these exciting approaches are all focused on
the hardware. And I think that really transformative biomedicine is going to appear
when we add to this the really critical way to understand control and communicate with
the software of life or aka the collective intelligence of cells and their problem solving
abilities. So when I talk about intelligence, I'll probably mention that many times in this talk,
what I mean is this, this, this, this William James definition, which is
the ability to reach the same goal by different means. Very interesting definition, it doesn't
say anything about brains, it doesn't say anything about whether you were evolved or engineered or
some combination there over how you got here. It focuses on this kind of very cybernetic notion
of being able to navigate a space towards a goal and having some degree of competency to do it
by different, different means when, when, when your standard way of going about it is blocked
in some way or perturbed. So, so what kind of collective intelligence do these cellular swarms
deploy? What do they, what, what can they do? Well, let's see, we know that developmental
self assembly is very reliable. So most of the time, this single cell will give rise to this
amazing three dimensional anatomy that's target morphology. But we know that it's not hardwired
because if you cut these, for example, in half, what you, you don't get two half bodies, you get
two perfectly normal mono zygotic twins. And so there's this, and there are many other
these types of perturbations that the idea is that, that in the system from different starting
positions, and so this is a very vastly simplified morphous space down to sort of two, two axes,
you can get from different starting positions, you still manage to get to the same
ensemble of goal states corresponding to normal human variations. And in fact, in various ways
in development, you can, you can go around local, local optima such as this local, local minimum
and so on, and still get to where you need to go despite starting off from different positions.
So that's interesting. It has, it has some degree of flexibility of its surroundings.
And this isn't just for embryos, for example, this, this is that ax law that I mentioned,
these guys regenerate their limbs, their jaws, there's their eyes, their spinal cords, portions
of the heart and brain. And what you'll see here is that if they lose some part of this limb,
and it can be down here, it could be here, it could be up here anywhere, what they will do is,
they will rapidly regrow and remake the limb, and then they stop. And that's perhaps the most
amazing thing about regeneration that it knows when to stop. When does it stop? It stops when
a correct salamander limb has been completed. So what you have here is a kind of error minimization
scheme, where, where the system will attempt, despite these kind of injuries and deviations,
will attempt to keep to this target pathology. So this idea of anatomical homeostasis, the ability
to take action repeatedly to make up for perturbations that push you out of the correct region of
morphospace down to this region, they can work their way back. So of course, salamanders and
worms aren't the, aren't the only ones that can do this. The human liver is actually highly regenerative,
even the ancient Greeks knew that, I have no idea how they knew that, but they did.
Every year, a year, which are a large adult mammal, they regenerate their, their antlers,
so that means bone, innervation, skin up to a centimeter and a half of new bone growth every
day. So, so kind of remarkable regenerative ability as an adult mammal. And even human children can
regenerate their fingertips. So below a certain age, a clean amputation will regrow with, you know,
cosmetically very, very reasonable results. So one final example, this is something that we
discovered a few years ago, which is, which is this, tadpoles, of course, need to become frogs.
And in order for a tadpole face to become a frog face, things have to move. So the jaws have to
come out, the eyes have to move forward, the nostrils move, everything moves. And it used to be
thought, it was assumed that this is some kind of hardwired process. After all, every tadpole
looks the same, every frog looks the same. And so if you just, if every piece of the head just
remembers which direction and how far to go, then you go from a normal tadpole to a normal frog.
So, so that was the assumption. So we decided to test that assumption. And this is really important,
because as we talk about this field of basal cognition, diverse intelligence, looking at
these kind of protocognitive capacities and unfamiliar embodiments, it's very important
that we cannot simply make armchair pronouncements about what we think, which systems we think have
what degree of intelligence we have to do experiments, because it is often not obvious.
So what we did in this particular case is we made what's called Picasso tadpoles,
and Picasso tadpoles have everything scrambled. So the eyes on the top of the head,
the jaws are off to the side, everything is, everything is moved around. And what we found
is that these tadpoles make largely perfectly normal frogs, because everything moves around from
novel position. Sometimes it actually goes too far and has to come back a little bit.
It makes these these movements and then and then it settles into a correct frog face. So
in fact, it has it has more intelligence than you would immediately you would initially assume,
because it has the ability to overcome a novel problem of being located in the wrong place that
typical embryos don't have to deal with. So the genetics doesn't specify a hardware,
the hardwired rearrangements, it specifies a system that executes an error minimization,
a way to, to keep acting until you get to the correct state. So that raises an obvious question,
how does it know what the correct target morphology is. And so, so this is the standard story of
developmental biology told in the textbook, which is that you have gene regulatory networks,
some of these genes make effective proteins that do things, so they're sticky or they do,
they diffuse or they signal somehow. And then there's this process of emergence where, where
lots of this happens in parallel. And voila, at the end, you get some sort of complex outcome.
And this is true, of course, there is this process of emergence of complex form from simple rules.
But this isn't the whole story. There's a really important aspect of this, which, which we study
by putting these feedback loops on here, which is that when you deviate the system from its
correct target morphology, and that could be large scale injury, it could be, it could be aging,
it could be teratogens or various other mutations. What happens is there are loops that kick in,
both in terms of physics and genetics, we're going to talk about the physics one,
that try to get the system back to where it was. Okay, so this, this is the anatomical homeostasis
part. So now if this is true, that well, this has a couple of components that it, you may think,
well, these are just feedback loops, biologists know all about feedback loops to this feedback
everywhere. And this is true. But the typical way of thinking about this, first of all, is,
it's something like, for example, a temperature control loop or a hunger loop or a pH regulation
is the set point is a scalar. It's a single number. This isn't the case here, you need a set point
that in some, to some level of detail, tells you what the correct shape is going to be. And
so that's unusual. And the other thing is that, you know, typically in these kind of developmental
molecular biology approaches, when people don't like to think of any kind of a final goal towards
which the system is moving, it's supposed to be sort of kind of this this this feed forward open
loop kind of thing where whatever happens happens, but there isn't a goal towards which it's going.
And I think that's fundamentally incorrect. It leaves a lot of useful things on the table to
think about it that way. So what we wanted to do was to follow the predictions of this kind of
way of thinking about it. And it makes some very strong predictions. What it says is,
if this is true, then there's going to be a target morphology encoded somewhere, it's going to have
a physical encoding somewhere, the way that you can find the encoding in your thermostat for where
the set point is recorded, which is going to be an encoding that. And what we'd be able to do is
learn to read it, to decode it, and thus to rewrite it. Because if we can do that, what that means
is that you can change what happens out here by changing the set point, not just by controlling
the genes and then hoping that this process gets you what you want. Because working this backwards
to ask, which genes do I edit to make specific changes here is incredibly difficult. It's a very
hard inverse problem. It's what's going to limit applications of CRISPR and things like that.
It's very hard. So it would be much nicer if much like with your thermostat,
you could change the set point and let the cells do what they do best, which is rebuilt without
you having to micromanage from the lowest level. So those are the predictions. And this is what
we've been working on for some years now. So I'm going to show you this. In order to start to think
about how a collection of cells could store some sort of goal that it's going to move towards,
we use the nervous system as a source of inspiration, because it's very, very clear that
there you have a great example of a system that can store goals and memories and work towards
it. So how does it work? Well, the hardware looks like this. It's a network of cells,
each of which has little ion channels that allow the cell to generate a voltage potential by
segregating positive and negative charges. And those voltage potentials may or may not get
propagated to neighboring cells via these regulated electrical synapses known as gap junctions.
And so that's how the hardware looks. What that allows the networks to have is this very
active electrical set of electrical processes. And here you can see here, this is a zebrafish
being this group made an amazing video of this zebrafish while recording all the electrical
activity as this animal is thinking about whatever it is that zebrafish think about.
And the commitment of neuroscience is that you should be able to do something they call neural
decoding, which is that if we weren't able to get all these data, and if we understood how to
decode them through these computer models, what we would be able to do is read out the contents
of the animal's mind. What is it thinking about? What are the memories, the preferences, the
behavioral repertoires? So the idea of neural decoding is that the information is literally
encoded in the physiology. All of the kind of cognitive aspects of this animal are encoded
in these electrical signals. Well, it turns out the amazing thing, it turns out that that kind
of trick is ancient. It is not just something that is used for brains because every cell in
your body has ion channels. Most cells have gap junctions to their neighbors. And it turns out
that evolution figured out the benefits of this kind of architecture. Oh, back around the time
of bacterial biofilms, long before nerve and muscle came along. And so it turns out that these
tricks that the nervous system uses are really based on some of these very ancient ways to
process information in electrical networks. And so we thought, wouldn't it be remarkable if we took
a lot of concepts from neuroscience and behavioral science? And this is what it means to consider
morphogenesis and intelligence. It's not just a metaphor of speaking. It's something that actually
says take seriously the isomorphism between these fields and take techniques from a completely
different area that have never been applied to development, developmental biology,
and apply them to a different medium in a different problem space and see what these tools give you.
And I think they give you a lot. And so that's how you cash out these claims like that.
And so what we decided to do was to say, okay, could we use the same kind of tools to read
all the electrical conversations that body cells are having with each other? And from that,
extract or decode, what are the anatomies that they're trying to build? What are their
competencies and so on. And so we made the first tools to read and write the electrical
information in cells outside of the nervous system. And so I'm going to show you these
tools. I'm going to show you what we can do with them. So this is a voltage sensitive fluorescent
dye. And this this allows us to noninvasively over time lapse, see what what all the bioelectric
patterns are. And then we can we can do a lot of quantitative computer simulations to relate
that to the different channels and pumps that are expressed and really gain an understanding of
what the what the physiological dynamics here. So here's an example of what what you see when
you do this. This is a video of a frog embryo putting its face together, its grayscale,
that doesn't matter. You can see it's quite quite dynamic. But what you'll see here we call this
the electric face. This is a this is one frame of that movie. It basically shows you that long
before the the organs of the face are patterned and long before the genes come on that that control
some of these things. Already this this anterior ectoderm has a map represented within it this
bioelectrical map of all the organs. So here's where the mouth is going to go here's where the
eye is going to go the placos out to the side. Here's where everything is going to be. So this
is this is an endogenous pattern. And I'll show you in a minute it's actually required for normal
face development. Whoops, it's required for the the morphogenesis that actually creates the face
if you interfere with this pattern, the gene expression will change the anatomy will change.
So that's a normal endogenous pattern. Here's a pathological pattern. What you can do is you
can misexpress a human oncogene, and then eventually you'll get a tumor. But before the
tumor becomes apparent, you will already see that there are some bioelectrical changes where these
cells are basically electrically disconnecting from their neighbors, and they're going to go off on
their own and that's that's metastasis. And so and so and so there's some obvious applications here
of to monitoring birth defects to cancer diagnosis and so on. But more important than than the
characterization tools are the functional tools. So we don't use any applied fields, there are no
frequencies, no waves, no electromagnetic radiation, no magnets. What we do is we control the native
interface by which cells control each other, that is the electrical side of electrical controls on
their cell surface that they expose to each other. And the way we can do that is all the
techniques of neuroscience. So we can target these electrical synapses to either open or close them,
we can target all the ion channels to change directly, not just the connectivity, but also
the actual voltage states. And you can do this with drugs and you can do it with ion channel
mutants and with optogenetics and various other various other techniques. And so we have the
ability now to go in and with with with significant specificity to change which cell talks to each
other cell, and what voltage in fact they're they're they're communicating to each other,
which corresponds to synaptic and intrinsic plasticity, respectively. So I'm going to show you
an example, one of my favorite all time examples, originally discovered by my very first student
back back at when I was at Forsythe Institute at the Harvard Dental School. We had this we
have this this this amazing finding, which is that we decided to start to manipulate some of
these voltages to ask what what what will happen. These were very early days, no one knew what was
going to happen. In fact, people thought that voltage was a housekeeping parameter. They said,
well, if you mess with the voltage of these cells, they'll die, you'll get an uninterpretable phenotype.
But we decided to try. And so so what what she did was to interpret, in the first person to see
this was Ivy Chen, and then several other people in my group worked on this sherry owl and vipe
high, more recently. And so so what she did was to inject RNA and coding a particular potassium
channel into some cells that were going to be something other than I. And what happens is that
when you establish a little spot of voltage that is the same shape and and and the voltage pattern
as that I spot in the electric face, I showed you, you can induce eyes anywhere else, you can get
them on the gut, you can get them on the tail, you can put them anywhere anywhere on the animal.
So and these eyes will often have the all the correct internal layers, so all the retina and
optic nerve all that stuff. So this tells you four really interesting things. First is that the
bioelectric pattern is instructive doesn't just when you change that pattern just doesn't just
screw up normal development, it's not permissive, it actually tells the cells build an eye here
that's functionally what it does. Second is the amazing modularity, we didn't have to tell all
the cells what where the stem cells go what the how to build a lens how to build a retina, we
didn't have to do any of that we in fact we have no idea how to do that we couldn't possibly give
it all the information how to build a whole complex eye. What we found is a very high level
subroutine call that basically just says build an eye here the animals tissues already know how
to build an eye we found a trigger for it so so very modular and that's and that's good for regenerative
medicine. Also what's remarkable is that if you probe this animal with what was considered to be
the PAC-6 master eye gene only the anterior norectoderm which is this tissue up here is competent to
be eye and so in the developmental biology textbook there's a story about ectodermal competency
and they tell you that only this these regions are competent to become eye and that's true if you
probe them with a PAC-6 signal but if you go upstream and probe this system with a voltage
signal in fact all of them you find out that all of the cells including gut endoderm which is really
crazy are actually competent to make eye and so the whole issue of how competent are these cells
is is really predicated on how you how you pose the question and this has this has direct implications
for prompting an AI and other other kinds of systems you you have to have the right prompt
to to really learn what the system is capable of. Also something else that's interesting this is a
lens sitting out in the flank of a tadpole somewhere and what which you'll notice is these blue
cells this is beta galactosidase and these blue cells are the ones that we actually injected with
the channel all the rest of this was never directly injected by us all these brown cells are native
unmanipulated cells but what happened is that something that something that happens in other
collective intelligence is like ants when a couple of ants come along something they want to move
and it's too big for them they will recruit their their their neighbors and so that's what
happens here these cells so so two levels of instruction we instructed these cells that hey
you need to make an eye and these cells on their own without us having to handle size control or
how many cells there are or any of that these cells come and deared and and and and hijack their
neighbors to participate with them in this in this project of constructing this lens because
this system knows how big the thing is supposed to be it knows how many of them there are and it
can do what's necessary which again we had we didn't need to do this at all this is a native
competency scaling to the appropriate task is something tissues already do so this goes back
to my my claim that for proper regenerative medicine you really want to be working with all
of these competencies these morphogenetic navigation tricks that that the system has
that are completely not obvious from standard development and we need to be able to exploit
so um you good so so doing that you can do you can do you can build many things you can build
you can ask the system to make ectopic four brain so here's this giant brainy tappel you
can make extra legs so here's our six-legged uh six-legged frog you can make extra hearts
extra beating hearts you can make extra odysses which are inner ear organs or you can ask it to
make fins now that's interesting tappels aren't supposed to have fins that's more of a more of
a fish thing we'll get to that in a minute but of course now that once we saw that we were able
to induce complex complex structures we immediately started on a regenerative
kind of medicine model which is leg regeneration and so what we see in frogs frogs normally don't
regenerate their legs but what we see here is that if we provide a cocktail with a specific
ion of four that changes the voltage state of that wound cell what we can do is we can trigger
immediately within within a couple days you get this msx one positive
a blastema marker and the leg immediately starts to grow by 45 days you've already got
some toes you've got a toenail and eventually you got a very nice leg that is touch sensitive
and motile this um by the way uh the stimulus here was only present for 24 hours and if you
stimulate for 24 hours in our most most recent paper you get a year and a half of leg growth
and the whole point is that we aren't there 3d printing anything we're not there with scaffolds
or or control of gene expression or stem cells we're not trying to tell the frog how to build
the leg we provide a very simple signal right at the beginning which says go towards the leg
building um region of morpho space not towards the scarring region and that's it after that we
don't we don't touch it again so again relying pushing all the complexity onto the system itself
we are now attempting to do this in in mammals in rodents and i have to do a disclosure here
because David Kaplan and i are scientific co-founders of a company called Morphosuticals Inc
which tries to apply this technology to get limb regeneration in mammals and hopefully someday
in the into the clinic um okay i want to change gears and talk about a different organism we're
back to planaria here i'll remember that these guys can regenerate uh kind of every every part
of their body they're amazing in in particular they also solve the aging problem they're immortal
as far as we know there's no such thing as an old planarian they regenerate everything as it as it
does and that says and uh you've got this uh you've got this amazing capacity and so we wanted to
answer a question uh how does each piece know how many heads of tails it's supposed to have
it's kind of a funny question but you know if you're a piece like this you have to know
how many heads and it's not it's not obvious from where you were located because if you take a um
if you take a a planarian and cut it in half this region has to make a tail this region has to make
a head they were direct neighbors they were in the same location in the animal but they have
radically different anatomical outcomes so it's not a trivial problem you can't just tell what
you're what you're going to be based on where you were in the original it doesn't work so how
do they know so what we discovered was a bioelectric circuit and i'll i'll skip all the details uh
that literally uh controls uh this this process and stores the information about how many heads
you're supposed to have so the way it works is these the single headed planarium and you can
see the anterior is where the the head markers are expressed of course and so when you cut them
like this very reliably you get a one-headed worm but uh what you can also do is is cut these guys
again one-headed animal uh anterior gene expression in the right place in the head not in the tail
and so you cut them and you get a two-headed worm and why would this be a two and this is in
Photoshop these are these are real animals and why would you get a two-headed worm i just told
you that this is very uh reliable reason is that we were able to find this bioelectrical
pre-pattern that looks like this and the decoding is kind of simple i'm showing you this because
much like with the electric face this is the simple one there are other patterns that are
they're very hard we're still trying to crack but what you can see is one head one tail and what
we were able to do is use drugs to affect ion channels to change this pattern into two heads
and it's kind of messy but but it's okay it works two two heads and so uh what you see here is is
that this two-headed um this two-headed pattern gives rise to two-headed animals but here's the
amazing part uh this is not a readout of this animal this is a map of this animal and this
normally uh this this anatomically and and transcriptionally normal animal has a different
representation of what a correct planarian looks like and if you injure him and not until
that so it's a latent memory if you if you injure him then the cells will go ahead and they build
what the pattern says and then then they will go ahead and they build two heads but until that
happens it's a perfectly normal one-headed body so uh several interesting things here one of which
is that this this bioelectric again of course the bioelectric pattern is it is instructive it tells
you how many what what kind of structures you're going to have second um remember that at the very
beginning I sort of promised that we were going to find a read and decode and re-specify the pattern
memories that allow a particular set of tissues to to know what to build and when to stop this is
it you're looking at it the question the question of how does the planarian piece know what to make
this is the answer it's because this pattern contains the information that's needed to specify
one aspect of its morphogenetic um uh future and the other thing is that uh this is this is
perhaps the interesting thing is that again this electrical pattern is is not a map of this animal
it's a map of this animal so in an important sense it's a counterfactual memory it's a memory of what
it's a it's a representation of what I will do in the future if I happen to be injured so maybe
this is an evolutionary precursor of that amazing mental time travel that that brains allow us to
do which is to uh imagine or remember things that are not true right now right things that
happened in the past or things that are going to happen in the future this is the perhaps this is
the ancient somatic equivalent of that um of that process so a single planarian body can store at
least one of two different memories of what a correct planarian should look like so it's it's
reprogrammable in an important sense just like learning in the brain and just like our computer
technology the same hardware can store different types of information and why do I keep calling
it a memory because if we take these two-headed animals and we cut off the primary head and we
cut off this if topic secondary head with no more manipulation you might think that well the genetics
are untouched you didn't edit the genome there's nothing wrong with the genetics so if you get rid
of this this this crazy secondary head maybe the cells will just rebuild the normal planarian
but that's not at all what they do if you if you if you cut them again they will continue to make
two heads in perpetuity and um this this has this has all the properties of memory it's long-term
stable it's rewritable because we can shift back and forth we know how to make two heads from one
and we can actually take these two-headed guys and put them back to being one-headed it has
conditional recall meaning it can store the memory until it actually gets injured and it has two
discrete possible behaviors and here you can see this this this video you can see what what these
two-headed animals are like and you know the first two-headed planaria were reported in the
early 1900s but it wasn't until 2008 that my student Larissa Bosniak first I had asked her to recut
these things nobody ever recut them to my knowledge you know because it was assumed that once you get
rid of that extra structure the gene the genetics are normal of course it should go back to normal
which you know it was assumed so it's it's really critical to um to to to think in in broader
directions that that kind of uncover these novel capabilities of tissues and what we're doing now
is all kinds of computational modeling to try to merge what we know about the bioelectric
state of the circuit here where it has this these attractors one head two head and so on
with what connectionist machine learning is telling us about ways in which network can store
information and can recover the entire information from partial or damaged pieces and so there's a
I think there's a great unification to be done here and this this this paper talks about that
but it is not just about head number it's also about head shape so the amazing thing is that
uh if I take this this this triangular shaped planarian cut off his head perturb the electrical
pattern in a particular way let them then then take the reagent away let them settle down sometimes
they settle back to a nice triangular shape like they should or they sometimes give you a roundhead
like this S Mediterranean or a flathead like this Pifolina and so the these animals are about
150 to 100 million years in evolutionary distance and not only does the head shape change but
all the internal components the stem cells the the shape of the brain become just like these other
species so you can ask this hardware to visit attractors in that morpho space that typically
belong to other species these species go there by default but this species can be pushed to
navigate space in that way if if the navigation policies which are encoded by the bioelectrics
are changed in the in the in the right way so the hardware is perfectly willing to visit these
other these other attractors in fact you can go uh and uh and and visit shapes that uh don't look
like planarian at all so you can make this crazy spiky form you can make the cylindrical things
you can make this sort of hybrids it's it's it's what Darcy Thompson was was talking about in his
in his classic where where he showed these kind of um deformations a kind in that nowadays you
would call it a kind of a latent morpho space of possible shapes and have you know real real
animals be be the result of deformations of a coordinate grid and there are all these other
possibilities besides the standard default that we see all the time so um of course what we're
what we're trying to do is is put together a full stack computational model that goes from
the molecular biology of which channels and pumps are expressed to the tissue level electrophysiology
and and all the voltage patterns to the organ level stable patterns that eventually can be
interpreted by humans and by AI as an algorithm about what every piece is going to build and
here's where you want to do your interventions it's very hard to do them down here not methodologically
of course but but conceptually it's hard to know what to do but up here it starts to get very obvious
and so we're trying to forge that um forge that thing because we have we have simulators of
bioelectrics and so on so um the last story uh I want to tell you about kind of uh this this this
part of the talk has to do with how this is going to play out on regenerative medicine so here's a
here's an example uh this is a typical uh tadpole brain and you can see very nice forebrain midbrain
and hindbrain left and right halves and there are a variety of of defects you can induce with
teratogens such as nicotine and alcohol and mutations and so on that really wreck this the
structure so here um the forebrain is basically gone the the eyes are connected directly to the
to the midbrain um real really problematic and so so so we wanted to develop a proof of concept of
using what we've learned about the bioelectrics here to uh to repair this to find interventions
that repair these very complex birth defects we don't have a hope of talking to each individual
cell and controlling where all the stem cells go and what the pattern is and I don't think in our
lifetime that's that's going to happen but we thought could we could we find uh high level
controls that let us leverage the competencies of these of the system so what we did was uh was um
and this is the work of uh alexis pi tech with vipaf pi in the lab and so what they did was create
she made a computer model of what the bioelectric pattern normally should be and how it gets altered
by these various treatments and then uh pi was able to um do the biology and do the following
thing to ask the model if the pattern is incorrect what channels would i need to open or close
to make the bioelectric pattern correct not going to worry about what happens downstream not going
to worry about whatever the could the gene expressions are they're induced by this but
how do i fix the bioelectric pattern so um what i'm showing you here is perhaps the most uh kind of
the most amazing example which is uh never mind the chemical uh teratogens let's let's look at
a mutation so this is a mutation in a gene called notch introduced into it's a dominant
active mutation introduced into these animals their brains are completely wrecked as a result
of this it's a very important neurogenesis gene forebrain is gone midbrain and hindbrain are a
bubble these animals lay there no behavior you know which is just profound profoundly defective
and so the model said something very interesting it said there's this there's this htn2 channel
which kind of has this special property and um what it will do is it's predicted to sharpen gradient
so it's like a like a sharpen filter in photoshop it basically it basically um makes makes very sharp
bioelectrical boundaries between compartments that are not differing by enough voltage and so
what we did was find out that whether by expressing more of this channel or by drugs in fact two already
approved human anti-epileptics that opened up this channel the model predicted that that would
fix it and it was kind of an amazing you know there's a shocking prediction we tried it and sure
enough uh incredibly incredibly enough uh even though this animal has the mutation the brain is
normal the gene expression is normal and their learning rates are indivisible indistinguishable
from controls and so i'm not claiming that uh all genetic defects are going to be fixable
this way there will be many things like missing enzymes and things like that that are not going
to be fixable this way but at least some uh hard hardware defects i mean this is an actual mutation
in a in a signaling pathway some hardware defects can be repaired in software by a transient
stimulation of a drug that was chosen by a computer model so we've gone from uh the very
initial early work in let's say around 2000 where we were just probing the space of possibilities
you know what does the what did the bi-electrics control down to now to the point where uh we are
in in already in 2018 we're able to use a computer model to pick a drug for a very complex vertebrate
birth defect and and repair it and so so the way that the therapeutics is going to look is
is basically like this and there's already you can sort of play around with with an early version
of it here uh you you'll pick some some tissues that you're interested in and uh what we need is
to know the correct bi-electric state of that organ or tissue and then you'll know what the
incorrect state is and then there's going to be a computational platform that's going to um
electraceutical design environment that stands for it and what it's going to do is
help you choose uh correct channels that will need to be open or closed to correct the pattern
and from there it's very simple to find drugs that will target that channel and so uh then and so
and so that that's how that's how this is going to work um and so uh kind of uh the last thing I
want to say about about this this this this part of the talk is that uh if we think about
the whole space of bi-electric biomedical interventions the vast majority of efforts
today go under this bottom-up category so the hardware uh repairs surgery transplants uh
his stem cell implants genomic editing um re rewiring gene regulatory networks and so on
all all of these things are focused on the hardware and we and we all know some of the
deficiencies and limitations so so we have very few things very few treatments that actually
fix anything many things once you stop taking the drug everything goes right back or actually
gets worse because it was it was uh targeted at the symptoms it wasn't actually fixing the
fundamental issue and of course we have great variability across patients we have lots of
side effects and uh and and this is this is to be expected when when trying to control a complex
system bottom up but but there are there are complementary techniques that we can use having
to do with first of all uh enough time to talk about any of this but there there's lots of interesting
applications in actually training cells and tissues and in fact molecular networks so using
stimuli rewards and punishments and so on to act to make long-term lasting changes by exploiting
the memory capacity of of all of these levels and of and of course uh what we've been talking about
now which is which is the whole field of morphosuticals which has within it um ways to target the
decision-making machinery the the morphogenetic machinery that it uses mechanical chemical and
of course electrical modalities and so this is all all the electrosuticals are down here with
ion channeled drugs and optogenetics and so on and and lots of lots more is discussed here and I
think just to speculate a little bit I think that future uh future medicine is going to look a lot
less like chemistry and a lot more like a kind of somatic psychiatry where you're going to take
very seriously the the memories the the the preferences the uh competencies of the body
cells tissues and organs and try to leverage those competencies by um not trying to micromanage
their behavior but trying to give them signals and so bioelectricity is a really critical interface
that normally uh mediates between high-level cognitive information down to molecular
properties and and and if that sounds weird to you just think about how you get up out of bed
in the morning when you when you wake up and you decide that you need to go to bed uh that you
need to get out of bed rather and go to work um what's happening here is that your high-level
cognitive intent that that knows what work is and all the consequences of no of doing it or not
doing it all of that has to has to filter down to the molecular events at your at your muscle
cells to enable you to get up out of bed so so your cognitive intent of of wanting to do something
changes the way that molecules interact in your muscles and so all of that that that
transduction from from from from cognition to to molecular biology is done by bioelectrics all
of that is electrical and I think we can hack this for for the rest of the body for some really
transformative health applications so the last thing I want to do just for a couple of minutes
is to broaden out a little bit into into two other quick quick mentions one is uh this idea of
let's let's just talk about cancer for a second so so this is what uh this is what we're made of
and what evolution individual cells and so what evolution has has given us is some hardware that
it allows cells which normally work on little tiny goals so so so little tiny metabolic and
proliferative goals of single cells to a very grandiose large-scale morphogenetic goals like
we're going to work together to build this limb and if that's inhibited temporarily then we're
going to do it again and then build it again so these are very high level goals that these cells
are going after but that process can break down and when that process breaks down this is what we
call cancer so these are human glioblastoma cells and what happens is that if you dissociate cells
electrically from each other they will basically revert back to their unicellular past they will
act like amoebas and at that point the rest of the animals just the rest of the body is just
external environment to them so they're not any more selfish than somatic cells it's just that
their cells are smaller so the boundary between self and world here the boundaries out here it's
huge this you know this this this whole thing acts as a unit to to achieve a particular morphogenetic
trajectory but but once you disconnect the cells they don't do that anymore now now all all all
they all they have is little tiny goals that stop at the roughly at the cell surface so so one so
now that's kind of a weird way of thinking about things but as always it has practical consequences
which is that if you think this way then then you might take take this hypothesis that if we put
human oncogenes into this tadpole we know it's going to make a tumor but what we'll do we're not
going to kill those cells with chemotherapy and we're not going to try to fix the mutation what
we're going to do is simply force them to remain bio electrically connected to their neighbors even
though they have the mutation and so we've done this now with with with glee and with with nasty
k-rass mutations here it's the the the oncogene is marked in red you can see that there's this
tumor here there's this a very very strong low expression of this oncogene in fact it's all
over the place in the body but there is no tumor here this is the same animal because even though
the oncogen is blazingly strongly expressed if the cells are electrically connected to the rest of
them what they do is participate in normal organogenesis not a not crawl around and and
metastasize so this is this is a way of taking some of these ideas about the the shifting boundary
between self and world and put it into a practical application and of course we're pursuing this now
in in in human glioblastoma and some other things okay the very last i'm just going to take
about four or five minutes here just to give you a kind of a last piece and i have to do
another disclosure here of fauna systems is a company that um josh bond guard and i have started
around computer designed by robotics and i and the idea was this uh i've tried to i've tried to
make the point that morphogenesis is a navigation of anatomical space by a kind of system that
remembers where it's going and has certain navigation policies and it has certain capabilities of
getting there despite some number of things that can happen to it um but if we if we ask the question
in a in a typical uh animal um where where do those memories come from in other words what
determines the the the shape of that space uh in the and the and fundamentally the anatomy of the of
the of the and the and of the the behavior of that animal uh typically the answer is well evolution
so so years of selection have shaped that space and now and now this is the you know this is the
morphology that that survives in the real world and so one we wanted to ask this question about
plasticity we said if if we take these cells with a standard genome um and give them a chance to
reboot their multicellularity what will they build like what is the what is the um the structure of
the of the um morpho space for creatures that have never existed before and so this is where
synthetic biology or better yet synthetic morphology comes in because we can make some
creatures that have never been here on earth in that in that particular embodiment and we can
ask what do their shapes look like so here's um uh here's an example uh what happens is uh
we take a frog embryo and this is all the biology here's work at the work of Doug Blackiston and
this is a collaboration with josh bongard's lab um and uh sam creedman was a student who did a lot
of the the computational work uh what happens is we can we can take off some of the epidermal skin
cells from this embryo and we we dissociate them and we put them aside in this in this uh set them
aside and they can do many things they could they could die they could spread out and leave
you know go away from each other they could form a two-dimensional flat monolayer like a cell culture
what they do instead is um they actually they get together and this is time lapse they they get
together and they make something very interesting which looks like this um and the flashing is
calcium signaling uh so what they make is something we call a xenobot um why xenobot is
why xenobot xenopus lavis is the name of the frog um i think it's a biorebotics platform so that's
why it's a it's a xenobot uh first of all they swim um and they use little hairs on their cell
surface um on their outer surface called cilia these are normally used by the frog to move mucus
down the body down its body to keep the pathogens away but they're using it to swim they can go in
circles they can sort of patrol back and forth like this they can have all kinds of interesting
collective and group behaviors that you can see some tracking data here um they change their
movements as a function of time they sort of wander around doing various things um here's one
doing a maze so you can see here it swims forward it's going to take this corner without bumping
into the opposite wall so it doesn't just go straight until it hits something it can take
that corner and here it shows some some kind of primitive initiative and uh spontaneously turning
around and going back where it came from so these are not these are not stimulated these are not
actuated in by us in any way unlike some of the current um biorebotics that exist the completely
um completely spontaneous um they have uh if if we if we track the calcium signaling like we did in
that zebrafish um uh like that other other lab did in that zebrafish that i showed you earlier
you can see that it's they're very active there's no neurons in here but the but the it's just skin
but the but the skin cells are very active and we are now applying all sorts of information theory
tools to ask uh if we can decode what the cells are saying to each other what two xenobots might
be saying to each other and so on um they regenerate so if you cut it almost in half it'll seal up
like this so so from from here they will um they will uh they will they will seal themselves
and um perhaps the most amazing thing we discovered by uh by the simulations that
sam and uh and josh josh did was that in their movements they tend to um they tend to have a
very peculiar effect on on their environment and so so you know they they built this amazing
simulator where we could doug could actually build various types of xenobots corresponding
to shapes that uh that that the that the ai was suggesting and what we found is this if you give
them uh loose skin cells in their environment what they do is they implement um van Neumann's
dream which is a robot that would go out and build copies of itself from materials that
found in the environment um because uh we've made it impossible for these guys to reproduce
themselves you know they they're they're just skin they don't have all the other organs you need
for frog style reproduction but within a couple of days they uh figure out a new way to make copies
of themselves and so what they do is they by their movements they collect these skin cells into a
little ball and they sort of polish and and compact the ball and because they're working with a
in a gentle material like us we we were only able to make xenobots because we were working with
with skin cells that have certain competencies they have the same advantage and so because it's
an agential material they make the next generation of bots and when these xenobots mature guess what
they do they run around and they do exactly the same thing and that gives you the next
generation of bots and the next generation so this is kinematic self-replication to our knowledge
doesn't no other organism on earth does this uh brand new brand new kind of thing um and so and so
this brings us kind of to almost the end of the story where one thing you can ask is what did the
frog genome learn through all all these you know so eons of evolution well it's certainly learned
to make a frog and it learned this developmental sequence that leads through this stereotypical
stages and then some tadpoles with with behavior that's not the only thing it makes it can also
make xenobots with a completely different developmental sequence this is this is a
couple month old xenobot and no idea what this thing's trying to become and they have different
behaviors including kinematic self-replication that that has never existed before so um we don't know
by the way um what their behavioral repertoires are like do they can they learn uh what do they
have preferences all of that is currently under active investigation but uh at least in in the
case of the morphology we can say a few things we can say that uh there have never been any
xenobots there's never been selection to be a good xenobot so this whole lifestyle and
capabilities and everything else cannot be uh straightforward you can't tell a straightforward
selectionist story about it um where does it come from that's an interesting thing we can we can
discuss and uh what it looks to me like from this and many other experiments is that evolution
doesn't give you just solutions to specific problems what evolution makes is problem solving
machines and under uh um default environments they always produce the same outcome and it's sort of
the development sort of lulls us into a false sense of we understand what the system can do
and evolution gives us a an easy way to uh to sort of to to explain uh why we see what we see
but there's actually a lot more plasticity and capability that doesn't appear until you probe
the intelligence of the system by putting it in a new environment where it has to do new things
and in particular we didn't engineer this by changing the genome we didn't put in any new
circuits the DNA is exactly the same we didn't put any weird nano materials the only thing we did
is liberate these cells from the rest of the embryo that normally uh basically uh um um
force them into having a kind of boring two-dimensional life on the outside of the organism
keeping out the bacteria that's it when you take them away from it's it's engine in this case it's
engineering by subtraction by liberation when we take these cells away from these other instructive
signals then you find out what their baseline preference is their baseline is is this to have
a much more exciting life as a as a xenobot um and so so i'm sure there are many many of these
things out there in uh in the world that we simply don't know about yet and so uh what i think the
xenobot really is i mean yes it's a biorebotics platform and there will be useful synthetic
living machines and and and so on but what i think it really is and the xenobot isn't just uh you
know to be clear the xenobot isn't just this thing the xenobot is this thing plus the AI that was used
to uh to to um investigate it the human engineers that that prompted these cells to do this that
whole thing is is really the xenobot and what it really is is um an unusual uh novel tool it's an
exploration tool for probing these these these morpheus spaces these other latent spaces that
we're not very good at at noticing and um and what i think is that um when darwin said endless forms
most beautiful he was i'm kind of amazed at all the diversity of life all of that natural life
is this tiny little corner of morpheus space that's formed by the space of possible bodies and minds
that's formed by every possible combination of evolved material cells dna tissues uh designed
material and smart materials implants and all that and software life is incredibly interoperable
and every combination of of these three things is probably going to be some kind of viable being
that's uh yeah hybrids and cyborgs and and some of these all already exist of course and many more
will and you know for the for the younger people in the audience in your lifetime you are going to
be surrounded by other agents that are nowhere on the tree of life with you you cannot decide how
to relate to them based on where they are on the standard n equals one tree of life on earth so so
we are going to have to do this i think is really critical now the xenobots are just the first uh
kind of a small step in this direction we are going to have to develop a new kind of ethics
for relating to truly diverse intelligences that don't look like you they don't share uh they don't
share um uh our our revolutionary history and uh you know uh a different a different way to relate
to beings not based on uh what do you look like what are you made of and how did you get here
meaning evolved versus engineer so i just i'll summarize the whole thing by saying that i think
one of the most interesting things in biology is that um all of all intelligence is collective
intelligence functioning through this multi-scale competency architecture that navigates various
virtual spaces um this kind of goal-directedness the cybernetic kind not the not the mystical
kind is uh really an invariant for recognizing building and relating to very unconventional
agents and and there's a lot more about this this this cognitive boundary that we can talk about
and the collective intelligence of cells is really an excellent target for regenerative medicine and
also as an example of why this kind of approach it's not philosophy and it's not metaphors it's
something that that actively on a on a you know every year it generates novel discoveries and new
capabilities that we didn't have before and um just that that that's that that exploring these
spaces provides an astronomically large uh possibility for new bodies and new minds which
has huge implications not just for um biomedicine and robotics but understanding evolution
understanding ourselves ethics so if anybody's interested in going deeper um lots of these
papers uh have discussed this stuff in in great detail i want to thank um the students in postdocs
we did um we did all the work lots of lots of technical support um some of our amazing
collaborators uh our funders um here um Jeremy Gay of Peregrine Creative does all the
illustrations um and uh most of all uh the various model systems because the animals do
all the heavy lifting so um i will thank you uh for listening and take questions
thank you dr love that was fantastic um and i want to thank you on behalf of the society
and the students and uh guests who are um joining us today to listen um and i thank you for taking
just a couple extra minutes to answer a few questions um i'm going to paraphrase uh some
that came in on the q and a forum um one there's often a concern when there's new breakthroughs
in um medicine that the new treatments are only going to be available to the rich there's going
to be an inequity problem um and i'm kind of intuiting what the answer is going to be but
is there a potential here to have a solution that can be more um widely adapted because of the form
that it takes yeah yeah there is i mean i i'll i'll say first that i'm not an expert in the
economics of medicine as far as i understand we have an inequity problem with water and so
you know it doesn't have to be some fancy therapeutics before you get into an inequity
problem so so that that's all that's the you know kind of baseline um but with this with this specific
set of manipulations yeah i actually think it has an extremely favorable um equity profile because
we are we are explicitly not doing the thing that's done now which is heroic interventions
at the very end of life to try to prolong basically a sinking ship and and that and what that means
is that the input to the next stage is is is way more um you know sort of uh uh degraded and that
means the next step has to be more expensive and heroic what we are saying is maybe there's a way
to trigger regeneration like in planaria or like in salamanders and uh and do it uh at the whole
you know during during the whole uh life life of the of the individual um increase in the health
span and in particular just about everything we do is uh can be done with very cheap ion channel
drugs so these are many of them already human approved most of them are off patent this is uh
as far as interventions go this is this is uh this is the delivery is going to be very cheap
what's super expensive right now is uh the r&d right so so so building all the equipment building
all that i mean none of this existed before all the software everything else everything has to be
once we crack this i mean i call this cracking the the morphogenetic code once we crack this
the actual treatments are going to be way cheaper than anything we've seen
fantastic um and uh just maybe quickly this one question because i think it's going to be on the
minds of many people we have um you know a common intuitive ends that a lot of our
um uh minds go when we think about um intelligence in other ways beyond the standard that we imagine
that we have um and that is you know creating intelligence in um silicon as opposed to in
our biology um and uh the question is um what is is there something that limits the ability of
taking our understanding of the hardware software relationship that you're uncovering
and transferring essentially ourselves into our our goals our memories into the silicon space
yeah um are you are you asking about uh creating novel uh novel agents in silicon or are you asking
uh what happened are you talking about the idea of of taking an existing person and implementing
them and is that that ladder thing it's the second that was the question essentially
prolonging your um your mind's existence in a computer yeah well look uh i mean this this is
really a an old philosophical thing let imagine imagine for a minute that um uh that uh this uh
the the the whole uh you know kind of star trek transport a thing was solved and they would basically
say well we're just gonna we're gonna record a copy of you when you're when we're gonna record
you when you're young and then when you get old uh we're just gonna you know beam down a copy and
he'll be you know he'll be young again and all great so okay this there's a couple of ways to
think about this one way to think about it will be uh well fantastic uh there's gonna be a young
me running around on earth like great they'll bring it on another way of thinking is okay you're
basically gonna make a time shift a twin and that's great but i'm still here aging and dying
that's what what good does it do me uh you know what what good do the copies do me so
i think that it's it's not an issue of technology it's an issue of what do we really what do we
really value and the question is if if there is a you know you you you i mean i don't think the
technology is going to be remotely there in in our relevant uh time frame to to make a copy of us
in any way but but let's say you could i mean ultimately i don't see why it's impossible but
but we're gonna be able to do it for a long time uh but if you know that you flip the computer on
and he says oh fantastic it's it's great in here and you say yeah well good good for you i guess
but what do i do so i'm not sure that that actually solves the the problem but it's fun to think about
fair point um and that's all the time of yours that we're gonna take um i know that you have
another engagement that you need to be getting to um but uh if everyone um you know in your own
private corner of the universe will uh join me in giving dr levin a round of applause thank you so
thank you so much really appreciate it and anybody that's interested drop me an email
i saw a couple other questions i haven't gotten to so anybody that wants to know anything drop
me an email thank you so much for that all right thank you everybody for joining us and
thank you dr levin again thank you so much dr levin and thank you so much dr krasnow for being here
bye everybody
