Welcome back to another video today. I want to show you guys, I mean, quick, but something I have really enjoyed, something that's just really helpful.
Okay, so, you know, you're on Linux, if you're a Linux user, you might be also a Linux gamer, you know, we love gaming.
I actually don't even play that many games nowadays, but, you know, schools got me latched up right now, but one of the programs we, you know, gamers use is Discord.
And a feature that they added like, I don't know, a year or two ago is crisp, like crisp noise canceling.
And I have to say, an amazing feature, you can just toggle it and boom, you got noise canceling, just easy.
And, yeah, if you got a noisy room, it's just, you know, or you got, you know, as gamers, we have mechanical keyboards out, you know, like, you know, they sound like that.
So, you know, you don't want to be playing in a game, like, and then just like, you know, hearing this, like all your mates hearing that.
So, yeah, it's pretty useful. And the problem is the Linux version of Discord is probably out of touch, like unmaintained, let's say.
There was only an update recently, but I don't think it added anything, or at least I didn't notice anything, maybe it fixed some bug or something.
But before that, I don't think there was an entire update for a year or multiple months.
So, yeah, and there's a lot of things you can't even screen share with audio and there is no crisp audio.
And if we go to crisp, there's the website, you know, it's only available for Mac and Windows.
So it's just not included into Discord. And I don't think it's Discord's fault.
I think it's like crisp, it just doesn't have, you know, it's not supported on Linux.
Simple as that. So what's the solution? Well, you have to use your own noise cancelling program, software, whatever.
And initially, you know, initially there was one program called Cadmus, which is actually pretty good, although I think it's not maintained anymore.
It's pretty good, though. It's GUI, however. And if you know me, I'm minimalist, and I don't like GUIs, I love the terminal.
So, yeah, it's pretty good, but you can't auto-activate it. So my first problem was you can't auto-activate it.
If you could auto-activate it, then I wouldn't even care it's GUI.
But you have to auto-activate it and to activate it, you have to activate it for the GUI.
So this is not it. And for a long time, I was looking for a noise cancelling solution, and I found it, I don't know, like a month ago.
And that is RN Noise Command Line, or CLI.
This program is really good because it's basically Cadmus.
Because Cadmus is actually based on this pulse audio GUI front end for this pulse audio noise suppression plugin.
If we go to this and we read it, then it's, oh, it's based on RN Noise.
And then this is just a library for noise cancelling.
And RN Noise is also just based on this plugin, which is also based on that.
So, yeah, it's basically the same thing as Cadmus and you get extremely similar results.
And it is very simple, you just install it through the Python Pi, I don't know what it stands for, Python Pi, just pip install.
And yeah, and how you can, there's a configuration file where you can put in your default settings.
I mean, if I bring up a terminal and I just type in RN Noise comes up with this menu and we can just list our devices, we can list our status.
So it is currently activated, although I'm not talking, I'm talking for my normal mic.
But yeah, whenever I go on Discord, I always use the new RN Noise, like the D Noise mic.
And to activate it, how do you deactivate?
Deactivate.
Wait, I can't spell.
Okay, so if we deactivate it, so I no longer have the RN Noise.
So if I just type in RN Noise, activate.
And let me show you, I got a configuration file here.
And all it is is just I'm inputting, because this is the device, this is my microphone.
So all it does is just when it activates, if there was, there wasn't this file, if I just delete it and save, it would tell me, like, hey, which device do you want to use?
So let me just, okay.
So it's like, got the device, like actual name and then kind of what it's translated to in English.
And then you can just choose whichever one.
But the one I always use is just number one, which I can just put into this configuration file, so that when I run RN Noise, active automatically.
This is great.
This is just I run one command and my noise activation, I have a D Noise microphone.
However, that is still too much.
I don't want to run even a single command.
So what I've done is I run it in my X in at RC.
And this is just a, yes, you can say like an auto activate from like launch type script, or how you want to call it.
Usually use it if you're on like arch or the minimalist space distro.
If you're on a boon tool or something, you'll probably be using something else.
But yeah, this is just where I activate my, like everything I need.
And, you know, at the end, I activate D menu or DWM.
And that's my window manager.
And just have a command here are a noise activate and then it just activates my D Noise mic.
And it's as simple as that.
And honestly, it just works.
It don't have to think about, you know, I always have a D Noise mic before I would have to open up this Stallone tray, which it's just basically a tray system tray.
If you don't actually have one, which I don't.
And then I'll, because I had the app image, I'm sure there's a way to download it for like arch or something, but I don't know why I just ran the app image.
So it would have a execute app image command like this one, and it would activate and then I have to click on it and then I have to click activate mic.
It was just somewhat of a pain.
It was somewhat of a pain.
And this is just much better.
Very simple.
All credit goes to NESP.
Really appreciate this guy's work.
I started because I'm like, damn, this is really good.
And I think I also, I'm the one who forked it.
Yeah, I've forked it because I'm like, wow, this is really good.
I hope he like doesn't just like nuke it or something.
So yeah.
Anyways, I hope you enjoyed this video.
Hope you can use this.
I find this really useful.
And yeah, it's very simple.
Anyways, that's it.
