Hey guys, welcome to my channel. So in this video, I'm going to talk about file managers
because I hate file managers, and I'm not talking about GUI file managers like Nautilus
to Naur. I'm talking about CLI file managers like Ranger, LF, because these things makes
you slow and many people use these file managers even though they know how to use terminal. And
this is not something you should do. So in this video, let's just break this myth and see why
using raw terminal commands like CD, LS find is way faster than using any
Ranger like application. Alright, so let's just open terminal. I installed Ranger for this video.
So open Ranger and go to my music songs. And suppose I just want to go birdie and then this
album beautiful lies. So it took me a bit amount of time, but I believe that it's faster than using
any GUI file manager, you can search and all these kind of stuff. But let's try doing this with
terminal my way. So I have this command fcd beautiful lies enter and boom, I'm in that directory.
Now some of you might say that you use your weird fcd command and not just raw change directory,
which means CD. Well, let me show this by just using CD. I think it's still faster than using
any Ranger or anything like that. So yeah, it took same amount of time as it took in Ranger.
I don't understand the concept of using Ranger over pure UNIX commands like LS and CD. I mean,
you can do literally anything, whatever you want to know, you can know about your files and you
can navigate faster, whatever, whatever you ask, I can do this with terminal without any worry.
Suppose you just want to open some songs. So I have this allies open. And if I press enter,
let's just search for a Taylor Swift song. So bad blood. And it's way faster than using
it's way faster than using any, you know, file manager. Now you might say for me, it's faster
because I'm using this commands fcd and open. But let me tell you one truth. I never used
any of these command. I usually just go like this. Seriously, this is my normal way of going
anywhere. Now there are some people who might say that okay, but with terminal, how you're going to
see thumbnails and these kind of stuff for images, well, I can use a six IB for that. And I have some
commands bind. So suppose I just want to delete some wallpaper or any image in real time, I can
just press control x t and it will delete my image. And I will make a video where you can select
from a six IB and you know, do some more stuff from it. I think it's pretty useful if you want to
foresee the image while doing some kind of operation like copying or removing. So it's not
ready yet, but I will show you there are a few more things which some of you might say that if
you want to like select some stuff, for example, let's go to my 10 folder. So I have some bunch of
you know, garbage files here. And if I want to just select and delete some particular files,
what I can do is I can just write RM and then type whatever I want to delete. I think this is
this is pretty normal way of doing things. I don't understand why people use ranger or anything like
that instead of just doing this. But okay, fine, if you are not into this, what you can do is you
can use fcf because fcf give you this minus m feature, which lets you select some file. So if I
just want to delete some things. So grab txt, suppose e papers it and when you press enter,
it's going to list all these files. So now I can make a variable out of this and I can do RM minus
rf. And let's do file PDF file PPTX and some more stuff at dot txt address dot txt, press enter.
And if I do LS again, so there is no instance of a dot txt. So the file is deleted now. So this is,
I guess, more better than using any file manager. So now some of you might say that but how I'm
going to copy and move files by using just terminal commands because when you use CP, you don't see
any progress bar and it's important to, you know, get any progress bar and you get this in ranger.
So you can use rsync for that. And I use rsync if you just want to copy some small files, you can
use CP if you want to copy some larger files use rsync. So let me just demonstrate you make a
new directory, go to my temp folder, LS rsync, I should copy some bigger, bigger, bigger file. So
go to my widths folder and try to copy this, this revolution os documentary. So rsync minus
minus progress minus AUV revolution os into my new. So it's going to show me the progress. So as you
can see, it's 66% done and it's done. Now go to my new LS and here's the movie. I mean documentary,
whatever. Now there are a few more things which I use to do things quickly. For example, I have this
get path allies which allow me to get any path. Suppose if I want to get path of some file,
it's going to put that file path in my clipboard. And now I can do whatever I want. Suppose I just
want deleted, I can delete it, I can use any operation. So let's just delete it. Now let me
just show you that how these commands like fcd open works because you know, it's an injustice. I'll
show you all the cool things and not tell you the secret. So it's pretty simple. Just use fine
command with type t, it's going to list out all the trick trees and just pipe it into fuzzy finders.
So suppose the wall enter, and it's going to output the thing. And what I can do now is I can
just make a variable and do cd. So if I press enter now and do something like wall and press enter.
So here I am in the wall. So that's simple. Let me show you my CSH RC. I think I have to first
go to CSH RC. Okay, so this is fcd. It's in function and not an allies. It's better if you make a
function allies won't work. Also here online 16, you can see xdg open. So this is doing the same
thing. But instead of CD, I'm using xdg open to open also here instead of D, I'm using F because
in fine command, when you use F, it's going to show all the files and not the trick trees. Also
here I have this get path. I think it's better if I just show you. Okay, so first time using find
with type F, so it's going to list all the files and then putting it in fcf. So if I want something,
I'm going to get the thing. After this, I'm piping this into said because I want to remove this dot
slash before path, it doesn't look good. So how I'm going to do this is pretty simple from starting
remove two characters. And that's it. This simple set command will do the magic. So
all right, so I'm not getting any dot slash in front of my path. There is one more problem here
that it's giving me the next line. So if I do X clip minus select C and press enter like wall
enter, it's not going to output anything. But if I paste this, it's going to put my curse in the
next line, which doesn't look very nice. So for this, what I can do is so I can use tr minus d
for delete and then next line, it's going to delete all the next line. Let me show you so wall
enter. So here I'm getting this percentage symbol, which means that there is no next line. It's just
my ZSH who is putting this next line forcefully. I think that's it. That's the command X clip
minus selection will put the thing in the clipboard. And now if I paste this, it's not going to give me
any next line. I can use RMCP anything whatever I want to use. So I think the message is pretty
clear that terminal is way faster than using any TUI based file manager because you can do stuff so
quickly and it makes you smart because the reason is that you do things while figuring out you do
things in real time. It's not you have to put your brain while using your computer and with time it
will make you better with computers. So please give this a try spend one week by just using terminal
and not anything else. I mean, yeah, you use Ranger in your terminal, but that's not the
point. The thing is that just use your commands instead of using any Ranger like bloated software.
By the way, this is my old laptop.
