What would you say is the best sci-fi movie ever made?
The Empire Strikes Back, Laid Runner, 2001 Space Odyssey,
Alien, Star Trek Wrath of Khan, Matrix, Total Recall,
or even The Adventures of Pluto Nash?
Oh no, I don't like that.
That makes me look like a big doofus, then honey.
Well, those are all well and good.
And some of the best genre defining films,
obviously not Pluto Nash.
But what if I told you there was a movie
that defied the genre in every way?
One that has stood the test of time
and transcended the genre.
The film I'm talking about is Luc Besson's
1997 classic, The Fifth Element.
So let's hail a cab, win a contest to Flossin' Paradise,
and save the universe as we find out
what the f*** happened to this movie.
Luc Besson conceived the concept
when he was just a teenager.
He was inspired by French science fiction comics,
particularly Valerian and Loreline,
a project he would tackle later on.
But let's not get ahead of ourselves.
While writing, he envisioned that the story
would be set in the year 2300,
and would be about a nobody who wins a trip
to the Club Med Resort on Flossin' Paradise
in the Angel constellation.
This nobody then meets Leeloo,
who had the beauty of youth
despite being over 2,000 years old.
During the 1980s, he would develop the script even more.
And in 1991, he had put together a 400 page script.
He also was honing his craft,
creating a documentary film entitled Atlantis,
which is a film all about the nature
and beauty of the ocean.
Luc met with Patrice Leidu and Nicolas Seydoux
from Gouement, a French film company,
to discuss production for the fifth element.
He even sought after French comic creators Jean Giraud
and Jean-Claude Mezier for the film's production design.
Their comics were the inspiration
that he would need for his overall design
for the sci-fi opus.
Mezier would design a Valerian comic
entitled The Circles of Power,
which had a character who drives a flying taxi cab
around a congested metropolis on an alien planet.
Luc was shown this and then fleshed out the concept
for Corbin Dallas and his background.
You have five points left on your license.
It's that cute, dirty mind of yours.
Besson would hire five other artists for the project,
including Jean-Paul Gaultier for costume design.
Luc Besson approached Bruce Willis and Mel Gibson
for the role of Corbin Dallas.
Willis expressed some interest,
but was reluctant to take on the part
because of his two previous flops,
Hudson Hawk and Billy Bathgate.
Oh, bunny!
Ah!
Ooh!
Bubble!
Ah!
Ah!
Ah!
Ah!
Ah!
Gibson would turn down the role.
More heartache would come when film companies said no
to taking on the film's $100 million budget.
In December of 1992, production halted
and the team disbanded.
You are fired!
Oh, I'm sorry.
He's got one lunch.
Oh, philosophy!
In 1994, Besson moved on
to his first commercially successful film,
Leon, The Professional.
He comes to town every Tuesday.
Are you free Tuesday?
Yeah, I'm free Tuesday.
The film takes place in New York City
and is about a hitman who befriends a 13-year-old girl
after her family is murdered by corrupt officers.
The film stars Jean Reneau, Natalie Portman
and Gary Oldman.
Some even say, myself included,
that it's Gary Oldman's best role
and would cement him as one of the best actors of all time.
Bring me everyone.
What do you mean everyone?
Everyone!
The film would gross over $45 million worldwide
on a $16 million budget.
During the successful time,
Luke kept working on the script for the fifth element
and not wanting to give up on his vision.
He would reduce the film's budget to $90 million
and went to Columbia Pictures,
who had a hand in financing Leon.
They would agree to finance the film.
Luke Besson was going to go for a lesser-known actor
to play the role of Corbin Dallas.
One day, Besson was in Barry Josephson's office
and was talking to Bruce Willis
regarding another film that he was set to star in.
Besson asked to speak to Willis to just say hello
and said that the fifth element was moving forward
with a less expensive actor.
Bruce said, quote,
if I like the film, we can always come to an arrangement.
End quote.
Willis would then read the script and accept the role.
Take the mission.
Production for the fifth element
would begin in August 1995.
Besson and crew traveled to various places for casting,
including Paris, London, and Rome.
Gary Oldman would be hired as Jean-Baptiste Zorg,
the head of a major corporation and supplier
of various weapons and devices.
You're a monster, Zorg.
I know.
Chris Tucker, Ian Holm, Luke Perry, Brian James,
Tommy, Heine Lister Jr.,
and Tricky for Massive Attack were also cast in the film.
I need to talk to someone.
I don't believe this!
This is not an exercise.
This is a police control.
Okay, I'm sorry?
When it came time to hire Willi,
Besson would pick Mila Jovovich
after seeing 200 to 300 applicants in person.
Besson would go on to create a fake language
entitled the Divine Language that Mila had to learn.
The two would then have conversations
and write letters to each other in this language
to help her better understand the role
that she was taking on.
Chris Tucker's character, Ruby Rod,
was originally given to Prince.
Unfortunately, Prince couldn't take on the part
because he couldn't schedule filming
around his touring dates.
Both Chris Tucker and Jamie Foxx
were each considered for the role.
But Besson felt that Tucker's smaller body
suited the character much better.
Even though I'm looking at this through biased eyes,
I can't see anyone else as Ruby Rod,
or would even give the same energetically manic performance
the way Chris does.
What was that?
It was bad!
He had nothing, no fire, no energy, no nothing!
You know I have a shorter run here, you know?
And he must pop, pop, pop!
As a lover of his homeland,
Besson wanted to film the massive production in France.
Unfortunately, he couldn't find any suitable facilities,
so he would move the production to London.
Filming would take place at Pinewood Studios
on seven sound stages.
Construction for these sets began in October 1995.
The opening and closing scenes that were depicting Egypt
were filmed in Mauritania,
and Plaza Laguna's opera scene
was filmed at the Royal Opera House in London.
Filming with actors began in January 1996
and was completed five months later.
When Bruce Willis finished filming around May,
Gary Oldman's scenes would begin.
I am very disappointed!
The designs of the New York City skyscrapers
came from 1960s apartment designs,
as well as futuristic designs
from architect Antonio Santalia in the 1910s.
Besson demanded that most action would take place in daylight
and wanted a brighter, cheerfully crazy look,
as opposed to a gloomy realistic one.
On to the costume design.
Gaultier would design each of the 900 costumes
that were worn by extras on the Flosten Paradise ship.
These designs were described as intellectually transgressive
and were said to challenge sexuality and gender norms.
Mila's costume for Lulu, when she's first revived,
was inspired by hospital dressing and bandages
that provided minimal modesty,
but today are considered to be some people's
favorite costumes for conventions.
I know.
I could take a few pictures.
The archives.
There were three different teams
who would handle three different types of effects
on the fifth element.
Nick Adler would direct mechanical and pyrotechnical effects.
Nick Dudman was placed in charge of creature effects
and Mark Stetson was in charge of the visual effects team.
Digital domain would be hired for the visual effects
and several different software was used
to achieve the 90s visuals we've come to love today.
Some shots in the film used a combination
of live action, scale models, CGI and particle systems.
This is all present throughout the New York City scenes
and even though the movie came out in 1997,
all of these visual effects still hold up
incredibly well to this day.
Fun fact, all of the stars in the background
were created by poking holes in the sheet of black fabric.
My favorite bit of history involving the production
of this movie revolves around the New York City buildings.
The production team would create scale models for the city.
Apartment blocks and skyscrapers were constructed
to be 20 feet high in a one 24th scale.
It took a team of 80 workers five months
to build all the models.
The windows of the buildings were cited by the team
as one of the most time consuming tasks
along with details behind the windows,
including furniture, blinds and tiny pieces of flat artwork.
Of course, virtual sets were built within digital environments
to enhance the miniatures
and make everything seem all that more real.
Look out!
Because this film takes place in the 23rd century,
there would need to be a different form of transportation.
Flying cars, boats and ships were constructed for the movie.
Physical models were created, though,
to serve as practical references.
Majority of the scenes that these vehicles were in,
particularly the car chase, relied on visual effects.
Mark Stetson utilized a combination of CGI
and practical elements
so the cars would look photorealistic in camera
with the busy eyes.
Blue and green screen technology was used for this as well
and allowed the actors to react and interact within the vehicles.
Hold on!
Ah!
Now, let's discuss the soundtrack
and what a dose of nostalgia it is.
The score was composed by Luc Vecic,
who was the director of the film,
and was the director of the film.
The score was composed by Luc Besson's long-time collaborator,
Eric Serra,
and is considered intrinsically musical.
Serra relied heavily on the use of orchestral texture
and used many exotic influences.
This can be seen in such scenes
as the Stalinist fanfare heard before the spaceport,
reggae music playing in preparation for the flight,
and a hula music that is played when the passengers arrive
on the Flostin Paradise ship.
He would even recruit Peter Gabriel
to record the song's track, Little Light of Love.
The most influential and memorable song from the film
is the diva dance.
It takes place on the Flostin ship
when a blue-skinned alien opera singer is performing.
It combines operatic singing
with electronic futuristic elements.
Serra showed soprano Inva Mula,
who dubs the voice of the diva.
She would tell him that some notes
were not humanly possible to achieve
because the human voice can't change notes that fast.
She would perform the notes in isolation
as opposed to singing all the notes together.
These notes were then digitized to fit the music.
During this scene, we see Corbin Dallas gaze
and awe at her performance.
It's all real because that was the first time Bruce
had heard it and seen the actress in full makeup.
The fifth element would make its first premiere
on May 7th, 1997,
as the opening film for the Cannes Film Festival.
Gaumont built an area for screening
and included a fashion show designed by Gaultier himself,
as well as fireworks and a futuristic ballet.
The film would open domestically on May 9th, 1997,
coming in first place,
earning $17 million on its opening weekend.
It would go on to become a box office success,
grossing over $263 million worldwide.
75% of its receipts were from markets outside the US.
It would become the most successful film
of the French box office in 1997
and would hold the record of the highest grossing French film
at the foreign box office for 16 years
until In Touchables was released in 2011.
It currently holds a 71% on Rotten Tomatoes
with critics at the time saying it's warm, fun,
and boasts some of the most sophisticated production
and costume design you've ever seen,
while being a campy sci-fi extravaganza.
My favorite.
Alejandro Jodorowsky and Jean Girard sued Besson
after the film was released,
claiming that the Fifth Almond had plagiarized their comic,
The In Call.
Girard sued for 13.1 million euros for unfair competition,
9 million euros in damages and interest,
and 2 to 5% of the net operating revenues of the film.
Jodorowsky sued for 700,000 euros.
The case would be dismissed in 2004
on the grounds that only tiny fragments of the comic were used
and that Jean had been hired by Besson
to work on the film before the allegations were made.
Yes!
I'm proud of you!
Just bring it on!
Every time I leave it just under the moon, I'm coming!
I'm leaving!
The Fifth Almond originally released on Home Video in America
on December 10th, 1997 to VHS, Laserdisc, and DVD.
In 2001, Sony would release the film on its Superbit DVD
with superior-sounded picture quality
compared to its less-than-stellar original DVD release.
If you were to walk into any Bose store in the early 2000s,
this movie would always be on display
when purchasing a surround sound system
for your home entertainment.
For super fans like myself, we awaited the day
that Sony would release a DVD with extras
containing the making of the film.
On January 11th, 2005, that wait would finally be over.
The Fifth Almond, the Ultimate Edition DVD.
Get ready for Superbit DTS High Voltage Fund.
Ba-da-boom!
Big Ba-da-boom!
Now, with over two hours of new, never-before-seen extras,
including six V2S and more,
The Fifth Almond, own the Ultimate Edition DVD.
On June 20th, 2006,
Sony would then release the first Blu-ray edition of the movie
and would be criticized as having poor picture quality
and lack of any features.
Sony would actually respond to the complaints
and in a rare move, remastered the Blu-ray release
on July 17th, 2007.
They even offered a replacement exchange program
for customers who were unhappy with the original Blu-ray.
Since then, Sony has released a DigiBook Blu-ray of the movie
and a 20th anniversary 4K remaster,
which has the best picture quality you could see for the film.
You tell me, my man, you were happy, big boy.
Find the floor, are you ready?
Fail, fail, fail, fail.
This film would be nominated for Best Sound Editing
at the 70th Academy Awards,
but would ultimately lose to Titanic.
However, it would win the BAFTA Award
for Best Special Visual Effects
and Luc Besson would take home the Lumeo's Award
for Best Director.
Thierry Obogost, the cinematographer on the film,
was awarded the Technical Grand Prize
at the 1997 Cannes Film Festival
for his work on this film, and she's so lovely.
It would also receive four Saturn Award nominations
for Best Science Fiction Film, Best Costume,
Best Special Effects, and Best Supporting Actress.
There was even a movie tie-in game by Activision
that was released in 1998
for the PlayStation 1 console and PC.
The PS1 game is considered to be
one of the worst movie tie-in games of all time,
whereas the PC version was better received.
I have played the PlayStation 1 version
and can say that it's incredibly frustrating
and some of the worst controls I've ever played on a console.
In 2001, New York Race was released on the PlayStation 2,
Game Boy Color, and PC.
It was a racing game based on the film
and released exclusively in Europe.
However, if you look around eBay or Mercari,
you're bound to find a decent copy
if you're into nostalgia video games.
Since its initial release,
the film has been considered a sci-fi cult classic.
Bruce Willis would even go on to say,
quote, it was a real fun movie to make, end quote,
and Mila Jovovich described working with Bassan as,
quote, the first really amazing director
I had worked with, end quote.
While many people will compare it to Star Wars,
which is incredible, and I have loved those movies
for as long as I can remember,
they aren't as special to me as the Fifth Element.
I'm sure people watching this are thinking,
you're crazy, and that's totally fine.
As a 90s kid, my idol was Bruce Willis.
From Die Hard 3, 12 Monkeys, Hudson Hawk,
and The Last Boy Scout, he was a staple of my childhood.
His performance, as well as the eye-opening scenes,
have stayed lodged in the front of my brain forever.
We're sending somebody into the dossier.
I'm dead.
Anybody else wanna negotiate?
In conclusion, the Fifth Element is a visually inventive
and entertaining film that has become a cult classic.
It boasts a distinctive style, eclectic characters,
and imaginative world, which all add up
to what some would say, including myself,
is the staple of sci-fi action films.
Whether you like it or not, it's a film that offers
both a fun and memorable cinematic experience.
Lilo Dallas, multi-pass.
Yeah.
Lilo, multi-pass.
She knows it's a multi-pass.
Lilo Dallas, my wife, we're newly wed.
Just met, you know how it is, bumping to each other,
sparks happen, yeah, she knows it's a multi-pass.
