Okay, good morning, ladies and gentlemen, and welcome to this beta zone.
My name's John Plummer, and I'm a senior portfolio editor for Nature Research.
Now, one of the key challenges that's facing society today is how to generate artificial
light in an energy-efficient way, and of course, artificial light is really a key resource
that society needs to thrive.
Intermitting diodes, or LEDs, are perhaps one of the most promising technologies that
we currently have for this, and it gives me great pleasure today to introduce Dr. Ruben
Costa from the Madrid Institute for Advanced Studies of Materials, who's going to tell
us how taking inspiration from jellyfish might just lead to the next generation of LEDs.
So, Ruben, please.
Thank you very much, and as you have heard from John, I have spent my whole life working
on artificial lighting, and since the last years, I started with natural light.
And I'm here today basically to tell you three stories, a story about natural light that
you understand better with my understanding is, artificial lighting, and how these two
walls have met in the lab, finally.
So, let's start with the first story.
Let me take you there.
So, this is the sun, and you are going to think about natural light sun, but actually
what I'm referring is exactly about the jellyfish.
This is the light under the sea that is generated by these animals in order to communicate,
lunch, for example, partner, danger, whatever, and one of the main questions that started
my first story is, how do these animals make light?
You might know this, but actually the answer is fluorescent proteins.
And this started in 1960 in Washington Bay.
It was when Professor Sima Mura was just every day in the morning and late in the afternoon
going there and fishing jellyfishes in order to understand why these animals were emitting
this beautiful green light, as you can see here.
And actually, there's a funny number.
He was killing around 10,000 jellyfishes in order to get a microgram of a new compound
that he called green emitting fluorescent protein.
And that's all what happens there, because after three years of research, you can imagine
10,000 jellyfishes every day, but then jellyfishes disappeared, finally.
But he was able to keep the compound.
We have it.
In that sense, it was in 30 years later when Chelfie was able to take the genes that makes
these proteins, as our DNA makes the proteins, and then to express the gene into living organisms,
not in jellyfishes, for example, in these worms, but also in bacteria, in E. coli.
And then you can produce these fluorescent proteins right now in bacteria, this we do
everywhere in the world, and then you can use it for bio-imaging, for example, or for
now making LEDs in the future, maybe.
So in actual color, 10 years later, I was seeing the one who was really understanding
how the green emitting protein emits green light and modifying all the colors, going
from blue to red.
So then we got the whole palette of colors.
And this is the message that I want that you keep from my first story, which basically
fluorescent proteins is a paradigm of natural light, beside our sun, obviously.
So in the meantime, the second story started.
This is the artificial lighting.
So at the turn of the 20th century, the electrical engineering had started to work out, and they
were making very funny experiments.
It was in 1907 when Joseph Rohn was taking this silicon carbide mineral, like our junk,
our mineral, really, he was doing this experiment here.
He was basically taking electrodes, putting on the mineral, and then suddenly you see
the yellow light coming out.
He didn't understand the word.
But he was just using this, and he was applying different voltages and getting different colors.
And he brought a paper, a very interesting one, which at the end of the paper, he brought
saying, please, if you know what it's going on, let me know.
It's basically a message in 1907, so you imagine that it was not very much knowledge built
up there.
And actually, it took us around 60 years to basically reduce the size of this junk mineral
to a very thin layer, one half of my hers, and to play against electrodes, and then we
got an LED.
And we got a red light, yellow light, green light, and finally the blue light.
But there is no white.
How to make the white?
It was just discovered by Professor Nakamura in 1996 in this Japanese journal here.
And actually, this is the construction of LED, and I need you to remember that thing.
I'm going to tell you exactly what it is, very simple thing.
It is a very thin layer, the one I told you from my hers, that is emitting blue light.
And on the top, we put a rare earth inorganic phosphor, don't need to do all that.
This material, the only thing that does is take part of the blue, only part of it, and
transform it to yellow-orange.
And the combination of the blue and the yellow-orange give us the white, the white that we are buying
today in any store in the world.
However, now I say, we're buying everywhere in the world.
This means that we are based in our technology for lighting and rare earth materials.
And this brings a warning, and this is my second message for my second story.
So summarizing these two stories in a nice way, and to introduce my first one, we have
on one hand the most powerful lighting system from nature, fluorescent proteins.
And all what I told you about the story, it got out to the Nobel Prize in 2008.
On the other hand, what we have is the most powerful artificial lighting system made by
humans, LEDs, that ended up in 2014 with the Nobel Prize for the blue LED.
So the question here is, have these technologies or these powerful lighting sources met at
any time before?
And actually, they did.
In 2000, it was Forrest and Thompson, the fathers of the OLED technology, organi-lacking
meeting diodes, who were trying to implement fluorescent proteins into LEDs.
And they wrote a nice article in Advanced Materials, and they say, OK, geolophies, proteins
inspire LED design.
But at the end, the message of this journal was, you cannot make compatible proteins with
LEDs.
Why?
Because fluorescent proteins require water in order to be alive.
And if you want to use water and LEDs, which is a very bad solution for LEDs, actually,
so you cannot mix these two technologies.
So the question here is, are fluorescent proteins and LEDs compatible or incompatible?
And why should we care about that thing?
It was in 2000, and nobody challenged this statement.
Then why I'm doing here, right?
So basically, again, picking up the message from the second story, rare earth phosphor,
well, and transforming blue into yellow-orange, and how much blue we get there.
So the color quality of LEDs are concerned today.
First of all, the blue component that we got there is damaging the eyes of our children
under 10, because we don't build up still the filter to protect our eyes.
But when we are adults, so beyond 10 years old, the main problem that we're also going
to have is the circadian rhythm, Nobel Prize 2017.
How the blue light tunes our brain chemistry.
Actually, I'm going to show you an example.
This is the temperature of your brain if you put electrodes, and if you look into a white
wall for 10 minutes, so you see the profile doesn't so much of temperature profile.
This is the same temperature profile if you run 10 kilometers.
You see your brain is very active.
There are red zones, which are indicating that your brain is working very, very, very
hard in this point, because you are releasing a stretch, you're generating endorphins, etc.
And this is the temperature, sorry, the temperature profile of your brain.
When you look at the screen, sitting without doing anything for 10 minutes to a blue LED.
So you see the profile looks quite similar.
Your brain is now activated.
And in a sense, this means that you don't notice, it's a non-visual effort, but we spend
many hours under artificial light.
And even if you don't notice, this is how your body is reacting too.
So on the other side, the rare earth components in general brings a problem when we think
about one of the goals that we have as a human kind is to bring electricity everywhere
in the world.
Why?
Because we want to have a fridge, we want to have a good internet, TV, but also because
we want to have light at any time we wish.
So if we think about then LEDs are going to be sustainable in terms of price and production
using these elements, rare earth elements, well, let me tell you, the rare earth element
that we use in LEDs is ethium.
In ethium, we have 400 kilotons of this material in earth.
And we use 20 kilotons to keep the LED production of today.
Imagine if you scale it up, this production.
So we don't have more than 10, 15 years of ethium to keep the production of LED sustainable.
And actually, another point is rare earth materials require mining.
So it has an ecological cost to the planet, refining, energy, and transporting that you
also produce a lot of waste to our planet.
So it's not the best material.
And that's the reason that we go back to 2000.
And we think in 2015, how can we make now fluorescent proteins and LEDs compatible?
There are many, many materials, but this material is not concrete.
And actually, if you think about the question is to bring it to our hands, well, the first
date, the problem was water.
So water is the media, which is war, very bad media for having LEDs and fluorescent
proteins.
Well, what we did here is basically to change this media by a polymer.
You don't need to know what.
But a polymer, it gives us the possibility to bring the proteins out of solution to
our hands, and then to make technology.
And actually, you see this picture here.
But let me show you a couple of videos from my lab.
So as you see on the top part, this is the fluorescent proteins extracted from bacteria
directly in solution.
And on the bottom part, what you're going to see there is the rubber-like material.
Rubber, because it's a polymer.
And you can see it.
You can squeeze it as much as you want.
You can just cut it.
You can do whatever you like.
So you can make technology.
And sometimes, people ask me about the stability of this material.
And actually, I can tell you this was one of the first ones that I prepared in 2015.
And you might see the green light there, the shining light that I did the first day.
So I don't know about the stability.
Don't ask me, because so far, I don't know.
But it is stable.
And once you have this in your hands, and you can make them technology, and then one
of the things we do is exactly the same device as I showed you in the second story.
We, for example, transform blue to orange.
This means you took papaya protein here.
And on the bottom, you have the blue LED.
You just have to down-convert or transform the blue LED into orange, into green.
And if you combine many colors, because everything is in nature, you can get this beautiful white,
which is made of a color filter, the fluorescent proteins, and also, in a sustainable way,
in a very low chip.
So 2015 and 2017, what we demonstrate here is that you can take this junk that I show
you here that looks very solid.
And then you can make, for example, a 3D printing with this material, and then you can start
to build up this place, as you can see here.
What you see is a micro-structured rubber there that you can apply as a filter for,
for example, cell phones.
In 2018, we were working very hard in order to improve the stability of our first LEDs,
reaching around now more than 1,000 hours.
Also we worked very hard in order to take films and to make it transparent enough to
build up, for example, solar windows, which is the next priority to start in my lab.
And another thing that I really love is when I came to a biologist lab, and I discussed
with them about, you can make technology with your fluorescent protein, they look at you
which kind of technology, bio-imaging, for example, drug delivery, say, no, you can make
lighting, actually.
You can make LED, you can make a lamp with your desk, being a bio-LED.
They look at you and say, what can I do for you, actually, very nice, but I tell them,
why not to make nature, to make the evolution towards my technology needs and the LED?
For example, I told them, I need to have no multi-component, I want to have one protein
that emits sunlight, there you go.
They design a white emitting protein where we stabilize it in the hydrogel and, for example,
in the rubber, and then we make an LED afterwards.
And now to think about how we can take nature, make the evolution to make LED, solar cells,
why not?
There is an open field right now to here.
And importantly, it's an open field coming from outsiders.
Biology is thinking about optorectronics, optorectonic people thinking about biology.
I love that combination.
So with these things, I would like to tell you basically one message.
One message which is bio-LED is the future that we are developing today in my lab.
We do believe in this strongly.
This is the group working very hard on this topic, my whole group working in Madrid.
And actually, I want to convey you one short message, which is the message of my third
story, from them to you, which is fluorescent proteins are compatible with LEDs.
And I do believe the future of this technology is sustainable on one hand and bright on the
other hand.
Thank you for your attention.
Thank you, Ruben.
It's a really fascinating look at how we can, I guess, take inspiration for the benefit
of new technologies.
Obviously, you've demonstrated it really nicely here, but this is also a new prevailing
design approach for realizing new technologies, this idea of taking inspiration from nature.
Also really nice is that you managed to tie together a couple of Nobel Prizes, blue LEDs
and fluorescent proteins.
So obviously, this is really fantastic.
I'd like to push you a little bit on the application side of things.
Obviously, you mentioned a number of really nice properties, the sustainability of the
material, the availability of the material, the stability of the material.
How quickly do you think it will be before we actually, you know, we can go down to a
shop and buy these things?
So the way to answer you is, LEDs right now, the projection of the market is huge.
So the benefit we are going to get there for the next five years, 10 years is enormous.
We are now canceling, incandescent bulbs are canceled, allotment bulbs disappear, in Europe
at least, this is totally you cannot buy anymore.
So if you think about general lighting, there is still a way to go there for the industry
point of view.
If you think about, for example, applications, small applications where LED are failing.
I'm talking about a decoration, I'm talking about phototherapy and plantable lights, I'm
talking about these things basically.
We have a very good nature to work.
And this is a thing, my expectation is in the next few years, bring this technology
and improve, still we have to reach about 5,000 opposite stability, which is kind of a magic
number that opens the possibilities to think about changing these lights.
In efficiency wise, we are very good, color wise, we are very good, but let's go into
the market slowly.
And then in the next five years, 10 years, when this system of the rare earth becomes
really unsustainable, it's the moment when this technology will jump up.
It's my dream.
And talking about industry and going into the market, you must have spoken to some people
from industry about this.
I'm curious what type of response you've had, because obviously this is a completely, to
someone working in the LED industry, it's a completely foreign idea to some extent to
take this organic material inspired by nature and put it in an LED.
It's a completely different thought process, I guess, for them.
So I'm curious what response that you've had from them.
I think my best moment was when they told me, we are trying this for 25 years and nothing
works.
But it's a fresh air.
Nobody thought about fluorescent protein.
And this is kind of, the first impression is very good, it's a fresh air.
The second impression is, well, we need to have 1,000 to 5,000 to 10,000 hours of stability.
And they say, OK, fine, this is the next step to go.
And this is where we develop now.
So in that sense, obviously this blocks commercialization, but this doesn't block collaboration.
The opposite.
It fuels collaboration.
Because if we get it, there is a pattern behind, there is a product behind.
And this is what, right now, I have to say, this supports from there.
This is a very good thing.
And I'll just ask you one final question before we open it up to you guys.
So for me, one of the striking points from work like this is that this is really multidisciplinary
stuff.
You've gone all the way from the biology of proteins, the chemistry of polymers and the
material science of polymers, to the physics of light.
As a researcher, how challenges it working with that breadth of subjects?
Because not many people do that.
Exactly.
Imagine when you go to a biologist, and then you tell them, I have a polymer, and then
they look at you, and they have LED lumens efficiency, and they're like, what?
Yeah, actually, and when they talk about gene expressions, they talk about chromophore
mutation here and there, proton chain, something happening in a proton chain.
I didn't even know, proton chain, what is proton chain?
It's a movement of water, actually.
It's a challenge.
It's a lot of fun.
The meetings are a bit longer, the normal, because people need to get used to the vocabulary.
But the good thing is to manage well.
I mean, in my group, there are physicists, biologists, biochemistry, chemists, engineers,
pure engineers.
They don't know anything about physics or chemistry.
So to have one person has this global vision, to be open-minded, to learn from everyone,
to catch all this vocabulary, and try to translate to your knowledge, and to communicate this
to your team.
That is my job, actually, and I love it.
And you see how people start to learn.
And I see something very curious.
I see one of the engineers writing more about fluorescent proteins in a first-year assessment.
And my biochemistry guy, I'm not talking about anything about products and proteins, I'm
talking about the LEDs, and that's amazing.
They learn, and they are more fascinated for the field they are not coming from.
And this brings new things, and I really like it.
And this is always how research develops fastest, I've always seen, when you do have
a diverse team, a diverse background, solving those problems.
Okay, fantastic.
Are there any questions from the audience?
We'd be very pleased to hear from you, madam, please.
We may have a microphone for you.
Thank you very much.
That was a really interesting talk.
I'm just wondering how you scale up the fabrication of these proteins.
Is it possible to do this on the level of replacing all the lights?
Actually, this is also a question coming many times from the industry as well.
The production by bacteria is very well optimized nowadays.
If you think about purification, which is actually the key point, and right now we work
on fluorescent proteins with 99.99999, all the lights you want to have, because you are
going to put it in living organisms, your body or an rat, for example, right?
So we don't need that.
We don't need to have high purification levels.
We can work with very low purification levels.
And this goes down, this makes it very cheap.
Actually, I think the estimation from a company that was in powder with enzymes, it was that
this production will take around $0.50 per gram to $1 per gram.
So it sounds very optimistic.
I don't know, but I mean, even if this is $2 per gram, I don't care, this is very cheap.
And just to add to that, from your interaction with industry, for industry to take on these
type of LEDs, is there a simple adaptation they can make to their processes, or does
this require, you know, a completely new capital cost investment?
Sally, when you talk about the polymers that are very cheap, and also many of them commercial
by level, I always say to modify in the lab and to upscale these, this is not a big deal.
Once you transform the gel, I said, you have a gel, and then you go to a rubber, there
are many ways to do it.
Obviously, we do in vacuum, the system, that is not the best thing for industry.
For example, this needs to be taken off in the system, and we need to do something that
can dry in air, for example.
It's not difficult.
It's possible to do it.
High temperature, for example, proteins, they are able to self-regenerate into these materials.
So if you kick them with heat, if you switch off the heat, they recover.
That's a very nice, beautiful future of these materials as well, inside the matrix.
So it's a matter of playing, and trying to make a factory line, and to find the right
production way.
Fantastic.
Do we have any more questions from anyone?
Sir, please.
Sorry.
Yeah, fantastic talk.
I'm just wondering how your efficiency compares to industry standards LEDs, and is that going
to be one of the key research challenges in the future?
Actually I forgot to mention that, thanks.
The first LED we built up, it was 100 hours of stability, 50 lumens per watt.
So 50 lumens per watt is enough for having a low-power bulb that you can buy for your
home.
Which is good.
Actually, think about it.
We are using the most powerful LED, it's a blue LED.
So we thus down-convert 90% of the blue LED into light, efficiently.
Because these materials are emitting, they have quantum yields of 80%, so they don't
lose much of energy by excitation and heat.
Right now, for example, the transparent I showed you at the end, you can get 130 lumens
per watt, which is pretty good.
We have to keep in mind that the top is 150, commercial, and the lap is 190, so 200, I think.
So we are pretty good at that.
And just to move it away, the discussion away from LEDs very briefly.
So obviously one of the core ideas in your work is that you took this protein that's
stable in water, stable in natural environment, you put it into an artificial system, your
flexible polymeric system, or flexible or not, depending on how it cross-links.
In terms of a wider design principle for new technologies, not just for LEDs, but this
idea of taking something that's stable in nature, but not stable when you take it out
and trying to stabilize it.
Do you think there's potential there for other new technologies?
I think so.
One of the things, well, I'm not biologist, so I saw this was green.
And I went to biology, and my ignorance, I asked them, how do I know that this material
is alive?
I mean, it's green.
I didn't know that the beetle barrier has to keep the chromophore in a special situation.
And then I was a bit arrogant in that sense.
Well, I'm sorry, the biologist was telling me, yeah, but let's see the quantum real,
blah, blah, blah.
We check it, it was stable.
And I told him, give me your worst material, the most unstable material, and give me to
try in my system.
And let me to stabilize enzymes.
There are seven families, no, five families of enzymes, six families of enzymes, sorry.
We stabilize five of them without using any cryo at room temperature in my lab, working
with perovskats, lead, working with OLEDs, working with solar cells, working with anything.
And they were working for two months, still keeping activity.
So this opens the way to think about, if we can stabilize proteins, why not enzymes,
antibiotics, vaccines, bioreactors, biodiagnosis, transporting in no cryo situations, these
are all the reactions that we also have there to open, not only lighting, but yeah, we are
there.
Fantastic.
And another question, please.
Thanks.
So before you came up with this awesome application for fluorescent proteins, and even before
GFP was cloned in the 90s, there were probably dozens of very underfunded marine biologists
studying some obscure CE creatures that people probably thought there was nothing useful
ever going to come out of that work.
So how can we use amazing stories like this to encourage this type of very exploratory,
basic science, that we have no idea what application will ever come out of it?
So I can take the question is?
The question is like...
It was very long.
Yeah.
I mean, how can we encourage that type of work that will someday have such an amazing
technological application?
I think also, how can we inspire funders to not overlook this type of approach?
Yeah.
So the real truth is, if you think in my lab, we all think about having a big world.
I told my guys, you have a story, and I love it.
Tell a story.
It can be a very small tiny thing, can be something building up, or something, but have
a big world to say.
So what I say to myself, my world is sustainability.
So I try to work very hard to get any material I can, which is sustainable, carbon-based,
bio-based, and to technologies that I know very well, because I have been working for
more than 15 years on that thing.
So having finding this big world, this is the most important thing.
And once you go to this big world, in my case, I was looking at research, and as everyone,
you look at the papers, you find out that this question was up since 2000, and you feel
like, wow, why?
Anything you can do is going to be amazing.
And in one minute, it will be amazing, because you demonstrate that you challenge this question.
So one minute is amazing.
Don't look for 100 hours or 1,000 hours.
One minute.
And then from that on, build up something small.
This is what I did, and I encouraged my people to do it in this direction, and to have these
discussions, which sometimes is hard when you go into this, but then I told, take my
word now, sustainability, as your flagship, and later on, when you make a postdoc, look
for your flagship.
This is my motivation.
Please.
Can I speak Chinese?
Hello.
Hi.
I'm in the solar panel industry, and I noticed that in your slides, there was one about how
do you combine your lighting with the solar panel, and can you please elaborate on that?
Thank you.
You can just translate the question.
No, not yet.
No, tell us.
You want to know that.
Secret.
He asked me about if I can elaborate a bit more about the solar window that I saw at the
end in 2018.
I said we start operating with solar windows.
See if I can explain a little more.
You might know that the technology solar windows is basically a panel that takes the sunlight
of the high energy part and drives the light to the corners, and then you put here your
solar cells.
So that the guy is going to look, John, very nicely and sharp, but you are producing energy
on the corners of the window, so this energy can go to your smartphone to be charging,
for example, at the same time that you enjoy from John's view.
So the thing is, this technology is long in the wall, but it's based on Cambium quantum
dots, and PDIs, which are very colorful materials.
So what we propose here is to replace this Cambium quantum dots by fluorescent proteins
and in trying to use those, which are taking light from very high energy and to now converting
the red energy part, which are many of them and how to stabilize them into a matrix, which
is, in principle, toxic to these materials.
This is where we have developed and patented recently.
Great.
So I'm afraid we're just about to run out of time.
So I think, for me personally, one of the big real take home messages from today is this
idea that we can take inspiration from nature for new technologies.
Sometimes people don't always make that link.
They don't always look at the natural world, or they look at the natural world and they
see life sciences and they see biology.
They don't see new technologies that can really, such as in this case, really help to solve
some of the big technological challenges that are facing our time.
And I think your question was a particularly good one, how we can promote this type of
research, make people aware of it, and also ultimately make funds available for this particular
direction.
So with that, please join me in thanking Ruben and thank you to all of you for coming.
