like you got into some, you went on this person,
nice mangoes podcast.
Yeah, that was that.
Talk about a no good deed going to the punish.
You know, there's just something.
I did my best to launch her podcast.
Well, there's something wrong with that account
because there's many ways in which it seems quite reasonable.
Yeah.
And then it's just rated into mental illness.
Well, there's a personal,
there's a personal nastiness about it
that just doesn't let up and a lack of charity.
And what I find is that there are certain things
I can do to slow down that kind of negative experience.
And then there are certain diehard actors,
some of whom are quite polite and charming and funny,
who just will not like their thing is they will ride this
to the most negative place if they can get there.
And that sub community, I've been talking about
in terms of we have diversity and inclusion,
which I'm willing to say is a good thing.
And then it needs a different function,
which is interoperability and exclusion
because there's certain people who can't be at the table
for a conversation if it's going to progress
and because their interest is in derailing.
Now, I got into some weird thing just now.
Do you know the singer Billy Bragg?
No.
He's like a progressive,
he's kind of like a punk Arlo Guthrie
or Woody Guthrie rather.
What a good, yeah.
And like he turns out he wrote a book
and he's talking about Eric Weinstein
and investment banker who is a free speech champion,
won't meet with some whole,
he's got a whole story in his mind.
And-
Oh, so he took a shot at you in his book?
We went on Sam Cedars program.
Oh, well, there's a venue that is not gonna select for-
Well, I spoke to Sam, look,
there's a problem with the Saul Alinsky thing
where Saul, you know, Saul Alinsky rules for radicals.
The focus on ridicule,
I think it's hard to remember like country Joe and the fish
was ridiculing a bad war in terms that are ridiculous.
You've now got a group of people
who if a mathematician says,
you know that in different arithmetics,
you could have an equation like two plus three equals one.
And so then you get somebody saying,
I don't know what they're smoking over there at Princeton,
but well, that's ridicule,
but you're ridiculing something
that you straw man didn't understand.
Because the person actually was making sense.
And so what I see is that the left,
and in particular the Sam Cedar crowd has a-
Doing that with abandon.
Well, it's willing to do two separate things.
Sam is quite willing,
like there's this whole thing,
but when you talk to Sam Cedar,
well, you would debate Sam Cedar.
And my feeling is I would debate part of Sam Cedar,
the part that just is focused on the ideas,
but the part that is kind of like
nasty and ridiculing and doing the Alinsky thing.
I don't know what to do with it.
I'm not interested.
I've spoken to Sam Cedar on the phone.
It's perfectly reasonable, made sense to me.
We disagreed on positions, but-
Well, the line that gets crossed for me always
with these guys, and again,
it's disproportionately on the left,
is the line of conscious dishonesty.
I mean, it's your brother's aphorism.
Bad faith changes everything.
Bad faith changes everything.
And these guys are in bad faith.
They know their line about, in my case, my views,
my actual beliefs.
And-
Not all of them.
There's just too much information.
Well, David Packman?
No, David Packman's fine.
I just did his podcast.
Yeah, I know.
But David Packman said some pretty non-charitable things
in some parts that seemed kind of ridiculing.
And I think you, me, other people.
Well, I haven't, whatever I haven't,
I have never seen him misrepresenting my views.
He's pretty good.
And I think that, I mean, again,
I don't know, I just did his podcast once,
but he seems like somebody who, if I said,
listen, you got me wrong here, that would matter.
And he would make an effort to get me right.
And that's the thing, which is,
the problem that we have increasingly
is that the tactics that are being used
in what are called progressive circles
have been confused with the content.
So that is, the objections to the vehicle,
which might be Saul Linsky's rules for radicals,
is conflated with the pale-
Which is a totally unethical program
for smearing people dishonestly.
It's immoral technology.
Well, no, it's an ends justify the means.
That's the big problem on the left.
Yeah, but that ethic is flawed, right?
So for instance, I mean, with me and Trump,
there's nobody who denigrates Trump as avidly as I do,
but I am super careful to be honest, right?
So it's not that anything you can smear him with is fair.
Because you can be, Sam.
I mean, the problem with some of these guys can be.
Sam Cedar can be honest on his show
and still have a show, right?
Nobody's going to cancel him because he was too honest.
No, I think that there's like this very weird other,
I mean, Sam, I don't want to get into the Sam Cedar thing
in particular, first of all,
because he can do an entire show,
we know you have to say, but...
He'll take these quotations.
No, but he has the, see, he has Pacman's ability to reason.
I mean, this is the banality of evil, right?
Like there's not that many evil people, right?
There's just a lot of people who are functioning
in some normal mode with normal incentives
and they become assholes because they're not heroes, right?
But so like it takes some work not to be an asshole
when you are incentivized to be one.
And we're all vulnerable to this,
but there's some people who have just cashed in to go for it.
That nonsense on the left makes me crazy
because in part it just feels like all of my ideals
are turned into some piece of crap that's...
Where of the left?
Not only the left, man.
I came from a farther left part
than I don't even know where you started, but...
Yeah, no, I've never been tempted to be anything
other than a Democrat.
I've never even said I'm gonna be an independent
because the Democratic Party isn't me.
If I could move to another party that made sense,
I'd do it at this point.
Anyway, I think that what we don't really understand
is that there's a homelessness problem
that is really significant.
If you are the sort of a person who needs to attach
to some kind of institutional structure
in a time when there is no institution
that actually holds your perspective,
you're gonna start to do very bizarre things.
Now, the thing about you and me
is that to some extent,
and I don't think we can do this long-term,
we're okay with being homeless, right?
You can use sort of first principles,
try to think your way out of stuff,
but it's very tough for most people.
And I think that there are these sort of collection points
in the adaptive landscape of politics.
Would you disagree with that?
Yeah, well, one thing that seems important
is the connection to science.
I mean, we're not spending a lot of time
talking about science in this mode,
but the dispassion and self-criticism
that is the only rubric under which real science can be done
bleeds into our thinking about all these other issues.
I mean, I think that's gotta be a relevant variable.
It's like, you either have a scientific cast of mind
or you don't, and when you don't-
I have both.
Right, but when you don't,
you're not seeing the
I mean, you're not even seeing
intellectual dishonesty for what it is, right?
It's just like motivated reasoning isn't a bad thing, right?
Wishful thinking isn't a bad thing.
Confirmation bias isn't a bad thing.
These are virtues.
This is in religion, this is faith, right?
This is, you know-
Well, this is like always the issue
with our friend, Jordan Peterson,
which is that when he gets really far out there
in the, I don't know, people now call mythopoetic,
I don't know the lingo.
You always wonder,
are you still maintaining a fact-checking ability
to bring you back to earth?
And so as long as those two facilities are present
and in dialogue, and as long as the fact-checking,
you know, what we call the scientific method
is in some sense inadequate to me
to explain how science has progressed.
All the mad thinking and then the spirituality
of coming up with breaking new ground doesn't happen.
You just gave us Ramanujan about an hour ago.
Yeah, so he's having dreams about the goddess Lakshmi
handing him theorems.
Well, there's that, you know,
the Kerala School of Astronomy
that came up with infinite series
before Newton and Leibniz was doing it in religious poetry,
you know, at Rhyme, I think, over there in Kerala.
So there is a kind of madness
that you have to invite to break new ground
and there's a kind of sanity that you have to invite
to wrestle with the madness.
And our friend Dan Barkay came up with this idea
that science is a two-front war,
but that most people have only been deployed to one front.
And I think that that's a really nice image.
I do worry that in part, the activist mindset,
particularly on the left, has a very clear idea,
which is that, yeah, it's really a shame
the number of people who have to get hurt
for justice to be done.
And that is a highly conserved idea
that I had not understood was broadly distributed.
But I mean, that is an ethic or a pseudo ethic
that we have to just relentlessly criticize
because it's so much harm that gets done.
I mean, that is the thinking that allows good people
or otherwise good people to create immense harm.
It's like, let's, yeah, throw them off the rooftops
because they, you know, the purge is on
sorry we have to break these many eggs, make this omelet.
But partially the question is,
how do we spend enough time together
to get past this problem?
Like, I really think it's quite serious that.
Part of it is that we're not actually doing
much of this face-to-face, right?
Like, I've never met Naseem, I've never met Sam Cedar,
I've never met, they shouldn't have been
in the same sentence, they have very different problems.
But if I had, if before any of this had happened,
Sam Cedar I think has done probably a dozen shows,
or I mean, I'm always getting,
someone's always sending me a video that he's made
that, you know, I don't watch, but I log the fact
that there's a yet another export from his world
where he's attacked me.
If I had had lunch with him before any of this ever,
he ever took an interest in me,
there might have been a very different fact.
Well, that's why I had a problem.
It's the fact we've never, you know, we were,
this is why I anchor to civility,
and you, you know, you now seem as a friend of yours.
So you have a, there's a kind of a loyalty effect,
or just a fact, you know, you have a different
relationship to his flaws, knowing him as a person.
And I, the same things happened to me,
like the fact that I've hung out with Jordan,
or Ben Shapiro.
Well, you saw it happen with Claire,
let's talk about the Claire situation.
Okay, that would have been different
had you never hung out with Claire,
or it might have been different.
No, I think there was a more serious issue,
and it just didn't.
Well, it was, no, the flip it around,
it was more of a betrayal, you know,
or a seeming betrayal, given the fact
that you had hung out together.
It wasn't just coming over the transom of Claire.
The betrayal in part was, was my betrayal of Claire,
I just didn't know it.
Well, whatever, I'm just saying the dynamic change
if you know each other, at any level.
I'm trying to make a different point.
When somebody you know behaves in a way
that is very, most unexpected,
like what I try to do is I try to slow it down.
I say, I bet we're watching two different movies.
And your story and my story are not,
the gears are not lining up.
And so if we just push on the gears,
the teeth are gonna pop off
and it'll be the end of everything.
And so with Claire, what I tried to figure out is
why are you repeatedly sort of coming at me?
You know, do you need to burnish your credentials
that you're objective, that you don't have tribalist loyalty?
That was one set of issues.
There was another issue,
which is that Naseem had gone after Claire
and I was silent.
I didn't wanna get involved in it.
I didn't like the way Naseem was going about doing
what he was doing, absolutely couldn't take it.
Didn't like it, detested it.
On the other hand, I have a particular bug in my bonnet
about IQ and race, which is that I think
it's an absolutely dangerous topic
that's being explored in a really bad way,
even by good people.
And that in part, IQ has this curse that I've said,
it's a pretty good measure of intelligence.
It would be much better if it was obviously terrible
or really terrific, but it's in exactly the wrong place
that it does tell us something about intelligence
and not nearly enough so you can be a genius with low IQ.
That problem, you know, was being teased out
and neither of them, the reason I stayed out of it
is just I didn't believe in Claire's position
as I understood it and I didn't believe
in Naseem's tactics as I understood them.
And Claire interpreted that, I think,
and I don't know this to be true, as wow,
you know, you're seeing me getting mauled.
And I thought, you would be there, you know,
or something like that.
And so in part, just backing up everything,
slowing it down, trying to listen.
You know, Ben and I have gotten sideways a few times.
To his credit, every time I take something
to Ben Shapiro, he'll think better of himself
and he'll come.
Yeah, I mean, that's my experience as well.
Even though he's part of his business.
Yeah, yeah, no, that counts for a lot.
So the place where we've reached some kind
of bad faith singularity is where I think,
okay, we just have to cut our losses.
There's no conversation, that's why I would never talk
to Sam Cedar in a public forum.
He's proven himself so committed to the singularity.
I mean, there's a bunch, there's maybe 20 people
who are just on this part of the landscape
where there's no coming back from it.
I mean, there's coming, obviously there's an appropriate,
any conversation that would have to happen
would have to begin with an actual apology.
I'm like, it's just so bad.
There's no alternate movie version that's exculpatory.
These people know their line, their avidly line,
it's all malicious, it's all Saul Linsky,
it's all just smear, smear, smear because it works.
It is Saul Linsky, but look, the best that can be said
for it, and again, I don't get along with it,
is I believe that they think that they're in desperate times
and they believe that desperate times
call for desperate measures and that's sort of the mindset
which is the ridicule is necessary to stop a greater evil.
And that entitlement, as soon as you start experimenting.
But ridicule is not the problem,
it's the line, that's the problem.
If it's an honest joke and somebody's expensive,
it's fine. I can't be honest,
I've probably watched 45 minutes of Sam Cedar total.
Yo, that's more than I've watched,
but I've watched enough to know that these are people
who, when they're trafficking in audio of my podcast,
that's been edited, edited to show the opposite
of what I was saying and they get 1,000 blistering comments
telling them, they keep the audio up,
or they don't, they never correct an error.
I agree, but that's what's coming out of it.
That's psychopathic behavior.
Whether or not they're psychopaths,
they're acting like psychopaths.
All right, but then we've got a giant chunk of our world
and then part of a lot of the sense-making apparatus
that is explicitly amongst itself psychopathic.
It believes that it is under threat and desperate times
and desperate times call for desperate measures.
This is its opportunity.
It's going to do things and it's gonna be,
the thing that I didn't understand about it
because I came from the left
is that it just explicitly thinks in, that's too bad.
I'll get you a Kleenex, next.
It's just this dead, cold-heartedness
that progress requires that good people get hurt, boo-hoo.
And that thing is so hardcore.
That's gonna make, that makes the Trumpian
backlash understandable.
And that's really in part what I'm trying to get at,
which is that when I went to Washington in like 1996
on the immigration issues,
I went into some staffers, like some warrant of cubicles.
And I saw the sign on one of the cubicles that said,
if it's worth fighting for, it's worth fighting dirty for.
And I came to understand that if you wanted to survive
and thrive and get stuff done in Washington,
that that had been absorbed almost universally.
And then once I realized that, I had to make a decision.
Did I really want to get good things done
or did I want to stay a person I could live with?
And that's very painful to actually have to think about.
Yeah, but I think that is an easy choice or should be,
we want to create a world where that's an easy choice.
We want to create a world in which that's an easy choice.
What we've created is a system of selective pressures,
which may actually end up selecting
for that over and over again.
And you don't realize, and this is the issue,
the reason that so many of these things make me angry,
like the great moderation or the abuse of the immigration
system to decrease wages and then you cry xenophobia
when somebody points it out,
or NAFTA and large areas of the country get really hurt
and you're saying everybody's gonna be made better off,
is that all of these things I can see in real time,
like right now what I can see, like those things
of the past is I can see this weird,
and this is getting back to the Jeff Epstein thing.
There is a deliberate attempt not to talk about
the intelligence community and its links to Jeffrey Epstein.
And it is clear, and it's a very short proof
because assume that he had no links
to the intelligence community, like none whatsoever.
Somehow a member of the Trilateral Commission
affiliated with Rockefeller University, Harvard,
no links to any intelligence community
anywhere in the world.
You could sell papers debunking
the claims that people wanna know,
which is how is this guy tied in
with the intelligence community, right?
So you're saying it's fishy that no one's doing that?
Well, I mean it's beyond fishy.
In other words, you have something
that everybody's demanding and wants.
If it weren't true, you could get paid
by showing that it's not true,
or making the best argument possible,
or making fun of how thin the claims are.
Well, that may yet happen.
I mean, again, I don't know that somebody
isn't writing the 5,000-word Atlantic article
on Epstein that's gonna answer his question.
Dude, how long has it been?
This guy supposedly commits suicide.
We don't know whether, you know,
what branch of the decision tree that's on.
And you can search, go to the New York Times
and search on intelligence.
The thing, and Epstein, it's not being explored.
It's not being shut down.
It's like an echoic tile in your echo locating.
It's not what you're hearing.
Go to the search bar and search for things
that people are discussing that don't come up.
And that's what's telling you that there's something very,
I mean, this guy was apparently a serious sexual predator.
We're in an era of me too.
But there are anomalies like that.
I mean, the clear anomaly for me was,
and it's one for which I don't have
any sinister explanation.
I just think it's an anomaly of the news cycle we're in.
It's sort of what Trump has done to our information diet.
When the Las Vegas shooting,
perpetrated by a man whose name I don't even know, right?
And I'm kind of a student of these things.
But I never even took the time to learn the guy's name.
I think many press reports decided to not use his name.
No, but this was the biggest shooting
in American history, right?
And 48 hours later, nobody was talking about it.
Well, that's not true.
That's like, it had fallen out of the news cycle
and never came back in.
It vanished very quickly, but there you...
I don't think there's any reason why it vanished
apart from the fact that we just don't have
the bandwidth for it anymore.
It's like, there was no link that made it
clearly ideological.
I mean, nothing in surface.
He wasn't a clear white supremacist or he wasn't a jihadist.
I mean, there was no...
You remember the word bump stock?
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
So the bump stocks...
Okay, so why weren't we talking about bump stocks?
Yeah, so we banned bump stocks as a result of that thing.
And that's the legacy of that atrocity.
But if you had told me at any point beforehand
that on whatever day of the week it was,
you're gonna have the biggest mass shooting
in American history by far.
And it was going to be a fairly cinematic one, right?
I mean, it's like you're talking about, you know,
shooting out from the windows of a...
Did you see Dan Bilzerian was at this thing?
Oh, no, no, I think I...
Dan Bilzerian is running out of this thing,
saying like, we're under fire.
I'm gonna go get my gun.
You know, he's like, he's doing it in real time.
If you told me we're not gonna be talking about this
a week later, right?
That just wouldn't compute.
But that is the situation we're in.
Somehow it just didn't survive the Darwinian contest
with whatever else was on social media.
I don't really think that that's what happens.
Well, so, Austin, why aren't we talking about it?
Well, that's...
See, like when you're starting to smile.
No, this is the thing that conspiracy theorists
get dead wrong, which is you are allowed to notice
some very weird anomaly and not have to say
what it is you're noticing.
Right?
Right.
My claim, like, let's do it.
But you don't buy my explanation,
which is because there was not an immediate purchase
on a larger story of motive.
And this guy, you know, it was just...
Not a lot of information came out about this guy
that was salient.
It just, we're so deluged by other stuff.
Yes.
Most of it Trumpian.
Correct, you're not correct in my opinion.
Okay, that's interesting.
So the way I would say it.
But whoever's right or wrong,
I'm just saying that this belief that I now have,
that we have a different relationship to information now.
We can agree that we're cycling through things very quickly,
but that was a spectacular...
There's a reason we're talking about.
It was amazing.
Because it's anomalously weird how fast that story disappeared.
Now, one of the things that we have to talk about
in that realm is Dana Boyd and her discussion
of strategic silence.
So that's your search string people playing along at home.
Strategic silence is a doctrine of some kind
that says that news media should not report the news
because of its potential impact.
And where was this articulated?
You should check out data and society,
which is a particularly interesting organization
which fingered our friends
as the alternative influencer network.
Oh, right, right.
And Dana Boyd, who I believe is sort of in our circles
in the tech circles, starts talking
about the need for strategic silence.
Is that a girl Dana or a boy Dana?
A female.
Somebody I perceive to be female.
I now don't wanna touch a human named Dana Boyd.
Right.
And strategic silence,
and she also talks about data gaps,
if I'm not mistaken, if I have my terminology right.
And so then you have to look at things like style guides,
like the AP style guide or the New York time style guide,
which is the way in which people are directed
to report news stories.
Is there a danger of copycat killings?
So there may be a body of thought around
what does one do around mass shootings
so that we don't have future mass shootings?
Or if this is particularly exciting to certain people,
should we publish the manifesto?
So as you start to understand
what the meta rules around these things are,
some of those could be innocent.
Well, I think some are better than innocent.
I think some are benign,
and we've been slow to adopt them.
I think the fact that I don't know this guy's name
is probably a good thing for the world.
And that was part of the new style guide.
You just don't...
Did you read the New Zealand Shooters Manifesto?
No, but part of it.
But yeah, I haven't read the whole thing, no.
So that...
What I don't want is I don't want somebody saying,
we should not read the...
We should criminalize reading
the New Zealand Shooters Manifesto.
But by the way, let me tell you,
he told us all that Candace Owens was his inspiration.
Right, right.
Because that's not what the shooter did.
So now we...
Well, no one wants to criminalize.
I'm just saying that you...
No, no, no.
I'm saying something much more disturbing.
It's appropriate for journalists to worry
that merely shining a light,
pointing a camera at this new atrocity
is the...
Should be the default setting, right?
Like name the guy, let's get into his story,
let's find out why he did it,
and do all of this in public.
We're in such a much more dangerous place, in my opinion.
But no, Bob, maybe we're talking past each other here.
It's just that it is...
We've been very slow to realize
that the part of the memetic contagion here
is the copycat effect,
the fact that in their own perverse way,
these people are being martyred and lionized
just by the mere sharing of this information about it.
Let's agree that in a better world,
we would have a situation by which
we would not want to communicate relatively...
We're gonna make these people famous.
We don't...
There's fame as part of the motive, right?
Posture as fame even is part of the motive.
Even if it's not part of the motive,
it's part of what is attractive
to the living, aspiring gunman, right?
First of all, let me steal me in your position
to make sure I'm getting it,
and then I can take issue with you
and we'll see whether I'm adding or subtracting.
I think what you're saying is,
is that because of the information quality
and the fame quality and the inspirational quality
to copycat killers,
that communicating the information
that somebody wished to communicate
provided they're willing to make a down payment
in terms of dead bodies taken,
lives taken out of this world.
I'm not even focused on the manifesto.
I'm focused on just naming the person.
You're sympathetic at some level
with the concept of strategic silence.
I would be sympathetic with the concept
of strategic silence if I trusted
the people who are supposed to manage it,
but that's, I'm trying to get to the next layer,
which is that I am very concerned
that the people who are enthusiastic
about strategic silence are interested
in telling us partial information
about all of these things
so that we cannot actually tell what the hell just happened.
Well, yeah, so you just changed the topic to jihadism
and we're perfectly in agreement because yes,
they will elide the religious identity
of perpetrators in various contexts
and actually hide information from us, right?
So you'll see something happen.
The media will pretend it's inexplicable,
right, like the end of the Orlando shooting.
It's like maybe this guy was just,
it was his repressed homosexuality
that was the problem, right?
And yet, those who have a little bit of information
recognize that this is a clear cut case of jihadism
and indoctrination and the consequences of certain ideas
and the analogous situation on the other side would be
what if we were going to systematically conceal evidence
of white supremacy being the motive for a certain death?
But what I'm trying to say is that in all of these killings,
like you just pointed out that the Unabomber,
you read, reread the Unabomber's manifesto.
Right.
And the Unabomber wrote a story called Ship of Fools,
which I thought was relatively interesting,
about people losing their heads in social justice
and society getting scum.
There's some of that in the manifesto too.
Yep.
He's very critical of the law.
Not a dumb man, that Kaczynski guy.
However, the point was is that you were able
to mine that for information and then you were able
to reach some pretty interesting conclusions
about where Kaczynski was relative to society in general,
you trusted yourself.
Right.
Okay.
My guess is that when it comes to jihadis,
you are more interested in communicating the information
about what the motivational structure is
because it is prescriptive that something might be done.
However, it is also-
Actually, there's another reason.
It's not just that it's prescriptive, it may not be,
it's just that there's more contact between-
There are more levers to play with
to try to control the situation.
And it's a much larger problem.
No kidding, right.
But on the other hand, if I look at the New Zealand shooters
and the Squirrel Hill shooters manifestos,
it's disgusting and it has content.
And the way on which I can explain to people
how all of the open border type stuff
is going to cause future problems is just to say,
you may not think of a country the way I do or somebody else,
but imagine that somebody comes to your home as a guest
and you give them the key and they say,
I hope you don't mind,
but I noticed that there were a lot of people
on Skid Row today who didn't have anything to eat,
no place to sleep.
So I ran off 2,000 copies of your key
and I hope we can adopt all those people
when they come over later tonight
because I gave them the address and the security code.
Now, if that starts to rattle around in your brain,
you don't feel good about it.
You may not conceive of your country as a house
with a front door and a security code
and rules as to who gets in and out, but they do.
And some of those people are gonna go crazy
and they're gonna kill people.
And I know that to be the case.
And it's not that I'm sympathetic
for the synagogue shooter or a mosque killer.
Fuck those guys.
The point is, is that we are not trying
to get the information because we have this class of people,
this intermediating class,
that I don't trust as far as I can throw them
and that you still have more residual trust in.
In other words, my feeling about data in society
is that I understand all sorts of things
that they're trying to do, but they're super dangerous.
They are incredibly dangerous in part
because they're gonna be backed by people
like Bill and Melinda Gates or the Ford Foundation
or whatever it is.
This is the Southern Poverty Law Center problem
and other guys.
So I think you and I have been talking
past each other a little bit here.
I totally agree that in this case,
we can't really trust the gatekeepers.
The only thing that I was expressing open-mindedness about
or agreement about with respect to strategic silence
is there is this, what's otherwise-
I would trust you to do strategic silence, yeah.
Well, in some ways, it's impossible.
It's like, take it out of the atrocity.
No, because you know that.
Yeah, but there's the atrocity side of it,
which is its own thing,
but just take the case of famous suicides.
We know that suicide is contagious.
This has a name, the Werther Effect,
based on Goethe's novel, The Sorrows of Young Werther.
So there's the fact that a sufficiently prominent person
who's got any kind of, especially,
and this is true, I think, for any suicide,
but especially if there's some sort of
ironic romantic gloss that can be put on it,
suicides go up and suicides go up in ways that are,
you know, plane crashes go up, right?
And we believe, you know, I don't know
if the data has changed on this,
but as of, you know, 20 years ago or whenever this was done,
I think this was in,
might have been in Caldini's book, Influence.
The plane crashes go up and the interpretation of that
is that some number of airline pilots commit suicide
with everyone on board, right?
We know that's happened before.
There's one famous case of that,
but you know, just out of the statistics,
that seems to be suggested,
but so what do you do when Anthony Bourdain commits suicide?
How do you cover that story?
There has to be some style guide around how you cover it,
and it's not, and at one point it could look like
an unwillingness to actually get at the truth,
but what's actually motivating you
is not an unwillingness to get at the truth,
it's just you're aware of the potential contagion effect here,
depending on what the actual story is.
