Six days after the September 11th terrorist attacks, it was President Bush who went to
the Islamic Center of Washington, D.C. and proclaimed that Islam is a religion of peace.
At the time, the remark was barely a cause for controversy.
Instead, it was greeted by most as a call to civility, a note of sanity, a warning to
fanatics who might consider taking revenge on some innocent Muslim women shopping for
groceries and a headscarf.
But now, nine years later, President Bush is widely accused, in retrospect, of having
succumbed to a momentary case of political correctness.
Many people now believe that his Islamist peace remark was born either of ignorance
or of expediency.
It did not even take another successful act of terrorism to set off the season we
just lived through, the endless summer of holy war.
The instigation was a proposal to build the mosque at ground zero, or if you prefer, the
mosque of the old Burlington Coat Factory in the financial district.
What ensued was nothing less than a referendum on Islam.
My work means that I travel around the United States asking total strangers a lot of nosy
questions about religion.
I've found that this question is Islam a religion of peace more than any other is now the one
on people's minds.
But let's acknowledge that, to many, the question before us tonight is either absurd or offensive.
To one camp, the question is absurd because the answer is patently obvious.
Just look at the headlines, they say.
If 9-11 is not convincing enough, what about the suicide bombers in Iraq, Afghanistan,
Israel, Spain, Pakistan, for God's sake, even a tourist retreat like Bali?
They say, what about Major Nidal Hassan, a psychiatrist in the US Army, who shot his
own colleagues at point blank after he spent years studying and reflecting on his Muslim
faith?
Was he under the influence of psychosis or of Islam?
They ask, why do honor killings seem to be a Muslim phenomenon?
How could a religion of peace permit a father to order the death of his own daughter?
This camp says not only is Islam not a religion of peace, it is intrinsically a religion of
violence.
The question is absurd, the case is closed.
Yet there are others who consider the Islam and peace question not so much absurdly obvious
as utterly offensive.
This camp asks, how can you condemn an entire faith, a religion followed by nearly two billion
people, because of the atrocities committed by its fringe extremists?
They ask, why blame the faith when the terrorists are clearly driven more by political ideology
than by theology?
They ask, why do we not apply the same judgment reserved for Islam to other religions?
Why didn't the ethnic cleansing of Bosnia Herzegovina prompt widespread rumination on whether
Serbian Orthodox Christianity is a religion of peace?
When Roman Catholic priests and bishops were complicit in the genocide in Rwanda, the world
did not blame Roman Catholicism, but the blame fell.
God is not great.
But for most, except for your wide readership, the blame fell on a few rogue clerics.
Why do we make such fine distinctions when it comes to religions, other religions but
not with Islam?
This camp asks, isn't the Old Testament laced with calls to violence as explicit as those
in the Quran?
Why do we explain away the warlike verses in Deuteronomy and Leviticus as a product of
their time and culture when we do not excuse the sword verses in the Quran?
Whether you think the question before us tonight is absurd or offensive, no matter which camp
you're in or neither, or whether you think it's appropriate, I'm hoping that what we
accomplished tonight is to cause every one of you at least one disconcerting moment in
which the preconception you arrived with is shattered.
So our format tonight will allow Mr. Hitchens and Mr. Ramadan each 10-minute opening statements
followed by a brief rebuttal, and we'll have a longer period for discussion and then open
it up for questions.
I hope you'll have some good ones.
I have no tolerance for any interruptions, though I don't expect that, but if we do,
we have ways to handle them.
And also a reminder to turn off your cell phones so we're not serenaded unnecessarily.
So we agreed very congenially before we began that Mr. Hitchens would begin.
Thank you.
Let me.
Assalamu alaikum.
Shalom.
Welcome back to the United States.
Thank you, Laurie, for your introduction.
Thank you very much, ladies and gentlemen, for coming.
I have to be brief, so I'll be terse.
Like a number of people who are students of religion, I've spent a lot of time lately,
as you should if you have the opportunity.
I recommend it very highly.
With Professor Dermot McCulloch's History of Christianity, marvelous work of scholarship
and literature written by a mainstream believer, extraordinarily broad and deep, in which he
ponders one very important question, the only one I've got time for now.
What happened to the word Christendom?
Remember, there used to be such a term.
It used to extend across the world, and the hope is that it would extend even further.
And it was unironically used to mean those areas of human civilization, and areas yet
to be civilized, of course, where the word of Jesus Christ reigned or would reign.
And it's all gone.
The word is never used except historically or sarcastically now.
And McCulloch doesn't say it ended because of the crusades, though he could, didn't.
Crusades didn't kill it.
All because of slavery mandated by Christianity.
That didn't kill it either.
Nor the mass murder of colonial subjects in the yet to be Christianized world.
That wasn't sufficient.
See, it didn't really end, he said, until 1914, when all the Christian empires of the
world, Austria, Hungary, Germany, France, Britain, France is a slight exception to this, but
only a slight one, and Russia, all of them commanded by Christian emperors and calling
upon their subjects as Christians went to war with each other and very nearly destroyed
the whole human civilization, and certainly reduced it to a point where we can't guess
where we might be if it hadn't been for this extraordinary outbreak of barbarism.
And out of that came the terrors of fascism and of Stalinism, of which it was the seedbed
as well.
I mention this partly because I want to maintain that there's no such thing as a religion of
peace by definition.
And second to point out, and that its best historian has to admit something, that if
I was a Christian would make me humiliated.
But because there was another empire involved in that war, the Ottoman Empire, which also
came to an end, its other name was the Caliphate, the Muslim Caliphate, it went to war on the
side of German and Austrian imperialism and Hungarian imperialism, and it lost not just
the war, having proclaimed a worldwide jihad against Christianity, except for German and
Austrian and Hungarian Christianity, which were its allies, and it didn't just lose the
war, but by 1924 had been dissolved by the Turkish leadership by Ataturk, it lost the
Caliphate.
And that's the only one that still has supporters.
The other Christian and religious empires have all gone.
But the Caliphate still has fans, not just in the Muslim world, sometimes referred to
by Muslims as the Dar al-Islam, the House of Islam, but also in what some Muslims call
the Dar al-Hab, the House of War, the part of the world that isn't yet Muslim.
There are Caliphate clubs in London now and Berlin and elsewhere, quite important ones.
And what I want to know is why that is and what we should think about it.
Members in this fantasy have, Laurie's spared me the need to say much of this, have committed
extraordinary atrocities in Istanbul, in Madrid, in India, in the Philippines, in Indonesia,
and of course in our own fair city.
And the pretexts for it vary.
They can be, the excuse for the mass murder can be that Australia has helped East Timor
become independent from Indonesia, they can be that Newsweek has printed a full story
about the desecration of a supposedly holy book.
You never know what it's going to be next.
But everyone knows to be careful about it and everyone understands that the threat of
violence that backs it is believable.
And that's my opening position.
Now you will say, I can hear it already being said, you may be saying it already to yourselves
because the defense mechanisms kick in.
And in any case, Laurie already said it for you.
And I hope Professor Ramadan won't feel the need to say it again.
But if he does, fair enough.
You may say, ah, that's not the real Islam.
Those aren't real Muslims.
Now isn't that a fascinating objection?
Is there anyone in this room, I exempt Professor Ramadan because it's his turn to speak next.
Is there anyone in this room who would care to arbitrate that question?
Who is to say?
Where is the authority that defines who is a true son of the prophet or true interpreter
of his work?
Part of the problem to begin with, and it's part of the problem because it is a religion,
is that it's perfectly true to say we don't know who the true Muslims are.
How right that is.
Who do, who does, speak for it.
Only the second problem with defining Islam is peaceful.
Only the second problem with defining it as peaceful has to do with the fact that it's
highly fissile and highly schismatic.
That there is a civil war going on within it, the religion of peace.
As we speak, at least one civil war between the votaries of this religion of peace is
already taking place.
And some of it is exported outside that world into ours, very salient fact.
The first reason, though, is this.
Islam makes very large claims for itself, very large claims indeed.
It claims to be the last and final religion, the last and final revelation.
When you see bumper stickers, everyone says you can't reduce major things to a bumper
sticker.
It's not my idea to have bumper stickers saying Islam is the solution.
It's a well-known slogan actually of parties associated with the Muslim Brotherhood.
They say Islam is the solution for everything.
It takes care of all your life and the one to come.
Sexuality, political economy, banking, diet, relations with other religions, everything.
It's a total solution.
What is creepy about the word total?
I hope I don't have to tell an audience like this.
It's the first five letters of the word totalitarian.
It's absolute.
It's absolute.
It's all-inclusive.
It's unanswerable and oddly for a religion that makes such large claims, notice another
thing about Islam, it doesn't particularly like having these claims questioned or scrutinized.
In other words, as there are just as there is with all religions an inverse relationship
between the claims they make and the evidence they can produce for them, you must have noticed
that with Islam, a younger religion and perhaps therefore more in its first flush, there's
an extraordinarily strong willingness to say that any challenge to its absolutist claims
is by definition profane.
And profanity and blasphemy can be the antecedent to very severe punishment and often are for
Muslims and for non-Muslims.
And this is not a road of peace in my submission, thus my first point completed.
The claim to govern everything from hygiene to sex and the afterlife, which contains detailed
prescriptions for the good and bad versions of itself, again strikes me as somewhat totalitarian
and they're both based upon two very, very questionable and not very peaceful concepts.
One is the idea of a perfect human being, the Prophet Muhammad and the other is the
idea of a perfect book, the Qur'an, the recitation.
Now the category perfect human primate or mammal and the category flawless book that
could possibly not use any kind of change revision or editing are categories that do
not exist.
There are no members of these categories.
Or any challenge to this faith is bound to lead to heresy and to schism and does.
And just as all forms of absolutism and to Taoism, leader worship and revealed truth,
unalterable text always do because they can break, perhaps, but they cannot bend.
And thus the latent potential of violence between them, among them, as well as within
them is very great.
And at any moment someone is in danger of being accused of being an apostate or an unbeliever.
This week, the Coptic Pope of Egypt, Pope Shenouda who represents 10 million Egyptians
was hustled onto Egyptian TV.
He's not asked on all that often.
I don't think he was even asked on this time, I think he was told he'd better come on.
Why is the leader of Egyptians, Egypt's huge Christian minority, suddenly compelled to
make a TV appearance?
Because one of his bishops had said in an interview that he thought that some of the
verses of the Quran showed signs of having been added later on and to be later accretion.
And Pope Shenouda was forced onto the television to say, it's not that that didn't happen,
it couldn't have happened.
It shouldn't even be discussed.
So that it has to be claimed, even by non-Muslim subjects of a Muslim state, that there is
after all, because no Christian claims this about the Bible anymore, no Jew claims it
about the Pentateuch, after all, yes, there is just one book that's completely word and
letter perfect from the first time it was not even written down but recited.
Now demands that you believe the impossible do not lead to peaceful outcomes, nor do they
lead to peaceful or tolerant regimes.
And I'm not going to ask you which Muslim country you would like to live in.
I don't know whether Professor Ramallah will tell us which one he would pick if he had
to, because I don't have to ask you a question like that, because it's already in your mind.
Can you wind up now?
Yes, I can.
Dilute, I can, yes, and will, shall, shall in fact.
Sexual repression doesn't lead to peace.
The idea that women are inferior to men is a profound cause of unease, let's say, the
least of it.
All religions make some form of this claim, Islam seems to make it less apologetically
than most.
Because that the world will come to an end in an apocalyptic form which will lead to
the victory of one religion or another, not peaceful either.
It's possible, perhaps, I haven't exhausted all my remarks, that the endless teaching
of battle stories to children and the stories of lethal feuds from 7th century Arabia don't
lead to peace, or the forcing of children to memorize and retell such stories by rote
doesn't lead to peace either.
It's arguable that peace isn't attainable, it's full.
There may be arguments in some forms, sometimes in places that religion isn't even desirable,
but it will not come by the fanatical adoption of a man-made text and a man-made supreme
leader.
Nothing but war and tyranny has ever come from the adoption of formulae like these.
The only way to moral and intellectual satisfaction, even temporary, perhaps only temporary, but
of any kind at all, comes to those who are willing to take the great risk of thinking
for themselves at all hazards and trying to share the benefits of that tolerance and that
open-mindedness with others.
And with that, for now, I'll rest my case.
Thank you very much.
Thank you for this invitation here this evening, and I really also want to thank once again
the University Press for organizing my visit here in the States, and I won't forget ACLU
and others who helped me to struggle for my rights for being here in the States and being
able to speak, to listen, and to contribute to the American debate or the Western debate.
And I know that among us, Jamil Jeffer is here, so I want to thank you again for this
support.
Let me go straight to some of the points, and I'm not going to respond straight away
to some of the claims on all the claims, but during my talk, as it is the introductory
speech, let me highlight some of the points.
When I got the question, of course, as a Muslim and as a believer, but as someone who is coming
from within the realm of religions, it was quite clear that to put it that way was not
the right question to ask.
Is Islam a religion of peace, or is Christianity, or is Judaism, or is Buddhism a religion
or a spirituality of peace?
Doesn't mean anything for me.
It's not the right question.
It's not the accurate question.
Not because I think that there is a good Islam and the right Islam, and there are people
who are acting in the name of Islam who are not representing what Islam is.
This is not my point.
I never said that, by the way.
But the point for me is really to try to deal with a phenomenon with religion from within
and to try to understand the dynamics and to understand the trends and to understand the
diversity.
So just to essentialize one religion by saying it's all about war, it's all about peace,
and even said by George W. Bush, doesn't mean anything for me.
So this is one point which is important, but religions and old religions and Islam among
all the other religions are dealing with human beings.
And if you deal with human beings, you deal with violence and you deal with peace.
You deal with violence because human beings, by definition, have to do with violence.
They have to deal with aggressivity, with wars.
And to expect from the religion not to tackle the issue is just to dream of something which
is not going to happen, all the spirituality.
Go for Buddhism or go for the Bhagavad Gita, you deal with violence.
So this is it.
Now, what is the answer coming from religions and from trends when it comes to violence and
to peace?
This is the right question for me.
Do we have something which is coming and helping us to go towards peace?
This is, for me, the right question.
So now, once again, when I have people speaking from outside, and it's especially the case
these days when it comes to Islam, is we speak about Islam and we speak about something which
is a religion that is perceived through one window or through one interpretation, and
we very often take what is visible through the media.
But Islam is as complex as Christianity and Judaism and Buddhism and Hindus.
It's a diversity of interpretations.
Yes, you are right.
The Quran is, for the Muslims, the very word of God.
But many interpretations and many ways of dealing with the books.
The problem is that the book, the problem is the reader.
It's the way, no, no, we have only 10 minutes.
So this is why when, for example, you take a text and you can do this with the Bible,
with the Torah, the Gospels, it's always the same.
Tell me the way you read.
I will know what is in your mind, but not for sure what is in the text.
And this is something which is the starting point of a serious discussion in theology.
Because I don't like all these intellectuals and philosophers and even journalists.
They are very keen on understanding the complexity of philosophies and the simplicity of religions.
That's not right.
The one to blame sometimes are the religious people themselves.
Because the way to present their religion is something which is all of dream and hopes
and not dealing with the reality, which is a complex reality.
And this is where I think we have to come to a better understanding.
So very often when I deal with such topics, I just have to start with the very beginning.
We want to deal with the religion, let us speak about religious issues and religious
understanding, not to avoid the starting to just to come to newspapers and headlines.
It's not going to help us to understand the religion, just to go for what is happening
in the world.
Let us also understand the fundamentals and then come to some of the translation, the
historical experiences.
Because as much as you can speak about September 11, you can speak about the 16th century under
the Ottoman Empire, which was a great civilization with the diversity of Christians and Jews
and even non-believers working and living together.
We are always speaking about Indonesia, but we can prove everything with history.
If we don't get a sense of the principles we are talking about.
So for example, coming from a religious viewpoint, I wouldn't say Islam is a religion of peace.
I say Islam is a religion for human beings.
It deals with peace and it deals with violence and it helps the people to go from violence
towards peace.
It's a way towards peace, but it's not a peaceful reality because we are not peaceful
beings.
We are all in tension just to get that inner peace in us and this is the starting point
of the Islamic philosophy of human being is really to start with your own self.
Look at your heart and tell me if you are at peace or you were at peace.
Peace is a process through which you have, it's a process that you get at the end of
a self-education.
Educate yourself to get this inner peace.
This is coming from the universal message of all the religions.
You get this in Buddhism before even speaking or not even speaking about one God, but you
get it in today's, you get it in Christianity, educate yourself to get that peace.
So you have to deal with your inner wars and tensions.
So this is the way we have to deal with the issue about peace and the starting point is
spirituality.
Why?
Because at the end of the day it's really something which is important and this is
the difference that you can find between Islam and the Greek tradition.
If you come back to Socrates, Socrates was saying your body in itself is bad and this
is why you have the soul helping you to educate your body and to master your body.
In Islam there is nothing like that.
Your body is not bad, is not good and your soul is not bad, is not good.
It depends on what you are going to make out of it.
It's your responsibility because you are free.
You take dignities in your freedom and you have to use your freedom to make it bad to
make it good.
Take the good decision for your body, that's good.
Make the bad decision, that's bad.
So it's all a question of educating yourself with your own body and it's exactly the same
when it comes to the understanding of the world.
So this way towards peace, it's based on education, it's based on a spiritual way of
dealing with yourself and you know what is the meaning of that?
The very essence of what I'm trying to translate now is jihad.
So this is something which is coming from the classical tradition and once again the
classical tradition is helping us understand jihad is resist the bad to promote the good
and the bad is in yourself first and then you will try to get the good and to get the
good is this inner peace.
So jihad is not the way towards war, it's the way towards peace because you have as
a human being intrinsically to deal with your inner wars and inner tensions.
It's exactly the same in the world that what we have to do, you will find something which
is the will of God.
What is the will of God, diversity.
He made you tribes and nations in order for you to know each other but you know the risk
of diversity, it could be lots of knowledge and protection wars.
So you have to educate yourself to live with other and with this diversity to know each
other.
So you can look at Islam saying you know what Islam claims, it's the last and final religion.
It's not enough to end with this sentence.
The most important thing is what Islam is saying about the other religions that you
have to remove them from the earth, no.
He made you tribes and nations in order for you to know each other.
So respect the Christians, respect the Jews, respect the people who were before you.
So it's a call towards respect that you find also in the texts.
So yes, you will have Muslims, they will take one dimension and interpret this as it is
the final religion, we are not going to deal with all the others.
But you cannot deny the fact that through history, Muslims in many situations, in many
historical situations were dealing with this diversity and we learned from the Middle Ages
and we learned from the Ottoman Empire that Muslims are able to deal with diversity and
take from the Jewish tradition.
My monitess was speaking Arabic better than me.
He was a Jew and he was an intellectual and he was a theologian and he was dealing with
respectful people.
So all these Muslims were wrong Muslims because they did not understand that the final religion
should not listen to the first monotheistic tradition.
That's not true.
You cannot reduce this in such a way.
It's too simplistic to represent what a religion is and what a history and a historical experience
is.
So this is for me something which has to do with the diversity that we have, that it's
rooted in the Islamic tradition as well, in the classical tradition that we find it.
So when you deal with diversity, know that you need to promote and it's out of your personal
education, mutual knowledge to get respect but you also have to deal sometimes with oppressors
and people who are going to try to take over and you have to resist.
And this resistance in order to reform the world for the better is the very meaning of
Jihad.
Now once again I will never deny the fact that some Muslims, some theologians in history
and now are using some of the verses in a way which is for me unacceptable.
And you know I go even further than that.
Just after September 11 when I was invited by time, I came here and I was asked about
this.
I said, you know what?
It's not only not good and not Islamic, it's anti-Islamic what they are doing.
It's against my religion.
It's against the principles.
So I'm not saying this is the good religion and this is bad.
I acknowledge the fact that they are interpreting the text in a way but what I'm saying from
where I am from within my tradition is this is anti-Islamic.
This is not the right way to deal with the text.
So you can't introduce this into something which is, oh the only right Muslims are the
Muslims who are acting the way I believe Islam is, meaning bad.
I think it's not fair.
It's not a discussion that we can have.
So let me come to my conclusion here.
At the end of the day, if you go through the text and you understand the philosophy of this
way towards peace, dealing with your own wars and inner tensions and the tensions within
the society, you will find interpretations within Islam that are promoting something
which has to do with peace without avoiding violence because we all have to deal with
our violence.
This is something which is important and in history you will find the examples for decent
and for that so don't rely on history, history you prove whatever you want.
But at the end of the day, this is exactly the case for all the philosophies.
All the people who are promoting human rights, we all have to do something which is out of
humility to check our people because with the best means you can promote the bad or
the worst attitude.
In the name of human rights, we want to kill people.
In the name of human rights, we can promote and support the war in Iraq and Afghanistan
where so many innocent people have been killed.
And I said it from the beginning, never forget that the blood of an Afghani or Iraqi innocent
man or woman is as valuable as the blood of an American innocent man or woman.
No discussion about this.
So the best ideology in the name of human rights, in the name of democracy could be
used by people to promote the worst.
So let us be humble instead of criticizing one religion and one ideology to know that
in our universe of reference, you will find people using our texts, our values, sometimes
for the good and sometimes for the bad, sometimes for peace and sometimes for war, sometimes
for dignity and sometimes for money, sometimes for protecting freedom and sometimes for geo-strategic
interests.
It's not right to essentialize by saying all the wars on human rights, for human rights
or all these philosophies are right or wrong or promoting a philosophy or a religion of
violence.
I think that these kind of conclusions are very dangerous because they don't give us
the opportunity to find in any single religion, in any single philosophy, people of good will.
These are the people who can talk to each other, understand each other and make it possible
to live in diversity and in mutual respect.
Thank you.
Well, I also don't think that the motion, if that's what it is, chosen for this evening
is a particularly good one.
But I knew about it as long as Professor Ramadan did and I did at least agree to speak to it
in spite of that reservation.
And I make this not just as a point of self-pity, but because, for example, someone in this great
city who's become used to making nice these days, Imam Rauf, who describes himself as
both founder and visionary of whatever the downtown establishment is now to be called,
wrote an article, I'm pretty sure it was on the eve of Yom Kippur for the New York Times,
in which he said, when you think about it, this is one of the most hand-washing statements
I've yet heard him make in the Make Nice department, when you think about it, our word Islam is
almost exact translation of your word shalom.
I didn't say it.
I've never heard anyone else say it.
It isn't true, among other things.
Islam may have some relationship to the word salam, which can have some relationship to
the word prostration or religious observance in May, but we know what Islam means, is intended
to mean and does mean, is surrender to God, acceptance of God's surrender, sometimes translated
as submission, but in any case, the resignation to the divine will.
Again, not in my opinion, a prescription for peace, but that isn't my only objection to
it.
I don't think that abjection or fatalism or the prostration before a divine or, let alone
before, holy men who are interpreting the book is a recipe for good health of any kind,
mental or physical, since we're talking about the Greek concept of the body and of the spirit
and of virtue.
Just to get that out of the way, now you're right.
I was surprised to find myself saying, Professor, when you say that the problem is not the book,
but the reader.
In the case of the Quran, that is certainly true of me.
It's true probably of every book I've ever read, that there are difficulties I have with
it or capacities I don't have with which to approach it, to understand it, but if I'm
reading the Quran, I certainly say, well, I can't tell whether this book is the word
of God or not.
I can only doubt that there is such a thing, but I can hope that this was a bad day for
God.
Can't I?
And I can hope to live in a country where I can say that and get applause.
Ah.
Yes, and even Murph.
And don't think that it isn't a precious thing and don't think it's being compromised.
I'm coming to that.
I don't like the idea of a paradise reward for martyrs.
Don't like it.
It's not me, somehow.
Don't like the account.
Don't like the early accounts of village squabbles with the local Jews who've taken a look at
the new claimant to be the Messiah and decided about him what they decided about, the previous
claimant.
He's no good.
Not up to snuff.
Do you think the Jews are ever going to be forgiven for that, by the way, for rejecting
two in a row?
I don't think so.
And I don't see why they should.
Hope for.
I don't see why they should hope for forgiveness, either.
And still I'm allowed to stand here and say this, and there are many parts of Europe.
I couldn't do that anymore.
Or I'd have to be very careful in who I'd invite it for the audience.
I couldn't do it easily on the air, couldn't do it easily in print, couldn't do it easily
in public, couldn't do it on certain campuses, couldn't do it with certain publishing houses.
Now all of this has been done to us by the wrong Muslims.
Well, let's get together then, isolate who these wrong Muslims are, who've imposed a
culture of violence-backed censorship upon us, and let's get rid of them and have an
honest discussion about the text and the reader.
And I think the ball is in your court, Professor, on that.
Just to stay with my own profession, the thing I know best.
Not one major media outlet, print or broadcast, has yet shown you what the Danish cartoons
actually look like.
Yale University Press, which commissioned a book on them, which was to include the cartoons,
as how could it not, eventually panic.
Yale University Press panicked and published the book without the cartoons over the objections
of its author.
Everybody knows what I'm talking about.
The President of the United States and the head of the Joint Chiefs a few days ago were
so pulverized with fear that they had to address personally in pleading tones a Christian
nutbag in Florida who might have been or might not have been about to commit a minor act
of blasphemy.
Is this the culture that Islam wants us to have in relation to it?
One of, if you like, pre-emptive submission, pre-emptive cowering backed by the fear of
force.
Because that is not multiculturalism.
That's not, that's nothing like the gorgeous mosaic.
That's actually the absolute negation of what a multicultural system would be like.
And a multicultural system has to look rather ascense, I think, on a religion whose preachers
and websites openly, openly make threats against people like myself, against the Jewish people,
against the Hindus, who, if heaven's sake, aren't even monotheists, can be killed on
almost any pretext, and a very important point, and I have to make it, and against the wrong
kind of Muslim.
Professor, don't, I'll say this as mildly as I can, don't, you may not be aware that
you were, and I'm, I don't want to increase the area of unexpected offence taking that's
been so hugely broadened by the sensitivities of a religion that has the answer to everything.
But I'll just say I don't greatly care to be told, as if I didn't know, that an Iraqi
life is as precious as an American one.
And as someone who's visited Iraq quite a lot, had the occasion to think about it a
good deal, I wonder if you could mention anything the United States has done in Iraq that is
remotely as criminal, as sadistic, and as violent as the blowing up of the mosque of
the Golden Dome in Samara.
One of the holiest sites in the Muslim world, callously blown up by Sunni forces in alliance
with forces who, perhaps I'd agree with them for once on this, were fascistic barthists.
Probably they got the weapons and that high explosive from them, that makes it worse surely.
Intending to start and successfully in fact initiating a civil war, in which countless
thousands of people have been killed, religious processions have been fired upon, funerals
have been fired upon, Koran's back without number of course been incinerated, much more
importantly children, old people and civilians.
Now where is, I just wonder, you must be able to quote it to me.
Where is the Sunni fatwa against this conduct?
Where is it?
Where is the authoritative statement of moral outrage in the Sunni world saying this is not
acceptable behavior for followers of the Prophet?
I missed it.
And so apparently did the followers of the Prophet miss it because they keep on doing
this all the time.
They were doing it before the United States got to Iraq and they'll be doing it after
we've gone.
So I'm sorry I won't be talked to in that tone of voice.
And I want to know, I repeat my question, who has the authority to issue fatwas?
Is it Sheikh Haradawi who sometimes very much expressed respectful, who on Al Jazeera gives
advice on all kinds of things?
Some of the minocular sexual matters and so forth, doctrinal rulings, sometimes upon the
legitimacy or otherwise of suicide bombing, if directed at Israelis.
Not just Jews of course, but no, no we draw the distinction.
On the other hand Hamas, which does the suicide bombing, doesn't draw the distinction.
If I can't issue a fatwa against Hamas, if I'm a Muslim, if there's no one who will
and they won't, surely someone could say we don't think Hamas should have on its website
and manifesto the reproduction of the protocols of the Elders of Zion, a Christian fascist
fabrication that is one of the warrants for the Nazi exterminationist solution.
I mean surely that's a question for the UN Anti-Racism Committee on a spare day or since
that spare day never seems to come for some Muslim authority to say no brothers, don't
do that.
It doesn't come, it doesn't happen.
Look on the website, it's still there.
Now you would do better I think Professor, if you identified yourself as a member of
a very small and critical and endangered minority, someone who really is against all this and
will say so and will also decry the fact that the religion itself can't seem to throw it
off, but you seem to have that a little bit both ways.
Now yes, so then my closing statement is this, if you want diversity as much as the
professor does, as much as I'm sure many people here do, religious diversity, cultural
diversity, what you need for it is this, you need a secular state with a godless constitution
like this one.
To speak as you did of the Ottoman Empire as a place where there were not just Muslims
but Christians and Jews is either not to know yourself or to expect others to have forgotten
or not to know what it meant to be a non-Muslim under the caliphate or under any similar theocratic
Muslim authority to this day.
Now what we need, secularism is the only guarantee of religious freedom and yours and
that of every other Muslim, we will defend but you won't be surprised that we have some
questions for you in the meanwhile, thank you.
Okay.
You laugh a lot, make laugh to people and I have a problem with, we are talking about
people who are being killed, we are talking about people about wars, that's fine, I have
a problem with the way you are putting things here.
You know when you said the first from Mark say okay you know what, total, these are the
first letters of totalitarianism because Islam is a comprehensive religion by the way exactly
like Judaism and Christianity, I never met a rabbi, a Christian telling me you are with
God on Saturday and with the devil on Monday or what is that?
But in Islam it's as if it's all together, it's a very simplistic way of dealing with
Islam, it's a comprehensive religion but there are rights of God and rights of people
and you have to differentiate and it's very old.
Come back to Alain de Libera, the French philosopher telling you you know what's separating authority
between what is to God and what is to human being, it's coming from Islam and this was
taught and translated into Christianity in the Middle Ages, exactly opposite to what
we think.
You may disagree but at least acknowledge the fact that there are many interpretations
in history that say Islam is this total means totalitarian, what's that?
Otto, these are the first letters of autocratic, it's not an argument, it's not serious.
And as I said yes, we are talking about reading and by the way it's for all the text, it's
the same for the Marxist, you know quite well about the Marxist tradition and you know
what some Marxists did with the text, it means that everything that Marx wrote was bad?
No, once again it's a serious matter here when we are talking about interpretations,
I mean it, I mean that yes there are people using the text in a way which is not, and
you have historically to acknowledge the fact that you yourself might have read some of
the text, not in the good way.
So this is the second point, about now the cartoons and some of the things that you were
referring to.
You know, look at the Muslim majority countries and look at the Muslims and the Western Muslims
and if you look at the reaction of the Muslims living in the States or living in Europe,
you cannot just say Islam was one, all the Muslims were reacting the same way, by the
way the very month of October when the whole story started, I was in Copenhagen and I said
to the Muslims take a critical distance and don't be involved in this, you don't like
it but let it be because this is freedom.
The point is that you are not making because you are reducing something which is, oh the
cartoon was all about freedom of expression, you don't speak about the instrumentalization
by politicians and governments in Muslim majority countries and even in the West about the whole
story because this is too complex to be put in.
So many authorities, many scholars and then you come with the, who are the Muslims who
are able to speak.
If you read some of the things that I'm doing or writing you would say that yes, I acknowledge
the fact that there is a crisis of authority in Islam but please don't tell me today that
you didn't hear.
The Muslim voices around the world criticizing and saying this is unacceptable to kill the
people in the streets in New York and the condemnation was widespread by the scholars.
If you don't hear, of course, this, you know, not less than 12 councils of Muslim scholars
around the world from Amman to Istanbul to Paris Dublin were condemning this.
It's as if they don't speak because at the end when the people are calling to kill for
killing they are heard but when people are condemning what is done in the name of the
religion it's as if they don't speak, it doesn't make the headlines.
But I'm telling you that some scholars did it and said it and I was one of them and you
know what is very interesting in the whole discussion, when the people like what I'm
saying say you know what, what he's saying is good but he's alone, minority, it's open
but he's alone.
But when the people don't like what I say say you know what, he has huge followers.
So depending on if you like or not what he said you have followers or not.
So I can tell you something that the mainstream Muslim presence in the West in many Muslim
majority countries as well acknowledged the fact that they are critical towards the use
of the religion.
Now many Muslims yes would support and I did this and by the way I was banned from this
country mainly for that are saying for example that the Palestinian resistance is legitimate
and I said that and I repeat this here but I also said that the means used to kill innocent
civilians and innocent Jews in and Israeli in Israel I cannot accept that.
Have you heard that?
I said it.
So and I'm not alone, I'm not alone so once again it's many interpretations listen to
this and also be respectful of this diversity and the way the Muslims are dealing with this.
So the fatawa, the legal opinions are coming from everywhere when you speak about some of
the issues because you know it's sensitive so you put it in a very simplistic way women,
violence, Hamas and all these together it gives the impression oh yes yes this is right
but you don't give the people all the interpretation everything which is done in every one of these
fields coming from the Islamic tradition and scholars of today trying to improve the status
of women trying to to condemn violence and to promote justice and peace you also have
to deal with this.
At the end you may have a problem with religion much more than with Islam and to tell me to
tell me at the end of your speech the only right solution is a secular godless constitution
in the United States of America I think it's problematic because I don't think it's a godless
nation here there is a reference.
No no no only the constitution no only the constitution but I don't think that even you're
the politician and even the president of the United States of America is referring to something
which is a godless secular system or I don't understand all the speeches I listen to.
The point is that my way of dealing with the secular or separating authority I don't have
a problem with separating authority I don't have a problem with this and it even my solution
in Israel and with Palestinian I want one state where the people can live together under
the same rule of law but it's as if we agree on this in France but not really in Israel
because it wouldn't be Israel so it's a selective not consistent approach I want you to say
this everywhere in that way and then you are saying it but I would say that the people
who are uploading sometimes they want this for some and not for all.
So let me tell you something I'm critical from within and I think that I'm far from
being the only one and from within the Islamic tradition listen to also for example the western
Muslims who the way they were dealing with the September 11th the way they were dealing
with the cartoon crisis the way they were dealing with fitna many of them were saying
no don't be involved in the United States of America how the Muslims reacted to all this
controversy on the mosque here in New York or in burning the Koran day listen is where
they all violent or have you heard some voices of reason and peace in this country I think
if you are honest you heard these voices of peace of people referring to their religion
and say we are Americans and what we want for this country is a peaceful proactive existence
and coexistence I think that this is also coming from the ethics their values and you
have to value this as being the future so to dream of something which is a godless future
I think it's a wrong dream but to be able to deal with all this diversity and to listen
to the voices instead of rejecting an entity as something which is bad per se let us look
at the people who from within are trying to do good with what they are and what they believe
in I think that this is the way forward for all of us and this is the way I would put
it for the future and I'm not talking about wrong Muslims I'm talking about a critical
debate among Muslims and I hope that you yourself with the people who are supporting
some of the views you are also critical about the way you sometimes reduce the ardor to
an alien presence not helping us to get to a better understanding critical debate sometimes
I'm just lost with the way you put things because the debate is closed before it started
thank you
I'm going to try to get to the core of some of what you raised and then get to some questions
we that ran long but I think it was I think it was very fruitful I want to distill something
that came up here two important things one is the question of authority in Islam a scholar
once told me that he thinks the problem with Islam is that every Tom Dick and Harry can
give fatwa and that there's no pope there's no magisterium and so in some ways what you
have is leadership by whoever has you know the biggest audience now right now one of the
most revered scholars is Yusuf al-Karadawi and he says he takes an opposite position
from professor Ramadan on the question of suicide attacks in Israel he has a program
with 40 million listeners and he has a website and he says that suicide attacks on Israeli
citizens even women and children are acceptable because all of Israel is a militarized society
and all citizens are combatants so the question here is he has you know he's got this very
large very large audience and since there is no arbitrating authority there's no single
authority is not what Islam becomes whoever has the most has the biggest audience has
the sway in what what the faith is I think that no I think it's it's it's true if we
look at what is happening now in the Muslim majority countries as well as in the West
that there is something that we can call a crisis of authority in the book radical reform
I'm tackling this from many viewpoints and not only from you know political discussion
is really even in our way to deal with sciences human sciences ethics we have this problem
you know when you don't know how to manage diversity it ends up with division and not
knowing who is leading and this is the way we don't have a church so we have diversity in
Islam so we have to know how to manage this and it's problematic and I would say that if you
look today at what is happening even though we have this crisis if you look today at what is
happening around the world you will see that we have many councils still the mainstream is not
promoting you know violence and an extremist views the mainstream is promoting you know what
he said for example about Western Muslims or Muslims living in Muslim majority countries is
about transparency no corruption democratization this is the mainstream that is coming now we
have voices and you speak about you Sufl Kardawi and you are saying that I was a support one of
supporters of him you know I have one position in every one and everybody I'm dealing with in
history in the past and as is even the present I read what he said and I tried to be selective so
for example on that point killing I said no I disagree on identity and when he once was very
harsh with me saying no we have one identity and since Islamic I said no we have multiple identity
I'm Swiss by nationality Egyptian by memory Muslim by religion European by culture these are my
identities he didn't agree so I talk to people but I know that on this for example in Israel I
disagree with him but you cannot reduce you Sufl Kardawi in the world today to this position
because he had many other positions on women on the society on democracy he is promoting something
which is he called democracy in the Muslim majority country that you have to consider by saying okay on
this we disagree and on that we need to have a critical debate you can adjust because one position
we don't like one position we remove the people from the landscape no they are part of the landscape
and they are heard in the Muslim majority countries so this is my position on that
well I'm certainly not going to criticize Islam for not having a pope and in fact it would be your
your vis-à-vis in this discussion was horribly in error in any case in the Christianity never had
only one pope and still doesn't I mean there were several Catholic claimants to the papacy at
different times just among Roman Catholics but today I mentioned one of them the pope of the
Coptic Christians based in Cairo the the Eastern Orthodox don't call their leader the pope they
call him the patriarch but the Christian world is full of Pope types usually anathematizing one
or another the pope is just the word that innocent Americans use for the man who claims to be the
leader of the Roman Catholic so I don't think it's possible in fact to have a moral authority
within religion because I think the two things it's so sharply divorced but this doesn't this
doesn't lead to just chaos because and it certainly doesn't lead to the dictatorship of minorities
or extremists in that give you two examples quickly in the case of the moral blackmail of
Denmark that was backed up by a physical threat to destroy its economy and and burn out its
embassies across the world well coordinated attack of sabotage against the small European
democracy the organizing group was a thing called the OIC the organization of the Islamic
Congress groups all the Muslim countries in the world it's an increasingly powerful lobby at
the United Nations hopes to pass an international resolution forbidding all criticism of religion
all forms of blasphemy and profanity every ambassador of those countries in Copenhagen went
to mr. Rasmussen the prime minister of Denmark and told him under the threat of violence he
should change his law so as to allow us to allow him to determine what went into the Danish
newspapers and when he said he couldn't do that things got a lot worse now that's the ambassador
of Egypt and the ambassador of Turkey and the ambassador of Belgium important countries in
case of Egypt containing an enormous Christian population coming to you as if they spoke for
a religion I this claim is true or it is not it's self-evidently not true but it is certainly
made don't let's be in any doubt about it and don't have let's have any doubt that it means to
extend its influence over the people who are sitting in this hall second very quick the
fat war against someone Rushdie in other words the offer of money to suborn murder for the crime
of writing the work of fiction in his own name by the spiritual leader of Shia Islam that's what
the fat work meant then means now was after the murder of many people associated or not
with the publication of the book repudiated ostensibly by the Iranian government after
long pressure and lobbying at the United Nations about 10 years ago I think that was but I've been
since then for the pleasure of going to Friday prayers at Tehran University twice to hear the
sermon and on both occasions there were banners and slogans saying that the the imams holy sentence
against someone Rushdie will never die it hasn't died with the Imam for many's death warrant will
always be carried out not I think a very good use of the premises of the university I can't speak
for whether it's a good occasion for Friday prayers or not well it brings me to a second point
you see there's something shady involved here some people say that Islam and Islamists give
themselves permission to lie to non-believers sounds like the sort of vulgar paranoid thing
that an Islamophobe would go around saying doesn't it with very easy to disprove except that it
hasn't been as that example we'll just illustrate and these are not minor threats these are threats
to the very core of what we believe is the essential thing for society which is the ability to ask
questions to read the books we choose to pursue unfettered investigations and these are flatly
negated by the by the claims of a religion that says it is the answer to everything can I can
respond to this because really I thought that's a no no no no the question is is no the point is
on on the cartoon issue the way you are translating things is problematic let me just come to some
of the facts here very quickly the first thing is that it happened in in October that the cartoon
were published between October till January nothing happened and I met the Muslim organizations in
Denmark and I told them and many were of the opinion don't react the ambassadors of Muslim
majority countries and Arab countries mainly asked the Prime Minister to meet with them he refused
and my position that he made me he made a mistake here because he should have met them telling them
I have no say in this it has to do with freedom of media this is not of my business he didn't do
this they took it as humiliation they went back they bought the tickets no no but look easily no no
no no no let me finish because we will come to the point here they went back and they bought
the ticket of a group of Muslims among them Muslim leaders in Denmark to go to Muslim
majority countries to just present what was done tell me Egypt is ruled by Islam is it Islam which
is used there Mubarak is a secular president isn't it Syria is a Muslim leader or is a secular
state all the main societies where the government use this because you know what happened is it's
easier to use the people to tell them against the West you can demonstrate but not against the
government which is an autocratic government so it's not religion is political instrumentalization
of popular emotions against the West just to make it a religious issue you cannot just avoid
talking about political instrumentalization of countries where there is no democracy and this
country are not Islamist countries they are secular autocratic countries on your third point I
can't possibly disagree with you of course there's a great deal of opportunism and demagogy and I'm
certain hypocrisy as well and in fact I have I will I will say that I've heard you and seen you
saying that before and I agree I don't I don't think I would classify a country that halls the
Christian leader of its minority on to the TV to say no it's not possible that could be have been
any exactly to give you a trivial instrument no I would not nor would I describe the alawait
regime it's an alawait sectarian regime not a secular one that is funded by Tehran and is the
funder of the murder gang Hezbollah as secular either no don't insult me not that it really hurts
me that much I don't feel humiliated or anything all right we're going to take some questions
whereas apparently the leader of a proud country like Egypt when a demand to and he makes to interfere
in the internal affairs of Denmark is not met feels I'm sorry I just to end this discussion for me
on my side is the only fact that you acknowledge that there is a political instrumentalization of
religion and you say I'm right that's enough for me this is exactly and you were earlier you were
trying to tell me what Karl Marx said on the subject that's your job that a valuable exchange I think
that was worth worth hearing but I know that there are people in the room and also listening in from
the satellite sites who want to have some of their questions asked and a few of them are along these
lines and they actually are aimed at you Mr. Hitchens because of your ringing endorsement really
of a secular society and atheism a question from Vale Colorado do Jewish Christian or other religions
have a greater claim on being religions of peace than Islam I mean is your beef really with Islam
or is it with all religion well I'm sorry the comrade from Yale tuned in so late I mean
late enough to miss the first four or five minutes of my ten minute introduction devoted to a close
exegesis of professor McCulloch's realization that Christianity had out genocided and out ward
and out crusaded itself finally by 1914 if you care to pick up I think you might be able to and
I'll sign it if you will pick it up my book God is not great you will find a discussion of the
warrants for slavery murder genocide and land theft that occur in the books of Moses and that
are an ineffasible offense to any civilized person and the reason why so many Jews are secular at
least one of the reasons so again I could go on but I really feel I don't need to a corollary
question would maybe it's just something funny what would atheism be a non-religion of peace
no if there's something probably very slightly intolerant by atheism at least so I hope I should
I might just say though because I really think first of all but I misunderstood me when I say
the American Constitution is godless I mean I was quoting the title of a famous study of it
by professor Israel Kramnik what I mean by that is to say the US Constitution only mentions
religion and God in its preambles when it means to say the ways in which they must be kept out of
the public square that's happens to be fact about our Constitution and the reason why we still have
it otherwise the Republic would have been destroyed long before and that its first amendment says
that religion can be no business of the government a statement no Muslim society could begin to make
thank but once again once again you can just refer to the Constitution and you will have Muslims
just referring to text and avoiding the practical consequences and sometimes the policies that
are promoted in one country and remember that the previous president George W Bush was talking when
going not for the same reasons as you are not from the same source because you were supporting the
war in Iraq but he was doing it in the name of God so the Constitution here is not preventing
someone from within to speak in the name of God even if he's voting exactly the same thing that in
the name of the peace that you are promoting you were for the war in Iraq I can't imagine you're
going to defend well from that from from that church I can no one was ever summoned to vote for
the war in Iraq in the name in the name of God and the president's own church as well as every
other church Christian church that I know of was opposed to the war for whatever little difference
that might make none to me this I think this one is for Professor Ramadan why are there no progressive
Muslim majority quest countries with rights for women and homosexuals etc no there I think that
once again if you look at the Muslim majority countries we cannot just have something which
is a monolithic vision of what is happening what is happening now in Muslim majority countries is
really before just looking at some dimensions of you know the rights of women within or the rights
of homosexuals for example is really to look at the situation in the whole society and the way
it's progressing now we have the great majority of the Arab countries they are under dictatorships
there is no freedom religious or secular society this is the same for all so if you look at this
and you are expecting from within an evolution in this society forget about it look now at what
is happening in Turkey Turkey is changing moving towards something which is a more democratic system
and you see within that our rights and discussion and critical discussion that are possible so I
would say that you cannot essentialize history and say the Muslims cannot do this it's evolving and
it's changing and it depends where you can have this kind of discussion and the first because
there are priorities the first is really to go towards democratization and transparency in the
Muslim majority countries and if you go to Indonesia even though we are far from a perfect
system you have much more discussion in Indonesia today about the principles the critical reading
of the text than you have in in you know Arab countries so I would say it's evolving there is
no state to school and now what is also interesting is look at what the Western Muslims living in
democratic system when they can express themselves when they are enjoying freedom and they are not
under the political pressure what they are producing as the Islamic contemporary thought it's moving
we are talking about citizenship we are promoting women's rights we are promoting the rights of
the people to live and to be respected without discrimination so look at the different historical
setting and you can see that it's moving and it's changing and there are new answers for new
challenges coming from Muslims are you saying Turkey is moving in a progressive direction as
it becomes more Islamist is that what you're saying that that's quite interesting the way you
translate what I said it says much more about what you think that's what I said but
well wait you said it was moving in a more progressive direction no what I said is that
even the people who are now leading the country that they are referring to Islam and they were
perceived as Islamist now we don't know how to call them are they Islamist or are they
moderate Muslims or are they ex Islamist the point is that no one here can deny the fact
that not only the government because we can be and we should be critical towards the government
but the people around and the intellectuals in Turkey and within the even the the party
you have new thoughts and they are coming with something that we didn't see even in the Muslim
majority countries in the Arab countries so speaking about the rule of flow and democracy
and transparency separating and and promoting what they are trying to promote and to be in tune
today with the European principles and I would say this is the only thing for me which is important
if for example Turkey is abiding by the European rules they should be able to integrate European
Union and not what we have now because it's a Muslim majority country we don't care about what
they are trying to do so don't reduce Turkey to labels there are dynamics there are people
who are promoting things that are quite interesting I went there many times and I can tell you the
women in Turkey the Turkish women for all the trends not only you know from the secular for
the Islamists everywhere they are promoting a better understanding of Islam a better
acknowledging and resisting discriminations and trying to work for more autonomy and I
would say this is what I said and this is what I promote well actually I agree with you that the
the was a very ossified at a turkish bureaucratic intolerance system that to some extent has been
opened by the challenge from Mr. Erdogan's party but the reason why Turkey continues to be looked
on a scans by so much of Europe is not because it's the Muslim majority country it was a Muslim
majority country long before the European Union was formed and no one no one's just discovered that
faith of most of its people as Muslim it's because of legal and political reasons one of them is
continually legal occupation of the Republic of Cyprus which is already a member of the European
Union and the expulsion of a large proportion of its population reduction of them to refugee status
Erdogan's been worse on that than his predecessors the other the second is the refusal of Turks to
admit that they're not the only people living in Anatolia that there's another nation called the Kurds
that lives there which has language and national rights which have been negated on that actually
the Erdogan party's been slightly better than some of the other Turks and the third is the
refute the continuing campaign of falsification and lying about the massacre the genocide of the
Armenian population a continuing disgrace which Erdogan which Erdogan has made hasn't spoken of in
the most luggage possible term a question from from Pittsburgh here is is there an acceptable
literature of interpretation of the Quran similar to the Jewish oral Torah does that make sense
yes of course you know if you you you come back to the first the classical Islamic tradition in
what we call firq law and jurisprudence and ethics and you know we have a huge classical
tradition the problem very often is that the Muslims themselves they neglect and ignore their own
tradition but also the people who are coming to Islam they are just driven by headlines and it's
they are simplifying the real the reality of you know you can get a phd in the states or anywhere
in the in the west without having one notion of what is called Islamic philosophy while the
Islamic philosophers the philosophers are referring to Islam as much as Maimonides and and and so many
we only know Avereis because he's very close to us but the fact that we refer only to him just
showing us how much we ignore about the others do you know that Descartes who came with the
rationality and doubt read himself read the thesis of Abu Hamed al-Razali who was talking about doubt
and doubt as a sense of getting certitude and unknowledge neglected not known I think that
the Islamic tradition is full of that we have to reconcile ourselves with our past in order to come
with a diversity of new visions for for the future and I think that this is a missing for all of us
I would say that this neglectfulness towards history and tradition is a problem within the Muslim
universe of reference as much as it is for Christianity and Judaism and all the other
great philosophies and religions we have a few questions here I don't think we can avoid this
tonight about Sharia it's become a kind of an assumption among many Americans now that what
Muslims are really after is the imposition of Sharia in every society in which they live even
Muslim minority countries and it's not a lot understood about Sharia but what is known is that
crimes such as adultery blasphemy apostasy and homosexuality are punishable by the death penalty
and to westernize this seems like a whole legal system that's a violation of human rights so
what is the intention with Sharia especially for Muslims living in the west is the idea that
eventually we get there and we all live under Sharia law you know this is a first is a legitimate
question it's an important question because many Muslims living not only in the west by the way
throughout the world you have Muslims they deny this they say no no they don't understand Sharia
or they reduce Sharia to the penal code and sometimes it happens but Sharia is not the
penal code and still with this that it's not only the penal code we really have a problem with the
understanding of Sharia by Muslims and the way it has to be understood in our time and once again
many interpretations here you have some Muslims and you cannot deny this their perception of Sharia
it starts with the punishment and then it goes towards social justice because you punish you
go to and this is for me once again problematic and I'm critical of this but I cannot deny the
fact that you have a tiny minority of Muslim scholars they think like that in Nigeria in
Saudi Arabia in Egypt everywhere you have another understanding of Sharia which is we start with
social justice and then the punishment is part of the whole process and my position I have wrote
many times on that for example in western muslims and the future of Islam the understanding of
Sharia is the way towards faithfulness in which we are faithful to some of our principles so it's
not a closed system Muhammad Abdul in the 19th century when he was studying he was under the
the British colonization and he was we don't want this colonization and we want them out of our
country but their parliamentarian system is the best for us as Muslims it doesn't contradict our
system and he was of the opinion that the democratic system is not opposed to Islam so you have
transcending this my position on this is that Sharia is the way towards faithfulness it's the
way towards justice it's the way towards mutual respect and and and living together so this is
why for example when I read the american constitution or any european constitution today and it is said
all the citizens men and women black or white should be treated equally by law this is my Sharia
not going to change this so the point for me it's when the principles are respected and the
principles of justice is something which are not too system that are opposed they are principles
that are common that we can live together so this is where from an islamic viewpoint from
within the muslim communities in the west you will see that the mainstream position coming
from all the muslim organizations in the west is we abide by the law of the country we are loyal to
our country and we act as active and responsible citizens within the country and the only thing
that we can say today is look at the facts and the figures and not only the perceptions because I
was shocked but what I got as an image I didn't think that this could happen in the states what we
had with the the community center in new york by people saying islamization of of america I saw
this in europe I thought it was impossible to have it here and then it came here meaning that the
people are scared they are there is a great deal of mistrust these people are silently colonizing us
so this is where the muslims and this is why your question is important should come and say look
we are american citizens we abide by the law we respect the constitution we want to be treated
equally mutual respect and equal rights no discrimination for any religion or no religion
at all this is the way it should be and if you look at facts and figures millions of western
muslims today are just abiding by the law and they got the three else that I'm talking about in the
book is the first they abide by the law the second they speak the language of the country
english as you speak english or german or british they speak the language and they are loyal to
the country they want the best for their country this is what it means to be a western muslims or
western or muslim europeans or muslim american and I think that these have the muslims should also
speak out about what they want but they also need to be heard when they say things like this
because I have been repeating this for 25 years and after one 25 years what I get is
smart guy he has a double talk he says this but he means something else so if someone is
telling you always when you say something that you have something else in mind there is no
discussion this is once again the end of the discussion because the the point is that there
is no trust there is no potential discussion and critical discussion and by doing this let me tell
you something which is also important it's very counterproductive because at the end there is no
dialogue it's not possible to talk because if you talk and say oh you are if it's you talk in a good
way it means that you have bad intentions and if you you speak in a bad way oh now we know your
intentions so what do you do what are you going to do could we accept that as a closing statement
from you and let mr. Hitchman's because we've gone over that's fine I think that's a fine closing
statement thank you do I get the same question I don't mind would you like to close with that
on sharia it really is I find okay I like I like surprises um well sharia just means law I mean
all people say sharia law are making an elementary mistake and of course it it's not the case that
every thief has their hand locked off in muslim society or every adulterer gets stoned and I'm
and I'm perfectly sure that's not just because it would diminish the labor force so
radically or or so to speak disable it I think it's more because of something I've
claimed to notice elsewhere which is the religion is man made and so there are enormous discrepancies
in how these things are promulgated and also how they are enforced and the most countries and societies
come quite early and easily to the conclusion that their own religions are in one form or another
not not really practicable the same I mean after all in
in Saudi Arabia women can't even drive a car whereas in Iran she can vote not for much but she can
as much as a man can let's say her vote can be stolen and degraded as much as her husband's or
her brother there's an infinite variation I don't know I can't shake what I was what I heard saw
once on the BBC from someone who's a career in London I follow I don't know if you know him you
wouldn't like him and jump chowdery so well very well known noisemaker around around London
complaining about secularism Judaism was kind of thing and he's been in trouble with the law a few
times and was interviewed on BBC went on about how nothing would change until the green flag of
Islam was flying over Downing Street and Buckingham Palace and so forth and was asked I thought quite
mildly by the BBC interviewer said well if you if this is the way you feel about Sharia and about
total Islamic rule wouldn't you feel happier moving to a country where they already had it
and which is it I mean a polite question but a rather cheap one I mean
but still what didn't prepare me for the answer chowdery looked straight at the guy and straight
into camera said what makes you think this is your country I thought it's a very good question now
why do you feel I know I think I know partly why I feel why do you think it's necessary to affirm
that and of course a Muslim well should learn the language should obey the laws should
observe the customs and so I mean what most immigrants don't feel they
so to be absolutely have to say that the answer I suspect is that it's embarrassing to notice
that in places like as far apart as Sweden and as Spain there are groups of people who say their
countries should be part of the caliphate and that that's why they've come here and if it wasn't for
those people um you wouldn't be in this position so it seems to me that uh to be in order to be
consistent you should you should fear them and dislike them find them morally and intellectually
repulsive at least as much as if not more than I do and I don't say that you don't but I do think
that that is that is the urgent priority on the ladies question about where would be the best
country to live if you were a Muslim and wanting to be a member of a sexual
or gender minority or I think she said a female or homosexual so hard to confuse
um actually the easiest the easiest place for you to to live in that case would probably be
I was thinking about it while Professor I'm sorry would probably be this will be my closing
state would almost certainly be either Bosnia Herzegovina or Kosovo culturally culturally
Muslim democratic open societies in southern and Balkan Europe that were saved from obliteration
by the power of the United States which has never had a word of thanks for what it did
and which remains a secular country with a godless constitution
that's a note on which that's a note on which we can end which is the last best hope of humanity
thank you all right thank you both I hope it's been an enlightening evening
