Yeah, I hear some echoes of people could. Yeah, I think we have to mute. It's us probably.
So I will mute myself before once you start. So, okay, we were having now, like, Michael
talk. And I think where is your screen share? Are you sharing the screen?
Correct. I'm already sharing the screen. Yeah. Can people not see my screen?
We don't we don't see your screen, but it might be you don't see this.
Are people not seeing the slide? It's us. It's us that we are not
a swap video. There you go. Okay, so now we have you. And let's confirm with the other.
Yeah, the audience can see it. So we are fine. Okay. Welcome, Michael. Thank you for
participating in our conference and workshop and the stage is yours.
Very good. Thank you so much for inviting me. This has been an extremely interesting workshop.
Lots of new ideas and I look forward to sharing some more information with you and some thoughts.
All of the primary papers and if you need to get in touch with me, these two websites,
you can reach me all the papers, the data, the software, everything is there. What I'm going to
tell you about today is a framework that I've been developing based on our empirical data. So
probably about 15 years of work at the intersection of developmental biology and computer science
that has driven my attempt to pull together some some some deep ideas for how to understand this
and how to move it forward. And I call this TAME that stands for technological approach to mind
everywhere. And basically, it's a framework for understanding truly diverse intelligences.
You'll see what I mean by that, based on fundamentals of a kind of goal directed behavior
in unconventional agents. So the main points that I would like to transmit today are these.
First, that the question of how much agency or cognition is to be attributed to a particular
system has to be treated as an engineering problem, not philosophical pronouncements of
what various systems can and can't have, but actually an empirical approach to find the
optimum level of description to enable control and prediction of that system.
And I'm going to talk about the fact that very diverse intelligences can actually be directly
compared with each other and placed in a sort of the same space. If we think about the spatial
temporal scale of the goals that these systems are capable of working towards. So this gives
rise to a kind of a model of what I call the cognitive light cone based on the types of goals
that these systems are able to represent and pursue. And I'm going to show you that synthetic
bioengineering and some advances in biology provide an incredibly large option space for new
bodies and new minds. These new creatures don't have standard evolutionary backstories in this.
They are a very important set of systems for impacting our understanding of evolution,
of what the genome actually does and so on. And I'm going to show you some very specific
examples from developmental biology, looking at morphogenesis as a kind of unconventional
collective intelligence, meaning the collective intelligence of cells, solving problems in
morpho space. That will be the example in which I'm going to illustrate some of these concepts,
but I think they're much, much broader than that. And I'm going to show you some data showing that
developmental bioelectricity provides an interesting window on the scaling of cognition,
both during development and during evolution. So I started this framework prompted by a really
interesting conference at the Diverse Intelligence Summer Institute that the Templeton Foundation
put on, where we were asked to come up with a way to compare truly diverse intelligences. And this
isn't just humans, apes, birds, and maybe octopus, things like that, but it's actually,
it needs to, a good framework is going to enable us to compare and contrast really unusual creatures,
colonial organisms, swarms like ants and bees and so on, but also synthetic biology, so engineered
novel life forms that never existed before, both unicellular and multicellular. We should be able
to use the same framework with AI, so artificial intelligences, whether embodied or purely software
or whatever. And of course, exobiological agents that we may find during exploration of off the
planet, if that ever happens. And the key to this framework is that it has to move experiments forward,
it cannot be pure philosophy, it has to actually suggest, make predictions and suggest novel
capabilities. So the outline for today's talk, I'm going to, is in basically in three parts.
First, I'm just going to talk about some examples and some, some, some ways in which we should
broaden typical cognitive science approaches. Then I will talk about this framework, the
philosophical principles, and then some very specific hypotheses for how we can define selves
and how cognition can scale. And then I'm going to show you the vast majority of the talk is data.
So I'm going to show you how we've been using these ideas to understand and control morphogenesis
as a collective intelligence. And then I'm going to show you some novel synthetic
organisms that have never existed before, and these are called xenobots. So the first thing I
want to think about is the fact that when we usually think about intelligence and cognition
and agency, we think about the subject of all of those things, the self. So the self is this
construct that is the owner of complex memories of credit assignment among the individual parts
that function together to provide positive and negative outcomes. It's the, it's the owner of
goals and preferences and things like that. And the interesting thing about this is that
biology shows us that these, these selves are extremely malleable. They change over time,
not just evolutionary time, but actually during the time of the, the time of the organism.
So for example, here's, here's one example. So this is a caterpillar. And it's a creature,
it's a soft bodied kind of creature that crawls and chews plants. And it needs to turn into this
very different type of creature that flies and drinks nectar. And because of that, the brain
is completely different. So the caterpillar brain is quite different from the, from the
butterfly or moth brain. And during this process of metamorphosis, that brain is largely liquefied,
the cells, many of the cells die, most of the synaptic connections are broken,
and a completely new brain is rearranged. This is all during the lifetime of the agent. So if,
you know, if you're philosophically minded, you can ask yourself what it's like to be an agent
during, during the time that your brain is completely reorganized. One of the most amazing
things about this is that the memories which caterpillars have, in fact, persist through this
process. So the, the butterfly remembers training that the caterpillars underwent and there's,
there's some nice data on this, you can see reviews of that here. But this is, this is in fact,
not just for, for unusual metamorphosing creatures, all of us made the journey of the cartesian cut
from a single cell. So we all started life as a single fertilized egg. This is something that
molecular biologists would look and say, this is a machine. This is this, you know, it's a molecular
machine. It has lots of biochemical components functioning according to rules. It's a very nice,
you know, it's a very nice piece of physics. And then at some point, this, this self assembled
into one of many creatures in some of which at least or possibly all of them have what we consider
to be cognition, let's say a human in the case of a human embryo. So all of us went from,
undertook this journey. And so, so one thing that is clear in biology is that there is no
sharp line that is supportable where you can say this was just physics and then something happened
and now you have a cognitive being. So, so we have to understand how, how cognition scales
gradually across these kinds of its scales and it modifies gradually, both during evolutionary
time scales and the animals own development. So this is another way in which ontogeny recapitulates
phylogeny because we all take this, take this journey. So in fact, we like to think of ourselves
as integrated beings in tell true intelligences and then maybe ants and bees have some sort of
collective intelligence. But actually, we are all collective intelligences, we are all made of parts.
We are in particular, we have collections of neurons and various other cells. And so when
you look through, through life forms, you see that they are made of nested subunits, not only
structurally, we all know that we are made of organs, made of tissues, which are made of cells,
and so on, not just structurally, but actually functionally and cognitively because there's
this evolution uses this multi scale competency architecture, where every layer solves problems.
So from the swarm to the individual animal to the organs to the cells in the subcellular components,
all of these systems solve various kinds of problems in diverse spaces. Now,
what evolution does is reuse some of the same problem solving tricks in different spaces.
Now, we are all very familiar with understanding intelligence when we see it as
operating in three dimensional space, behavioral space. So we see these birds,
they know how to pick up cigarette butts and receive a reward. And we say, okay, that's pretty
intelligent, the bird has learned something. All of our sense organs point outwards. And so we are,
we are very familiar, many, many animals are very good at detecting agency in the outside world.
But if we had sense organs pointing inwards, let's say a kind of biofeedback where at every step of
your life from childhood, you knew exactly what your liver or your pancreas was doing with respect
to what are the physiological states, what are the actions that it takes, we would then have no
problem recognizing some of their behavior as intelligence. And what I mean by intelligence
is simply problem solving, to move to better regions of some state space. And these spaces
might be the space of all gene expression, of course, these are all very high dimensional spaces,
I sort of collapse everything into two spaces here. But the space of all possible gene expression,
morpho space, which we'll spend the most of the talk about, which is the,
the space of possible configurations of the body. So anatomy, anatomical space,
and physiological space, okay, there are many, many examples, your organs and your cells are
solving problems in these spaces all the time. And we should be humble about the fact that
when we look at a system and try to understand how much and what kind of intelligence it has,
we are ourselves taking an IQ test, because recognizing goal directed problem solving behavior
in a system requires us to be smart enough to notice it, to notice the appropriate space,
and to understand what is the system doing. And many times when we don't see that,
we need to ask ourselves if we're in fact missing something important. So one of the things we
can say about intelligence in all these spaces is basically that kind of a generic statement
is basically that it's proportional to the ability to stay out of local minimum, to have a
kind of a wider view of what actions you should take. So that, for example, this from here to here
is the most direct path where this dog can get to where it wants to go. But actually, if it was
willing to have some patience and walk away from it for a while, it could then do much better.
And so there's this sort of local energy barrier that the more intelligent you are,
the more you're able to overcome these kinds of things. And one of the things that we now
are able to do with chimeric and bioengineering technologies is take this multi-scale biological
system and replace any, at any level, replace components of this with new components that
might be engineered, and they might be other cells or molecules of other creatures. And so we can
build these composite beings that are not standard issue evolved creatures. So we can replace
any level of organization, we can replace with components that are somewhere on this scale,
somewhere between evolved and designed. So maybe they're natural, maybe they're modified,
maybe they're completely engineered, and they will have some degree of intelligence,
maybe they're just pure mechanism in the sense of the very passive mechanisms,
or maybe they will be quite intelligent problem solving components. And already,
we start to see this, right? So you have humans with various appliances, so basically early
stage cyborgs, we have bioengineered animals, we have synthetic machines like hybrots, which
are brains driving robotic bodies and so on. And so you can see this at every portion,
we can start to replace these components with DNA or with tissues and so on.
And all of these are going to be somewhere on this hierarchy. See what's important about this is
once we start changing all of these things, we can no longer use the familiar touchstones
of phylogeny. We can't say, well, this kind of looks like a fish, so therefore I expect
fish level sophistication of cognition, because all of these synthetic and we'll come back to this,
these synthetic creations are not going to have origins or components that make it very easy to
say what's going on. So we need a kind of cybernetic understanding of cognition that isn't
based on what you're made of or how you got here, but is actually based on much more much deeper
principles of what your cognition is like. And so that is the beginning of how we started thinking
about this approach. And let's talk a little bit about some of the theory now and then we'll get
to the data. So the foundations, and I only say this because I like to make this explicit,
you're going to see all of this in the next stuff in the next sections, but I'd like to make the
philosophical underpinnings of all this completely explicit. So we all know what's going on,
nothing is hidden here. The first thing is that I think we need to take evolution and
developmental biology very seriously. And that means doing away with binary categories,
when we talk, is it really cognitive? Is it just physics or does it have real memories?
There are no sharp categories here. Everything is very gradual and we'll talk about that.
The point here is that we're not trying to anthropomorphize simple systems. In fact,
nowadays, now that we understand evolution and bioengineering, I'm not sure there's any such
thing as anthropomorphizing in the sense that humans have some sort of magical properties
that can be incorrectly attributed to other types of beings. I don't think that exists.
I think as long as you're appropriately scaling your model to whatever system you're working with
and it's giving you empirical advantages, that's how we have to do this because there's no other
way to do it. And so I'm going to stick very closely to an engineering approach where I'm not
worried about talking about goals in the cybernetic sense. I'm not worried about trying to avoid
attributing too much agency to things because attributing too much agency
is just as bad as not attributing enough to an engineer. These are identical errors.
And so we'll talk about the fact that agents are a patchwork of multiple unconventional
intelligences at different levels. I don't believe there's any magic in the material.
There's nothing really magic about synapses or protoplasm or anything else.
So we're going to be material independent here. And I really want to understand biology,
which Chris Langton refers to as life as it can be. So not zoology, not just the types of plants
and animals we have here now, but actually what's unique and important about all cognitive systems.
So one of the things that this framework does from an engineering perspective
is simply say that there's a continuum, a smooth continuum with some waypoints
along this journey, where the way that you need to understand the cognitive
capacity of whatever system you're dealing with is really defined by what is the most efficient,
most optimal way to interact with that system, the way to change the way the system functions.
So if you're dealing with a certain class of hardware systems like clocks, for example,
your only option is modification of the hardware at the lowest level. You're not going to teach
it anything. You're not going to convince it of anything. Hardware modification is your only
option. Then there's a more interesting class of devices like thermostats, which are a little
further along because they have an encoded set point. So they spend energy to maintain a specific
goal state, and you can interact with them in a very interesting way. You can rewrite or alter
the goal state, and then the machine will now pursue that goal, let's say a different temperature
range, without you having to rewire the hardware. You don't have to change the hardware of the system.
In fact, you don't even have to know about the hardware. You don't have to know how it works.
As long as you know what the set point is, you can recognize where it's encoded and so on.
Then there's a whole other class of systems like this, where you actually need to know even less
about what's going on because you can train them. And so human beings have been training animals
for thousands of years without knowing any neuroscience because they appreciated the
important fact that systems like this can be modified based on stimuli, based on rewards
and punishments, and you can actually rely on the system itself to reconfigure its own internal
mechanisms in terms of plasticity and various other things. And you don't need to do that. You
don't need to micromanage it. You don't even need to know how it works. You just need to understand
how to motivate the system, how to communicate with the system. And then we get to some very
advanced creatures here, where you can actually communicate not simply with rewards and punishments,
but actually with cogent reasons for doing things. So this is a very engineering approach
because the idea is not to have philosophical feelings about whether thermostats do or do not
have real desires. The point is actually for any given system, in any given, let's say, novel
biological or novel engineered system, the task is very simple. Which kind of model gives you
the best prediction of control? So using these kind of models on these systems will give you
nothing of use. But actually using these kind of models on sophisticated systems
actually leaves a lot on the table as far as capabilities. And this is one of the limitations
of modern molecular medicine, is that the assumption is that everything is a piece of
passive hardware like this and must be dealt with at the hardware level. So genomic editing, pathway
rewiring, pathways, protein engineering, everything is focused on the hardware. We've
actually done a lot of work showing that some of these other approaches are much more powerful
in medical kinds of circumstances where you're trying to get the system to do something complex.
So the one way to think about how all of these different very diverse types of systems can be
related to each other is simply to try to map, and again, I've collapsed space into one dimension,
this is almost like a Minkowski kind of diagram, where we can plot on a diagram of space and time,
what is the scale of the goals that a given system is able to pursue. Now remember, this is not a
diagram of how far a system can sense or how far away it can act, but actually the size of the
goals that a system is able to pursue. So if you're a bacterium or something or a tick or something
like that, you are only interested in very local concentrations of certain compounds, you may have
a little bit of memory going backwards, you may have a little predictive capacity going forwards,
but everything you're doing is in a very small radius of goal-directed activity, you're only
interested in very local things, and in fact, you're not capable of caring about things that are
very far away. So it forms a kind of cognitive light cone of the things that your cognitive
system is capable of doing, and so we can think about other animals that may have some pretty
good memory going backwards, a little bit of predictive capacity going forwards, but still
unable to really care about things that are going to happen two months from now in the next town,
it's just impossible for some of these. But if you're a human, for example, you might have an
enormous light cone, in fact, uniquely among animals, you might care about things that will for
sure take longer than your lifespan. Some of your goals are actually not achievable because
your lifespan is not as big as your goal space. And then we can imagine all sorts of other
shapes for possible alien or synthetic kinds of creatures, and of course, all of this is nested.
So we are a patchwork of modules within modules, each of which is capable, whether in physiological
space or anatomical space or behavioral space, contain various sizes of goals, very large, very
small, and so on. Now, what's really interesting is that the scale of these cells can change quite
rapidly. So here, this is one cell, this is a lacrimaria, there's no brain, there's no nervous
system. This is one cell that is handling all of its anatomical, physiological, behavioral,
metabolic needs at the level of a single cell. Now, these cells, you know, relatives of these
single cells can collaborate together to work on very large things. Here you see a multicellular
body, this is a salamander. If you amputate the limb, the cells immediately begin to grow,
they will continue to grow and shape a new limb until it's complete, and then they stop. So we'll
talk in a minute about what this is. This is an anatomical homeostasis where the set point is very
large. All of these cells are solving a problem in anatomical space, they start out in a region of
anatomical space that's not good, they want to get to the much better region, that is their goal,
and they know how to, the collective is able to get there. So that's the scaling of goals that
occurs during evolution, but there's actually a reduction that takes place and we call that cancer.
So what happens is when individual cells, and this is a human glioblastoma, when individual cells
become disconnected, functionally disconnected, I'll show you how this works, functionally
disconnected from these large-scale goals, they revert back to an ancient unicellular amoeba-like
lifestyle where their only goals are to reproduce and to optimize certain metabolic functions,
which means migrate wherever life is good. So the boundary between self and world, in this case,
these cells basically treat the rest of the body as just an external environment. They're not more
selfish than any other biological construct, they're equally selfish, just that the self is not
very small. So that boundary between self and world can grow and shrink. And so the way you can
schematize it is simply this, that you have individual cells, and this takes place at many
layers, I'm just gonna introduce this with this example of cells. So individual cells have some
degree of being able to compute and remember and make predictions about states of their local
environment, but when they join into networks, and in particular I'm gonna talk about electrical
networks, these networks are actually have a lot, have higher IQ, they're not only measuring
information from wider spatial areas, meaning they're integrating lots of signal spatially,
but they actually have higher computational capacity and they're able to have larger scale
goals. And so this is what we see, you can sort of track the width and space and time of what
these cells are concerned with. And here's a very important component of this, which is stress.
This idea that what stresses different kinds of agents is basically a delta between
your goal states and the state you're in now. Stress is what drives you to make changes,
whether it be through gene expression or physiology or behavior, to get closer to your
goals. So stress is a kind of metric, but what's very interesting about stress is,
stress isn't just that delta, stress is the ability to export that delta to your neighbors.
So the idea is that all of these cells are able to measure states much larger than what
individual cells can care about, and thus reduce the delta for much more complex states.
So one can say that if you tell me what you're stressed about, I can make a pretty good guess
about your cognitive sophistication. So if you're stressed about local, if the most complicated
thing that could possibly stress you is local glucose level, then you're probably something
like a bacterium. If you're stressed about the state of the economy on earth, then you're probably
human level or above. Being able to be stressed by complex large scales of events is a very
strong driver of sophistication. And so what you can see, now let's look at some data here,
what you can do is you can introduce oncogenes, in particular human oncogenes, into normal cells
in this frog embryo. This is a tadpole, so here's the eye, here's the gut, the spinal cord is back
here. So we can introduce these oncogenes. And what you can see, the first thing that happens
when these oncogenes are active is they cause the cells to detach electrically from their neighbors
and to enter an aberrant bioelectrical state. This is a voltage map, and I'll show you in
a minute, we use this a lot. We map the electrical state of these cells, and here they are, you can
actually catch them converting to this kind of ancient amoeba-like state. And the most important
thing is that you can actually suppress this process, despite the fact that the oncogene is there.
If you grab control of the bioelectric state of the cell by co-injecting an ion channel,
that's going to, even though the oncogene is very strongly expressed, there may be no tumor,
because you're managing the goals that these cells are going to follow. They are now connected
to their neighbors, and they're all working towards making a nice, you know, nice skin
muscle and everything else. One of the most important things that evolution discovered
to do that is this thing called a gap junction. So gap junction is this, it's a primitive synapse,
it's an electrical synapse used throughout the body that enables cells to directly communicate
with each other through their, to connect, to directly connect their intercellular miliars.
And what that means is that traditional signaling like this, you have one cell and it produces some
kind of signaling factor, and it, you know, it diffuses and this cell can feel it. This,
it's very easy for these cells to remain, to remain separate and keep their identity,
because once you receive a signal like this, you know it came from the outside. And so you can
ignore it, you can, you can, you can remember it, or you can not remember it. You have, this
cell has its set of memories, and this cell has its set of memories about past events that have
happened, and it's very easy for them to be separate. But once cells become coupled by these
gap junctions, something very interesting happens, and the information that comes across
does not have any metadata about the owner. Okay, so anything that happens to this cell that triggers
some kind of a second messenger response that serves as a memory engram of that experience,
once that propagates into this cell, this cell now has no way to tell whether that information
originated within, was related to this cell, or in fact it came from this cell. So all of the
experiences and, and prior history of this cell are now shared by them both. They cannot separate
who's who, it's a kind of mind meld, so to speak, because their, their internal milures are linked
in an important way. And so now a lot of their individuality is really stripped, right? You get,
you now get this one system with a larger, larger networks, larger IQ, lots of memory of, of, of
what happened to both cells, but it's no longer possible to keep that very strict separation,
and this is how goals scale. So what you can do, and we're making some very, some very rigorous
models of this is you can start with very simple homeostatic loops, single cells, all they do,
let's say pH, right? All they do is they sort of, they measure the pH, they compare the set point,
and then they either load, acid load, or efflux, that's it. And so these very small, very humble
goals, once you start connecting these cells by gap junctions, you have a bioelectrical medium,
you have this excitable medium that's able to store and process very large states as goals,
and this is something that's, that's been worked a lot in hot field networks and other kinds of
systems. So we are, we are making those kind of models to understand large scale memories,
in particular pattern memories, as a scaling of simple homeostatic units in electrical networks,
right? It's a kind of a connectionist approach. So let's, so let's look at, let's look at some,
some real data and let's see what, what you can do with all this. And so we'll do two things. We'll
talk about morphogenesis as a collective intelligence, and then we'll look at this, this novel proto-organism.
Okay. And we're going to try to understand how these goal memories are actually stored and processed.
So the mechanisms by which collective intelligences of cells store set point information. So the first
thing I just want to mention is that there are, there's huge plasticity in living things, which
has really important implications for evolution. This is a, this is a tadpole that we've made.
There are no eyes in the primary where they're supposed to go. So these are nostrils, here's the
brain, here's the gut. So what we've done is we suppressed the primary eyes, but we've, we induced
an eye on the tail, and we can have a separate discussion about how we do that. We do that through
the techniques that I'm talking about today. We induce the eye on the tail, and we have this
machine that tests these animals for visual learning and basically trains them for certain
behaviors and visual, visual cues. We find out that these animals can see perfectly well.
This, this eye synapses onto the spinal cord, not the brain, and their behavior is quite normal.
They can, they can learn, they can see, they're very nice, very nice visual behaviors. And so
what this means is that the, the ability of, of, of evolution to explore the, the, the various
configurations is greatly potentiated by the fact that if things happen, let's say there's a mutation
that moves the eye, no problem. Your behavioral repertoire doesn't automatically fall apart
such that now your fitness is very low. In fact, the animal can, the animal can still,
still function and then you can explore other, other consequences of, of that mutation. So,
so this is, so this is really important. And this ability, this, this, this plasticity and this
ability to handle novel circumstances, right? That's the key here is the novelty. This animal
evolved for millions of years to process visual input from the eye fields, but one changed and,
and it can, it can handle this. This is another example of problem solving and physiological
space. So here's, here's a flatworm. These are planarium. I'm going to show you much more,
much more of this. These flatworms have this amazing property of regeneration. So if, if you
cut off their heads, for example, they will regrow a new head. In fact, they regrow everything.
So what we found is that if you take one of these planarians and you expose them to barium
chloride, so barium is a non-specific potassium channel blocker. It's a really a bad problem
because now these cells can't pass potassium. So the heads of, of the heads of these planaria
literally explode overnight. I just, let's go head deep progression. They literally explode.
But what's incredible is that over the next couple of weeks, if you leave the animal in the barium,
they will regrow brand new heads that are completely normal, that are barium adapted.
They have no problem with barium whatsoever. So what we did was we, we did some transcriptomic
analysis to simply ask the question, what, what new genes are expressed in these animals
that are not expressed in these animals? You know, how is it that they're barium adapted?
What happened? And it turns out it's actually a very small number of genes that was changed
in order to, to do this. So now think about the, the critical part here is, is two things. One is
that barium is not anything that planaria find in nature. So there's never been evolutionary
selection to, to put up with, with barium. That's a completely novel. And the other thing is that
cells in the system don't reproduce quickly the way bacteria do. So you can't use some sort of a
selectionist explanation that basically there, everybody tries random sets of gene expression
and whoever survives repopulates the head. There's no time for that. These cells don't turn over that
fast. So it's almost the problem here. Think about this problem. You have tens of thousands of
different genes that you can turn on and off. It's sort of, I visualize this as a nuclear reactor
control room, right? Your cells are poisoned. You have this physiological stressor. The cells
are poisoned. Everything's melting down. You have to find a very small number of genes that you're
going to up and down regulate to solve this problem. You've never seen this problem before.
How do you know which things you are going, which genes you're going to turn on and off?
And so part of that might be some sort of generalization from other problems you've had that
may have been similar. For example, excitotoxicity, epilepsy, things like that may be similar to
this, but it requires an incredible amount of problem-solving ability to navigate that
transcriptional space, that space of all gene expression, to find exactly what you're looking
for. So that's an example in physiology. Now let's look at examples in anatomy. So this here
is a cross-section through the kidney tubule of a nut of a salmander. And if you look, the normal
tubule has eight to 10 cells or so that work together to build a lumen of a particular size.
These tubules have a particular diameter. What you can do is you can make these
nuts with progressively larger cells. And you do that by inducing extra copy numbers of their
chromosomes. Amazingly, the cells put up with it and they just simply get bigger. The cells get
bigger. As the cells get bigger, what you will see, and this isn't our work. This goes back to the
40s. What you will see is that fewer and fewer cells are now working together to make basically
the same size lumen. So they're adjusting the number of cells based on this really novel and
unexpected outcome of having to build a salamander with much larger bricks. So this is, if we had
a robotics building something, you could give it a completely different size of brick and it would
make adjustments and things would still work. We don't have anything like that. The most amazing
part of this is that if you make cells that are truly enormous, what will happen is just one cell
will bend around itself and achieve the same outcome. So completely different molecular mechanisms,
not cell-to-cell communication, but now cytoskeletal bending that gets you to the same place using a
different set of molecular components in service of a large-scale anatomical feature. So this is
very much looks like a kind of top-down control where the goal of making a tubule can be implemented
with diverse, it's got that degeneracy, it can be implemented with diverse molecular mechanisms
and the system executes whatever it needs at the lower levels to maintain the correct region of
anatomical space at the higher levels. We don't understand how this works, but it fits nicely
William James' definition of intelligence, which is same goal through different means,
the ability to reach your goal when things are changing, including in this case, not just changes
of external environment, but changes of your own components. Your cells are now way bigger than
evolution prepared you for and you can still do what you need to do. Here's another example. This is
a frog. Frogs, unlike salamanders, normally do not regenerate their legs and so what we've done is
in some of our work that aims towards regenerative medicine, we've figured out how to
make them regenerate their legs. When you do that, something very interesting happens. This is an
early leg. Here's a toenail, here's some toes. These early legs don't look anything like the way
that legs normally develop. Eventually they get to the same place and they make a very nice frog
leg at the end, but the intermediate paths are not like developmental strategies at all. In fact,
they look kind of like a plant really. It's just a different way to navigate morphospace to get to
the same outcome. What you see here is the biology has this incredible plasticity of behavior, of
physiology, and of anatomical construction to get to the same goals via very different paths.
As I'm going to show you in a minute, also from diverse starting positions. That plasticity,
that intelligence of these systems is really important to understand. As we think about shape,
we have a very basic question. Where is anatomy specified in the first place? You start life as
a collection of blastomeres, your bunch of cells descended from the egg, and this is a cross-section
of a human torso. This is amazing. Look at this incredible invariant order. All of the cells,
the organs, everything is in the right position, the right orientation, the right location relative
to each other. How does it know where these things should actually go? People naturally
say the genome, but of course, we know how to read genomes now. What's in the genome is
the specification of the micro-level hardware. DNA specifies the proteins. There's nothing in
the genome that directly talks about anatomical size, shape, symmetry type. It's all about the
micro-level hardware. We need to understand how does this order arise? We need to understand
if part of it is missing. How do we repair or edit this? How do we get the cells to rebuild?
And then as engineers, we want to go one step further and ask, well, what else could these
cells build? And how could we convince them to build something completely different than their
default outcome? I've already shown you this, that these individual cells are very competent
on their individual cell scale, but it gets much more interesting in examples like this.
This here, what you're seeing here is this is a normal tappel. So here are the eyes, here's the
brain, here's the gut. And these tappels need to become a frog. In order for a tappel to become a
frog, they have to rearrange their face. So this means that they have to move their jaws,
have to move forward, their eyes have to move inward, everything has to move. And it was thought
previously that somehow the genetics basically tells each organ the direction and the amount
to move, because then you can always go from a standard tappel to a standard frog. So what we
did was we made these, we call them Picasso frogs. They are completely mixed up, everything is in
the wrong place. The jaws are off to the side, the eyes are on the back of the head, everything
is moved around. And when you do this, what you find out is that they still make largely quite
normal frogs, because all of these organs will move around in unnatural paths. In fact, sometimes
they go too far and they actually have to have to come back. They will keep moving until a correct
frog face is built. So what the system actually does is the genetics doesn't specify the movements.
The genetics specifies the seed that constructs a machine that minimizes error. It's able to,
from novel starting configurations, it's progressively able to minimize the delta
between where we are now and what the correct face is, which obviously raises some important
questions. How does it know what the correct frog face looks like? So in my group, what we've been
doing is this is kind of the standard model of developmental biology where you have gene
regulatory networks that turn each other on and off. Some of these genes make proteins that are
sticky or they diffuse or they're doing various things. So then there's this parallel physics
that goes on and then there's this process of emergence where if lots of individual pieces
do execute these local rules, then eventually something very complex happens like this nice
style manner. So this is all true. This is all happens. Of course, there is a feed forward,
a emergent component to this, but there's actually also a very important set of feedbacks
that occur both at the level of physics and genetics, and we're going to talk about the
physical one here today that basically executes a loop of anatomical homeostasis.
When the system is perturbed from its normal target morphology, and this might be with injury,
with pre-cancerous conversions, with teratogens, mutation, anything that takes the system away
from that's correct shape, kick starts cascades that will try to get back to the correct location
in morphospace. So what we needed to know was can we find the storage mechanism for this set
point? Every homeostatic process has a set point, and so what you want to do is you want to find
the storage mechanism of the set point and you want to know how to change it. Can we learn to
read and write these set points? And this is very important for the kind of biomedical approaches
that we're really focused on in my group because making changes here, which is what all of molecular
medicine tries to do is to make changes somewhere down here, is incredibly difficult as a means of
changing what we really care about, which is anatomy, which is solving birth defects and
traumatic injury and aging and things like this, because reversing this to be able to decide what
changes do you need to make is incredibly hard. This is an inverse problem that's probably
unsolvable to try to, in general, to try to reverse this highly nonlinear, highly recursive process
to say, what do I need to do at the micro level to get me to a desired system level state?
So what we would like to do is we'd like to change the set point, leave all of this intact. The cells
are very good at implementing different set points. We just like to change the set points. So where is
it encoded? So we took our inspiration from the brain. We know how this works in brain brains are
an excellent system for maintaining behavioral set points and being intelligent about getting to
those set points. So we said, how does this work in the brain? Well, in the brain, you've got some
cellular hardware that basically is a set of electrical networks that is the home of the
interesting electrical dynamics, which you might call the software, because it's able to be changed
by experience and so on. And what people in neuroscience are doing is this project called
neural decoding. So the commitment is that if you were to read and be able to decode all of the
electrical activity in the brain, you could infer the the memories, the preferences, the
goal states, you know, that's where it's all encoded. It's all encoded in the electrochemical
dynamics of what this hardware is doing. And what the nervous system is using all this for is to
coordinate muscles in three dimensional space so that you can move around and do various things.
What did evolution, where did this come from? You know, in evolution, this is a brain didn't
just appear out of nowhere. These electrical systems are actually ancient, even bacterial
biofilms have all of this stuff. So what did this look like before we had brains before we had
muscles for large scale behavior? It looked actually surprisingly similar. It we have the
exact same scheme. So you have all cells in the body are actually producing these these electrical
dynamics through the network. And what you can do and this is a video of a early frog embryo,
we're tracking the voltage, this is not a model or a simulation, this is real data,
you're looking at all the electrical dynamics, as you might when you look at a brain,
that we could try to read and we could test the hypothesis that these electrical dynamics
are the medium in which the collective intelligence of these cells is making decisions,
who's going to be anterior posterior left right, how many heads do we have and things like that.
So it's a very parallel project to what neuroscience is doing, but taken away from
sort of generalized away from neurons and and asked about all cells. So just again to nail this
down all cell this is developmental bio electricity, all cells have ion channels,
all cells set electrical resting potentials, they communicate those through gap junctions,
which we met a few slides ago, that can communicate them through to their to their neighbors using
the exact same mechanisms. And and here you can you can read about how we think that that that
coordinating problems in morpho space was the basis of intelligence in behavior when evolution
pivoted from just coordinating the body shape to actually running around in three dimensional
space by using muscles and and and sense organs and things like that. So let's let's think about
how then if I'm making the claim that that these bio electrical patterns are a kind of cognitive
proto cognitive medium for making decisions in anatomical space and I'm just going to show you
want some examples of that. So here's our planarian, here's the flatworm here the eyes the head here's
the tail. What we can do is we can first ask let's look at gene expression which of these cells
think they're part of the head. Well it's this one these blue cells here right so there's anterior
gene expression in the head there's none in the tail that's very good so it's supposed to be
when you cut off the head and the tail this middle fragment remembers exactly what goes at each end
and pretty soon you have a new planarian one head one tail fine. Now here's another planarian again
one head one tail again anterior gene expression in the in the head that's fine when you cut this
guy you get something amazing which is a two-headed form now this is not photoshopped these are
these are real animals now why would this animal with normal gene expression and normal anatomy
why would this animal suddenly by the way this process is is a hundred percent of fidelity you
know it's habit it's it's it's very hard to make them make a mistake they always basically do this
correctly why would they suddenly make a two-headed animal because in the meantime what we did was
we looked at a bioelectrical circuit that oops that we looked at this this bioelectrical circuit
and we realized that there might be some there might be a gradient some electrical communication
that allows these these cells to to remember how many heads they're supposed to have and
where the heads go and so what we did was we learned to to to suppress this and this is not
with applied electric fields or magnets or anything like that this is by using RNA interference and
specific drugs to target ion channels target the native machinery by which these cells produce the
voltage gradients and what we found is that these animals actually make two-headed these these what
once once the electric the bioelectric circuit is perturbed in a very specific way they actually
make two-headed animals and one of the most amazing aspects of these of these two-headed
animals is that and I kept calling this a memory here's why if you were to recut this animal again
in plain water no more manipulations of any kind so you chop off the primary head you get rid of
this ectopic secondary head if you thought some of these cells were you know epigenetically
reprogrammed to be a head fine they we throw them away all we leave is this nice normal gut fragment
because that was nothing weird about that about this gut fragment that the genetics are unchanged
and so you might think that it should just regenerate a normal planarian but that's not
what happens they regenerate these two-headed forms and if you cut those they still regenerate
as two-headed forms and this is basically permanent and we now know how to change that
circuit back with a with another brief bioelectrical drug stimulation change it back to being one-headed
so the question of how many heads a planarian has or is supposed to have is quite interesting
the default that that the hardware specified by the genome will make is one but that's not really
where the information is stored the information is stored as I'll show you momentarily in the
real-time electrical state of a circuit that tells these cells what the target morphology
of a correct planarian is it is the set point and that set point is not genetic the genetics
here are untouched we didn't edit the genome or anything like that we we change the encoding
of what the correct state is considered by these cells when they are injured and so
this meets all the properties of memory it's long-term stable it's rewriteable it has conditional
recall which looks like this so the reason that that this guy made a two-headed animal is that
we looked at the bioelectrical circuit here's what a normal one state looks like the voltage
here just tells you one head and what we did was we altered it and it's a little messy the technology
still being worked out but basically what we did was we induced a different pattern memory
in the exact same kind of body so this says when you are injured you will build to the target
morphology and this is what the correct planarian target morphology looks like make two heads and
that's what it does so to be super clear this electrical map is not the memory of this existing
animal this is a memory of this one-headed animal so a one-headed body a normal a normal body can
store at least one of two different representations of what a correct planarian should look like so
this is what i mean when i say the bioelectrical state is the protocognitive medium of this
collective intelligence the cells are literally keeping a representation a visible i mean we can
read this now and we can rewrite it a visible bioelectric representation of what they should
do if they get injured until they get injured this pattern is ignored it's a latent memory it
doesn't do anything once it gets injured then you see what it is because it guides them to make this
this two-headed one now this kind of approach can make ectopic heads of the same species and that's
that's kind of sufficiently surprising but we can go further than this and it turns out that what
you can also do is push the tissue to recall memories that belong to different species so here
is one planarian species that has a triangular head you chop off the head you perturb the electrical
network in a particular way where you basically prevent the cells from communicating with each
other very well for 48 hours during that time everything gets kind of confused you withdraw
the drug the network settles back down to a stable attractor when it does that attractor sometimes
is the correct one so sometimes you get a nice triangular head other times it lands in the wrong
attractor that actually belongs to other species of worms so you can get round heads like this
S Mediterranean you can get flat heads like this Pifalina okay and it's not just the shape of the
head but actually the the shape of the brain is changed to be just like these other species
or the and the distribution of the stem cells is changed and again no genetic change here we
didn't do anything to to alter the hardware we altered the ability of this electrical network
to remember what the correct pattern is during regeneration okay and this is you know the the
idea here is not just to to make weird-looking worms you know worms and frogs there's a lot of
biomedical implications to all of this where we're looking for optimal control of these kind of
outcomes in a way that doesn't require us to try to micromanage gene expression and so on which I
don't I don't think will be doable in our lifetime so you know there's applications here for cancer
obviously both diagnostics and for normalization strategy so not chemotherapy but normalization
and of course for regeneration you know using triggers to regenerate regenerate complex organs
such as limbs so in the last few minutes I just want to show you step step away from kind of
natural natural bodies to show you the the real the real plasticity of cells and how remarkable
this is so evolution provides standard animals with a set of instincts that operate in anatomical
morpho space these are default outcomes this is why acorns make oak trees and zebrafish eggs
make zebrafish right there's a default outcome but much like in the nervous system there is a lot
of reprogrammability here and so we wanted to understand how much plasticity there is
and so we wanted these these new pattern memories we wanted to see if they could form
very rapidly and we want to understand where they come from so so this is this is the work of
staff scientist in in my group Doug Blackiston we have a collaboration through this new institute
with josh bongard's lab at the university of vermont and and his student sam kriegman now a
postdoc in my group and what they uh what what they were doing is computational analysis of the
following situation if you take cells and you liberate them from their normal environment right
from the normal set of instructive interactions that the cells are that the other cells are telling
them to do you know this larger network that has these bigger goals would they reboot their
multicellularity what would they do okay well if would they cooperate and if so what what what is
it that they would build so we did this simple experiment here's a frog embryo we take some
some skin cells off of the off of the top of this early embryo so these are these are ectodermal cells
we dissociate them and then we put them in a little um in a little depression you can you
can see that here so basically we just dissociate them and then we just pipe at them down into this
little hole and so over the next uh over the next 24 hours they will simply compact like this okay you
can see them they compact together right and then um here this is actually the flashing you see is
actually calcium signaling it's um it's a very interesting signaling dynamics but they make this
this this round sort of thing now they could have made lots of they could have done lots of
different things they could have crawled away from each other they could have died they could have
formed a monolayer like you see in cell culture could have done lots of things instead what they
do is they form something we call a xenobot xenobot for Xenopus lavis that's the name of the frog
and it's a bio bot platform so first of all what you see here is that they are self-motile so here
it is swimming along they have cilia the way the reason they move is they have little um little
hairs known as known as cilia that that they use to to to to to row against against the medium and
and so and so they they they swim along these cilia are normally used on the skin to
to move pathogens and mucus off of the off of the surface of the of the frog and you can see here
that that they have all kinds of behaviors this one goes in the circle this one sort of patrols
back and forth right here is some tracking data on a group of them this one's going on kind of a
longer journey this one is going in circles these two are interacting with each other these skin cells
normally are restricted to a very boring two-dimensional life sitting on the outside of
a tackle by the rest by the instructive signals from the rest of the animal when liberated from
this they it turns out they have a completely different capacity to cooperate and make a new
sort of little proto animal um we didn't add anything we didn't edit the genome this is
we didn't induce we didn't put any um any trans genes there are no um nanomaterials all we did was
take something away we took away the restrictive in in uh instructive signals that the rest of
the cells impose and we asked these cells what do they want to do so now you're starting to see
this this this multi-scale um multi-scale competency architecture where the plasticities
that that i've been showing you about being able to correct for all sorts of defects and so on
is because all of the components have their own agendas which can be modified by the larger
scale network that they're a part of but you can start to see this when the when some of those are
lifted now uh here is here it is in a maze this is filled with still water so there's no water
flow it's completely closed so you can see it it it takes the corner without bumping into the edge
it then decides to turn around and come back where it came from okay so some sort of internal
dynamic so here it is i'm swimming along it can it can take this corner without having to bump
into the opposite edge so it somehow knows that there's a possibility to take a corner here
and then and then it turns around we don't know why it turns around they have all sorts of spontaneous
behaviors right in the system they have the interesting capacity to regenerate themselves
so if you uh cut them in half this one was basically like pinched in half you can see here
over this 180 degree uh that hinge right there right over that that 180 degree um the forces the
forces must be must be really strong but was able to do is able to try and fold itself back up
into its new shape into its new xenobot shape and if you actually pay attention to the calcium
dynamics you can see it's very brain-like they have this is you know this is basically what what
calcium looks like um in uh in in brains when you image living living animals there are no
neurons here this is just skin everything that you've seen was just skin cells cooperating towards
a new kind of morphology right they have another very interesting behavior that we first saw
there's a kind of herding behavior where they operate in groups like this and they they do
these kind of circular um these kind of circular behaviors to make little piles and and why do
they make little piles well the most amazing thing is that um these little piles if these little
piles are themselves skin cells then what they will do is they will push them together into these
little piles guess what the little piles become the little piles become the next generation of
xenobots so there's there's a couple of interesting things going on here first of all uh this is a
kind of replication it's not a real lineage they don't have strong heredity yet but it's a kind of
replication because given components in the environment they will make copies of themselves
this is much closer to um von Neumann's idea of reproducing machines than to the way that any
other organism reproduces right so they will they will go around they will make uh you know multiple
generations of these little balls and the little balls become xenobots and continue the cycle and
keep doing it again and again one interesting thing is that um what's happened here is that
when we made it impossible for these cells to reproduce in their normal fashion within 48 hours
they have found a new way to pretty much do the same thing that has never existed as to
our knowledge never existed in evolution no no other no other animal does this and so
this is an amazing example I think an amazing example of problem solving and plasticity when
you can't do things the original way you can repurpose your existing hardware to swim around
to uh and then to undergo behaviors that will actually uh do do things that you can't do the
normal way that that's the first thing the second thing to note here is that when we made these
xenobots we it was very much a collaboration between us and the cells themselves we don't
know how to tell cells to assume a particular shape yet all we were able to do was to uh remove
some some constraints and put them in the new environment the cells did all the rest after
that all the heavy lifting and we and uh this is this is very important because it's a new kind of
robotics and engineering where your material is not passive it is not active it's more than that
it's an agential material right the new I think the future of bioengineering is you know of
engineering in general is working with parts that are themselves some sort of simple or maybe not
so simple homeostatic agent so that what you're doing is you're not engineering the way we normally
engineer you micromanage every part you have to know how to do everything you are actually uh
um signaling to with with you know you're trying to shift the way that that that your parts are
going to behave because they have their own behavior and evolution does exactly that when
these when these bots make the next generation of bots this only works because the material they
are working with the cells that they are working with is itself an agential material and is going
to do the same things on its own that's the only reason this works and that's and the same is true
of evolution when you when you try to change an organism you have to motivate and and and
affect its guided self assembly the cells that you're working with they have their own
they have their own agendas and so what when you see these zeno bots they have a normal frog genome
and and these zeno bots don't have a straightforward evolutionary backstory if you ask
why do zeno bots have a particular behavior and structure the answer is not because for millions
of years they were selected to be good zeno bots there's never been any zeno bots so the cells
themselves were part of the evolutionary stream on earth but they were selected for a completely
different set of functions so we really need to understand how it is that evolution doesn't make
it doesn't find solutions to specific problems it finds machines that solve problems in novel
ways right so here's the here's the unique developmental sequence of a zeno bot this is
what normal frogs do they are they look like this then they look like that then they run around
like this this is what zeno bots do they make a they make a body like this eventually they will
transition and you know two months later they transition into something that looks like that
where does that come from that's never existed before during evolution so just to close up
here's here's the the summary of what I tried to say is that there is a framework which is really
focused on a continuum of agency not binary categories it's very engineering focused in
terms of finding the best most appropriate models for to explain the scaling of cognition
the materials don't matter there is no privileged substrate one useful way to think about systems
is as the scale of goals that they are capable of of pursuing we can think of intelligence as
problem solving and abstract spaces and developmental bio electricity is a great way to start to look at
how competent individuals can scale their goals and I think that's exactly what what evolution
did and we can certainly do that evolution is hugely uh potentiated sped up by this kind of
multi-scale competency architecture and the biggest to me one of the biggest questions
going forward is where do these goals come from it's not going to be selection where else can
they come from and I just want to remind people that now with the new technologies everything
that every every organism you've ever heard of right everything that Darwin meant when he said
endless forms most beautiful all of that is a tiny little corner of this incredibly large
state space of cyborgs and hybrids and and chimeras and all all possible combinations of
evolved material uh engineered material and artificial intelligence and we're going to
have to be able to relate in some way to these things when we're not able to say what it is
and what it's capable of based on what it looks like and where it came from so lots of lots of
papers on all these things I'm happy to send send things out these are the the people that did all
of the the hard work of the things that I showed you today so I thank them I thank our collaborators
our funders of course and and the model systems which which always do the heavy lifting and I
will stop here and thank you
okay
oh can you hear us Michael yeah yeah okay well amazing talk what can I say I'm I'm really really
impressed I knew some of your research personally but now that I see more I want to know more
very very nice uh attractor of topics and what we start with the question round anybody has
questions comments yeah Francis well I think what this illustrates is that agency is something
very primitive in life and agency is not just adaptation as you say to very specific selective
pressures but it's adaptation to a wide range of things so it's the the plasticity it's the
flexibility it's the adaptivity that has been selected so I assume that these cells have some
general agential behaviors which adapt to the circumstances and when the circumstances are
very different like in the case of these Xenobots I assume there is still enough agency left that
they can do things that look kind of intelligent even though they are completely different from what
they normally do so it reinforces a little bit my proposal in my talk that I said that the first
step is of the salt maintenance it's a zillions where zillions means expanding your basin of
attraction that means expanding the space in which you can solve problems so once these things
probably have learned a valuable time ago before they were folks is to expand this space for problems
they could solve so that now if you take them out of their normal space where they are in the
focus body they can still do things in this completely different space because they have
most this kind of genetic agency you might vote yeah yeah I think that's that's right that's
absolutely correct uh of course one of the big mysteries that we now have to address and we
are we're doing this in computational models and and and at the bench is to really understand how
evolution is able to produce this because the standard you know sort of the standard story is
that evolution is supposed to always pick the immediate you know sort of short term benefit
right and how it is that that it maximizes this incredible ability to problem solve instead of
a very hardwired and certainly there are animals that act hardwired in various ways you know c l
against and things like that but but but but the majority are exactly as you just said and so
how that arises from from evolutionary dynamics that are that you know we're always told are very
kind of short-sighted and and you know always taking the immediate benefit it's it's not clear
and that that represents a huge area for research uh well my hypothesis is that when we think about
evolution we're thinking about organisms that are already very highly specialized and then
they are already so well optimized for certain things that they can't afford to take risks to
make too many changes but if you think about the origin of life and you think about all the
catalytic systems where there are all kind of molecules coming and going and and temperatures
changing and and water entering and drying out these very first thoughts they had to be extremely
non-specialized they had to be extremely resilient they had to be extremely adaptive
and probably these properties are just properties that define life to have to get to the first
living cells you have to have this extreme adaptivity and then once you have these more
specialized organisms you didn't need all these functions anymore but they are still there because
they're probably the essence of life more comments questions no well i have a little question here
this hand has a little question oh it's frozen even better yeah um um
so as i understand you you are using the the the electrical field on the cell
or the how what what electrical what is the volt you measure the voltages but what what would be
like the the real object that is being measured there yeah what what we're measuring is the the
voltage difference between the inside and the outside of the cell so every cell has a membrane
and there's an electrical potential between zero and let's say 80 millivolts that's between the
inside and the outside so what we're looking at is if you think think about um think about a neural
network or an artificial neural network where every node has an activation level right and so
what we're looking at is the the electrical state of every individual cell but that's not actually
where you know that's not actually the where the information is the information is in the flow
of electrical computations through the whole network so what we're measuring is is the is
the spatial pattern and then over time we would take videos of each individual activation weight
it's exactly like um it's exactly like neuroscience except that the time is is greatly slowed down
so all of the you know you can take almost any neuroscience paper and just do a find a
replace and microsoft word replace the words neuron with the word cell replace millisecond with hour
and everything else basically works it's it's the same kind of thing yeah so so this pattern
start across multiple cells then it's not the oh yeah yeah yeah no that's critical that's
critical it's it's not individual cells yeah yeah yeah so okay so yeah okay and i have
sorry sorry but continue first it's the it's the it's where i'm getting to the question
so um so you are using now with there is this a genetic information that is kind of like the
hardware you were mentioning then you have the electrical field which is the electrical component
which encodes an extra mechanism which has been kind of like overlooked by by evolutionary morphogenesis
or like by the field you were mentioning and then i wonder um like this is the my wonder is like
might there be other forces at play um have you have have you studied or measured or why
will have to be only electrical uh so so that that's the since there are many other physical
quantities that might have several dynamics dynamics and play role of meaning transmission
and so on yeah sure sure sure there there are many others and many people study them there's
biomechanical forces there is ultra weak photon emission there are of course chemical gradients
that everybody studies all of these exist uh my claim is not that they're not important or that
bioelectricity does everything no but but bioelectricity is where the only data that i know of has been
obtained where those bioelectrical dynamics are actually the memory medium of this collective
intelligence it's possible that you know 10 years from now somebody will find out that the
biomechanical stress patterns are also storing the same thing entirely possible but it hasn't
been done the only you know these other these other forces have been treated as pieces of
physics at the lowest level that need to be tracked to to understand the system and their
bioelectricity is exactly like all these others but what we have shown i think is that
bioelectricity has a really important role as the as the as the actual medium of the computation
so it's like you know you can look at a computer and okay yep there are stress forces there are
vibrations there are you know a heat gradients there's all kinds of things going on but if you
want to really understand what computations they're doing the bioelectric the you know the
electric patterns through the circuits have a privileged status and maybe these other
modalities will have the same thing it's entirely possible maybe evolution uses them all
but it's but it's not known it's only known at this point for the bioelectrics yeah yeah that was
my my question please derek yeah very amazing talk first of all and i knew your work already
so but okay it was nice to see all these little details explained carefully no i i i'm a counter
physicist so electricity is is photo so in a certain way i wonder actually certainly because
you have this memory effect so there is something new being revealed here i think that has not been
really identified and that is difficult to to explain out of Darwinian evolution even
in in in an easy way at least in a straightforward way well that's also the message which was a
little bit in your talk i think yeah so i wonder whether because it would be too long to to tell
you the details now but i could send you some some some material there but i'd say we are working on
on an integration of quantum physics where this would fit in in some way you see that would be
things happening on the quantum level in in in photon clouds which which which were not
which not have been revealed yet yet clearly that have to do with with meaning meaning that
would be stored in in in light in some way and so so it's amazing it's amazing these experiments
thank you i knew them already so it was not the first time that i saw them but let's say that
yeah yeah i'd be very happy to yeah please send me yeah send me something which i have
i will send you an email because this would take too long to make our explanation exactly the
the kind of things that we want to want to happen that we connect with each other and also the
online audience can also bring bring connections and why not keep keep discussing i'm i'm totally
interested in this and i know some people who will be interested too so i'm kind of new to the
topic but it's extremely extremely interesting as for me as well please francis another thing
that i find very interesting in your work i had heard about it is before this idea of the cognitive
boundary where you use the metaphor of the light cone but i'm not sure that's a very good metaphor
because the light kind of extends in this way while yours comes together so maybe more something
like a cognitive horizon i would say the horizon is as far as you can see and i personally have
been using the the concept already for four years of prospect the prospect is what you can see ahead
of you and what you can imagine to be good or bad so prospect is both an anticipation and a notion of
good or bad or value the prospect is the things you see potentially that you may go to or that
you may want to avoid and i think your notion of cognitive boundary is very similar to my notion
of prospect and indeed the term in evolution you might say is to extant the prospect because
the louder the prospect the easier it becomes to find something valuable to go towards a girl
that is worthwhile and the easier it also becomes to see the potential dangers and to avoid them so
i just heard a commentary about uh teyade shard there were teyade shard there who had a kind of
mystical philosophy but he had very good intuitions he had this role of complexity consciousness where
he's just doing evolution complexity and consciousness increase at the same time and
this notion of consciousness was a little bit like this notion of the cognitive boundary
as evolution progresses the systems can see farther and can see wider around them and that
comes to his idea of the north here by the internet now we can all in a sense see what's
happening all around the world so it's this extension of the of the cognitive boundary i think
or what i call prospect i think that's a very important idea i agree can i say something can
you hear me i can hear you yeah yeah great maker thank you very much yes for this for this amazing
talk i just want to make a make a make a notion in terms of interdisciplinarity
um um because what you said uh i find super interesting and super amazing where where is
the shape defined or located in the first place this is the one uh question you you put under
the other one was how does it the system knows when it is right the the the forming of the shape
and these two questions are exactly the crucial crucial questions in in design in the in the
artistic process so this did really strike me when you were saying this so where are these
and is it possible to find these set points uh and so i think this this this um this happens on
on on many different levels these i think these are two very very deep and important questions
this is just what i want to to to say yeah um really thank you thank you so much yeah i i took
a bunch of notes during your talk so i will be i will be emailing you afterwards i i completely
agree there are some nice nice similarities here yeah great thank you sure okay amazing then um
we will take a little break um some coffee on this side of the of the universe and then uh
we'll see you back for our last talk where massimiliano sanin will tell us about transport
networks and why they modeling is the wrong way um so i will stop the recording now and then stop
the call so the videos can be generated so see you in nearly 15 minutes okay thank you guys
until soon thanks michael
