We will start the seminar. I think most people know me here. I'm Francis Heligand, I'm presently the director of the Centre Léon Apostle.
And I'm going to talk about a topic which I consider to be very important. Of course, you would like to believe that all the topics you speak about are important, but this one for me is more important than other talks I have given in the centre.
I think it's a kind of a unification of a very large number of things I have been doing and not only a unification of things I have been doing, but as I hope to argue, a unification actually potentially for the whole of science.
That's why I call it a new ontology for a transdisciplinary unification.
So relational agency, it's a recent term. I'm not 100% sure that I will stick to that term. There may be better terms, but I think it captures very well what this new ontology is about.
So let me start by saying what is an ontology.
Okay.
So, starting with the term ontology which may not be common to everybody.
So an ontology originally was a term in philosophy that was speaking about being on the things that exist.
More practically an ontology is a theory about the fundamental constituents of reality, whatever world you have you assume that reality is constituted at the basis of something extremely fundamental the essential the elements or the building blocks of the things that exist.
So any kind of a worldview or metaphysics must have an ontology at its foundations and often the ontology is implicit.
But lately, more and more people are interested in looking explicitly at ontology because changing the ontology changes your whole worldview.
So there are some classical ontologies for example materialism is that the idea that at the bottom everything consists of matter, but then there's idealism that says no in the end everything consists of ideas.
There are some other versions like social constructivism where everything after all is a social construction. I'm not going to detail a different ontology that exists, but go to the ontology which is kind of the most standard the most default one the most classical western ontology.
I claim that this is purely western, you will find this ontology I'm pretty sure also in other world views but it's the one that we associate it most with the scientific western world view.
And more specifically by what I have called in my research the Newtonian world view, the Newtonian world view that meets the world view of classical mechanics.
This is implicitly since most scientific theories later developed on the basis of this Newtonian world view, most scientific theories kind of implicitly assume this ontology.
And this ontology why is it so widespread, because it's simple, because it's concrete, because it's intuitive, and because you can express it very nicely in mathematical ways.
And that's what I call the ontology of objects. So, we can say that as the whole western world view originated really with the ancient Greeks.
These two come from ancient Greek philosophy, and one philosopher there was for many days, who had something against change, we were saying that change is an illusion, the only thing that exists are eternal permanent things.
Frater was looking at these eternal permanent things as what he called absolute forms, IDs, so the IDs are there eternally.
And finally you had Aristotle, who was a student of Frater and Aristotle was more practical was more empirically minded.
And he of course was not going to deny that objects could change, but he still kept his idea of the absolute essential form by speaking about objects having essential properties.
So the essential properties, the essences are what define the object. So this is the ontology of objects, you have objects that have certain essences that are in there.
But it's more concretely I have chosen here a picture of a break as kind of a default prototypical object. What is this prototypical object, it's a thing that is this thing that means we can very clearly see where it begins and where it ends, it's located in space
border around it, and it is inert, it just sits there.
It's independent, it's absolute, it just is.
It doesn't do anything unless some force moves it.
So what is standard objects have as properties, they just remain the way they are, they have these essential properties, they remain identical to themselves, they keep these properties.
Of course, we want to describe change and not all things are static in the world. So, what Aristotle did to solve that problem is that he distinguished between the essential properties the ones that do not change.
And what he called the accidental properties. And with accidental properties we think about things like the position of that break, or the speed with which you throw it so you can imagine that that break is moved in different orientations.
But the orientation or the position in which it's accidental, it's not essential, it does not define the break.
And if those accidental properties change, that is because something else, namely some outside force such as gravity has made the break move from one position to the own.
So the ontology of objects assume that objects are just their passive, they do not change on their own.
After Aristotle, this ontology has developed further in the direction of materialism, and that is the idea.
Objects are made from an inner substance, a substance is kind of what carries the object, what shapes the object.
Substances can be remodeled or rearranged, but the substances are assumed to be eternal to be always the same.
So a substance is something that just is there, it can't be created, can't be destroyed, it can't be transformed.
And in our modern scientific world, we assume that the fundamental substance of the world is what we call matter.
So it's a materialistic world view.
And we assume that matter ultimately consists of particles, which are kind of the smallest objects, the elementary units, the smallest possible objects.
So that's the basis of our traditional world view.
The world view also entails is what we know as reductionism, which does that, yeah, if everything consists of objects and objects themselves consist of smaller objects and these smaller objects, eventually consist of particles.
Well, actually, that's all there is.
If you want to understand something, you look at it as some arrangement or assembly of particles.
And if you want to know what happens to that object, you just need to look at what these particles are doing, meaning how they are moving in space and time.
And why do they move because there are forces.
And there we have the essence of the Newtonian world view, you have massive objects that move under the influence of forces, such as gravity.
So in such a world view, yeah, actually, you can't really have anything new.
Everything exists just out of these bits of matter, which are essentially identical, you may be rearranged them but nothing novel can emerge, there can be no evolution, there can be no creativity.
Moreover, in the Newtonian world view, you assume that all these changes, that's to say the forces acting on these objects, they are deterministic.
So, there is no uncertainty, there is no indeterminacy, there is no freedom, and therefore there also cannot be something like autonomy, free will or agency.
Objects cannot decide how they will react, they just are passively subjected to these forces.
Up to there, the logical structure is consistent, we have all these objects subjected to forces, we can explain lots of things in terms of objects and particles, but then there is one thing which we clearly cannot explain.
Namely, if we assume that there are human observers who are looking at those objects and doing things with those objects, then we need to assume that these humans have something that the objects don't have.
Namely that these humans have agency that they are autonomous free subjects who can decide, consciously decide what they are going to do.
So the brick may be subjective passively to the force of gravity, but I as a human can decide whether or not I will throw the brick or put the brick here or there.
So then we get that, that was the solution of the cat to that problem that humans must have something else, something that is not that matter, they must have some kind of a substance that he called mind.
Which led to the philosophy of mind matter dualism or mind body dualism, there is the mind which is something not material, and then there are the material objects, but immediately that creates a problem which is known as the mind body problem.
So we assume that the body is material, and the material particles in the body are subjected to deterministic forces, while the mind has a free will, and can interact with the body, then how can that be that's a contradiction, either the matter is subjected to deterministic forces,
or it's subjected to the free will of the mind, it can't be both. So, we have a problem there which is an unsolvable paradox that lots of philosophers have been lamented about.
So, for me, this paradox the only way to solve this is that you really need a different ontology, you should not make that distinction between passive objects, and active, a gentle minds that nobody understands quite what they are.
And that brings me to a different ontology that is also pretty old, that is the process ontology.
The process ontology against palmadiness, we said that change is an illusion, process ontology on the contrary says change is the most basic thing.
The reality is not constituted out of static object but out of things that change out of processes. And that is an old philosophy, it actually dates from before the Socratic philosophers before palmadness, and the best representative in Greek philosophy is Heraclitus,
who is famous with his statement that you can never step in the same river twice, a river is not a thing, it's not an object, a river is a flow, every time you step into the river, it's a different water that you're stepping in but there is still this river.
And we see similar philosophies in Eastern philosophy, for example in Taoism where you have this idea of the Tao as a kind of a flow that describes reality.
So these ideas have been picked up in 20th century philosophy by a number of philosophers like Whitehead, Théâtre, the Chateau, and Bergson, but they have never really made much impact on science and I will later explain why that is.
So, rather than immediately going into this abstract process philosophy, I first want to come back to something that's even earlier than the Peace of Catech philosophers.
And that is animism, animism is not an official philosophy, it's a way of describing how hunter-gatherers look at the world, it's a concept that was produced by anthropologists who were studying hunter-gatherers and who noticed that
they tended to see all the phenomena around them, the plants, the animals, the trees, the clouds, the rivers, as animated, that means they saw them as agents, not as passive objects but as agents that have some spirit of their own and therefore the hunter-gatherers live,
you might say, in harmony with nature in the sense that they see themselves as being immersed in this network of relationships, so they have relationships with all these natural agents.
So, there are different attitudes towards animism and the traditional view in anthropology is that, well, animism is just some very primitive, naive view, a pre-scientific view where people attribute supernatural characteristics to these material objects,
they kind of tend to think that there is some kind of a spirit living in the tree and it's all very naive, it's just a projection of the internal theory of mind on those external things.
But since recently, since about 20 years, there is a new view developing in anthropology by anthropologists such as Noyd, Bert David, Tim Ingold and Gavin Gehm-Harvey, who look at animism in a much more pragmatic manner, that's to say for them, animism is a natural way of adapting to the ecosystem in which you live,
that means understanding the ecosystem as indeed a network of agents, and in which you as a human are just one of the agents among many, and you try to form good positive relationship with those agents.
So, he's kind of a little bit of a symbolic depiction of animism, it's the idea that the tree is not just a piece of wood, but it has some kind of a spirit, but we need to understand spirit here as that what animates it, not so much as some supernatural,
it's more like entity the way it is depicted in dualistic philosophies, where there is the minds of the tree and there is the material of the tree, and those two are separable, that dualism isn't there in animism, the spirit of the tree is in the tree, it's not something that you can take out of it and that you can see in some kind of a supernatural realm.
If animism is indeed this kind of very natural, intuitive way of relating to the world, then a good question to ask is why are we no longer animists, and many people nowadays especially with ecological movement have kind of lamented that we have lost our connection with nature,
that people no longer have this kind of intuitive empathy with trees and with clouds and with rivers, and that in fact a lot of our modern problems of scarcity, exhaustion, pollution can be explained by that because we treat nature no longer as a collection of agents with whom we are interrelated,
we are treating it just as a bunch of raw materials of objects that are just there to be consumed and to be transformed whatever way we see fit.
Now I have discovered an extremely interesting author who is not that well known, that's why I want to emphasize that it's worth reading him, who is called David Abram, who is an anthropologist who has done some field studies in different countries,
Yeah, he's not a very traditional scientific anthropologist, he's more kind of what you might call an eco-philosophy, that means he tries to get into the mindset of these people he has been observing and he himself tries to recreate that kind of animistic consciousness.
So he has published two books that are both written, which I made lots of different markings so that it gives you kind of a sign of how much they inspired me, and the titles kind of speak for themselves.
So his first book is The Spell of the Sanctuary, so he speaks about this sensuous embodied sensation of being in the world in nature and participating, feeling the wind, feeling the trees, hearing the birds.
And the other one he calls an becoming animal, yeah, it's recovering this sensitivity that animals have where animals walk to the woods, and they will notice the slightest changes and noises that we westerners when we walk to the woods we will just ignore.
Now what's also interesting about Abram is that not only he gives you a sense of what this original animistic consciousness was, but he also has a hypothesis of why we lost that.
So his hypothesis, I'm not sure it explains everything but it's definitely words looking at is that we lost this consciousness when the invention of alphabetic writing, something that we get from the Hebrews and the Greeks and why is that by writing what you do is you describe something with a word but the word is disconnected from the thing.
The word just stays there, it's in a book, it goes into a library, it loses completely the connection with the context and a word by definition is something static.
Words do not change when you open your book it's still the same words in there, while the tree that the word refers to the tree will have changed in the meantime.
His idea is that when Prater started thinking in terms of essences, Prater was one of the first philosophers who was really using littered material was really using texts that Prater kind of had this idea of eternal forms essences by looking at words.
And then when you go further and you start expressing these things not only in words but in mathematical formulas and you completely cut out the context, which means you make kind of a static abstract representation of it that is unchanging.
Now another aspect that is definitely very important also is that since Prater and even more since the hunter gathers, we are living in an artificial environment that means an environment mostly consists of artifacts, artifacts like cups and cups are passive objects.
There is nothing animated or a gentle inner cup, while in a piece of wood, you may say okay it's just a piece of wood, but if you come back two months later that piece of wood may have been eaten by alz or it may have eroded or it may have changed color.
There is no difference between natural materials that are constantly adapting to circumstances and things like cups and all kind of artifacts. And if you look at this room here, there's nothing animated in here except people.
This dualistic world view, it's logical that we make a distinction between material objects that are just passive like this, this table and animated people, which are oldest, and there's nothing in between.
But if you look outside the window then you see the trees and then you see other things except objects and people.
So, I'm not the only person and Abram is not the only person who has been thinking in this direction, and I might even say that there is a tendency now in science and philosophy to have a certain renaissance of animism.
I will first look at the domain that I know best, the scientific models of agency and what is now very common also called agent based models, what's an agent based model.
You make a computer simulation of some complex system, could be a market, could be a society, could be an ecosystem.
And by defining agents where agents are entities that follow certain rules and they interact with each other and with the environment to these rules.
The dimensions of course are abstractions, but because each agent acts on its own, and then interacts with the other.
What you see is that the whole tends to develop very complex dynamics, and then we come into the domain that has been called complex adaptive systems you see that these networks of agents start to self organize, and they develop all kind of emergent properties.
This is an attempt that has been going on I would say at least for 30 years in the physical sciences in the computer sciences, but also in the social sciences and the humanities there is a certain revival of this, what I would call animistics spirit.
Also there we see models of agents in networks and probably the most famous one is the actor network theory that was developed among others by the sociologist Bruno Latour, and I don't remember his first name Albert Caillon.
What they do is they analyze complex social evolution as an interplay between many different what they call actors, but the actors are not just humans.
The actors can be institutions they can be technologies they can be even physical resources like uranium.
All of these are actors in the sense that their actions will have an effect on how this network develops and what is coming out of it.
And this is not really my specialty, but he has been here in the audience has worked on that the idea of the parliament of things.
Once you start to reason in that thing. In this reason you start to say well all these non human actors, maybe they also have some say maybe they should, we should give them some rights, and they have for example be attempts to give legal rights to rivers that has been a case like that that I know in New Zealand.
So there is one part of the influences of this new paradigm. And then there is a paradigm more in the humanities and in the so called cultural and critical studies that is called post humanism, which some of the authors are the famous Donna Haraway and Karen Baird.
And here the idea that humanism puts humans central is the old idea of the cat, you have the humans that are rational, and that have this mind, and they are different from everything else.
They're different from the animals they're different from technologies, they are unique.
The post humanism says we should no longer take humans as the central part of everything humans are just one among many, and the border, the bond is between what is human and what is not human are often fuzzy.
For example, at technologies that support us, we become like cyborgs. And also if you think about symbiosis between humans and animals.
We can't just say that the human is a separate individual. So, what you need to do is to blur these boundaries between humans and the rest of the world and see humans as just one among many agents that are all living symbiotically.
So, all these movements they're going in the same direction but at the moment, you can't say that there is a really an integrated theory.
Each of these have different terminologies have different concept they have different assumptions they come from different traditions, like for example very simple idea that you speak about agents in the one and you speak about actors in the other.
You speak about individuals.
Obviously, there is a lot of incoherence still. So, what I'm trying to propose here is to unify the different approaches by developing a common ontology.
So we said that an ontology is a set of building blocks conceptual building blocks.
And we don't want to lose the ability of science to make mathematical model so we should ideally have buildings books conceptual building books that can also be formalize at least can be put into mathematical formulas that can be used for computer simulation.
So that is why I propose my new ontology which I call relational agency, and which is an extension of the process ontology.
Why do we need an extension of the process ontology. Well, if we look at the process metaphysics in the work of people like Whitehead and Berg so we see lots of inspiring ideas but we don't see very clearly, concretely applicable things.
So these existing theories, they tend to be quite obscure, complicated, fake abstract.
They also don't have a very clear definition, they say that everything is a process but then what is the process, then typical examples are kind of a process of evolution or process of development but these are incredibly complex processes where you can't really say where they begin or answer.
It's very difficult to model. So that is, I think why these process philosophies have not yet had much impact in science, because you can't, you don't know very well how to implement them, how to model them, how to analyze them.
So what I propose instead of starting from girls processes without borders. Let's start from the equivalent of elementary particles that we will call these elementary processes.
And these processes is elementary processes I call reactions.
These are our building blocks, and then when we need to go to more complex things and we will just build up more complex things as networks of such reactions.
So, a little bit for the people maybe with a background in physics.
When you go to quantum to you you see that actually this kind of elementary processes of these elementary reactions are really the basis of everything.
But the traditional quantum mechanics tells you that particles are not objects, the way we imagine them. They don't have essential properties that just are there.
Properties of particles you, they get their properties to observations and what's an observation it's an interaction.
They do not interact and do not act in quantum mechanics, they don't really have properties they don't even have a position in space in quantum mechanics you can't say that an electron is located in a particular position, it's only after you make an observation
that you can say, ah, it's there.
But the moment after the observation, it has again diffuse and it's no longer there.
In quantum mechanics we tells you that the properties of objects are not stable they're not permanent they're not absolute.
If you go to quantum field theory you come to the conclusion that even the objects themselves are not stable because particles are merely instantiation of fields and fields are descriptions of potential interactions.
So particles in quantum field theory they are being destroyed, they're being created, they're being transformed.
So, if people need convincing that elementary processes are more fundamental than particles, I think quantum filter is the good reason.
Because quantum filter is the most fundamental theory we have in physics, and it's also the most accurate one because there are attempts to make more fundamental theories like string theory but these theories simply don't make any predictions whatsoever.
Or quantum filter makes very precise prediction that turned out to be very precisely correct.
Now by defining these elementary reactions and these elementary reactions I will use a formalism that is so simple that really, I mean a child could learn it.
So I want to have a formalism or language which is transdisciplinary can be applied to all possible cases.
The elements of my languages of my language are what I call conditions, sometimes they also use other names like components or molecules, and the reactions that change conditions so what is a condition a condition is something that you can distinguish.
A condition could be its light or its dark and a reaction then is something that changes that condition.
For example, you see here the reaction.
This means that means something brings a into existence a appears, I could for example say, I'm in the dark, and suddenly there is like a appears.
It's kind of like the simplest possible process you could imagine something distinguishable emerges appears.
And if something appears you can also disappear. That's the second case here a followed by an arrow a goes into emptiness a disappears if there was light and suddenly the light is switched off the light is gone.
Of course it's not very interesting if you want to describe networks, you will need to have some relations between conditions. So the next simplest reaction is a leads to be, which means I start in condition a.
I go to condition be.
Maybe I go to form a situation where there is a little bit of light, and then I go to a situation with a lot of light, or maybe I go from a situation where there is yellow light and then the light changes into blue.
It's very simple to get to the full power of the formalism. You need to do to use a notation that is used in chemistry and in physics to describe elementary actions that is the A plus big if C plus the A plus B means a and B are both there, a conjunction of a and
I think there are two conditions.
If these two conditions are there at the same time, then some other conditions will appear for example, a leads to be could be the condition is dark clouds are gathering the process is, it starts raining.
If I have two conditions if I have dark clouds are gathering and people are in the street, then it starts to rain and people will seek shelter.
So the pluses are just saying that you have two conditions.
This level of formalism already allows me to define elementary agents, an agent is something that makes a process happen.
So the agent is the one that performs an action if you wish, that means that makes the process happen. And I can describe it here in this formalism I use C as an agent.
The A plus C turns into B plus C, that means the C still is there.
But the A is transformed into B, the C is a necessary condition to turn the A into a B so C enables the reaction in the language of chemistry C is a catalyst, a catalyst in chemistry is a molecule that makes a reaction happen but that is not itself affected by the
reaction. So this catalyst C can be seen as the agent turning A into B, and the reaction that it performs can be interpreted as what in artificial intelligence is sometimes called a condition action rule.
Because the agent is sensitive to a particular condition, namely it's sensitive to condition A, and when it never it is confronted with condition A, it will perform an action that turns this A into B.
So one agent can catalyze a reaction turning A into B, but it would also turn C into F, E into F, F and G together into H, B into E.
So generally an agent will catalyze different action that means an agent can perform different actions, and which action it will perform will depend on the initial conditions.
So if there is A, the agent will produce B, if there is B, the agent will produce E, if there is E, the agent will produce F, if there is F and there is also G, then the agent will produce H.
Agents have these kind of properties. It's particles, molecules are agents in that sense. Agents will react with certain things and depending on what kind of agent it is, it will perform certain reactions and not others.
So agents have this kind of identity of being able to perform certain actions. Now, if you take all the reactions that an agent can perform together, they form what in physics or mathematics is called a dynamical system.
And a dynamical system is the equivalence of a force that means something that pushes things in a particular direction. It takes the A's turns them into B's, it takes the B's turns them into E's etc.
It is pushing things. A dynamical system is something that pushes things in a certain direction, and we know that dynamical systems typically have attractors that means that they push things into a region, but they don't push them out of that region.
So they kind of accumulate in this attractor region and we can interpret that very simply that attractor is like the agent goal. The goal of the agent is to move whatever is there into this region.
Now, catalyst agent in that sense they play a little bit the role of the objects or the forces in the old ontology objects in the sense that they don't change during the reactions forces in the sense that they have an effect on the things they react with, but
they're not assumed to be eternal. They're not assumed to have these essential properties that remain forever.
Agents are just conditions like all the others which mean that there are certain reactions that destroy agents that consume agents that build agents.
Agents can play the role of objects and forces in the old ontology, but they have this inbuilt dynamism they can change into something else they are not given you don't need to make this assumption that objects always need to be there.
Now, if you reason in terms of natural selection you see this network of all kinds of reactions and the actions are constantly turning things into other things.
What remains after a while well all these things that are turned into other things are no longer there, but some things are not being turned into other things.
And so after a while, the ones that will remain are the ones where the available reactions are not turning them into other things.
So, the existence of things like stable particles.
And that's an effect of natural selection in elementary particle physics you have lots you have a zoo of hundreds of different particles and most of these particles are very unstable.
That mean they react with some other particle turning to do new particles which in turn fall apart or turn into new particles.
So from time to time you could produce a very stable particle like a proton.
And then yeah, then the whole universe gets filled up with protons and gets filled up with new tons.
And these protons and neutrons from atoms and these atoms are also quite stable.
You just let the reaction soon after a while you stick typically with the most stable was there's a natural selection of the most stable one that explains why even though the world is at core, a big process.
This process tends to produce locally stable entities that we call elementary agents.
Elementary agents like stable particles. They're not very interesting. When we think about agency more in the style of human agency we're thinking about something that we make all auto poetic agent so an auto poetic agent for music kind of a generalization of a living agent, a living organism.
There's a difference between a living agent and one of these physical agents like particles that is that a living agent is constituted out of processes.
So the processes are going on. It's not a stable particle. It's particles that are being transformed into other particles are being transformed into other particles, but the whole is stable.
And here I have kind of thought of the simplest possible instantiation of such an auto poetic agent is an a turns into a bee and a bee turns into an a so they are forming each other.
But typically because there is always some losses because of thermodynamics some of the bees get lost some of the bees disappear.
So we plan is that you need to have some input of ace. So, if you imagine this cycle a be as a simple living system.
The incoming ace is the food and the outgoing bees is the waste, but the two are constantly rebuilding each other.
It's an extremely simple cycle.
To make it more realistic, you will need a bit of more sophisticated mathematics and the mathematics here that turns out to be extremely useful is called chemical organization theory.
This is because the inspirations come from chemical reaction but actually does not speak specifically about chemistry it speaks about all kind of reactions.
And it is a very simple and elegant mathematical model of this kind of auto poetic system that means system that are producing themselves that are in a constant flow of self maintenance.
The definition of an organization or a chemical organization is a set of components or conditions and the actions that is has two properties close that means the reactions working on the components produced new components.
But after a while the new components are the same component that were already there so the system is close in the sense that it's only producing things that are already there.
And it's also self maintaining that means that whatever is consumed by reaction must be produced again.
So whatever disappears appears again, and nothing new is added.
So, an organization is something that reproduces all its components, it keeps the process alive.
Just to give you a little bit of a graphical depiction, this is a bit of a more complex organization and the one I had.
The rectangles here are the reactions are three, the letters here are the components that are being consumed and transformed.
I'm not going to go into any details here.
I want to give you a much more intuitive example. And this is a very nice kind of thing that you can actually buy over the weapon I'm considering buying what it's called an eco sphere.
It is an aquarium that is completely closed so it's a glass sphere where nothing enters except light.
There is no air that can escape, there is no water that goes in or goes out.
And in that eco sphere there are a number of organisms that stay alive and the organism we will look at here are the shrimps.
You see these little red things are shrimps, the green things are algae, and then the third one which you can't see because they are too small bacteria.
So how come that these things can stay alive in a completely closed atmosphere.
That is because they have reactions that are self maintaining they fall on auto poetic system. This is a kind of an ecosystem at a very small scale that is producing itself and what is the production.
You have an input of light because the plants need energy to go.
So, then you will have the shrimps that will consume the algae and also consume the oxygen that's there.
And they do that basically to survive so the shrimps don't change in the process, but they produce waste.
They have carbon dioxide, and they produce a little bit of heat.
So if they would just be shrimps, well after a while all the algae would be eaten, all the oxygen would be taken up.
There would be an accumulation of waste and CO2, the shrimps would die, the whole thing would stop.
But at least for the waste, we see the bacteria will take the waste and they will also use a little bit of oxygen and they change these waste into nutrients.
They also produce a little bit of carbon dioxide so if they would be just shrimps and bacteria, the system would also not be able to survive.
But then we see that the algae, when they get light as an input, they can turn the CO2 and the nutrients which were produced by the bacteria into more algae.
So the algae multiply themselves through this process and because there are now more algae, the shrimps can again eat the additional algae and the whole cycle starts anew.
So what you see here is that the system is self-maintaining and at the same time it's a process, so it's a self-maintaining process.
Everything changes, everything is being consumed, everything is being produced, but the whole survives.
Now this is a commercial thing that you can buy in a shop, but you can also make one yourself and I have already done that.
So what do you do? You take a big glass jar, you go to a pond, you collect all kinds of things from the pond, a little bit of dirty water, some mud, some plants, some animals typically will be snails, insects, maybe tadpoles, some worms.
You put it all together and then you see what happens and well, initially it may not go very well.
I'm pretty sure that some of your organisms will die because they are not adapted to this particular ecosystem.
But after a while, you see that it comes to some equilibrium, that means there will be some species that will survive and it will go.
It will be fit, that means they will be adapted to this closed ecosystem.
And it is a dynamical system that means things go up and down, there will be fluctuations, sometimes there will be more algae and sometimes there will be more snails.
If there are more algae and not enough snails, then the snails will have more to eat, they will eat more of the algae, so the number of algae will diminish, the number of snails will increase.
If there are too many snails, there will not be enough algae left to feed all the snails, so some of the snails will die.
So there will be kind of a negative feedback that whenever some species grows too much, the feedback will be that it again diminishes or vice versa, whenever one diminishes,
there will be a feedback so that in the next state it will again grow.
So these systems tend to self-organize.
Now we can use the same principle by zooming out to the very large scale, namely the scale of the whole planet.
And if we look at the whole planet, the whole planet is kind of like an ecosphere, it is a closed system.
The only thing that enters is light from the sun, the only thing that goes off is heat that is radiated in space, but all this is in the planet.
And yeah, it has adapted the planet as a whole is stable.
Of course there are fluctuations, there are occasional darts, there are sometimes species that get extinguished, there are sometimes new species that arise,
but as a whole the system is stable, is self-maintaining, and if you would write down the reactions, you will see that the reactions are actually the way I wrote them down are almost the same as the actions with the shrimps,
except that now I have replaced shrimps specifically by animals in general, I have replaced algae specifically by plants in general, I have replaced bacteria specifically by decomposes all these kind of animals, bacteria and other decompose organic stuff.
And basically the same system, it just at a much larger scale, much more complex.
So what you see in there, yes?
I was just wondering, like the role of being an animal involved in being in waste can be exchanged, you know, because here we got this idea of animal plants and things that remain and waste is somehow like an inanimate thing that participates.
So I was wondering if we can make it a little bit more abstract, thinking that the role of what an animal is for us is not the same role that it plays there, because even waste could turn to be as animal as the animal in this view, you see?
In this particular model, the animals are agents because animals appear both in the beginning and in the input and in the output of the reaction, while the waste is not.
I would like to show that if you would make a more detailed model at some level, waste may be an agent as well. So the agent in my definition is the one that participates in the reaction without being consumed by that reaction.
So in this case, the animals are agents, the plants are agents, but the waste is not because the waste is just for the oxygen is just being consumed and produced, it does not stay.
So I mean that since we were doing examples of different spatial levels, more or less the same structure is kept, so that has been caught my attention that then the dynamical growth in the process being an agent for being the role of what we understand normally in its waste,
it would be more like a process for all than a way of being an object, you see what I mean? So it's going to be more abstract for all of us.
Yeah, like we are the ways of another process, besides being an agent, we are and that relates to the multi-level thing you were saying.
It's a good question that I'm wondering whether there is a fundamental distinction always between agents and the other side sometimes of course resources.
Resources are things that are being transformed into other resources, while agents are the ones that perform the transformation but are not themselves affected by the transformation.
On the other hand, agents also will be transformed by other agents, but it could be that there are resources that are just resources that do not do anything active.
I have a question. So considering that like an idea can exist before the reaction and exists after the reaction, so can an idea also be then an agent?
Yes.
And so, so then an archetype could be an agent.
It's like a kind of governing idea for a culture that persists through time.
If there are two criteria for an agent, first it should persist during the reaction and second it should be necessary for the reaction to take place.
So if certain things would only happen if the archetype is there and the archetype itself is not affected, then you would say that the archetype is the agent of that process.
Basically, yeah. So like for a religious culture like the ultimate agent we got, could be the most persistent.
Except that gods have not always existed, that people at some moment invented gods and at other moments have forgotten gods.
All agents are immortal and the agents, I think they're very strongly culture dependent, so they come and they go.
But yes, they are agents.
But are you not making a distinction between like individual people in general?
Because people show it persisted for tens of thousands of years, 200, so but individual human beings don't persist so much?
Yeah, yeah.
Is that important? Is there a difference between like an individual and for categories?
Yes, in my paper I have told the difference between an agent and an agent C, where the agent C is the more general term but also includes these two different agents.
But that would imply that you need to enter some topology to say that there are agents that are localized by humans and there are agencies that are distributed such as religions.
On the other hand, the agency is still localized in the sense that it's on this planet and not yet out of this thought of how to make a distinction in a short way.
And why do you choose an agency that has better space here, like goes like an over understanding rate, it's like autonomy where there's something that can create itself during itself.
It's like an overview, so why do you think?
No, no, the self, the self, the self producing things are agents, agents of a more sophisticated.
Yeah, but why do you choose strong agencies for something like that?
No, precisely because I want to get rid of the dualism, which says that you have the passive object like things and then you have the active agent like things that have a mind.
And what I claim is that the difference between the two is much less big than the big.
Well, there is a difference, but there's a difference between orthopedic, I make a difference between orthopedic agents and what I might call stable or rigid agents.
I think that in many cases, you may look at an agent as stable or rigid at one level of granularity, but if then you look at it at a deeper level, you will see that actually it is a process.
I think even this cup, if you would look at the level of quantum fields in between the atoms of this cup, you might find that actually it's some kind of an orthopedic agent.
There are models of quantum fields that say that a bolt between atoms is actually a continuous exchange of virtual photons.
So maybe what these things that we consider as static agents, maybe they are really orthopedic, but at the level where we would never consider them.
Yes.
I'm very new to this, so this might be a very strange question, but I tried to understand what is new and what I'm seeing.
When you were setting it up, I was, like, desiring and anticipating on a model in which process seems to be central, and the idea of entity would have kind of disappeared.
When I see this described, I try to wrap my head around, like I see actually entities that do processes with each other, just like in chemistry previously.
I have a good question, that is why it's, I mean, intuitively we see these things as entities, but that is why I started by calling them conditions.
A condition is something that you can distinguish, and a condition is something you can distinguish, and distinction by definition is already a process.
So the distinction is, in a sense, the most basic elements, and you can distinguish something, and in our nervous system, basically our brain can only distinguish things that change in some way.
Things that do not change, you can't really distinguish them.
The simplicity in the notion of distinguishable is already that it appears at a certain moment, but it's not always there.
The typical examples of conditions are CO2, so we tend to think of CO2 as an entity, but is CO2 an entity?
It's a particular state of patterns of carbon and oxygen that is sometimes formed, and then again dissolved, and the CO2 that's now in the atmosphere will not be the same CO2 that is tomorrow in the atmosphere.
So it's a short-term, and we tend to use these short-terms and to redefine and to turn them into entities, but actually there are distinctions.
And then the question is which distinctions are stable, and the whole process, the whole idea is, if you make a network of reactions, you can start to see which things are more stable, which things are less stable.
The whole thing is absolutely stable. All of them are changes. The basis is changed.
It's an abstract concept, but it's young.
Yeah, I have two questions.
The first one, I don't know, maybe you could operate later on.
I was thinking about luck. How can luck be defined in this relational agency?
I was a lucky agent, and if I was an agent in this worldview that we're defining, how does luck, randomness, and spontaneity, and all this can be defined with this model?
Yeah, that is also a quick question. The way I describe the reactions at the moment, they look deterministic, but you don't need to make the assumption that there is deterministic.
You could, for example, have two reactions.
Two reactions, A turned into B, and A turned into C.
There are different ways to interpret that. You could say, part of A turned into B, part of A turned into C, or you could say, A needs to make a choice in the final turning to B, or it turns into C.
If you think statistically, as A being the concentration of particles of type A, then maybe you can say 75% of the A is turning to B, 25% of the A is turning to C.
But if A is a single particle, it cannot both turn into B and to C, sometimes it turns into B, sometimes it turns into C.
If you're getting one in the field, you have possible reactions, but it's intrinsically indeterministic. You can calculate probabilities generally, but there's typically more than one reaction possible.
And statistically, then you can say, 75% of A turned into B, but an individual reaction, that's what it's all about.
Is there a way to talk about this using, like, sticking more closely to the language process and relationships, rather than talking about particles?
Because even though I know you're trying to talk about process, when we keep using these language particles, it keeps sounding like the old language.
So I know, but if I wouldn't use that language, most people probably wouldn't understand what I'm talking about.
Well, I would be very curious to know what that language sounds like, and I think it's also funny, like, that our language isn't set up for it.
Yeah, no, no.
I think the best term up to now that I found is conditions.
So A is a distinguishable condition.
But the distinguishable condition is probably a distinguishable condition.
So, I need to describe that very good term.
I'm angry, and then somebody tells me a joke, and suddenly I get very happy.
So A was angry, and B was happy.
So A turned into B.
It's not a particle. It's not a thing.
My anger turned into happiness, but anger is not a thing. It's a state, it's a condition.
Which you can measure.
That's the point. I think that's the same thing.
More fundamental in my ontology, which I haven't discussed at this moment, because I wanted to put the end of this on a higher level agency, is the difference that makes a difference.
Something is distinguishable if it's a difference that makes a difference, and making a difference means that if I have an A that doesn't react in anything that A doesn't exist.
So A could make any sense, at least some reaction where it turned into B, and some reaction that produces an A.
If the difference doesn't make a difference, then it doesn't exist.
So everything is only defined by its reactions.
And that is, at the most fundamental level, I call it the good stuff in action.
The things get the meaning by their relations with others.
It only exists on its own. A on its own doesn't have any meaning.
It only gets a meaning by participating in this action.
How is the difference from the empirical maximum science, like if we cannot observe it, then it doesn't exist.
It's a metaphysical view of this.
Another version is the life needs principle of the identity of the distinguishable.
There isn't any way in which I can say that A leads to B, and A5 leads to B, but I don't know.
If I say that all A5 leads to B, and there isn't any reaction in which A and A5 behave differently.
When I say A, A5, they're the same.
There is no difference that makes a difference.
A B and A5 are one and the same thing.
If they participate in exactly the same reaction, they are the same thing.
And that is a problem that many people in philosophy do not understand.
They kind of tend to assume that the example I always give is the heart problem of consciousness.
You probably have all heard about the famous zombie problem.
Imagine that there is a zombie, and the zombie behaves exactly like a normal person, but the zombie does not have consciousness.
For me, a zombie must be a real person, because if there is no way in which you can distinguish a zombie from a person, there is no difference.
And then either all people have consciousness, or all people are zombies, but there is no sense in postulating something that is indistinguishable.
But things exist because they have relationships with other things, which in turn have a relationship with other things.
That is why it's good, something that is no bottom level.
I will not start from elementary particles.
These particles exist, and everything else is reduced.
I say there is a network of reactions, and whenever something appears in the network of reactions, it's only because of the network of reactions.
If there is a network of reactions, then it doesn't exist.
If you are not being able to distinguish a zombie, then it can be possible.
There is no chance yet to remark it.
How do you know that you didn't skip one kind of every end?
Yeah, that can happen. That's how we learn.
You can't conclude that some of them are the same then.
The thought experiment of Charles was about the zombie is that he says explicitly that there is no way you can distinguish them.
If you state that as an assumption, then you create a meaningless thought experiment.
But I wonder if I have some kind of intuition.
Even by replacing things by relationships, it's like going back to this, trying to start from this idea of elementary relationships.
Yeah, I'm not sure if it's really a solution to productionism or not.
Maybe it's just productionism by another name.
It's still this idea that you can come back to something elementary, some basic building block that you can then put together to explain the world produced to this day.
What's the other aspect about this form of capitalism?
It's a kind of phase as far because when you say, okay, yeah, it's just normal.
It can be anything, it can be as big or as small as possible.
It can be me being angry, it can be me being happy.
It can be the world having a COVID epidemic versus the COVID epidemic being finished.
This is how big or how small this case is.
The only thing is the distinguishable condition that leads to a different distinguishable condition.
So it's elementary in notation.
It's not elementary in the sense of what it represents.
It does not claim that what it represents is something elementary.
I can use this formula to speak about COVID and COVID is something extremely complicated.
And couldn't it be that a way to express the relational agency model is to express that objects and subjects can switch position?
Because if you can show that sometimes an animal is eaten, sometimes he gets eaten.
So sometimes he's a subject, sometimes the object.
This kind of illustrates the relational agency idea more than just summing up reactions, you know what I mean?
No, I mean, it certainly has two types of reactions.
You have the reaction, human was called human.
You can eat the cow with waste, I think.
The cow is being eaten and then you have cow with blood, cow with waste, and here the cow is an agent.
So they are interested in the cow becoming a subject and human object in the same reaction.
There's an example of when you try to plant potatoes in the garden, you think you're the subject and the potato is the object because you choose the potato,
but actually you can say that the potato breed chose you because he used you to choose him.
So he actually is also the subject and you're the object listening to the potato.
You see what I mean?
It's more of a switching inside of the same reaction.
There's postage after that.
There are two humans.
What do you think of it? They are both agents.
I would suggest that we will have a discussion later on, maybe the ontology gets more clear.
I don't have that many more slides, but there are a few slides that I would like to share with you.
So I think that important concept here is that you can have transitions in levels of complexity.
Whenever you have agents, they interact, they tend to adapt to each other until they become mutually adapted.
That means a formal network of synergistic relationships, mutually dependent, and that network when it becomes self-maintaining,
it can develop sufficient autonomy so that people look at it as an agent itself.
An agent itself means that it will transform certain things into other things without being affected by the transformation,
not affected in the sense that it loses its autonomy.
A super agent in this whole system is easy to express as a sub-network of agents.
I'm going to make drawings here, which will quickly get complicated.
That's an old idea of system theory.
System theory says you can zoom in and sub-maintain your system into a network of subsystems,
or you can zoom out and look at your system as just one part of a super system.
So you can do this perfectly with this formal system.
At a certain moment, you see a certain organization of needs, a self-maintaining network of relationships.
You draw a boundary around it and you say, that's a system.
That system I interpret as a super agent, and now I can look at the relationship between that super agent and other super agents,
and then I can put them together in an even bigger level, and like that I can build a level.
So some of these examples, these are what we used to call metasystem transitions in the Wikipedia cybernetica project.
The origin of life starting from the reaction between molecules,
that's what we are now working on in our double-comp projects, trying to simulate that.
Symbiogenesis is also a classic example where you have organisms of different types that start living together,
and form one bigger organism, multicellularity cells that live together and start differentiating, performing different roles.
So each cell is an agent, but all the cells together, the multicellular organ also form an agent,
and of course the emergence of social systems organizations from individuals.
Yeah, one little more example.
The cell can be also understood as an anthropogenic agent.
A cell is something actually that looks very much like this ecosphere, this glass ball that I showed that has an input of light.
What are the agents inside the cell?
Well, actually the genes, the genes are the ones that produce the enzymes, and the enzymes are the catalysts of the reactions.
So in a sense you could say the genes are the agents inside the cell, but it's not like in the bold idea that the genes control the cell.
No, the genes are individual agents that form a society, and the different genes need to mutually agree and coordinate their actions.
And that's together with the input and output of the cell.
The cell is constantly adapting to its environment.
So genes, inputs and outputs all together form this one super agent that is this very complex symbiotic network.
And what would be the process description of that?
Instead of the genes as entities?
Well, the genes are catalysts, which specifically for genes are very stable because the cell wants to store its information in genes so the genes are highly protected between DNA, which is difficult to change.
Yeah, when you multiply a cell, you need to multiply DNA, when you have a sexual recombination, you do need to change your DNA.
So every agent, however stable it is within a certain context, there will be context in which an agent is formed or distorted.
I was thinking more, I hope you will say that the processes are about because in the process ontology, I mean radical process ontology, we will expect that the originary process is not for agents.
It's an originary pathway for processes involved.
So agents are the processes involved and they are embodied and observed through the distinctions we make and this we call them agents.
But what it works for really is the process.
The agents are a kind of local concentrations of processes.
So you might see an agent is kind of like a concentrated bunch of processes.
That's why I define an agent as a bunch of processes.
An agent is really a collection of reactions of processes.
An agent is an embodiment of reactions.
So from what you said, an agent is simply that which persists through the process.
It's this idea of the catalyst.
It's the pattern which remains in a sense.
All these processes are happening and there's one pattern, there's one thing that's stable, the catalyst, which kind of goes through.
It's the thing which in the end undergoes no difference through the process.
Everything else undergoes change and difference and this agent remains the same.
It's locally during certain processes, not during other processes.
So why, I think my question is also like why in trying to construct a kind of in some sense like a process ontology or a relational ontology,
relation is another way of a difference, right?
Which I think we all, I mean, I think all of us have basically agreed that it's super important idea, right?
But why in constructing a process ontology, would you then again put it in the central piece, the thing which doesn't undergo change?
If the whole point of the ontology is the difference is the most important thing, why put as the central point exactly the thing which undergoes no difference?
The two reasons, first is to connect with our standard traditional intuitive ontology which sees objects and agents.
The second, because evolution has this principle of natural selection, which means that those that are stable survived.
Evolution has a tendency to produce things that are more stable.
If that wasn't the case, then all this would be one big chaos, like let's say immediately after the Big Bang.
Immediately after the Big Bang, there were no agents, there wasn't stability.
There was just one sea of particles reacting with other particles, turning into other particles.
Happily we're no longer in that state.
We are in a state where things have coalesced and stabilised, but the stability is always healthy.
Stability is healthy, but without that stability, we wouldn't be here, we wouldn't be able to sit on this bench, we wouldn't be able to talk.
So you need to explain why the stability there is.
I mean, ontologically there are two big problems.
If you start from an ontology of objects, the problem is to explain change.
And in my view, you can't.
If you start from invariant things or the fundamental building blocks of the world, you cannot explain change.
Because if these building blocks are always there, why should they start changing?
What causes them to change?
If you start from versus ontology, then your problem is to explain stability.
We all agree that in the world there is both stability and change.
But if you start from the one, you need to explain the other.
And it's much easier to explain stability from change than the vice versa.
You can't explain change from stability.
You can explain stability from change, but stability remains.
It's not absolute.
I think the whole concept of time and the special place in ontology is the idea of the essence of the process.
It rests on the concept of time.
So it seems like the whole ontology is building this country.
I think time, people tend to give time more from the month or the year when it really has.
I've been working on mathematical models for the emergence of space-time out of processes.
So for me, a process is something more fundamental than time.
Time assumes that there is someone with a block.
And that all these blocks are synchronized and then where the process happens,
A is turned into a block.
There is someone who has a block.
What happens at time D2?
And that happens at time D1.
This is already a very complex construction.
At the level of this, under this energy country,
where is the time?
Time emerges if you have lots of these things.
And then you can see that there are something like the space-time process in there.
And then you can start to look at time maybe as some way of describing this thing.
But we know from the relativity theory that time also is relative to time for this part.
It's all the same as the time for that process.
So the idea of time as an absolute phase, time and space,
time and space, that's a Newtonian claim for it.
All processes happen in space and time.
No, processes happen.
And then we look at the arrangement to say,
well, we can organize a bundle by putting the space-time code in its own one.
But space and time are the same.
Quantum mechanics is another example where you see that space doesn't actually play any role
because things can be entangled without millions of light years apart.
And then how do you define change?
The change is primitive.
So you don't define change.
Change is your primitive.
That's an ontology.
Each ontology needs to have a rudimentary, primitive element that is not defined.
So the process is the fundamental element.
Everything else is built out of the process.
Even space and time.
And I must admit that the parts that Silver states we mostly,
the first thing I did in my PG,
in physics, it's make a process of space-time out of processes.
It worked, except that I needed to make one assumption which I'm not happy with
and I still haven't found an alternative for that one assumption.
Maybe the assumption is that processes don't go back in time
because if they go back in time,
then you lose the whole idea of time order.
Why don't you like it?
Open possibility.
It's like these reactions have certain properties,
because like if you have an opening,
we have one reaction happening faster than the other,
it means that it's normal with time.
The only way to expose and save penalty is the same which one going faster than the other.
No, if you go to the lowest level we found,
so the kind of formalism that we use at the kinetic and the dynamic level,
they assume that there is a speed of reaction.
At the ontological level, I don't want to assume that.
Let's say there is a difference between the ontology and the formalism.
In the formalism, you may want to add some parameters
and make it easier to model that are not necessarily fundamental in the ontology.
I don't yet know whether these processes should have some quantitative speed parameter in there.
That's one way to do it.
It's an easy way to do it.
But I don't like it because it makes an additional assumption
which I don't think I can justify.
I think that there is a, I think, sorry, I have to start adding to what you were asking.
Even though we might not have a measurable or scalar version of time,
and we might, I think it will be reasonable to assume that if we have a meta-system transition,
so we got one level, then we get the emergent level,
and then out of this, in this emergent level, there is a new emergent level,
like from sets to tissues to tissues to organisms.
We have three levels there, for example.
We might expect that the processes that make up the voyette in the organism
take more time than the processes that make up the voyette in the cell.
So still, even if we might not have a time scale, we still have an ordering of time,
like an order.
This takes more time than that.
I think we at least can kind of make, you know, order the vertical,
and the second thing that maybe hasn't been, it's following the same point,
is that every time you make a model, you can representation with a reaction network,
you have to make, implicitly, a choice on the level of this time,
order time scale you're making for the distinctions you want to work with.
So now when you say, okay, this A is the COVID model,
is the pandemic in a certain city, and this other B is no pandemic in the city,
then you are implicitly assuming a time scale where this reaction,
I mean, in the regular physical authority, you're implicitly assuming a time scale
and a way of making distinctions in time space.
But perfectly, you could change this model into a fine grainer model,
where A now, it's an auto-biotic system of multiple things that embody,
like our maybe more mesoscale human daily life view of a pandemic.
And then the transition, instead of being seen as A goes to B,
it might be like a very long process in this other view,
and even seen as a meta-system transition,
that in this other level, you look at it as a fundamental reaction to say,
so maybe this choice of basic level of representation
and time scale induced by that, which is actually the scientific connection,
because you make distinctions somehow,
and you have to measure them for the sake of doing a scientific
driven at this representation of reality.
So this part maybe wasn't that explicit in the talk,
but it's all that they have confused some of the attendance,
because it's very kind of not easy to imagine that A is actually a complex,
that is auto-biotic somehow.
It's defining its own time scale.
So, yeah.
But it's exactly that confusion that's like why I...
And then you go back then.
I would love to hear it expressed in another language,
whereas really we stick to this language of process,
because the goal after all is to try to make this unification somehow,
to try to bring all these different ideas together in this new ontology
that can be usable.
And it's hard to use because it slips into this other kind of thinking,
it slips into thinking that these processes are things.
It's not like...
But also I think what gets lost is a little bit this...
What I feel is lost is also this coming back to this animism.
I think that was also such an intriguing part of the talk,
and of the word of ideas.
And I don't feel like this is how our kind of...
My instinct is that I don't feel like this is how our hunter-gatherer nature,
like worshipping cousins and poor parents thought of this.
No, no, no, this could be helped.
I think that there's something more about story that's being lost.
I think that the idea of story could be really important,
because a story is after all the most persistent thing in this.
I suspect...
I would like to experiment it.
I think this in general has been experimenting with it,
that you put up with stories as reactions like that.
I mean, I made this human simulation piece,
a long time ago at Wurzschöberg,
which was a play based on reaction networks.
But it's also the other thing to think about.
If it's about thinking about what's the most persistent agent in all this,
well, the most persistent agent is also story,
because this is all stories.
This is all different ways of telling a story about ontology,
about how the world works, and so on.
So in a sense, story itself is the most persistent agent,
but it's also...
But it's also a process, right?
It's persistent, but it's also a process.
And I think if you're a hunter-gatherer going through the forest,
that's how you perceive things.
You perceive yourself as a story in relationship to other stories,
and there's also an emotional relationship.
The condition of both is that the story is sequential,
because the language is sequential,
we can only speak about what's happening at the time,
or what this just explains,
and that's the thing that happened in parallel.
And if you want something like an altruistic procedure,
you see that lots of things are happening in parallel,
and that's what the story cannot catch.
No, but I think with the mythology, it's different.
With the mythology, you have multiple stories in parallel,
and you understand intuitively where you're at,
and you keep the mythology of the story.
Yeah, but that's not enough to explain something
like how the metabolism of a soul works.
I don't think any mythological story will capture all that complexity.
I don't think even our brain can capture it.
I think you will really need a computer model to capture that.
But these are stories, though, anyway.
I would like to come back to this complaint,
which I see the same way.
We are looking at a bunch of objects,
and how this effect is produced,
because you say you would like to hear this language,
and I wonder if language is ever able to give you the sound you want to hear,
because whatever we will be doing,
we are using language which has nouns,
which are the basic protocol that we are using,
and then it's translated into this.
Okay, let's drop nouns, let's speak verbs and adjectives.
Let's do that. You will hear processes.
But as long as he can put A is chaos,
B is changeability of feelings,
and C is wind.
And you will say, but why are you speaking about those objects?
Because they are named and put there,
and they are interacting and so on.
So I think this is one contributing factor, which is the major one,
that we will not get out of objects if we don't change the language
by which we are referring to,
which is an underlying method for modeling,
the natural language.
And another contributing factor,
which has to do with this particular formula,
is that when you say process ontology,
or process or relational agency,
to me, not necessarily some thing changing into something,
but it's the basic relationship.
Forget the things, changing into, yes?
So of course it's like, I know it's a kernel of your model, yes?
But I think relationship,
relation, process doesn't have to be this changing into,
and a lot of agencies of relationships are not this changing thing,
but exactly persisting of a relationship, which is the agency.
But persisting relationship for me is a repeated process,
a self-maintaining process.
I am friends with you,
that assumes that from time to time we talk to each other,
we exchange information, we help each other,
there is a self-maintaining dual person between you and me.
Fine, but you could think, yes,
that the process or the agency of the relationship,
you could approach in modeling,
not by arrows, but let's say lines or whatever,
that the existence of this friendship is the agent in your life,
in my life, in community and so on,
and it's more like a gravitational field that acts, yes?
And then it would be a different model, I know.
No, no, no, that's perfectly the same model.
Is it you change the reactions to be as species
and as species to be the reactions?
It's exactly the same,
but you change the whole school,
but it's actually the same.
You mean you can, what I say, you can model with this,
this I know, yes?
But understanding of the relationship,
it's like as a basic unity.
I think one of the points with the formalism is that it's so simple
and the examples are so intuitive,
that people immediately assume that,
yeah, but it's too simple,
but they don't see how flexible it is.
It is flexible, like A, B, C,
and like it's maximum flexibility
because anything can be, like it's a maximum.
Except, yeah, I'm now speaking about this,
like the ontology of the turning into, yes,
but there could be like an ontology of,
yeah, just different types of relationships
with turning into this.
It's like, when you define agents,
why not defining,
getting rid of agents
and defining it as shared agent disease?
Because at the beginning you said
everything is about relationships
and this ontology is based on relationships.
So if we have, for example,
someone who has that formula,
human plus cow,
human takes something else on that person's mind.
So, yeah, that's what I'm talking about.
So probably I'm thinking about
how much of a human is a cow
and how much of a cow is inside the human already
as a potentiality.
So could it be,
I suggest defining
some form of every person
of every entity or thing
is a shared agency already.
It's kind of like a pre-condition,
defining it as...
What do you define as a shared agency?
Meaning that you are, by nature,
you are of a relationship nature,
rather than that agent.
Because when you say an agent,
an agent has a boundary
and has its own internal dynamics,
based on complex adaptive systems,
yeah, but it also has a relationship.
The whole thing is a network.
The whole thing is a network.
There are no independent things in there.
There are no things that are not that work.
I mean, if I were to do it...
If now I would do one here,
that's not possible.
Everything needs to be done
of the one with network.
There are no things that do not interact with other entities.
Because if they don't interact,
they won't interact.
They don't exist.
It's like a field of agencies.
You could call it like a field of agencies, yes?
Actually, the field metaphor is quite nice,
because fields are typically seen
as these kind of arrows,
but they are like the point in all kind of directions.
And what the field does is it creates a flow.
It makes things move.
That's another way.
I mean, there are different metaphors
to try to explain this.
What I have been emphasizing here
is agency relationality.
The basis is process.
Why do I define agency?
Because of these new approaches.
I spoke about multi-agent systems
and actual network theory,
where people are more and more static
to think in terms of agencies.
And why are you relational?
Because the agents do not exist
on the whole point of the agency.
Everything is one big network of interactions,
in which locally you can distinguish agencies,
but they are only locally autonomous and stable.
They're still part of this larger whole,
and this larger whole will change them.
But you need local stability,
because otherwise you have a world that is like,
as I said just after the big bang,
a world that is pure chaos, pure change.
You need to explain why this table is stable,
and why this thing is stable,
and why I'm less stable than the table,
but still I will still be there
when you talk to me tomorrow.
You need to explain that.
So you need to explain why in this chaos,
this field of actions and interactions,
there are islands of stability,
which are relative.
They are like floating islands.
They don't stay in the same place,
but they're kind of islands where you know
if you go on the island,
you won't sink to the floor,
but there's stability there.
What if you didn't need to explain it?
I'm being a little...
Why don't we just...
We just...
We don't need to explain why the table is stable,
it's a version of the plan.
It seems to be getting in the way.
This is like, I don't really care
if you don't really care about it.
We're talking to some other people,
who still believe in internal mechanics,
and somehow we want to convince them
of our way of thinking.
But what if we just left them to their own devices
for a while and just got on with thinking about process,
without trying to convince them
that the table exists?
As a mystic or as an artist,
you might take that attitude,
but as somebody who wants to change the world,
who wants to be pragmatic,
who wants to develop technologies,
who wants to do science,
you need to look at stable things.
You need to make sure that the vaccine you have developed
against Covid will still work
in five hours from now.
If it's just a process and the vaccine changes every minute,
then you can solve Covid.
I think stability is not about
not changing, but about not having
an effect on something.
And when you look at the table,
always because if you fall over the table,
it has had an effect on you,
so it's not always a stable thing.
So it depends how you define stability.
If something has even an object as an effect on you,
it has agency because it changes your life.
So some of these agents are static.
There are theories that say,
like Vibrant Matter,
that all objects have agency as well,
because they can have effect on other objects or agents.
What do you think?
Yes, you want to move?
I'm wondering about the more pragmatic,
or let's say,
in regard to what science does,
how science is covered,
and think about
what is the epistemic value
of this ontology
post-Militian classical
because at the end of the day,
you're collecting data
and the ontology we have,
the metadata we have there.
Basically, you could call it like stable processes
or stable conditions,
but at the end of the day,
it goes back to the same way of viewing the world,
which is just some entities.
We call it process.
I mean, it's just like things like the change of terminology,
but at the end of the day,
we're going to go back to doing the same thing.
Can I compliment you a little bit?
Because it's very much related to your question,
and I think you can answer both at the same time.
Where would you position this?
Because it's a philosophical standpoint,
but also it's kind of linking to science.
Where would you put it in the philosophy of science,
let's say, traditional groups?
I'm not sure I want to put it in the philosophy of science,
but what I want to say is, as I said it here,
it's an extension of the Newtonian world,
which means it does not say Newton was wrong,
objects don't exist.
In some cases, it is useful to think
in terms of objects following the laws of Newton,
but if you want to go deeper,
and especially if you want to look at processes
like, I say here, life, mind, society, culture,
then the thinking in terms of objects is not useful.
It's like in classical scientific revolutions,
like relativity theory of quantum mechanics,
relativity theory did not negate Newtonian mechanics.
Newtonian mechanics is a limited case for low speeds of life,
or quantum mechanics will not say Newtonian mechanics
is an approximation for macroscopic objects.
So in that sense, Newtonian mechanics
and all the existing theories of science are not negated by this,
but they are seen as a limited case
in four more specific situations
where the processes are very simple
and you don't have to take into account
all these complex anthropometric self-maintaining interactions.
So what this does is expand the field of things you can describe,
things like life, mind, consciousness, etc.
But without giving up the old stuff, which we know works,
we just don't take it as literally anymore.
We're not going to say that atoms are like billiard balls,
we know that, but still sometimes it can be useful
to think of an atom like a billiard ball.
You mentioned the mathematical model
and the very big amount of your talks, right?
You make really concrete ideas
interested in seeing a very simple application.
You mentioned I want to do research on humans around societies,
and I'm going to do that using mathematical models.
So in what way will I do it different than I did before
because of this ontology?
Well, we have a number of mathematical models like that.
Two people in the audience are doing that.
The last two are starting today.
But I would like to complement from your answer,
because the title I think is extremely clear on that,
but maybe since it's the title,
it's also kind of overseen.
It's the ontology for disciplinary,
you call it disciplinary science,
but the word for disciplinary, yeah.
So the point is that in traditional science,
the act of identifying the objects is kind of immediate.
You want to study in the ontology,
whether you have species, resources,
it's kind of like the ontology
that we can't equip with from natural language
is already given us the entities we want to serve
and it's open.
Culturally, you know, constructed,
it's easy to say,
oh, we're going to study these things
that already have an angle, so on.
When it comes to transdisciplinary research,
the problem of identifying the objects,
it's already, like, what are your guys,
what are the guys that will be studying it?
That's already a problem.
And that's why the traditional approaches in V6 and so on
might fall short,
because you don't want to study the entities themselves,
you want to study the meta-guys
that seem to be more representative of the phenomenon,
than the entities that are composing this phenomenon.
Like in COVID, me being sick,
neighbor of someone not sick,
it's not the phenomenon of COVID.
But that's how in agent-based models,
and you saw, like, all the data that you were doing
in the pandemic was doing that,
was focusing on the basic entities doing models
and seeing how this thing works.
But another perspective is to look at the whole of the situation,
of course, composed by parks,
but looking at the potential states of this global situation.
And there is something called the top-down interactions,
that maybe Francis, you can explain better than me,
which is also interesting,
but because when you don't know what these big guys,
these major transition guys are,
and then you identify them,
you can see that these meta-systems
are also making the influences on the individuals.
And that's, like, in social science,
it's very common.
Maybe you, Mark, can give examples of top-down.
How is it different than just a very complex system?
So, using, like,
if you look at standard psychological research,
they use also observable objects,
like intelligence or personality.
And then you could just build a couple of those,
which becomes very complex,
which, again, in society,
with multiple people interacting in very complex ways,
there's also objects here.
The point is that this provides, I mean,
in my view, Francis, you can say,
no, she's wrong, but in my view,
this provides a conceptual framework
to start understanding the levels of representation.
And it's not just from scratch,
and then I look at statistical macro-properties,
and then I say, this is happening.
Because this is the typical complex systems thinking
that the guys approach any big question from the model,
and there is no conceptual framework
to think about the different levels that start appearing
and the meta-level interactions that can happen.
So if you start from this perspective,
you have like a set of principles that you want to look at
before saying, ah, this is the phenomenon.
You want to build the story of the complex system
level by level, let's say.
And I think this is an important game,
and particularly we have been doing models
or trying to conceptualize better notions
that are typically inter-miscellaneous like sustainability
or resilience or concepts or notions of that kind,
that kind of when you look from the very bottom part of the system,
you kind of fall short of explaining,
but if you look at these different layers...
I would like to add something.
I made my PhD in physics on the structure of physical models,
and I came to the conclusion that my analysis
in Newton and Feynman,
that there are always a number of ontological elements
that are kind of assumed.
You first assume that there are your objects.
In your case, might be people or organizations.
These objects have properties.
These properties can take on different values.
These different values define states.
These different states define a state space.
And then you assume some kind of a dynamics
of how the properties change over time
under the influence of different forces,
and like that you build layer on top of layer,
and then you get typically a very complicated model,
but actually all your ontological assumptions
are already fixed in the model.
So you can't afterwards,
you can maybe fine-tune a little bit
by changing this parameter or that,
you can no longer change the model
while you're working on it.
While with this kind of modeling,
I just add a few reactions,
and the whole model changes.
But not in a way that you lose what you had.
You can put it in your simulation,
and you see that if I add two or three reactions
or I move two or three reactions,
well, the dynamics changes.
But you don't have to throw away everything.
You don't have to start from scratch.
That's what makes it so easy.
You add a few things, you take away a few things,
and each time you have a working model
and some of those will be better,
some of those will be worse,
but you don't need to start from scratch.
With this micro-macro level relationship,
the emergence,
because we also define a process
because it seems to be happening
parallel to what one is,
a relationship between two,
so one is intervened on the other.
So is this also a process?
I don't like the subject of super-medium.
I speak under shame a bit about emergence,
but I'm not at home,
because properties that don't are not properties of the form.
And how do you get growth?
I have more or less growth.
I look at it as a whole,
but of course there are still things that go in and go out
because nothing is isolated.
And now I can look at this as a whole,
and this as a whole will have properties,
because what comes in here
undergoes all kinds of nonlinear interactions,
whatever comes out here.
It's not what went in here.
It's not one of the things in there.
It's the whole self-maintaining thing
that has produced this output.
And yeah, so I say this thing as a whole
reacts in a different way than any of its components.
It has emergent properties,
but in this case I can say more
I don't need to know all these details inside
to simplify my model
or just look at what comes in and what goes out.
In other cases, I might want to look inside
and look at all these things
and then what is it actually that is still small?
And then I can make my model as detailed
or as close as I want.
That's what you want of models.
There are always simplifications,
but the question is to leave out the things
that you find less important
and to get in the things that are most important.
So, and then by experimenting with this language,
I think it's much easier to make good models.
Yeah.
I was wondering if you could elaborate a little bit more
how the mind fits into a smaller work.
What the experiment of this model is particularly
with respect to the mind.
Actually, the mind is, you might say,
the most obvious application of it.
I started by saying that the character is
a matter that follows these deterministic rules,
these deterministic rules,
and the mind that can think of its own
is free, that has free will and accessionality.
What I said is agency is something
that's in between the passive object
and the free will in mind.
And depending on how much agency there is,
it will have more of these properties
that we associate with mind, intelligence, emotions,
memories, values, goals.
And agency, as I have developed it
in a couple of other papers,
and what we are doing now in our project is,
as this network, this anthropogenic network,
becomes what we call more resilient,
which means more adaptive,
more able to deal with more difference outside situations.
It becomes smarter, it becomes more autonomous,
it becomes less dependent on the external conditions.
And at a certain moment, you will say it has a mind.
And for me, there is no such thing as mind or no mind.
It's a continuum.
I call it agency, there is low levels of agency.
The particle has a very low level of agency,
and my brain has a very high level of agency,
and in between you have bacteria and trees and rocks,
and they all have agency,
which means they all have some degree of mind.
That's also implied in some of your consciousness,
or what is consciousness?
Consciousness, I interpret as sensation.
This thing is sensitive,
because if there is an impulse, it changes.
So, the example I gave with the a and the b,
a produces b, b produces a.
Not suppose that there is also a reaction,
a plus c gives d.
The moment I bring d into the system,
d plus c into the system,
c plus a will produce b,
which means there will be less a available.
The system feels, it senses that something is not the way it should be.
What is the way it should be?
Self-maintenance.
Natural selection leads to systems that are self-maintaining.
The moment something happens that affects the self-maintenance,
they sense it, they feel it,
and they will react to it.
That's all the point.
Compensation of perturbations,
you become sensitive to perturbations,
and then you act to compensate the perturbation.
Self-consciousness.
It's a consciousness, but at a very, very limited level.
At a very primitive level,
just the bacterium is conscious of the fact
that it is moving in an environment where there is toxins,
because it has certain rules,
it says that if toxin concentration increases,
it has to change direction and move in a different direction.
The bacterium is sensitive to toxins,
because it feels that there are toxins,
and it performs the action to move away from these toxins.
It's a kind of a consciousness, if you want to call it like that.
Some people call this panpsychism,
that even environmental biologists have this sensation.
If you want to call it like that,
I don't object, but I just wouldn't use the term
to call it a mind scale.
It's a question of more of a taste in terminology
than in a conceptual difference.
For me, mind is a continuum
from elemental particles to the human brain and...
Connecting to that,
I don't know if you have seen
the work of David
from this notion of intelligence,
and it's very similar to what you...
Have you seen that?
Because you kind of have gotten...
I have heard a couple of papers of Levin,
and here's a very similar one.
I was reviewer for an article about that.
Michael Levin is very similar.
Connected with intelligence.
He speaks of this...
Well, like, typical relativity,
we rely on the entire cone of intelligence.
Like, this planet can reach with no consciousness
in the process like sense.
And then he says,
okay, we're on this planet now, humans,
and then a group of humans has a higher cone,
so a higher intelligence,
and then you can do probes, and things, and planets, and that.
But he goes all the way up to...
Yeah, I think his model is simple at night,
but a little bit too simplistic.
He kind of imagined that...
If this is me,
this is space, and this is time,
and I'm aware of a certain region in space time,
that's my memory of what has happened.
This is my idea of what's going on
in places in the universe,
and this is my anticipation of what might happen.
And then he says,
for a human, that will be big,
but for a dog, it will be small,
and for a bacterium, it will be tiny.
So he says, it's the wider the range.
Is the higher your consciousness or your agency?
It's one way to do it.
Time is up.
When I share the article.
Close here.
Are there any questions from the audience?
Yeah, we didn't even ask,
because there were so many questions in the room,
and now it's time it's up,
so do you want to extend it?
For me, can you extend it a bit?
Yeah, so if there are any questions from the audience online,
because soon we'll be moving,
you know, to a more informal part of the meeting
and leaving this room.
So I think we can take one or two questions
from the online audience,
if there's any question there.
Guys.
Look.
The audience.
Anyone?
We have perhaps a small comment.
Is it clear?
Can everybody hear me?
No, just to comment a little bit.
First of all, very interesting talk.
Francis, I enjoyed a lot.
And I would like to comment a little bit
on the observation that Orion and Marta were making also.
Why starting from this kind of ontology?
It could be that we will have some more surprises, of course,
if science develops more.
And there could be some hints already.
And the comment I want to make is a little story
that Feynman once said
in the beginning of the quantum computer idea,
there was then a whole theory in computer science,
the Turing machine, a kind of a fundamental theory.
The Turing machine would be the fundamental entity
of computation.
And still many, many computer scientists work with this
as a fundamental entity of computation.
And then the quantum computer came
and Feynman once said, yeah,
the problem with Turing is that
he didn't know what paper was,
what a strip of paper was, you see.
And so the Turing machine, you need a strip of paper.
You need something of the material world.
And so quantum computer doesn't work with strips of paper.
Things are not on paper anymore.
And I think we will stumble at a certain moment
that that might, when I hear Orion say,
why not start with stories?
Of course, you can see as a scientist,
it's very difficult to have a grasp on a story.
But we might stumble on the foundations,
I think, where even writing on a blackboard
or what we can do mathematically will be too limited
to really go deep into reality.
Because if you write on a blackboard, A, B, C,
it's of course something specific you do.
A gives B, B gives C.
You cannot do what eventually a quantum computer could do,
you know, on a blackboard.
So just my comment would be that in an amazing way,
we might be repeating parochial things in some way,
like the old reductionists,
like the old reductionists in the time of...
and not be completely aware of it.
That is a little bit what could be the future of...
and then of course we will have to change again,
we will have to adapt ourselves again to new findings
and stuff like that.
And I think that is a little bit what sometimes is felt also,
yeah, processes, but processes, okay,
you can make it say it's perhaps not in time,
but there is something also that limits ourselves
to being on a blackboard, to imagine with our material mind
what can happen.
So even there, I think there are some limitations.
If you really go to the depth of what the nontology is,
I don't know, I don't know what the limitations are.
There are some hints here and there, I think.
So does it mean that every century or every generation,
every kind of advancing around the sun in reality,
we remake the reductionism?
Is there a new reductionism?
I think every form of knowledge is a simplification of reality.
Every model is a reduction.
You should be aware that it is a reduction.
As long as you're aware of that, I don't think there's much danger.
The moment you start taking your model for reality,
that's when it becomes dangerous because then you are reductionist,
then you think that what your model says is what the real world is.
A model is something that helps you to predict
and to understand certain things.
And if it turns out that something that doesn't predict
or doesn't understand that well, then you may change your model,
but you should not take the model for reality model.
It's by definition a simplification that means a reduction.
Reductionism to me means that you,
it's a world view where you take the relationships into account.
So you think that somehow the world can be explained by things,
but not really their relationships or the interactions.
It's not that reductionism is like that,
but I think the reductionism that Derek and Shima are talking about
is the fact that you reduce things to some marks of a life world.
And of course, reality is more complicated than those agencies.
Of course, it is more complex.
Of course, this is a simplification.
It's a simplification which no longer assumes objects.
It assumes processes and interrelationship.
But still, when I try to represent it on the bright side,
it's a simplification that's unavoidable.
The only way to communicate the whole of reality
is to experience the whole of reality.
I can't transfer the whole of reality to you, to your mind.
I have to put it into language
and to symbolize that it's also simplification.
It's a very efficient experiment
and also different complex interactions.
You just start from the most basic particles
and then you can make it very complex.
Yeah, that is the advantage of this thing.
It's what I would call an open-unlit model.
It's a model where you can add and change things as much as you want.
You don't have to make certain assumptions
that there are these particles
and they have these properties and no other properties.
And they obey these laws and no other rules.
That's reductionism.
You make this ontological assumption
that absolutely can't be changed.
Well, here the only assumption that I make
is that there are conditions
that sometimes transform into other conditions
and if these transformations
appear in a certain pattern
and I see that there is stability and there is self-maintenance
and then I can start saying non-trivial things about them.
But I don't say what those ABCs are
and what the arrows precisely are.
I don't say when they happen or how long they happen.
That makes it open-unlit, it makes it flexible.
Thank you.
Is there a question on the chat?
No, it was on my hand.
Yeah, so we move it to the bar.
Thank you everybody.
Thank you everybody online.
I'm closing the results.
Thank you.
