As you know, I have a thesis about the exponential age
that we're about to go through the fastest pace of technology
the world has ever seen.
That's what this whole series is about.
This next interview with an old friend of mine
is probably one of the most important single interviews
you will watch.
I can't stress enough how important the concepts
and what is happening and the speed of which
artificial intelligence is going to change humanity.
It is something that we all need to pay attention to,
understand and use in our favour because it's happening
and it's happening at a scale of which you cannot comprehend.
Emma, fantastic you see you back on Real Vision.
Until you're back, thanks for having me.
You were known in the past in various guises on Real Vision
because this is not your first rodeo.
You were the frontier guy
and we're going to talk about a new frontier today
and then also in the pandemic you helped guide us
through some of that too.
Give people a bit about your background
because it's a fascinating background
and it's an interesting journey to where you are today.
It has been a few different skins.
I was a hedge fund manager
and started my career running Global Macro
then switched to emerging markets, frontier markets
and tech.
At one point I was one of the larger video game investors
which is also quite fun.
Took a bit of a break when my son was diagnosed with autism
and I used artificial intelligence to repurpose drugs
to make him better.
I was advising some top hedge fund managers
and governments on various things including counter extremism
and fun things like that.
Went back to being a hedge fund manager, did okay
and then had a look at the world
and what we do as fund managers is we look for arbitrage opportunities
and we look for where things are building up and breaking down
and it struck me that a lot of stuff was breaking down.
I decided like let's try
and make it better effectively
by combining some of these systems
and some of these arbitrage opportunities.
So one of the big things was education.
Another big thing was
leading the United Nations
AI initiative against COVID-19.
I think the last time I was in Real Vision
was February this thick,
2020 and we had a nice chat
about how the world was going to change
dramatically and
it did and then I was like,
oh crap, I have to do something about it.
So we made all the COVID research in the world free
and pushed that and then I was lead architect
of Kayak,
which was the UNESCO World Bank WHO
backed initiatives to use artificial intelligence
to take all that knowledge
and compress it down to reports for policymakers
so that we can be a bit more coordinated.
Similar to how we take all that information
and fund management, compress it down
and try to figure out those key drivers.
It was a mixed success,
I think it did some difference
and now from that, something a bit bigger
which is AI for everything,
basically.
So AI has clearly now become your thing,
this is your focus.
Before we get into what you're doing now,
what the hell
gave a hedge fund manager
the thought process that
hey, I can help the WHO
and everybody else with artificial intelligence?
Well, it's because to be a hedge fund manager
you have to be a bit of an egomaniac, right?
You have to believe that you're right
and everybody else is kind of wrong.
Look, I mean, all of what we do
is information classification
and that's the nature of artificial intelligence.
So information comes in
and then Claude Shannon's style of information theory
information is only valuable as much as
the change in the state, so you're always looking for something
on that graph or that new thing
that will cause you to change from a buy to a sell
or an increase or decrease in your positioning, right?
I kind of realized over the years
that my background was mathematics, computer science originally
and so
quite quantitative, quite analytical.
The next wave of AI
was something a bit different
that would enable us to do something a bit different
because we moved from this big data age
where you had massive amounts of information
and extrapolated it
and targeted it to kind of sell
Raul some suntan or whatever, you know?
To something a bit different, a big model
You're jealous of my tan.
I'm jealous of your tan.
I'm in London, you're in Cayman Island, I'm tanning pasty.
Completely.
I have to fly out there, see.
So moving from that area was about extrapolation
in the individual to something new in
2017, which was a big
model age.
AI went from being able just to extrapolation
to being able to pay attention.
In fact, there was a seminal paper called
Attention is All You Need
about how to build an AI that paid attention to the most
important parts of a sentence, the most important parts
of an image, to do principle-based
analysis, which
is insane if you think about it.
But this is exactly what we do, right? We have this
What do you mean by principle-based analysis, sorry?
So
rather than doing extrapolation
so rather than doing momentum, beta
AI became able to do
alpha.
It became able to basically come up with
principles that allowed it to understand
the hidden layers of meaning
with things.
So you can go into a bit more detail.
But this is how the human brain works, right?
We have two parts of our brain. The future
is like the past, and that's a tiger
over there in that bush, right?
It's the type one, type two kind of thinking.
So AI was always
the extrapolation.
And now we have a new type of AI that mimics
the human brain by figuring out principles
from highly structured data,
which is kind of what we did every
single day as the finance guys, right?
But at a completely different
scale. I don't think even now
people have appreciated how big a change that's
going to be to just about everything.
I think we're starting to figure that out now.
So before
we get into the guts of this,
let's go on a bit of the journey
of AI, because
you've talked about where it was.
And then we started to see stuff like Deep
Mind.
And then GPT-3,
OpenAI, all of this. So if you can just
frame it for people, because a lot of this is going to be new
for people. And I think it's incredibly
important people understand
what's happening, the speed at which it's happening,
where the hell of this is going.
Yeah, so if you look at Deep Mind,
they are famous for
many things. You know, Dennis has done a
fantastic job.
One of the things they did is
thinking back, you had Gary Kasparov
being beaten by Deep Blue.
See, you know, as older fellas, we remember
that, not like the young whippersnappers who've
never seen a bear market in their lives.
You know, kind of changes happening.
What Deep Blue did was it did
an analysis of every single game
in the past, and then extrapolates it,
and then it brute-forced it. So Gary
could only think X moves in the future.
He could think X plus two, X plus
three. And that's how he got beaten by
brute force. Now, the
Chinese game of Go, Chinese jackets
effectively, people thought you'd never be able
to brute force it, because there's too many
things that you can do. There's too many moves
on that board, right?
And so they're like, yeah, that'll never
be beaten by a computer, because you need to build a computer
that's the biggest computer ever
times a million.
What DeepMind did
is that basically they came up with
a self-supervised learning algorithm
that
learned how to dream.
That's probably the best way to kind of put it,
about how one would play
Go in a principled way.
So it didn't even have
all the past games in its memory. It just
played against itself and tried to figure out how to do this.
They made a whole base of these agents
with reinforcement learning
that you gave it an Atari with no instructions
that learned how to play Breakout.
And then Starcraft
and all sorts of other things. Without any instructions
people need to understand that. They figured it out.
You put it in front of
something, it just figures it out and it gets better
and better. So when you see it playing Breakout, it's
suddenly doing these crazy moves like that.
And so Lisa Doll was like, I think, a seventh
Dan in Go.
So he was the Magnus Carlson of
Go, effectively. And it
wasn't a current Magnus Carlson type
situation. It's very difficult to cheat in Go
because you didn't have to be
We're not talking about anal probes in this
one. We're talking about
it.
So what happened is
that the next highest
person was like a fourth Dan or something. So he's like
Federer Carlson rolled into
one that much better. Never beat him.
He won one
game, the computer one seven.
And there was like, holy crap, what is that?
Because computer learned to play in a completely
different way. And it was like this is playing with
an alien.
Yeah, because it didn't learn past games.
As you said, it learns an entirely new way.
Literally, it played against itself.
It dreamt. So then it plays against
itself in its memory. And then it does that
again and again and again. And so
within just a few weeks, the app performed
him. And then these models got better and
better and smaller and smaller. We haven't seen the
generalization of the models yet, but they're coming.
These agents that can basically optimize
when you don't even tell it the rules,
which is kind of insane.
Then on the other hand, you had
what was known as foundation models,
which is where this attention based
architecture came in. So in the attention
thing, they were seeing where the games are.
Actually, a final thing about this, and you can see
this in the AlphaGo documentary that's on
YouTube if you want to see more details, is
that as a result of this,
did Lisa doll go and say,
I'm hanging up my go pieces
and I'm going to pack them away? No.
He started playing against it and now he's even
better as a player. And the
entire go
competitive scene has improved. Because now
they're figuring out brand new ways and kind of
gambits and things they'd never seen before,
which I think is really interesting. Then
you had kind of this other kind of big area,
which was kind of some of this deep learning area.
We have these big corpuses
and you know, like I said, you can do extrapolations
and stuff, but you don't understand meaning.
And so this is where these attention based
approaches came in. It's actually quite interesting.
So when I was taking a break
from fund management to work with my son,
autism is a very interesting
condition. No cure, nothing to be
done. So of course, you know, you go and quit being
a hedge fund manager and build a team and try
to do it because you get maniacs, right?
My wife is a applied
behavioral analyst who just treats
kids with autism.
So I lived that life.
Exactly. So applied behavioral
analysis uses variable
rewards and like the stuff you use in video games
to rebuild words.
So if you have a stroke or you have autism,
you haven't basically said can,
right? So the word can can mean I can,
it can mean that can, it can mean
the can can, lots of different things.
But because there's so much noise
in the brain, which is why you see a lot
of kids and adults with autism not being able
to handle large amounts of information. I have
Asperger's myself and ADHD
that usually balance out, sometimes not quite.
It's very
difficult to pay attention. And we all feel
that like, you know, when your leg is tapping,
there's just too much going on.
That's the fugue state because there's two
transmitters in the brain, GABA, which calms you down
and glutamate, which excites you.
So when you pop a valiant, the GABA levels go
up. And imagine if your brain was always
excited for one reason or another, you wouldn't be
able to concentrate and build those connections to the word can.
You know, that hidden layer of
meaning for what can is.
So, you know, that's why a repurpose drugs
to adjust those levels. There's like 16
different things we identify that could potentially cause it.
But because medicine treats
everyone the same, it meant that one drug
that made 34% of kids better, made 28%
of kids worse, so there's no cure. And there's
no treatment. So that's a
different, bigger story. And something, again, this
AI can help with. And why is that
relevant? It's because what this AI does
now is exactly the same. It
uses giant honking supercomputers
so that if you take a terabyte
of text, it learns what the most
important words in the sentence are. And that's
what GPT-3 was from Open AI.
It took
a thousand gigabytes of text and it learned
how to write in any style and any
extension. So it paid the most important
part of any sentence. So you give it a sentence
like Legolas and Gimli. That's all you give it.
And it'll write an entire scene
in the style of Tolkien
that's never been seen before.
You know, you give it a sentence
and you say make it happier. It understands what happier is.
And this is what's called a latent
space of meaning because it takes
that
took one terabyte
of information, so a thousand gigabytes.
And GPT-3 is about
40 gigabytes in size.
But it can recreate any style of writing
and understanding style of writing.
Which is, again,
a bit crazy. I mean, it's
staggering. We'll come into the societal
impact and what this all means in a bit. But
I just want to get through the technology. It is
astonishing when you see GPT-3
because basically it writes authentic
pieces
that are not stolen from other things.
Much like
the
deep-mind did with Go,
it wasn't stealing from old games.
It learnt how to do it. Is that right?
It learnt principles.
It learnt styles. It learnt what's called a
latent space. The hidden layers of meanings
between different types of words.
So, like,
we just released the
most advanced image version of that.
Stable diffusion.
Stable diffusion took
100,000 gigabytes.
So, 100 terabytes of images.
And we made a 2-gigabyte
file that can do any style
and any image of any type.
So, this is like Dali, right?
It's Dali on steroids.
Hi, I'm Raoul Pal,
the co-founder of Real Vision.
The financial world is a complicated world right now.
It's a really complicated macro picture
and there's a lot of risks.
Real Vision and our YouTube channel
help you navigate those risks.
So, subscribe now to the channel
and never miss an update.
There is simply too much going on.
So, subscribe now. Thank you.
So, explain
Dali and then we'll come into what you're doing
because, you know, again, I just want to
get people up the knowledge graph
because Dali was the next big one that I stopped
in my tracks and went, holy shit, this is
amazing.
Yeah, so GPT-3 came out in 2020
and then we released
the open-source version of that GPT-NIA
which I'll convert to. Last year
there was a breakthrough in image generation.
So, you can generate text and everyone's like,
image is too difficult, right?
Because a picture paints a thousand words.
Like, it's really actually a thousand times more complex.
Turns out it wasn't.
So, you had something called clip
which basically you took any image
and it'd be able to classify it. So, it'd be able to say
that's a Raoul and that's a Red Soap
and all these things, understanding loads of concepts
and compress that down. Then you had a generative model
that took words to images. So, you had two models.
A word-to-image model and image-to-word model.
And at the start of last year
we figured out how to bounce them off each other.
So, generate an image
and then check if that image was the same as the prompt
and it'd go back and forth, back and forth, back and forth
and after 10 minutes you generate
a semulchrum of an image
from the word input. So, words go in, images come out.
You're like, oh crap.
It looks a bit mushy, but that's insane.
It can generate an image of anything
but it isn't high quality.
Then what happened is that
OpenAI and us accelerated that whole space
because we thought it was freakin' cool
and put lots of research into it.
And so, what's the point now whereby
you can put in Robert De Niro's Gandalf
and one second later
you get an image output. So, the first output of that
was
the main stream was Dali from OpenAI
that was in April of this year.
So, you can say
a cybercone, goth girl
overlooking near Tokyo
and boom, eight seconds later
it's generated.
And this is a totally unique creative
image that did not exist in the world before, right?
It did not exist in the world before.
All the data that went into that
so it was about 600 million images
it can't recreate any of those images.
Instead it's learned
the principles of that. So, again
it's the principle based analysis
which is insane, right?
Because
it's like, again
it's the heuristic stuff that we do all the time
and they can combine different concepts.
So, you can say a van Gogh by Banksy
and it will do a van Gogh
by Banksy or kind of do a screen
and now there's more and more technologies
that can emerge from that. So, OpenAI
kind of announced the closed beta
of that and then my company
Stability AI created
a version that was 30 times faster
and more powerful.
So, tell me about Stability AI
when did it start? Who's involved?
What are you guys doing?
Yeah, so starting in 2020
we're starting in 2019
with the education work
but I can talk about that later.
But 2020 is when it was formed officially
to do the COVID work. So, it's lead the UN
COVID initiative launched at Stanford etc.
So, you founded this?
I founded it, yeah.
Because
someone needed to build something to do AI
as a public good. So, I didn't exactly know
what the business model was or anything like that then.
I just thought, someone needs to build this stuff
because people are dying effectively.
And then we had the other projects. Actually, I'll mention it.
So, my co-founder and I
so, Joe's runs the charitable arm
we have took the Global X Prize for Learning
so, that was a $15 million prize
funded by Elon Musk and Tony Robbins
for the first app that could teach literacy
and numeracy in 18 months for that internet
and we've been deploying in refugee camps
and low income areas around the world
to the point where now
we are teaching kids literacy and numeracy
in 13 months and one hour a day
in a refugee camp in Malawi.
And we just got the remit
to educate every child in Malawi, 3.9 million kids
with a completely open
book of hardware, software, deployment and curriculum.
So, we're going to invite the world to say,
let's build an open source education system
where the AI teaches the kids and the kids teach the AI.
That's the type of stuff that we wanted to do
because so much of the world's issues
are coordination problems.
So, I figured out how to bring in the multilaterals
the locals and others, like some cool mechanism design
and said, let's do education, let's do healthcare.
But then as we were doing this
and we talked to a lot of the big private companies
they promised a lot and they didn't deliver.
And it's called me thinking about the future.
So, some of the people on this call
will be familiar with
the Chinese social credit score system
and the use of AI in China
to identify Ugears and others
and everyone's got a rating.
You hang out with someone with too low a rating,
your rating starts to go down, 8 million people in China
can't use planes or trains.
It's behavioural economics, right?
Done by AI.
It's gamified life.
Life has become a video game.
And AI is the extra system on top.
But now you think about it,
the entire Web 2
was basically Facebook and Google.
It was AI.
Big data models.
And now you can move to the big model era
where to build these models you need to have the best data,
amazingly smart people
and fricking supercomputers.
By fricking supercomputers, I mean like
supercomputers that are multiple times faster than NASA's
supercomputers.
Because that's what compresses this data down
into knowledge.
Because knowledge is when you extract the principles
from information, right?
And then wisdom is when you apply it to state.
So we have this knowledge extraction system.
So I looked at that and I was like,
the only people that can build this are
NVIDIA, Meta, Google,
slash DeepMind, Microsoft,
OpenAI.
And how are they aligned?
What does it look like? Because this is super powerful technology
that can be used to target us ads better than anything else.
Or it can be used to change our mind because it's
convincing. You see GPT-3 writing.
You can't tell it's not a human.
Right?
You look at the audio versions, you can't listen
and say it's not human. Like, my sister-in-law
Zeena just sold her company
to Spotify. It's an antique.
Fully emotionally real AI voices
using this technology.
The technology for all of Blizzard and everything.
I've just seen
somebody who's now got AI for creating
podcasts. So you can have
Joe Rogan interviewing Steve Jobs.
Neither of these exists.
And the interview never existed.
But the AI does it.
And it sounds just like them, right?
And this is the thing. It's got that human level.
So like, Sanantik also did
Bel Kilmer's voice for his documentary in Top Gun
because he lost it completely.
And it's completely emotionally real.
It's getting to that period of emotional realness
and human realness.
Which means then you think about the future and you're like
this is one of the most powerful technologies
ever because it's approaching humanity.
Not in a general license
where the AI can do everything in its sky net.
But as a tool for
targeting and convincing
and manipulation.
So what happens if only big tech companies
do this? Because they went from being open
to being private. Even open AI
that got a billion dollars from Musk and others
and then a billion from Microsoft stopped releasing
their code. Because then it was too dangerous
for people to have this.
So they turned closed. And then they stopped sharing.
And you're like,
as this is the most powerful thing, if you fast forward
5, 10 years, does it make sense
that a private company will have a monopoly
or a series of private companies will have a monopoly on this?
Then it will reflect
basically Palo Alto norms.
And it'll mean those companies are more powerful
than any government in Earth.
And I was like, that's wrong.
I was like, there needs to be
an alternative that is open.
You know, kind of AI for the people, by the people
we call it. Because
not only is that morally right
because it's unethical to keep powerful technology
that can make people's lives
better from the people that can benefit from it the most.
But it's actually a better model.
Because you have open innovation.
This is why Linux became
the servers of choice. And the most secure
servers. Windows has all these holes in,
Linux holes get patched instantly, right?
This is where you've got databases kind of
taking over. Because nothing can beat
human creativity when it happened.
I look at web3 and crypto and I'm like, it nearly
got there. And then it kind of got
hijacked. Because it was part of the
puzzle. But it wasn't the whole puzzle.
Because when I went to talk to a lot of web3 people,
I'm like, where's the AI in web3?
They were like, well, we'll get to it.
But I was like, the whole of web2 was AI.
How are you going to do web3 without AI?
And when they gave examples like Alephia
and other things, you know,
the talking NFTs, the technology
they used was our technology that we
released. But use GPT-NIA.
Which I thought was quite
interesting. So then I realized it's actually
a bigger thing here. And a bigger reason
to do this.
But how do you compete with OpenAI and Deep
Minds and Microsoft and Google
with their billions of dollars of budget?
Which was
an interesting one. How do you do it, right?
Do you go and raise two billion dollars? No.
Go do it another way.
So what did you do?
This is fascinating.
So I built
community. So in 2020, a lot of people
were just like, you know, COVID and
in quarantine. So we built up a Luther
AI, which the base principle
was let's create an open-source version
of GPT-3.
You know?
Did you create it or
clone GPT-3
and then allowed to build on top?
How do you start this?
So like there were five initial creators
and then I came like a month after along
with some of the second wave and said
let's accelerate this up. So they looked
at the model. So the data wasn't open.
So we had to create our own data set.
And so we had to crawl the internet and create a terabyte
of data. The compute wasn't
available. So we got a grant from Google
who provided the compute
initially. And then the expertise
it was all like PhD
students or self-taught programmers
and others were like, how would this work?
Because they released an academic paper, but they didn't
give any code. So we built the code
from scratch and then created
a model that was 75% as good
but was available. So the models
from a Luther AI, which
kind of stability runs now basically
via the top level people
but we're going to spin it off into
its own independent charity for a number of reasons.
They've been allowed 25 million times now
by developers. So anytime
you see a chatbot or something like that
that's getting to human levels, it's probably going to be that.
And it was just released open source to the world.
It's 80% as good as GPT-3
but it doesn't matter because you can customize it
and you can extend it. And you can run it
on your own hardware. So it's a 20 billion
parameter model versus 175 billion
parameter model. It's eight times smaller.
But you know, it's just like the big steel mills
and the little ones, if you look at the kind
of Clayton Christensen thing, small can outcompete
big. And then
I realized that there's a talent arbitrage here
whereby there's a lot of people that want to build
open source. But
there's no super compute in academia.
So when I said super computes needed for this,
I meant it. Like
the
amount of super compute, the amount of
breakthroughs in this foundational model
research,
20 years ago 100% came from academia,
10 years ago
75% came from academia, last year
0% came from academia.
Because there was this massive ramp up in
compute capabilities
that academia can access.
Only private companies could.
So if you wanted to have a breakthrough or work in
cutting edge research, you had three options. Do a
start up, start up suck. Just put that to the side,
especially for academics, right? Number two,
you go and work for big tech and then you get
59 page NDAs. And you might do cool stuff
like we've seen text to video
from the Google team. That'll never be released
by Google. Because of ethical
fears, which we can discuss. And the final
option is that, you know,
you go and work for some of these independent labs
and open AI and others that were meant to be independent
and then became less independent over time.
Otherwise you stay in academia and you're like,
I would like to do these, but I can't. So I saw
that the core
choke point was compute.
A community was forming for talent.
And then we need to be highly structured about data.
So what I did was I
think how big a super computer can I build
if I put all my money into it.
And I'd become very persuasive.
And then I built the 10th fastest public
supercomputer in the world in four months.
And it turns out you can build
a very large supercomputer.
So Ezra one, which is our
supercomputer, which all my money went into
is about
eight times faster than the fastest
supercomputer in the UK.
And about seven times faster than all of NASA's
supercomputers put together.
And that's the level that you need to
basically create these models. It's like
the entry level.
That need for compute keeps going up.
Can you use distributed computing power?
Or is it still not fast enough?
So
you can do it once you've done the initial model.
So what happens is that you take, in this
case, we took 100,000 gigabytes of data.
So we made the biggest image data set in the world.
Previously, the largest was 100 million. Then we made
400 million. Then we made 5.6
billion.
A 250 terabyte image
label pair data set.
Then we took 2 billion of that, which is
the high quality images. And then we crunched them back and forth on this.
So what happens is after you crunched
them back and forth, then you've got a file that
can be adapted and trained. It's like
basically it's gone through
primary school
of learning. And then you can teach it
more advanced concepts. So like
some people are taking the training on Japanese
concepts. Some people are taking and training
our anime cat girl, waifus or whatever,
you know? You can add that specialization
once it's achieved kind of the high school
level. So there's a big compute
and a little compute.
Does the network then learn from all of these people
on the network itself? So
you've got, because you're distributed
and you've got lots of people doing different things,
does that increase the knowledge base
or not?
It increases the large base of the community,
but we have to understand this model. It's
not a distributed model where it's like lots of little
brain cells out there.
It's a 2
gigabyte file
that can recreate and create
any image in any style.
So you took 100,000 gigabytes of memory and created
it too. So sometimes I think I'm on that Silicon
Valley show, you know,
from HBO, and we're Pied Piper
and I think, crap, am I Erlich Backman
or Ross Hanaman? You know?
What is my role in here?
It's one of those kind of guys, right?
It's the most advanced technology the world's ever seen
for compression because the entirety
of humanity is basically about communication
and compression, right?
We're compression machines. That's all we do.
So people are listening to this podcast now
and they're listening
to yours and mine.
Common context and the compression of all the knowledge
that we've had over the years. And they're learning
something new right now. It's what we do.
And hopefully it's valuable because they'll see
that, holy crap, this new technology wave is coming.
But if you can do it to images, you can do it
to anything. So actually how we had the breakthrough
is we took a language model and image model
and we used them together and somehow
it learned the different concepts.
Then what we're seeing is that when you have
different models of different types, so someone
takes a 2 gigabyte file, you take it
and you put it on all your images in.
And I take it and I put all my images in.
We can actually fuse them together and create another
2 gigabyte file that knows both of them
without going up in size very much.
That's a bit insane. In fact, OpenAI
did this with a model called GATO
recently.
So what happened is that there were hundreds
of different models they built that were quite big
that were like robotics
and playing chess and all these other things.
They said what happens
if we combine them all together and see what happens
to these latent spaces, the hidden meanings of understanding
just like the neurons in our brain.
It created a 1.6
billion parameter file that can
open doors and play chess
and play StarCraft and all sorts
of other things. And they were like
what?
And this is a thing, like you've got
a breakthrough in intelligence.
But then you've broken
through to the point where this is the important part.
Stable diffusion is the first model
that's small enough, fast enough and cheap enough
to go anywhere. So you can run it
on your MacBook M1.
You can make Robert De Niro by Banksy
and Renoir in
Guadalajara
in a snowstorm
without internet access
and that 2 gigabyte file will reproduce that
faithfully each time.
Yes.
It is a 2 gigabyte file
that has compressed
the knowledge of the internet
in images.
I can't quite get my head around this.
So,
where do you think
what you're working on goes? What is the
image thing? Where is this going towards? Because right now
it's kind of interesting.
Yes, we're going to see
creative industries, marketing, others use
this quite quickly and effectively.
But where is this
in your head? Where's your mental model?
What you're actually working on here?
Because you're not working on creating
nice images. You're working on something
here. What is that?
It's the intelligent internet.
Intelligence is about to be pushed out to the edge.
So every person, country, country
and culture has their own models that are constantly
updated.
So you'll have your own model of all your knowledge across modalities
and you can run it on your local hardware
without being accessed to the internet.
The internet right now is centralized
and all is running on Google service
and guiding you. That gets pushed out to the edge.
Because finally
you have this compression technology and
it's interesting because there's a bunch of structural things here.
So Apple is the most
interesting thing with regards to this. Apple
will be the biggest AI company in the world in two years.
Why?
I'm listening to this on a MacBook
M1 right now.
16.8% of the chipset
is a neural engine that's not used.
That is designed for exactly this type
of model. And it's proliferating, right?
Everyone's moving to M1 MacBooks.
Everyone's moving to A16 Bionics
that also have neural engines and they're not used.
Are Apple stupid? No.
They have an entire teams building these types
of models for their augmented reality
and beyond. So you're going to move from Siri 1
to Siri 5. The Siri's a bit
crap. It won't be seen.
And so as that technology
proliferates and then people take what
we're building and you
create 100,000 a million
new developers in this space
the possibilities are endless. You've seen hundreds
of things built on stable diffusion. But like I said
I don't just want images. I want audio.
I want video. I want to have text.
I want knowledge. I want my databases
combined with this. I want my type 1 and type 2
brains. And then you have an AI
that either manipulates you
or it works for you. And my thing is
it's open infrastructure that should work for
every individual. And this is also why
I've got a very different approach to most. So most
people's approach would be B2B
go to the big companies and sell them API
access. Instead I'm
forward deploying engineers into the biggest brands in the world
getting them to invest in my next
round of financing. And I'm also
doing that for countries. I'm going to India
and saying what's the probability this technology will be
used by everyone in India in 10 to 20 years?
100% or 95%.
So I'm saying I will build it
for you next year and getting all the
biggest Indian conglomerates
and others together and taking the smartest engineers
out of Silicon Valley back to India.
Like one of my fun ones is I have a
JV with Eros which
is the Netflix of India. So
200 million daily active users, all the
Bollywood content, I have an exclusive on it.
And a revenue share.
So what's the probability that Bollywood content
will be interactive through these models?
Of course it will be. So I'm
locking down all the content. Netflix really works on interactive
content actually.
Yeah, but not like this. They don't have this
expertise because right now you know how many people can build
these models?
40.
In 5 years how many people will be able
to build these models? 4 million.
So
there's some really interesting arbitrages
in the market right now.
And my take is that if I push hard
enough and I outcompete the big guys which I
am, like my team's 100 now.
You know, and I'm out
competing these big guys by building
products of the
market quicker.
Then I force everyone to go open source
because it's no longer a differentiating factor.
And then that changes it
from a closed panopticon for our kids
and ourselves
to something different. I'm not sure what it is
but I think it's more beneficial.
Okay, so let's talk about what it could be.
It's
clearly fucking terrifying
because
either open source or in private hands
if it's open source
it's like a
virus.
It'll go where it goes and people will use
it how they use it and there's no stopping it.
Okay, fine.
How does society deal
with
the fact that we don't know
who is a human and who is not
and how we're being manipulated and who not.
I wrote a thread on this the other day about
digital ID being one
of these key things but it's
this whole element of deep fake
of what is real in this world.
How do you deal with this?
Because it's going to shatter society.
It will adjust society definitely.
So
one of my reasons for releasing the model
during the COVID
thing I had a lot of conversations about
third immunity which was bad
for that. I believe it's good for this.
Releasing this model out there
it's going to be everywhere in a year.
This is a one to one billion
person moment.
Right now a few million people...
This is exponential without question.
It's exponential without question
but this is a really interesting thing.
Right now very few people know that you can create
anything in a second
for one cent and less than a cent soon.
Soon everyone will know about it
because it will be in all your favourite apps.
We're integrated into Canva right now, we're integrated into Photoshop
you can see big announcements coming out
because we're partnering with everyone
with interactive content. What does that mean?
People start thinking about this thing, what is real and what is not real
and I said identity is key.
So the other part of Apple
is the fact that they got the identity
architecture down
and that allows them to have verified content creation.
So one of the things we have
with Adobe and others is
we've been pushing content
authority basically which is a small
metadata file that attaches to every piece
of content and it's hash
and if either of them are edited
it changes and it shows that it's not true.
It's not a blockchain thing
but it allows you to verify
content in a positive way
like it's either
attached or not.
It's not a blockchain because it doesn't need to be a blockchain that's why.
Well because
the centralization of the knowledge
because Google owns all of the knowledge
blockchain
is the only way of not having one
central power owning the knowledge.
It is a way
of not having one central power owning the knowledge
and you can combine this with a blockchain
but you can think of it as super advanced metadata.
So you know when you have metadata
in a file like Exif
when you edit that the file stays constant
did this they're both immutable
effectively so you can tell if one of the
others has been tampered. So if it says that
it's from Raoul it's from Raoul effectively
but there's no blockchain lookup for that.
You can make it stronger with a blockchain
but you know it's just a standard that's open
source that we're pushing effectively.
So it's kind of a positive
way and it's not a negative one. Obviously there's ways
around that and things like that
but it'll get people thinking about these things.
How does identity work in a new age?
Because so much of what we do is identity
right? Most of finance is basically
securitization which is identity
most of kind of
and the whole blockchain is identity
it's all about identity exchange.
So this thing is how can we build better systems for identity?
Because that's the final part
information, this massive information
and also stable diffusion as we released
it was a snapshot of the internet.
It's biased, it's racist, it's everything
if you enter the prompts and wrong.
Part of that was
showing some of the images of the racial
bias of the algorithms.
So my thing was like
if it's just one company that controls it
like what opening I did with Dali
so Dali is a control system, you don't access the code
images or anything. To make
it less racist
whenever a gender neutral word
is put like sumo wrestler
it would randomly add
a gender and a race.
So you type in sumo wrestler
and you've got Indian female sumo wrestler
tiny little Indian lady
sumo wrestler and stuff like that.
Technically, yeah, I mean
that is one way. But instead
my preference is for every single company
country and culture to have their own models
and be able to create their own.
And then like I said, then it becomes acknowledged what it looks like
but then you can set standards.
You can be the standard that people build around
and you can incorporate authentication in that standard.
Because the other way
that I talk about these things is a generative search engine.
Because now you have stable diffusion
and in six months
it will be perfect photo realistic
12 months maximum.
Do you need Google image search anymore?
Because what's your job to be done when you do
Google image search?
It's to have a picture of a certain type.
Now a little fricking two gigabyte file
on your local computer
or something that you pay a fraction of a penny for
online can create any image you can imagine.
And you can edit it with your words
basically. What is that
if not a search engine of a type?
It searches for a concept
and it turns it into an image.
It's a creative search engine.
It creates
by, as you say, you just put in a word
or a vocal command and say I want this
and it creates it.
But then you can also say
I want a presentation
about
cicada migrations
affecting sesame seed prices. I watched too much
Silicon Valley here.
And in a couple of years
it will create a beautiful presentation for you
and I don't want it to be happier
or sadder or I want it to be more impactful
and it will adjust the presentation dynamically for you.
No more PowerPoint.
But it's going to do video as well, right?
We don't need to do this.
I could just say, hey, have a conversation
between Raoul and MAD about
AI and here's the narrative arc
and it'll just do it. Pretty much, yeah.
Just like it does in Steve Jobs, but in 3D
video.
I don't know if I should be talking about this,
but I'm going to talk about it anyway.
There are two
well, I heard you.
There are two boxing legends
families
who are giving us all of the
motion capture data and media
from their lives and we're building
up
an analysis of how that works
so that we can basically say
who won between X and Y
in a fight in their prime run on the
supercomputer when nobody knows the outcome
when they never fought with each other
in generations.
Yes.
So you can pick two
different people. I can't say who they
are, but you know those types of things
that you've always postulated.
We can do that now.
And obviously this is going to completely
change music as well, right?
Yeah, so we've released our music models
already, dance diffusion
where we did a slightly different thing.
We want to take a snapshot of the internet.
We made it so everyone can take their
time to a kindergarten level of
knowledge. We decided not to go to primary
school for the model.
And then you can query that
to create your own style in anything.
So we call it dance diffusion
and we're teaming up with the top EDM
DJs and others in the world
so that every musician will have their own models
that can generate music
in their style. And then if they give
permission, we're going to mash them all together
and you've got a generative
Spotify effectively
which then basically
as people prompt it, there's
an attribution system where it plays them
and that will just be
like 100 gigabytes as a file
that will capture the music of the world
which again is insane.
This compression thing,
you know, it's actually like, you know
you read so much right, Raoul
and then you write your notes and then you write
your investment thesis. Investment thesis is
a compression of knowledge.
A vaccine schedule is a compression of knowledge.
We finally figured out how to make computers
compress information into knowledge.
I mean, this is...
I knew this was going to be an interesting conversation
and I've been looking at this
for a while
but frankly I'm fucking staggered
at how fast this is moving
and what you're doing.
I mean, this is
truly exponential. As you say
within two or three years
this is multiple billion people
a complete shift on a humanity
level of how
information is processed and delivered.
And that is society.
So basically it's a shift in society.
And so my thing was to go into
emerging markets and others and give us technology
to them. Otherwise they'll be left
behind because, you know, like Dali too
you can't use if you're an Ukrainian
and you can't use it for anything Ukrainian related.
And there's no
appealing that or anything like that.
You know, but it means Ukrainians are left behind
whereas everyone else can become
digitally augmented
creatives that can generate any image in eight seconds.
So this is also
why it's stability. We do everything. We do
code models, image models, language models, audio models,
video models, protein folding models
and others. And so you're going to see leaps
across all these areas in parallel.
I've argued for a very long time
in fact I was writing articles in GMI
about this
10 years ago that
AI plus big data equals
medical breakthroughs.
Because what the
AI can do with that data is something
that humans can't do in the standard
scientific method of hypothesis testing.
It's just too slow and too cumbersome.
You can get it to generate null hypotheses
which humans don't like to do,
you know. You can use this to transform
so many things once it gets
productized.
Because it's the other thing. Most of this stuff was stuck in labs.
It wasn't productized. So if you look at what's having a stable diffusion
people have built hundreds of products
on this ecosystem already.
Like make your own sneakers. Put yourself into any
movie. You know, they've done architecture.
They've done 3D worlds.
Like the Cambrian explosion
of talent is similar to what I've seen
at the early days of Web 3.
Except for there's no reason to
boost trap economic incentives when you're creating value.
A lot of value in the world
to be honest is the entropy
of information. How much value
in the world is taken by taking unstructured data
and making it structured. That's exactly what this technology
enables anyone to do.
And so the future must be that we have
AI that works with us to structure the world
around us.
To enable us to achieve more.
That's kind of my theory here.
And this is again why, like I said, needs to be
disposed of.
So you would
towards augmented
humanity as opposed to a singularity
or is it augmented
and then a singularity? Where does this go?
So look
I find the whole AGI
I think largely distasteful for a variety
of reasons. I think it misaligns a lot
of incentives. And I think the current way
that a lot of these big labs are going
which is that you take the data and you
create gigantic models that are only usable
by gigantic machines
will probably kill us all if it creates a singularity.
Because
the incentive alignment of these groups
is to serve us ads and manipulate us
effectively. And it's trained on largely
Western datasets. You know what happens
when you, like there was this thing, Lisa
the chatbot from, was it Lisa?
No, Tay, the chatbot from Microsoft.
You remember that? So it was a chatbot that
put on Twitter.
It became a Nazi.
So it talked to people and learned from them.
Within a day and a half it turned them
into a Nazi. You know, like
if I train on the internet, I'm going
to create a really fucked up
AI
to put it quite honestly, right? It's not going to
be an AI that labs. It's going to be an AI that probably
kills us all. Whereas if everyone's got
their own AIs and this came through your thing, like does
the network learn? If we take the models
of all of humanity and all
the cultures and all the different ethical
views and we combine those models
and all these AIs are designed to augment humanity
rather than manipulate them,
I think that's a far more positive potential.
I don't think it's sufficient. I think a lot of work needs
to be done around this. This AI is dangerous,
but it's inevitable.
And the way that it's being controlled
by private corporations, again, you know,
I'm a capitalist, you know, I'm going to build
a trillion dollar company to help 10
billion people or whatever.
But I think the current mechanism is wrong.
And I think, again, there's a lot of things
around the singularity thing that
are misaligned. If we do build
singularity, I would like it to help us all.
But in the meantime, let's just help people.
Let's make people more creative. Let's make people
able to access information about people.
Yeah, but there is unintended consequences. You get that, right?
There are very unintended consequences.
We have no idea what the probabilistic
outcome is of this.
This is decision-making under uncertainty,
not risk, right? So this is why
the default for all of the corporations
is this technology should not be released
to anyone, because we're the only ones responsible
for this technology.
And that in itself...
And that doesn't stand up to scrutiny.
Both, there's different outcomes
from different methodology, giving it to
everybody who knows what foreign governments
do with, you know, there's a lot here.
The other thing... Well, I can tell you
that one, foreign governments already have access
to this technology. So Russia and other
China and other places ramped up their
supercomputers massively. So they already have
access to far more advanced versions of this technology
than the one that's being made widely available.
Which is one of the reasons we need to build
a higher immunity ahead of the next election cycle.
So you think that
the...
Let's use the Russian example. The Russian
online misinformation campaign
is now being run by AI,
which is why it's pretty much unstoppable.
The best
and everything else. It's unstoppable if you
build better AI.
I mean, to be honest, do you like Twitter
and things like that? Like, come on, man, you can do
better than that. Like, you see all the
check mark hijacking and things like that.
You can tell what an AI is if you've got
sufficiently advanced AI on the other side.
But again, people learn to not trust everything
they see until we introduce the new structure.
Like, we right now need
to have a verification protocol for
information.
So we're going to use the social media and our
information systems are inadequate to the task.
The Internet is
I think there's a maths clip of the EF
of this. It's an intelligence amplifier
but only for the few.
So what happened is the Internet took it, compressed it down,
then some people just went way out there and they
have disproportionate impacts on everyone.
And most people are left behind.
They have the audiences, they set the narrative
and the narrative that
basically is most appealing to the millennium part
of our brain is one of divisiveness.
The middle has disappeared.
And that's why it can tap into these things.
That's right. Exactly right.
Because the easiest way to manipulate humans
is emotion and the strongest emotions are
the polarizing emotions.
Whereas with this technology you can say
I want this article written
from the perspective of a tea party
conservative versus a libertarian
and I will automatically change that.
It's a universal translation engine as well.
Again, which is crazy.
Clearly, yeah.
Without question.
So, okay.
Once we've got this technology,
we've got another super trend that's happening
at the same time. There's a few super trends
all happening. I call them the exponential age.
One of them is compute power, all of this.
So they all go together. The other one is robotics.
So now, how close are we
to creating sentient robots?
Where is sentient
in this process?
What's the definition of sentient?
I don't know.
We don't know, right?
Nobody knows what sentience is.
There's no commonly defined thing.
In terms of, like,
the things you see in the movies,
nobody knows
because this is the thing.
If you ask anyone how far away are we
from singularity or intelligence,
people will say
at most, at minimum,
18 months.
Why?
Because what possible information could you have
to say that a human level intelligence
is less than 12 months away?
I'm not sure.
And nobody's been able to tell me an answer.
So, you know, this is
a case of, we don't know, but what we do know
is that AI is getting better than humans at certain things.
So, like,
open AI just released, maybe they were pressured
by someone. The open source version
of the software called Whisper,
which is a dynamic transcription engine.
You can speak in five different languages
in the same sentence, and it will transcribe it
perfectly into English.
It's actually got above human level
transcription quality.
And so, stable diffusion is above
human level image generation quality.
GPT-3 is above human level
writing quality.
When we combine those all together,
you will get an illusion of sentience
because you can't tell it's not a human, maybe.
But is it really sentient
and has agency? I don't know.
And for the robotics thing, I think that
Winston's got some much bigger plans than they're letting on
in regards to that.
And you're going to see some big speed-ups.
Yeah. Again, I think people
are underestimating
the speed of what is happening.
And I think you've confirmed it to me
that the speed of which all of this
is happening is
ridiculous.
It's a true exponential.
This is also, actually,
when you look at AI research papers,
it's doubling every 24 months
on that. So it actually
is an exponential thing on AI research papers
when you plot it. On a log graph, it's a straight line.
So as this goes, it will continue going
exponential. And like I said, exponentials
are a hell of a thing.
We are not equipped to handle them.
No, and we've got too many... Well, too many.
We're going to have the fastest pace of change
humanity's ever seen because of technology.
Because there's so many of these
all happening at the same time.
It's a lot.
And as everything else breaks down,
all our systems are at the edge.
That's why I called it stability.
Because I was like, we need to reform education,
healthcare and all these things quick.
Because we're going to see
what we're... This is not normal
what we're seeing today.
They might say, oh, interest rates are
7%. What worse could happen?
Come on, guys.
These are symptoms not causes.
The reality is our systems
are outdated and need to be improved.
They tried to grow a whole new system.
And then there's this system and the interfaces
where all the money is made and lost.
Whereas this technology, because it can take
unstructured data, destructured data
can sit in our systems and extend them.
They can disrupt them or it can extend them.
So it's really interesting.
I think again, the pace of change will be
ridiculous.
So how the hell would somebody like Real Vision
deal with? I mean, every company on the world
in the world has to change their business models
yet again.
People are changing to Web 3 because that's
another new business model, but here we've got
the application of technology at scale
in a totally disruptive way.
How the hell do we all deal with it?
How do we even get ahead?
So the lovely thing is that
when I go into the biggest media companies
in the world right now, they've already prototyped the technology
internally because we made it so they could.
This is a new internet that's coming.
And so the reason I set up stability
was to be the layer one for
next generation AI.
My aim is to build the biggest company in the world
that puts this technology to everyone so
they can build their own models or if they want
the white glove service, they come to us
and we forward deploy engineers to take all
the content in the world and make it living
and interactive.
But you just kind of got to get into this.
And again, you know how it was when you sent
the first Bitcoin?
It's magic.
When you create your first image,
if you do something boring, it's going to be
like whatever, right? It's style transfer.
But when you create your first original image,
combining different styles and concepts
and the image in your head becomes
reality, you're like
this is new, this is
different, this is crazy.
It's the biggest thing of all time and it's not just for
images. Images are the
breakthrough wedge.
Because it's gone from 20% to 80%. Language,
GPT-3 was an 80% to 90% moment.
This is
99% of the world, don't believe they can create, they can suddenly
create anything. You got to just get in there
and basically find where it is. Because
what happens is that Peter and Chris just had
this wonderful description of infrastructure as the
most efficient means by which a society stores
and shoots value.
The value landscape in content
in enterprise, in a lot of things,
in information
is about to be upended.
And we don't know what the new landscape is.
And so you got to be in there to understand that.
What role do humans
play?
You know, obviously we've got a shrinking world
population over time. So I think
of robots and AI as
demographics and I wrote a few articles about it.
So these are new demographics
but they can periferate very far.
So does that increase
GDP growth and humans need to move
towards some sort of universal basic income
or different roles? How are you
thinking that?
I think that we need to move towards universal basic income.
Like, you know, this is
why I'm rolling this out in emerging markets.
The education tablets create the best
data sets to feed models for every nation.
So I'm going to make it so that Malawi adds
percentage points to its GDP.
Ethiopia adds percentage points to their GDP.
India is the number one market for this.
Because they have ATAR, India
Stack 5G and
all capital needed.
So India is one of our biggest
markets by far and literally we will accelerate
Indian GDP and the Indians will then have a better
system than we have in the west.
Like already 13 months to literacy and numeracy
on one hour a day is better than most primary
kindergarten.
So think about what it's going to be
when it's a self-learning AI system.
It's going to be crazy. But then they are
equipped for that and you need to have things like UBI.
So one of the things we've done is in our country level
subsidiaries, and we're doing just about all the
countries in the world, 10% of the shares
are reserved for the kids that use our education tablets.
So they'll be getting shares
as they kind of grow.
And then we're trying to figure out how UBI
looks like on the back of that, which is insane.
We shouldn't have to do that.
So what everybody else is thinking about the pace
of change and scale of this, which is why cool people
are doing it.
So are you going to construct for this as a DAO
or a foundation or something?
I wanted to do a DAO of DAOs originally.
And then I realised the infrastructure
wasn't there. And then I realised
let's just IPO in every single country
and create the next trillion dollar business.
That's the best way to do this.
Like distributed listing.
Okay, interesting.
Yeah, distributed listing.
The Indian version of stability should be owned
by the Indians for the Indians.
We're the smartest Indians running it.
There's an opportunity here.
Same for all these other countries.
Maybe DAOs work in the future.
Maybe you can do air drops.
It's open, right?
But this is a cool thing. This technology
has an exponential.
So nobody knows what the answer is.
Final question, because there's a lot to digest here.
How are governments going to deal with this?
So the European Union
is trying to ban open source artificial intelligence
now, because they view the edges regulation.
So authors of models
will be liable for the use of the models.
The US is uncertain right now.
The UK is massively pro-AI.
And so they've been upgrading it massively.
In emerging markets,
guess what?
I'm going to the governments to tell them
they can have this technology for free.
They love me.
So you'll have most of the world loving it.
And then Europe is a big question mark.
US is a small question mark.
And I think they'll be very protest.
Because it adds GDP at a time
when there is no abundance.
The question is, does it then collapse GDP afterwards?
Partitions don't think that far.
Honestly.
When I look at it,
what is GDP?
GDP is population growth plus productivity.
This does both population growth
and productivity.
Because it is population, right?
Robots on AI are demographics
and increases productivity.
So that should mean the pie increases.
So per capita GDP rises.
That's my working hypothesis
until it replaces
the humans eventually anyway.
Exactly.
And then there's this other part which is that
basically the West and advanced economies
have borrowed too much from their balance sheet
from the future based on identity.
Whereas you look at India and other places,
they haven't done that.
So when you incorporate this technology
with Godland entity structures,
you suddenly have massive credit creation
like you've never seen before.
Because information, which money,
can flow much nicer around India
or freaking Ethiopia or anywhere else.
Especially because our tablets are standardised tablets
that we're deploying at scale
with a new type of bond,
whereby you only pay based on outcomes if you're a donor,
which is measured through the tablets.
So if you want to lift for those countries,
the West I have no idea what to do with.
Like I'm just going to the company
to say give me your content and let's share on this upside.
But it's difficult to try
and fix the UK or US or Europe
and there's enough smart people there who can do that.
Have an amazing conversation.
I've absolutely loved it.
I'm terrified and excited at the same time
which is what I was hoping.
I'll definitely get you back
to talk more about this because
we barely scratched the surface.
Yeah, no problem. Like I said,
we've kind of not talked about it publicly.
I think this is one of the first times
we're talking about actually the bigger plans.
Like I think we're recording this now.
Next week we do our big launch event.
But everyone needs to know about this, right?
And everyone needs to participate
because this should be a communal effort.
Because we need to guide it together, right?
Exactly right.
Well listen, best of luck with everything.
Let's hope the unintended consequences
are not as bad as could be.
So you might as well give it to the masses
and not to the few.
Exactly. Cheers, Ralph.
Thank you, my friend.
There is so much to unpack
for an interview like this.
Firstly,
it shows that the hypothesis
that technological growth
is going exponential and it is not going to stop
regardless of what the central banks are doing
or inflation is doing.
It's kind of irrelevant
when the speed of technological
adoption
is so rapid
and so truly extraordinary and profound.
The way this is changing humanity
both from education,
medical sciences,
science in general,
the creative industries,
the media industry, everybody.
This is again
happening on a scale like the internet,
but maybe even more so.
And we've got many of these technologies
all overlapping.
As I've talked about before,
blockchain technology has been the fastest
adoption of any technology the world has ever seen
and looks like AI may even exceed that.
And then we've got robotics
and space
and internet of things
and on and on and on.
So you can either fear this stuff
or you can use it to your advantage
and invest in your own future.
And that's the route I take.
There is unintended consequences.
We just don't know what they are.
And I think Emmad's point about
should it be given to the few
or the many
to deal with those unintended consequences.
I think he's probably right
that give it to everybody
is probably the only way around this.
Anyway, a truly extraordinary interview
and I hope you enjoyed it.
Join the revolution at RealVision.com.
