This video is sponsored by HelloFresh.
Higher system, to me, like there are other reasons to get rid of the monarchy, obviously.
But to me, it's just like, it's wildly unjust to subject people to this level of public scrutiny
and this absurd duty when like they have no choice in the matter.
Yeah, you can check out any time you like, but you can never leave.
Yeah, I think it's interesting that something that basically only causes suffering of the people
that it is about is also so expensive.
It's such expensive misery, isn't it?
I mean, anything where a British tabloid has any reason to be interested in you even for a single day.
It really feels like an act of abuse to me.
Yes, fame is abuse.
Fame is abuse.
In a post-MeToo world, we've come to understand fame as a weapon wielded by powerful people to manipulate, abuse, and silence others.
We've watched as major names like Harvey Weinstein, Kevin Spacey, and Bill Cosby have crumbled under their own hubris.
You make me feel young again.
In our current public understanding, fame is power. But to what extent is that really true?
Are fame and power always the same thing? Or is there ever a point where fame becomes a weapon wielded by the public as a means of abusing the famous?
I recently came across a tweet by fellow YouTuber Sarah Z, which made me really want to explore this question.
In it, she said, I want to talk about this public figure thing, just because, like, I feel like in insular internet communities, people vastly overestimate the amount of systemic power and prestige certain people have.
This raised the question to me of what happens when someone has fame, but no power.
Yes, fame comes along with endless privileges, but once it reaches a certain level, is it something that we as human beings are capable of withstanding?
Maybe there's only an extent to which we can meet the demands of our public selves until we reach a breaking point.
Maybe there's a point where fame itself becomes a form of abuse.
To unpack this, we have to consider the idea of celebrity.
Chris Rojek, the definitive pioneer of contemporary celebrity studies, defines celebrity as the attribution of glamorous or notorious status within the public sphere.
He says that celebrity is a split between the public and private self.
Of course we all present a version of ourselves in the public that's different from when we're at home.
I'm presenting a version of myself to you right now.
But the celebrity self is presented to a much, much larger public than the regular Joe.
Our current society almost revolves around celebrity culture, and we've been doing this for most of the 20th and 21st centuries.
The public identities of figures like Marilyn Monroe, Elvis, Kurt Cobain, Michael Jackson, Whitney Houston, or Amy Winehouse
have lived on much longer than the private people who embodied them and have helped to shave the culture we live in.
But there's one figure in particular who really cemented the public private identity of the celebrity as we know it today.
Do I even have to say her name?
Princess Diana, whose charisma, vulnerability, and generosity won the hearts of the world, had an unprecedented impact on society's conception of what it meant to be famous.
In an article published shortly after her untimely death, Jonathan Alter wrote,
If Helen of Troy was the face that launched a thousand ships, Lady Di launched at least a thousand covers and hundreds of millions of newspaper and magazine sales.
In the 16 years since her marriage, she became not only the most famous woman in the world,
but the only personality who consistently sold big in the global marketplace.
There was even a time when Diana was the most photographed person in history.
Since her death, the power of her image remains stronger than ever.
Say the words revenge dress to anyone and they'll probably know what you're talking about.
Yet the irony of Diana's role as a public figure is that her extreme fame is both what made her a fixture of history and what caused her demise.
Alter goes on to say,
Dodging tabloid photographers, she was doing her bit not just to preserve some privacy, but to hold back forces that she helped unleash.
Forces of media intrusion that will now be subjected to an unprecedented backlash.
In a twisted way, she died in the line of duty, not to country, but to the age she came to represent.
Diana's entire existence, her life and her death, is contradictory.
She was the master operator of the camera, knowing the exact outfits, poses and moments that would give the people what they wanted, but she was also a victim of it.
This contradiction of simultaneously feeding off of public interest and being abused by it is a product of a dynamic that scholars call the parasocial relationship.
First coined by sociologist Horton and Wall in 1956, the parasocial relationship is an intentional but illusionary dynamic between an audience and a public figure, typically in the realm of mass media.
Essentially, it's when we think we know a celebrity intimately despite the fact that they're a stranger to us.
Diana was the poster child for this.
When she died, the world genuinely grieved for someone they had never met.
So for this video, I want to look at what I see to be three facets of parasocial relationships and how they facilitate abuse.
Persona, authenticity and intimacy.
And rather than focusing on Diana, I'm going to look at three different celebrity case studies to explore how wide-ranging parasocial relationships can be.
Let's start off with Brittany.
Persona is a crucial aspect of parasocial relationships.
According to Horton and Wall, the public's closeness with a celebrity is contingent upon their appreciation for how well they managed to present themselves as a real person, regardless of how constructed that realness may be.
When we get a glimpse of a celebrity's private image, it's typically complementary to their public image.
Brittany Spears was an excellent example for this.
Since the start of her career, Brittany had always occupied a pretty contradictory public identity.
From the outset, she dangerously teetered the line between baby and woman, Madonna and Magdalene.
She perplexed audiences with her hypersexual getup and carefully trained baby voice, the bizarre combination of which was distilled in this 1999 cover for Rolling Stone,
which outraged the American Family Association, who decried it as a disturbing mix of childhood innocence and adult sexuality, even going so far as to ask God-loving Americans to boycott Brittany's albums.
But in the early years, detractors of Brittany's hybrid image were easily shooed away.
Why, you ask? Well, Brittany and her team were very adept at enforcing a version of Brittany's private self that helped to soften her hypersexual public self.
Her roots from a rural Mississippi town called Kentwood initially cast her as an earnest, hardworking, all-American woman.
She was just an ordinary gal whose raw talent allowed her to be plucked from obscurity and thrust into the limelight.
Of course, this wasn't true.
Brittany's parents pushed very hard for their daughter to make a name for herself.
She also had a very astute PR team and record label who gleefully capitalized on the public's perverse interest in teenage girls by making it seem like Brittany was unaware of her sexual appeal.
Listen, I'm 37. How old are you?
I'm 17.
I'm old enough to be your mother.
I don't want to see you in that shirt again.
I'm so glad you're bringing this up.
I was so humiliated. You do not understand. I'm going to Orlando thinking it's going to be like 90 degree weather and a storm, of course, goes through when I get there.
And then I go out there and when I came back, there was nothing I could do and I was so humiliated.
Yeah, it was cold. Things happened.
The way they were able to do this was by leaning into her Southern heritage and waving away criticism by chalking up her hypersexuality to being a product of small town naivete.
So you have no problem at all reconciling that, you know, Christian values, good moral, upstanding values, with being a little flirtatious, tantalizing, provocative.
You would be boring if you couldn't flirt.
I mean, it doesn't say in the Bible that you can't flirt or be sexy.
In a 1999 autobiography, she says,
The crop tops and hip-huggers I wore in some of my videos were the kind of clothes we used to wear in Kentwood.
It can be scorching during the summer, so the better or the better.
And I'm real comfortable dancing in them.
Kentwood was branded as a place of humble beginnings.
An American every town where people don't have a lot but work hard to make an honest living.
Welcome to my hometown of Kentwood, Louisiana.
It's a small, small town about an hour north of New Orleans.
This is my great-grandmother. Everybody calls her Granny.
And you haven't tasted any seafood until you taste hers.
People come from all around for her crawfish.
I work the cash register and clean the tables and help the customers.
These are going to be the best shrimp you've ever had.
I really love living in Louisiana.
The people here are so nice. They treat you like family and make you feel right at home.
In the same book, Brittany's mom Lynn says,
Looking back, I don't know how we managed, but somehow we did.
Bad as it was, it taught us something.
God helps those who help themselves.
We came together as a family in our times of need.
And just knowing that the five of us were in this together,
not to mention all of our kin and friends who were always offering us help and hand me downs,
gave us the strength to see it through.
So Brittany's original image was a delicate balance between the southern mores of respectable working-class
womanhood and the hypersexual pseudo-confidence of Hollywood.
But this persona started to break down when she began to reach the level of superstardom.
As Jennifer Musial points out,
The height of Spears' popularity in Hollywood illustrates how hard it is to reconcile rural,
white, working-class southern values with expectations of celebrity transformation.
The Hollywood celebrity script required Spears to turn her background into a brand,
or transcend it altogether by adopting bourgeois respectability.
Brittany's choices to continue shopping at Walmart, or to gum in interviews.
Although she seems to still be a sweet southern girl dressed down in casual clothes,
chewing gum firmly planted in her mouth,
or use a public washroom barefoot,
we're starting to clash with her extreme wealth and delicate southern belle persona.
She was no longer naive about her sexuality,
since her Christian good girl image was shattered by Justin Timberlake
when he revealed in 2003 that she had actually slept with him.
Did you f*** Britney Spears?
Yes or no?
Oh man, come on man.
Okay, I did it.
Breaking her promise of abstinence.
When she was married to Kevin Federline,
who was cast as a gold-digging good-for-nothing,
she failed to meet America's expectations of motherhood,
partying, displaying a sexual intimacy with her husband and the public's fear, God forbid.
And on one fateful occasion, driving in the front seat with her baby,
to which she responded,
I did it with my dad.
I'd sit in his lap and I'd drop.
We're country.
But this usual appeal to her modest southern upbringing no longer worked.
In the eyes of the public,
Britney was now the symbol of white trash womanhood.
As Musial states,
unlike her early years,
Spears was no longer the humble, wholesome new southern belle.
Now she was backward, irresponsible, and unapologetic.
And public scrutiny of Britney was brutal.
What has Britney Spears done this past year?
What has she lost?
She's lost her sanity.
Her underwear.
She's lost her boyfriend.
All right.
Respect your dignity, number five.
Number six.
I guess.
Number seven.
You okay, Britney?
He's sick.
This way.
I thought she was pregnant.
Are you okay, Britney?
Because that's right, Britney.
How are you doing?
I'm here, Britney.
Young guy's here.
Back off the drive.
Don't admit this won't happen if you just back off.
Shut the f**k up, man.
You see what happened.
Sorry about that.
I'm the person just like you.
What do you take on right now?
Your people.
Take a picture of us, Britney.
This is the greatest impression of an office worker
embarrassing themselves at a holiday party I have ever seen.
Five stars, Britney.
Bravo.
It involved a lot of mirrors.
And when Britney was rehearsing it,
she kept stopping the song and saying,
who hired the fat girl?
Goodness, you said that and not me.
Extra claim that she was seen texting somebody
immediately after her performances.
Any guesses on the nature of the text,
Joel, and the recipient of the text?
Well, I'm not sure, but I think we can rule out
dietitian, personal trainer, psychologist,
clothing stylist, makeup artist,
nanny, I can keep going.
Actual musician, songwriter,
stop me at any time.
Constant surveillance, ridicule,
and public humiliation culminated in the 2007 moment
I'm sure you're all well acquainted with.
What is this idea for now?
Chris, what happened to the hair?
It's gone on the floor, huh?
This has now become one of the most iconic moments
in pop culture history.
For all the wrong reasons, of course.
But it was nonetheless a breaking point
in how we understand celebrities.
In the throes of a public divorce
and admittance into rehab,
Britney walked into a salon in Sherman Oaks
and shaved her head to the dismay of her public
and the delight of the media.
This was highly documented by over 70 photographers,
and there's been a lot of speculation throughout the years
about whether she had consciously made this a symbolic decision.
But intentional or not, it was symbolic.
In shaving off her locks,
Britney had shed her blonde bombshell identity.
This was Britney revealing her true private self
for the very first time.
But what this private self was exactly,
we can never be sure,
since the photos documenting this moment
don't exactly pin down a single reaction from Britney.
She goes from contemplative to defiant
to lost to happy from picture to picture.
As Moya Luckett puts it,
the coherence this photo series resists
evokes a fragmented persona,
spurring discussion, debate, and even art
as the public rush to judge, diagnose,
and fill in the many gaps.
Later, we were told that Britney was undergoing
a mental health crisis,
as she was allegedly diagnosed with bipolar disorder,
lost custody of her children,
and placed under a now infamous conservatorship
with her father, Jamie.
She's since been ostensibly redeemed in the public eye,
but it's difficult to tell whether it's because
the public itself has become more forgiving,
or because any signs of veering off the course
of her carefully constructed image
have been cloashed by the conservatorship.
I'm thinking it's a mixture of both.
Ultimately, Britney's inability to maintain
a private image that was congruent with her public one
is the reason her persona became fragmented.
Britney's acceleration into fame
may have cemented her as an icon,
but it came at a brutal cost.
I think it'll take to get the paparazzi to leave you alone.
Is that one of your biggest wishes?
Yeah.
It's okay.
I would like for them to leave me alone.
In her commentary on Britney's public breakdown,
Luckett says,
her actions suggest a figure
whose intimate life has become so public
that millions have to witness her experiences
and emotions to validate that they exist.
In turning herself into representation,
Spears reveals that she is like us,
a spectator participant in celebrity culture.
Now, the goal of constructing a private image
for the celebrity is a means
of simulating a performance of authenticity.
In an essay on celebrity authenticity,
Aaron Meyer says,
the supposedly true, intimate,
and behind-the-scenes details of a celebrity's private life
are of the utmost concern for media sources,
as they emphasize the notion of a real celebrity
who, in her unguarded,
or supposedly outside the public eye moments,
is just like the average person.
Thus, while the fan may recognize
that the star seen on screen or stage
is a highly constructed figure,
the star is brought close
and revealed as a regular person
through the coverage of the details of her private life
within the media.
Of course, as we saw with Britney,
it's all about making sure that your private celebrity image
is kept within our social norms,
or else you can be deemed a pariah or a trainwreck.
Which means there's an important distinction
to be made between manufactured authenticity
and candidness.
I think the best case for this
is the very different evolution in the celebrity images
between Selena Gomez
and Miley Cyrus.
Both stars were tightened on the Disney Channel,
with each getting their own respective show,
many hit songs, and one Jonas' brother.
From the looks of it, it seemed like Miley and Selena
would have a similar trajectory into adult startup.
But obviously this didn't happen
because we were obsessed with taking bets
on which Disney stars will make it out OK,
and which will derail into trainwrecks.
And we saw this divergence play out in the media once again,
as Selena and Miley reached their later teens.
Miley's role model status quickly plummeted
when she appeared underaged and scantily clad
on a 2008 cover of Vanity Fair.
From here on in, Miley was now a certifiable bad girl,
and thus the subject of widespread public scrutiny.
Pole dancing at the 2009 VMAs,
being the subject of leaked, risqué photos,
and a video of her doing salvia,
ending with her official induction into bad girldom
with the Can't Be Tamed video.
It was also around this time when Miley began
stepping out of the carefully-maintained
and closed-off image of Disney.
So is this phase of your life and your career over
as you move on to the next area?
Well, the show still is gonna air.
Coming towards the end of this year,
there'll be more Hand on Montana episodes,
so that's still good for my younger audience.
There's a lot of, everyone likes the show.
It's a family show, so it's good for the families.
So that's not completely over for my fans,
but I'm kind of moving on new things.
Selena, on the other hand, was still acting on
Wizards of Waverly Place
and starring in a number of Disney and children's movies.
Her singing career was beginning to take off,
but her songs and performances remained pretty PG.
Even when the moment came for her to shed
her good girl persona in 2013 with Spring Breakers,
she was cast in a role that was much more tame
than her co-stars.
Despite the two having been pitted against each other
ever since they vied for the human equivalent
of a craft single,
the two stars crossed paths when Selena appeared
on Miley's Instagram Live in 2020.
And the contrast here in how these two represent themselves
is clearer than ever.
Miley speaks in her usual rapid manner.
She wears a kitschy Gucci sweater
and is surrounded by a loud scenery.
Selena, on the other hand, is wearing a simple blue sweater
with her hair tied back and sits in a clean white room.
Unlike Miley, she speaks slowly
and meditates on her responses.
You know, what's something that you can use
to filter helpful thoughts versus hurtful thoughts?
Because I know this is a time where the ants
just totally want to attack our brain.
And I think when things like this are happening,
we love to be future telling,
we love to be psychics where we know what's going to happen
and we really don't know anything
and it can just give us anxiety.
What do you use to keep yourself helpful?
Communicating with, like, women I respect.
You know, like, I have a few older women
that I look up to that aren't in the industry.
They, um, I call them,
and I think talking through what it is you're feeling
is extremely helpful.
When they talk about their respective struggles
with mental health,
Miley goes directly through childhood anecdotes,
whereas Selena keeps her discussion more general.
This contrast underscores the very filtered nature
of Selena's image, even when she's opening up,
as opposed to the almost stream-of-conscious way
that Miley presents.
This can also be seen in their individual interviews
throughout the years.
Upon going through various videos and articles
featuring Selena and Miley,
my researchers and I found that Miley tended to be
much more flexible with her vocabulary and tone.
She's also very defiant towards criticism.
You have been half-naked almost this whole year,
it seems to me.
It's getting cold now, so I had to...
You're wearing a little silk shirt.
For example, in a 2010 interview with Parade,
she says,
I am not a dull and people want to treat me that way.
They say,
now this is what we need to do with your makeup
and this is what I want you to wear,
and I'm like, dude, I choose.
When I was 12, that was okay, but I'm older now.
I have an opinion.
I have my own taste.
Her tone is often casual,
and she rarely holds back with swearing,
whereas Selena, even to this day,
is much more measured in her interviews.
When she spoke with Gia Tolentino
for Vogue earlier this year, she said,
I think I spent so many years just trying to say
the right thing to people
for the sake of keeping myself sane.
I'm such a people-pleaser.
Selena has often been referred to
as a role model for her fans,
but Miley has long occupied the opposite position.
Whenever she's interrogated about falling into the footsteps
of Brittany and Lindsay Lohan,
she and her family have maintained that Miley
and other celebrities of her ilk
are simply doing what non-famous girls their age are doing.
You know, you have to realize this is a 20-year-old girl.
Don't be one.
Oh, yeah.
Don't be forgetting that.
That's her thing.
Okay, 21, but these things are happening at 20.
This is what 20-year-olds do.
You know, she's just doing it in front of the world.
In response to the controversy surrounding
the alleged pole dance, she says,
My job first is to entertain and do what I love.
If you don't like it, then change the channel.
I'm not forcing you to watch me.
I'm not forcing you to talk about me.
I would do that pole dance a thousand times again
because it was right for the song and that performance.
But dude, if you think dancing on top of an ice cream car
with a pole is bad, then go check out
what 90% of high schoolers are really up to.
Sound familiar?
I mean, I'm, you know, I can't help that.
And if the parents don't like them to see it,
then change the channel.
So, sorry, you know.
So, maybe the difference isn't Miley
and Selena's personal philosophy on fame.
One believes that celebrities are a reflection of real life
and don't have an onus to instruct their audience
on what a role model should be.
And the other is a people pleaser
who believes celebrities should present an ideal
for their audience.
But I mean, this isn't exactly true.
Selena Gomez has always discussed the fact
that she's not perfect and that she wants to set
a good example but doesn't want to necessarily
be perceived as a role model.
When she spoke to Vogue in 2017, she said,
people so badly wanted me to be authentic.
And when that happened, finally, it was a huge release.
I'm not different from what I put out there.
I've been very vulnerable with my fans
and sometimes I say things I shouldn't.
But I have to be honest with them.
I feel that's a huge part of why I'm where I am.
So, I think what it really boils down to is the difference
in how they frame their private selves in public.
When Selena presents her private image,
it's through highly mediated encounters,
through a structured sit-down with Vogue,
through the occasional inspirational Instagram caption.
Just take a look at her account compared to
Miley's notorious shitposting.
Selena's openness with the public is very restrained.
When interviewing Selena about her past health struggles,
Amy Schumer asks, I think people worry about you.
I've worried about you.
Should we be worried about you?
And in response, Selena offers up some platitudes.
Some people just get off on building people up
and then trying to bring them down.
I guess what I mean is that people worry about me
because I've had some trouble in the past.
And it's kind, it is, but I'm okay.
The differences to personal struggles are always very vague.
But see, Selena represents the standard for celebrities
because she delivers a sort of manufactured authenticity.
As Meyer says, it's the tension between the two sides
of the persona, larger than life and the real person,
coupled with the tension between the possibility
and impossibility of knowing the truth about her life,
which makes celebrities so intriguing to the public
and such apt ideological symbols.
And this is where she really differs from Miley,
where Selena represents manufactured authenticity,
Miley represents candidness.
But although Miley's candidness has led to her fair share
of Britney-esque vitriol in the media,
we can't just count that Selena has been a victim of fame herself.
Her closed-off approach may have saved her from public scrutiny,
but it's also allowed for her massive fan base
to fill in the gaps and create their own idealized version of her.
Ever since her breakup with Justin Bieber
and her struggles with Lupus, Selena's rare moments
of opening up to the press have led people to read her
as a fragile person.
Just look at the way Gia Tolentino describes her.
The room is warm and the afternoon is becoming opaque,
and the superstar in front of me is giving off a soft,
bruised quality.
I find myself, as many fans and casual observers of Gomez
have found themselves, wanting to protect her,
to make her happy, to cheer her up.
Selena appears to have lived a very restricted life.
She even told Vogue this year that she doesn't have access
to her social media anymore.
Her assistant does.
Miley's authenticity, or candidness with the public,
has gotten her into trouble.
But Selena's commitment to performing this authenticity
means that she might not be living with any degree of autonomy
that a person should be.
In response to Selena's desire to break free from Disney,
Tolentino says,
It's partly a matter of her face,
which remains stubbornly useful.
Even when she's going full bombshell,
you can still imagine her cheeks surrounded by flowers
and cartoon hearts.
It's clear that Selena's personal brand of authenticity
has placed her in a perpetual state of adolescence.
People describe her in a way that makes her sound like a porcelain doll
rather than an autonomous, near-30-year-old.
She even said to Vogue,
Look, I love what I do, and I'm aware of how lucky I am.
But how can I say this without sounding weird?
I just really can't wait for people to forget about me.
Both Selena and Miley were placed in the
Britney-Lindsay-Amanda pipeline,
and both have used their separate tactics of authenticity
and candidness to avoid going down that route.
Miley has tried to take control of the abuse
by staying one step ahead of the public
and capitalizing on her lack of restraint
by making it a brand.
Conversely, Selena has submitted herself to the public
by manufacturing a passive private image,
which has in turn restricted her from breaking free
of her adolescent public self.
However you read this, authenticity versus candidness,
there always seems to be a sort of double-edged sword
for celebrities of this caliber, particularly for women.
Candidness can subject celebrities to public scrutiny
and outcasting, but it also allows them to navigate life
unrestrained if they're prepared for it.
And manufactured authenticity helps to preserve
a public image, but that doesn't necessarily equate
to an unrestrained private life.
So is there really any healthy way to navigate fame
and the public-private balance at this level?
I don't know.
Intimacy is potentially the most defining aspect
of parasocial relationships.
This dynamic completely hinges upon the idea that members
of the public forge a connection with celebrities
that's much closer from their perspective than the stars.
Like when I was personally offended when Aaron Johnson
got together with Sam Taylor Wood back in 2009,
a decision I thought was not only bad for him,
but for our future marriage and the kids we would have together.
Like I said earlier, members of the public have forged
such a strong personal attachment to Princess Diana
that when she died, the world underwent a collective grieving period.
As Richard Johnson put it in his own reconciliation
with Diana's death,
misrecognized by critics as manufactured or sentimental,
this morning was a typical expression of public grief
and personal loss, magnified as much by the intimacy
and extent of Diana's social connections,
face-to-face and mediated.
The illusion of intimacy is formed because,
according to Chris Rojek, celebrities offer
peculiarly powerful affirmations of belonging, recognition, and meaning.
So if Princess Diana was able to connect on such a profound level with her audience,
imagine how strong this type of connection has become through social media.
Social media has essentially taken the illusion of intimacy
and embedded it into our everyday lives.
Platforms like Twitter and Instagram allow for celebrities
to interact with fans directly.
They can receive feedback in the comment sections
and create stories on a daily basis where they speak to their followers
as if they're sitting in a room with them.
Through this expanded domain of interactivity,
there are now substantial elements of this parasocial relationship
which no longer look like the simulation
of a conventionally social relationship at all.
If anything, social media has made intimacy a bit of a problem.
So for this section, I want to look at Best Dressed
because I think she embodies the traits of a person like Princess Diana
on a micro scale.
She appears to be kind-hearted yet vulnerable
and unafraid to show her flaws.
And the way she's been treated by her fans
is a perfect case for how intimacy on social media
can work against the celebrity's favor.
Hello there, and welcome back to a channel called Best Dressed
in which I'm neither really the best dressed
nor do I upload fashion videos particularly often.
If you're unfamiliar, Ashley, known as Best Dressed,
is a YouTuber and former film student
who became known for making fashion and lifestyle videos.
She joined the platform in 2015 and steadily rose to fame
to this date amassing almost 4 million subscribers.
Now, there are tons of fashion people and vloggers on YouTube,
but Ashley managed to stand out thanks to her impeccable editing abilities
and striking sincerity in front of the camera.
She discussed everything from mental health
and then I have other days where I just completely fall off the rails.
I get down a YouTube hole. I start watching a bunch of movies.
I just crawl into bed and burn time.
And those can be correlated with depressive episodes for me.
She wore sex life.
And I felt ready to have sex for the first time with my first boyfriend.
I had this like, it was an uncontrollable feeling of shame and guilt
to her inability to live a fully sustainable lifestyle.
I wish that I could dive headfirst into sustainable fashion,
stop buying fast fashion altogether
and just have a wardrobe of completely reformation
and vintage and thrifted items.
I'm wet just thinking about it.
But unfortunately, as a college student paying rent in LA,
that's just not happening right now.
She had previously been attending school into living in LA,
but around January 2020, she moved to New York,
where she was able to get her own apartment.
But very soon after moving, the world quickly went into lockdown
and Ashley found herself confined to her home all alone in a new city.
This is why in September, she posted a video called How 2020 Has Me Feeling,
where she presents a sort of film diary talking about her experience
in isolation and fluctuating mental health,
which has delivered over clips from the past few months of her life.
And this was met with a very bizarre response.
Comments ranged everywhere from,
why didn't you wear a mask when you blow the candles on your birthday cake?
To, why are you romanticizing the pandemic?
To, you should get therapy.
Very quickly after, a barrage of videos began to pop up
evaluating where Ashley sits on the problematic spectrum
and basically picking apart every apparent indiscretion
she's ever made in her life.
Things like, Ashley isn't as sustainable as she says she is.
Ashley comes from a wealthier family than she lets on.
That she romanticizes mental illness and makes too many sex jokes.
The horror.
Now, online celebrities are frequently the subject of criticism.
But something about the critiques waged against Ashley feel unbearably intimate.
Almost beyond the illusion of intimacy you get with regular celebrities.
At some point, this healthy interest crosses over into a sense of ownership
as the audience takes up a more paternalistic and controlling position over the celebrity.
In his book, 21st Century Celebrity, Fame and Digital Culture,
David C. Giles finds that online celebrities or micro celebrities
are cultivating fundamentally different relationships with their followers
than the traditional celebrity.
This is especially evident with vloggers
who confirm their authenticity through the performance of intimacy,
like engaging in a conversational dialogue with the camera.
Hey guys, welcome back to my channel. I hope you're all well.
Good morning. Today's the day.
Good morning everybody.
Hello my beautiful friends, welcome back to my channel.
Giles says that the parasocial relationship between YouTubers and fans
is reinforced further by moments of vulnerability on the part of the celebrity,
particularly in the form of confession.
Ashley's confessionals differ from the traditional Selena Gomez confessional
because they're coming straight from her, sitting in her own home
and framing her own narrative.
They are no peering eyes or Diane Sawyers
or cameraman watching her as she tells us the details of her life.
These are coming to us from a far less mediated environment.
Like Giles says, it's during these moments that viewers feel
they have access to the inner reality of the celebrity
and we see the gap between vlogger and viewers narrowing.
When researching this video, I joined a subreddit dedicated to best dress
to better understand the culture of her fandom.
And wow.
The majority of the posts are either people nitpicking the details of her personal life
or just straight up talking shit about her.
Let's take a look, shall we?
A relationship with Ashley's videos.
Her videos are clearly made with tons of love, patience, and effort.
However, every other word that comes out of her mouth
makes me literally physically cringe.
The sex jokes she makes while blatantly unfunny are over-the-top cringey
and half the time incredibly gross and not relatable.
See her latest apartment tour.
She clearly does it as an attempt to destigmatize sex,
which unfortunately falls flat as her joke usually falls into the TMI category.
Not too sure how we can destigmatize sex if people still think Frank
conversations about it are quote unquote gross.
Ashley's fashion evolution.
Has anyone else noticed how much her style has changed?
I know she's getting older and can't stick to one thing constantly,
but she was someone who I genuinely went to for fashion advice
and she had some really good tips about how to match things and make them work.
Judging by her Instagram posts now,
it's almost like she just throws thrifted things together and calls it an outfit,
and a lot of the time they don't really work together.
For someone who is so conscious of colors and materials and silhouettes,
it's a bit disappointing for me,
especially considering how much I really appreciated the advice she gave.
This person tried to defend her but got zero upvotes
and was promptly retaliated against.
It's strange because these people seem to just purely dislike Ashley,
yet are congregating in a forum as fans.
Obviously these types of posts will appear in any subreddit,
but the sheer volume of nitpicking and overanalyzing
makes it look like this is the consensus within her fanbase.
And I'm clearly not the only one who's weirded out by the atmosphere here,
because the creator of the sub locked it due to what they perceived
as toxicity and obsessiveness.
And it's sad because this started as a forum for people who want to share ideas
about fashion and celebrate Ashley's hard work.
What the growing accountability culture of her fandom seems to suggest
is that because she has a platform,
Ashley should publicly own up to all of her minor personal mistakes.
But a lot of these perceived mistakes are a facet of being a human being.
We're full of contradictions and flaws.
Ashley doesn't address her mistakes because she still operates as a private person,
since her fame was acquired so quickly and through unconventional means.
She doesn't have a PR team, nor is she media trained.
She hasn't adapted her life to celebrity status
because she doesn't live the life of a celebrity.
And it looks like this atmosphere amongst her fans may be getting to Ashley,
since she seems to have entered an indefinite hiatus on YouTube
and appears to now only be operating on Instagram.
Of course, this is purely conjecture.
But I'd probably leave YouTube too if I received this amount of condescending animosity disguised as concern.
In a study on veteran YouTube vlogger Zoella and Gerslev states,
performances of a private authentic self are what is valued in social media celebration
through strategies of connectedness, accessibility, and intimacy.
Because Ashley was so accessible to her fans,
it gave them an illusion of access into her personal life
that quickly devolved into an illusion of ownership.
And then if you look at the comments under her Instagram posts,
it seems that a large portion of her fans think she owes them an explanation
for her hiatus since she's making money off of them with Instagram ads.
This is exactly what's wrong with the parasocial relationship.
The celebrity needs their audience to survive.
So the justification quickly becomes,
without us, you wouldn't be here.
And is this acceptable in any other context?
No, obviously not.
And this is where we come to understand that social media has an intimacy problem.
Social media has taken the traditional celebrity,
who has an entire industry behind them,
and conflated them with regular people who just so happened to achieve fame online,
the microcelebrity.
Which means that all the media's power to harass and abuse celebrities
has now been placed directly into the hands of the public.
Like Sarah Zed said, we overestimate the systemic power of microcelebrities.
They receive all of the abuse upfront,
but might not have any of the resources to deal with it.
As a star like Brittany crumbled under the demands and pressure
of being under the public eye,
how do we expect someone much less powerful to make it through?
The 2017 study found that one in four millennials would quit their job to be famous.
The second I started getting any traction on YouTube,
I completely reoriented my career path.
People want to be famous,
and Western society is so wrapped up in celebrity culture
that it's almost impossible to imagine a world without them.
As scholars Nunn and Biresse so astutely point out,
the celebrity figure writes large the contradiction of contemporary identity
for many citizens of the developed, mediated society.
The expectation that we have the right to live pain-free lives
bound up with the current pressure to understand those same lives
through painful emotion work.
Celebrities, despite their astronomical wealth,
carry the emotional burden of our society
because we place so much importance on them.
All I saw growing up was that fame isn't sustainable at all.
My favorite stars as a child underwent extreme hardship
in facing the brunt of public humiliation and venom
that no individual should ever have to go through.
25 years old and she's already accomplished
everything she's going to accomplish in her life.
It's mind-blowing and she's so grown up, she's a mother, you know?
It's crazy.
It's weird to think that just a few years ago on this very show
she was this like sweet, innocent little girl
and suddenly clothes writhing around with a python.
Have you seen Britney's kids?
Oh my god, they are the most adorable mistakes you will ever see.
They are so cute.
They're as cute as the hairless vids they came out of.
I'm serious, they're this cute, you guys.
I hate to be this person,
especially because I've made a brand for myself
in criticizing the wealthy.
But I do think we are susceptible to dehumanizing people
once they reach a certain level of fame.
I don't even know if I want to do this anymore.
This is messed up stuff that people are saying.
People telling me to hang myself,
people blatantly disrespecting the fact
that I'm still a human being is not okay at all.
If this is the community that I'm in
and the community that I put myself in,
I don't know if I want to do that anymore.
This isn't me saying that celebrities shouldn't be held accountable.
There's an intrinsic power that comes along with having a platform.
But by deconstructing the foundations of fame,
persona, authenticity, and intimacy,
I hope that I've been able to demonstrate
that it isn't so much the public or celebrity
who are necessarily to blame,
as much as it is the inherent structure of fame
and how quickly it can dehumanize the people who achieve it.
You have to realize that we're people
and that we just need privacy
and we need our respect.
And those are things that you have to have as a human.
I'm happy to introduce this video's sponsor, HelloFresh.
As you may know, I'm balancing school with YouTube at the moment,
so I find that I don't have a lot of time to peruse around the grocery store.
That's why a service like HelloFresh is so great,
because I can order delicious seasonal recipes
and fresh, pre-measured ingredients straight to my door.
HelloFresh is America's number one meal kit service.
It allows you to get creative with your food
and break out of your recipe rut
while offering a number of healthy alternatives,
like vegetarian or pescatarian options,
every single week with ingredients sourced directly from farmers.
I have a ton of trouble with meal prep
and often buy more produce than I need,
but it's great because HelloFresh cuts out the stress of meal prepping
so you can actually enjoy your cooking.
In my experience, the food is genuinely really good
and incredibly easy to make.
I was actually able to use up all of the ingredients.
Some days, I'll make a four-person meal
and put it all into a Tupperware to have for the rest of the week,
and on other days, I'll make a meal to share with all of my roommates.
With HelloFresh, you can get dinner on the table in just about 30 minutes,
or even 20 minutes with their quick and easy options,
and it can save you up to 28% of your regular grocery store bill.
The service is also very sustainable, which is super important to me.
All of their packaging is made from recyclable and or already recycled content,
and according to the University of Michigan,
HelloFresh's carbon footprint is 25% lower than that of meals made by store-bought groceries.
And it isn't a huge commitment either.
You can easily change your delivery days and food preferences,
or even skip a week whenever you need to.
HelloFresh is also taking the time to give back during the pandemic
by taking extra steps to keep their employees and customers safe
and donating over 4 million meals to charity in 2020.
So go to HelloFresh.com and use my code BroE12 to get 12 free meals, including free shipping.
That's BroE12 to get 12 free meals, including shipping.
Special thank you to Luyosta, Syed Hassan, Malpurtui, Izzy, D.W., Cooper Stimson, Nina E.,
James Barcelona, Tenzing Mingmar, Greg Peter, and Emerson Ross for supporting this channel.
Thank you.
