Okay, so this is my great pleasure. Okay, can you hear me? Is it fine? Okay, so this
is my great pleasure to introduce Joe O'Dellick Hamkins, who will talk to us about continuous
models of arithmetic, and I just want to add that Joe, we miss you, and think about coming
back at some point. Welcome.
All right, well, thank you very much for that introduction, and I miss New York also. I spent
a while, and so I certainly will be back at some point in New York. Okay, so I'm hoping everyone
can see my screen, and okay, good. So, right, why don't I just dive right into it?
So, this is joint work with Ali Enayat, and myself, and Bartosz, visual. I'm sorry, if one
of the polls could pronounce Bartosz's name. Peaceful. Okay, thank you very much. It's a difficult
name for me. So, our paper is available on the archive, and right, it starts with a question
that Ali Enayat asked about 10 years ago. Namely, can we form a model of arithmetic on the rational
numbers by defining new operations? Of course, not the rational plus and times, but some other
plus and times, using continuous functions in such a way that we make it into a model of
piano arithmetic. So, can we define a model of piano arithmetic continuously on the rational
numbers? That's the question, and I find this question quite intriguing, and I was very curious
about it, and the amazing answer is yes, you can do it, and furthermore, every... Oh, I gave away
the punchline here. So, the standard model has such a presentation, okay, using continuous
functions. It's hard to imagine, maybe at first, but in fact, every countable model is continuously
presentable. So, the main theorem is that every countable model of FIAA has such a continuous
presentation on the rational numbers, meaning using the standard topology on the rational numbers.
Okay, so I want to prove that, and also... Joe, okay, so can I just ask a question? Perhaps this is
something one should ask later. So, these are the rationales and countable models. How about the
wheels? Yeah, yeah, it's gonna... Okay, yeah, we're gonna... That's exactly the kind of question
that we want to ask. In fact, it might be on the next slide. So, a topological model of arithmetic
is one which is equipped with a topology for which the operations of plus and times are continuous,
with respect to that topology. And then the question is, which topological spaces support
topological models? For example, the reels or cannot space, the long line,
Susan line, bare space, and so on. Which spaces can you have a topological model of arithmetic?
That's the main question that we're going to address. So, I'm going to give you
many affirmative answers. So, on the rationales, the main theorem says yes,
but also on the eta-alpha, on how starts eta-alpha spaces, these are the dense linear orders
of size of alpha provided they're saturated. And then many uncountable subspaces of the plane
you can do it. And there's many other positive answers. And there's negative answers. So,
to answer Roman's question for the reels, it's negative. There is no way to do it with the reels.
Or, in order to the end, you can't do it long line counter space. All of these are negative answers.
So, the question there are no, there's no way to give a model of PA continuously with those spaces.
And bare space is open. We don't know the answer for bare space. Okay, so let's just jump right in.
So, in light of the answer, so that the main answer we're saying every countable model is
realized continuously on the rationales. And so, one could ask, well, is that phenomenon,
that sort of non-all phenomenon general? So, if a topological space supports a continuous model
of PA, then does it support all models of that cardinality? For example, in the rationales,
the answer for the specific space of the rationales is yes. And then one could also ask whether the
topology can ever distinguish the theory. So, are there arithmetic consequences of the topology,
where maybe you can get some of the spaces but not all in a way that enables you to say, well,
you can't ever have a model of this theory, but you can with that theory. And so, for example,
if a space supports a continuous model of PA, then is it going to give you models of all of the
completions of PA continuously? So, I'm going to answer all these questions by the end.
Sorry, Joel, can I just ask a dumb basic question? Go ahead. So, when you say, I mean,
if you're talking about the continuity of plus and times for these models, you mean they're
continuous with respect to the product topology on whatever is the space that you started with?
Yeah, because they're binary functions. So, we ask, are there continuous functions in that topology?
And is it conceivable that they could be, you could have not a continuous presentation, but sort
of, you know, if you fix any element and you look at the sort of, for example, because the
successor function be continuous, you know what I mean? Yeah, generally, the negative
answers are all, it can't even be continuous in one coordinate. So, yeah, we're definitely thinking
about that kind of issue. Okay, if anyone has a question, please feel free to go ahead and ask,
that's going to be fun. I'm totally willing. Okay, let's prove the theorem. So, this is the
main theorem. Every countable model PA has a continuous presentation on the rational numbers.
And the first step is to read the standard model, which is maybe surprising because it's hard to
imagine how you could possibly define plus and times on the rational so as to make
an isomorphic copy of the standard model of arithmetic and furthermore do so with continuous
functions. But in fact, I'm going to show you how to do that. Okay, so it begins with the sort of
school child's observation that if you're doing addition and multiplication, then you can start
even when you don't know the whole number that you're adding. So, for example, maybe you
have some number and you know the last some digits of it and another number and you know it
ends like this, then you can start to add them even though you don't know the whole number,
you can get some of the final digits of the answer, even if you know only some of the final digits
and similarly with multiplication. So, that's a kind of obvious observation that I think we're
all familiar with. You can start to do the addition even when you don't know the whole number but
just the final digits and similarly multiplication. And if you think about what that really means,
it means that arithmetic is continuous with respect to the final digits topology, you know.
So, that's exactly a sort of more sophisticated way of saying the same thing. If you want to know
the final digits of the answer, it suffices to know certain final digits of the inputs and similarly
with multiplication. In fact, it's sort of even better than continuous, it's Lipschitz because
the number of digits that you need to know is the same. If you want to know 10 digits of the final
answer, then if you know 10 digits of each of them, I mean from the right, then you can do it
and similarly with multiplication. So, okay, so we can put a topology on the natural numbers,
the final digits topology, namely the basic open sets are u sub s where s is a binary string,
a finite binary string and these are just the numbers that end with those digits.
Okay, so for example, u zero is all the even numbers because those in binary, the even numbers
are the ones whose last digit, whose rightmost digit is zero. And u one has all the odd numbers
because those are the numbers that whose last digit is a one in binary. And similarly this,
okay, one one zero is six in binary, but we have two extra zero, so we're going to go mod 32.
So these are the numbers that are six mod 32. And those are all open sets in the final digits
topology. And there's a couple of observations. So, okay, so the main point is that the addition
and multiplication are continuous with respect to this topology as we observe because of the
school child's observation. We can ensure that the answer is in one of these open sets by ensuring
that the inputs are picking suitable open sets for the inputs. Okay, so what are some topologies,
this is a house store of topology because if you have two different natural numbers,
then they disagree on some digit. And so there's some s and t open sets that are going to distinguish
those numbers. So it's house door. Also, it has no isolated points because every use of s is infinite.
And the basic open sets are cloaking because the complement of use of s
are just the numbers that disagree with us. So there's finally many ways to do that. And so
the complement of use of s is just the union of the finally many use of t's
where t has the same length as s, all the other ones. So those are cloaking.
It's symmetric and it's really generated by the two attic valuation, namely the distance between
two numbers is just one over two to the k, where the k is the first bit of difference between the
numbers. So this is, so it's a metric topology. And it follows by a result of Sierpinski that
every countable metric space without isolated points is homeomorphic to the rational. So this
topology that I described is in fact homeomorphic to the rational numbers. And so I didn't prove the
theorem by defining plus and times on q. I did it by defining a topology on the natural numbers,
but then arguing that that topology is homeomorphic to q. So now I can just translate the ordinary
addition over to q and whatever the homeomorphism is giving me will be continuous functions on the
rational. Okay, so that basically proves the theorem. So we have the natural numbers, the
standard model as a continuous presentation on the rational, because that topology, the final
digits topology is homeomorphic with the rational. So let me give a different proof now.
A more specific proof. What I want to do is define a certain linear order on the natural numbers.
It's called the final digits order. I guess, does anyone have a question?
Oh, I do. Briefly, just that Zierpinski theorem. And you're stating it from metric. Of course,
I mean, you could prove metrizability under the assumptions given anyway. So I'm wondering.
Yes, you're totally right about that. Is it harder to prove this result without saying the word metric?
No, because in fact, the real proof of the theorem is the argument I'm about to give next.
Okay. Yeah. So this was sort of the first proof, but then we realized what's really going on.
No, but I mean, I mean, Zierpinski's theorem itself, we're getting your proof, but just
to prove Zierpinski's theorem, you know, I mean, we don't need any of this. In fact,
the next argument I'm going to give makes it even more obvious, because in fact,
it's an order topology for an endless dense linear order. And obviously, that's homeomorphic with q.
So we don't actually need Zierpinski's theorem at all.
Okay. So this final digits order
is the following order. We take the binary tree. Okay. So and zero means go left and one means
go right. But this binary tree, it's a little bit backwards from how maybe you usually draw it,
because I'm ordering the sequences from the right instead of from the left.
So, so one zero is extending zero. Whereas normally, I think you when you when you normally
when you draw the binary tree, you go from the left, but I want to go from the right
to make it match up with the final digits order. Okay. So, so I'm adding new digits,
but I'm adding them on the left as I go up the tree, you know, and some of these sequences
correspond to numbers like one one zero, that's six. And one one one zero, that's 14 in binary,
right. And some of them don't correspond to numbers because they have a leading zero. So when
you have a leading zero, then, then you don't you don't correspond to it. And now I want to
put the natural numbers in order, depending on how they show up in this tree in this final digits
tree. And it's so I'm using the lexical order on binary representations, but going from the right
instead of from the left. You know, that's the final digits order. And it's, it's an endless
dense linear order. It's easy to see, of course, the tree is branching, but there's always, you
can always put a leading one on so every, every neighborhood is going to have a natural number
in it. So it's going to be a dense linear order. And the, the, the, the final digits topology are
just determined from the cones in this tree. So for example, use of one zero zero one is just
the natural numbers that are in this interval here. I mean, this union of intervals. And so
they're going to be open. So the order topology on the final digits order is the same as the
final digits topology. So this is, this makes it now completely obvious that it's homeomorphic
to Q because I've got accountable dense linear order. And I'm looking at the order topology,
but the order is isomorphic to the rational order by Cantor's theorem. And so the order topology
is homeomorphic to Q. So the final digits topology is homeomorphic to Q. So this is what I meant,
we don't need Sir Pinsky anymore or any of that. It's just the final digits order.
It's the order topology on the final digits order. Okay, are there any questions about
this final digits order? Is it clear enough? Okay. So like zero one is greater than one zero in
just zero one, zero one is, yeah, everything over here is greater than everything over here.
So, you know, this is the empty sequence. So it's sometimes when people say, well,
what's zero in binary? And, and sometimes people say, well, it's just zero. But no,
that's not right, because that would have a leading zero. So zero in binary is the empty
sequence, which is in the middle here. This, the sequence just with zero only is not representing
a number in binary because it has a leading zero, namely the zero that's right there. So this is
not a number. Okay, this is representing two and so on. So, okay. So one way to think about it is that
I actually have, I actually have one quick question. The ones that don't represent numbers,
you're, are you kind of just forgetting about them? Yes, exactly. Yeah. Yeah. So they don't
correspond to natural numbers, they correspond to sort of, I mean, this connection with periodic
numbers here are two added numbers. Well, that'll come up later. Okay, let's see. So where are we
now? So now the theorem was that every accountable model of PA has a continuous presentation on Q.
So far, I've only convinced you, I think that the standard model that I want now to prove that every
accountable model, and this is how it goes, take any accountable model of PA and consider the final
digits order as it is defined inside M. M can define that order, because it can talk about
binary representations and so on. And from the right lexical order, it can define the order.
And M sees its own arithmetic as continuous with respect to that order. That's just the
school child's observation that addition is continuous with respect to final digits.
So M knows that its plus in times are continuous with respect to the order topology of that order.
But what is that order? Well, it's accountable endless dance linear order.
And so it's helping you more pick to Q. So therefore, I've got a copy of M on Q with continuous
operations. So that's the proof. Basically, it's just realizing that the final digits order is
definable in PA and it gives you accountable endless dance linear order. So again, that's
perhaps will be addressed later. But how much of PA do you need for this argument?
Oh, very little. And in the paper, I'm not going to get into so much because I'm not so good with
weak arithmetic, but my co authors are pretty good with weak arithmetic. So in the paper, we were
careful to state exactly what you need. And I delta zero plus X is enough to handle the binary
sequences. And so I think it's on the next slide, actually. Yeah, wait, can you elaborate? I'm a
little bit lost at where you're using the definability in this argument. Oh, I need to
I think right here. Yeah. And M can be fine in order. So therefore, it makes sense to think
about the order topology. That where I it's just okay, it's really just a manner of speaking.
I mean, okay, fine. I mean, you're using that fact and that fact is most immediately expressed
in terms of the order. Right, exactly. Okay. So that's really why this way of thinking is maybe
better than the other way going through syrpinsky and so on, because I'm not going to be able to
maybe appeal to syrpinsky inside the PMO. Right. I'm going to find that confusing to do that.
But once you get to the next slide, right, you're not this kind of almost canceling your order.
That's not that's a statement you're just proving out here in the real world. You're not
or are you trying or are you proving that internally in some weak system? It's just where I lost
ground. M knows that its order is is dense and endless and M is countable. So externally we can
see look that's externally. Okay, that's what externally it's a it's a copy of Q because it's
accountable and the sense in your order. So that's why it's homeomorphic to Q externally,
internally M sees its arithmetic as continuous with respect to the final digits order. Okay.
And M thinks that that order is isomorphic to its Q, maybe nonstandard Q.
Wait, but do you need that fact that M thinks it's internally isomorphic to its Q? Is that
is that an essential part of this argument? Or is that no slide comment? No, it's not. I didn't use
it. All I used was that the order was dense than your order. But that's another property you can
consider, I suppose. Yeah, and we do. So it'll come up. Okay, sorry. Okay, so this is the weak
theory. One more question. Sure. This proof doesn't it just show that if you have any model of PA,
you can find a continuous presentation on its version of the rational. So if it's
exactly your two slides ahead of me, yeah, it's going to come. Okay, okay.
Okay, so this is the week to another question. Sure, go ahead. This theorem you have on the
screen. Do you know this one? Okay. Do you know whether it's sharp? Do you know that if you like
weaken this theory that you get countered? No, well, the thing is, if you don't, you need X to have
binary representations. And so I have no idea how to prove the theorem or refute it if you're
weaker than this. I just don't know. Okay, and your coauthors didn't either then?
I don't want to speak for them because I was hoping to stay away from I guess it's
the Mopa seminar, but you know, PA, it's in your name. So just give me PA.
Okay, I'm sorry. I don't know the answer to that Cameron. So okay, so here's a variant order,
which is very natural in which actually we have maybe we're considering at first, but it doesn't
work. So this is the this is a natural order where you don't ignore the leading zeros. You imagine
that every natural number is represented in binary by an infinite string with only
finitely many ones. And so you add on all the leading zeros, and then you just use the lexical
order from the right. So zero is represented by the the any number of zeros, you know, or the
infinite zero string if you like. And it's a different order because before zero was in the
middle. Okay, but also addition is not continuous with respect to this order. Because for example,
one plus one is two, I think we can agree. But if you look at two, the number two in this topology,
it has an open interval consisting entirely of even numbers because all the odd numbers are up here,
and the even numbers are here. So there's an interval, there's a neighborhood of two that
contains only even numbers. But one is the smallest odd number in this order. And every
neighborhood of one therefore will have some even numbers and some odd numbers. And so it can't
be the preimage of the interval around two, because you must be able to get some odd numbers by adding.
So therefore, addition is not continuous with respect to this topology. So therefore,
this is the wrong order is how I think about what's going on the other order is the right order.
Okay, it caused some confusion because we were looking at this order first. And then I realized,
wait a minute, we need we really need the other order. Okay, so in uncountable models, we get this
theorem, which is the one that Corey was mentioning, namely every model of arithmetic has a continuous
presentation on on its rational numbers, which will be an uncountable order topology.
Okay, and we can ask, well, oh, okay, but this is the proof that we observed already.
The model always has a continuous presentation with respect to its final digits order. And the
point is that its final digits order, it thinks its final digits order is accountable to its linear
order and therefore, order isomorphic to its rationales. And it and that reasoning is correct,
even when M is uncountable. But the point is that what what it thinks its rational software isn't
accountable to order anymore, but some non standard version of the of the rational. Okay.
How store introduced these Ada orders. So Ada is the the order type of the rationales,
but we can have uncountable versions of this. So if you have a saturated endless dense
linear order of cardinality all of alpha, then that's called Ada alpha, and that exists provided
you have this cardinality requirement, which is necessary for saturation. And so the corollary
is that the order Ada alpha, if it exists, has a topological model of arithmetic. And the proof is
just look if Ada alpha exists, then there are saturated models of size all of alpha for any
theory of suitable size language. And so if we just take a saturated model of PA of that size,
then its rationales will also be saturated and therefore we'll have
order type Ada alpha. And therefore, the previous theorem will imply that we can do it on Ada alpha.
And this is sort of a generalization of the previous argument about Q. It's really about Ada
alpha for any alpha provided that it exists. Okay, so which spaces, what is the Q of the model of
PA? What which topological spaces arise that way? There are always at least a little homogeneous,
because in the rationales we have translation as a continuous operation. So any point, in fact,
any, any finite order isomorphism extends to an automorphism. So that's a limited amount of
homogeneity in the topological space in the order and therefore in the topological space.
It's never complete as an order, because the model itself even knows that because it can
point at this word of two, which it thinks is a cut that's not filled. So the model can define
a cut that's not filled, and therefore the order is never complete. Okay. So in particular,
I guess that shows that it will never become packed as a topological space.
Okay, so the same idea works with the integers. If you have the integers of a model of PA,
then you can make a continuous presentation on the rationales. And now you use the signed
final digits order. So here we have a, we put a digit for the sign negative numbers over here,
positive numbers, and then we start giving the digits, but from the right. So the small digits
are more important. The rightmost digits are the important digits for determining the order. Okay,
so here's all the even numbers, positive even numbers, positive odd numbers, these are negative
even numbers, negative odd numbers, and so on. Okay, so I guess right here, because it's negative,
the zero is going up, and the one, the one is sort of more negative. Here, the zero is going down,
because it's positive. Okay, so this is a natural order on the integers, but the same proof then
works, because this is a countable dense linear order. So homomorphic to Q, and the integer
arithmetic is continuous with respect to this signed final digits order. Okay, let's see.
So let's now consider negative answers. So, and we're going to prove this in a way that was discussed,
namely, well, fulfilling something like the Tenenbaum, we're going to show that in fact,
it's often the case that neither addition nor multiplication can be continuous.
And often we only need sections, unary sections of these functions, we can show none of them are
continuous. Okay, so candor space is not possible, you can't do, you can't have a
continuous presentation of a model of PA on the candor space. And more generally, no compact
holster of space has a continuous model of arithmetic. So let's prove that. So no compact
holster of space. So this is the proof. Suppose you had a compact holster of space with a continuous
addition. So it's a model of PA and it has a continuous plus. So then look at the final segment
in the in the PA order in the arithmetic order, a final segment.
So this is the image of the whole space under the adding K map, which is a unary function.
So it's the image of a compact set under a continuous function and therefore it's compact.
And therefore it's closed. And so we've produced a lot of closed sets here,
but they're nested because as K goes up, those sets get smaller and there's empty intersection.
So we've made an infinite nested intersection of closed sets with empty intersection and that
violates compactness. So therefore it's a contradiction. Okay, so you can't do it with
a compact holster of space. An addition can't even be continuous, not even in one coordinate.
Can I ask a bit of a maybe a stupid question? Sure, go ahead. Where do you use house for
from this argument? Oh, right here to know that the continuous image. Yeah, it's in this step.
I think you need both of them for that, for that reasoning to work.
The image of a compact set is compact, but therefore closed. That's using house.
Okay, so that was for addition. Now let's handle multiplication,
but we can do basically the same thing. Now let's look at the multiples of K factorial.
So we compute K factorial inside the model. The model's version of K factorial because
K might be non-standard, right? But it's a PA model, so it knows about factorials.
So we can make K factorial inside the model and we look at all the multiples of that constant.
And that's the continuous image of a compact holster of space by this map, assuming that
multiplication is continuous, even just in one slice. And therefore this set is closed,
but again they have intersection empty because there can't be any number that's in all of these.
That's a multiple of K factorial for every K. That's impossible. And therefore the intersection
is empty and that's contradiction. Okay, so compact holster is impossible.
Let's do the reels now. The reels are impossible, so this answers Roman's question in the beginning.
You can't even have a model. Sorry, can I ask just a one point. It looked like you were using
this translation by K, multiplication by K factorial. I mean, why is there even that
slight difference? Or is it just a matter? I mean... Oh, if you just do multiplication by K,
then it's not linearly nested. So that's the only reason he is K factorial.
Oh, right. Yeah, okay, fine. Exactly. Okay, good. Thank you.
Linearly nested, yeah. Yeah. Joel, since we were talking about those, so what happens if you cut
the model, you know, take the model with a top? So there will be a largest K.
So then the argument wouldn't quite apply. Or some variant. Do you mean if you have a very weak
theory or what? No, you just look at the arithmetic of an initial segment with a top,
so then you can consider. I mean, you don't have K factorial or... Right, right. So there's much
that you don't have. Also, we have the highest number there, the both arguments. Right, I have
no idea in that. Well, you have to adjust the functions out of there when they are undefined,
perhaps the value is zero or something. Right, right. Yeah, if there's a largest element,
yeah, I'm not sure. I have no idea. I don't think we even treat that case in the paper.
That's a much weaker theory than what we're looking at. Okay, but I guess some of our
theories are just considering, say, success arithmetic, which is a weak theory, but it's never,
it never is going to have a top. I mean, in success arithmetic, you can always add one more.
So, okay, let's look at the reals. In the reals, you can't have a continuous model arithmetic.
You can't even have one where the successor function is continuous. Suppose that you had one,
and really, we just need successor arithmetic, which is a tiny part of PA minus.
So, consider the adding one function, if that's continuous, then the range of that map
should be connected, because it's a continuous image of a connected set.
But it's missing only one point, because you've just thrown out zero only. So,
but the reals have the property that if you throw out one point, it's not connected.
So, that's a contradiction. So, if you look at all the image of the successor map, the image of
the whole space under the successor map should be connected, because the image of a connected
space is connected. The image of a connected space under a continuous function is connected.
But in the reals, if you omit a point, it's not connected anymore. It always is disconnected.
Okay, so that handles the reals. It doesn't handle the plane, though,
because in the plane, you can omit a point. It is still connected.
But it does work with the long line. Okay, sometimes in the long line, you have a least
element. So, you'd have to omit two. If you have a long line and you omit any two elements,
then it's disconnected. So, you just add two instead of adding one. But it's the same idea.
Okay, so if you become disconnected after deleting any, finitely, many k points,
then that argument is going to show you can't have a continuous model.
But I missed that. Is that because it's the long line rather than the bi-directional one?
Yeah, I mean, normally, I think when people say the long line, they mean the one-directional one.
Yeah, the positive one. Okay. Yeah, but the previous argument works with the bi-directional
long line. Or it works with the one-directional long line, but you just have to add two instead
of adding one. Yeah. Okay, right. So, here's a different argument. So, if you have these two
properties, if you have an uncountable connected space, but it has no descending omega-1 sequence
of connected subspaces, and there's no partition of the space into uncountably many disjoint
connected uncountable subspaces, and the reels have that, then you can't have a topological
model of arithmetic. You can probably guess which of those two arguments was the first one.
I mean, this is our first argument, of course. And then the other one of adding one and omitting
a point, it makes it so obvious. Okay. So, let me just briefly give this argument. So, case one,
if the model has an increasing omega-1 sequence of numbers, then we can look at these sets,
which are nested omega-1 sequence of connected subspaces. And that violates the first condition.
In case two, otherwise, there must be some number D with omega-1 many predecessors.
And in that case, we can look at modular arithmetic at the residues. And depending
on the residue, we're going to get a partition into uncountably many connected
uncountable subspaces, and that violates the second condition.
Okay, let's just proceed. Every topological model of arithmetic has a continuous pairing function,
and by that, I mean a continuous injection, not necessarily bijection, but injection.
And the reason is just Cantor's pairing function. Of course, Cantor's pairing function in arithmetic
is a bijection, but it has this one half in it. And dividing by two might not be continuous.
In fact, we can prove that sometimes it's not continuous. So, you can't divide by two, but
if you just get rid of that factor of a half and then add two m instead of m. So, this is twice
the Cantor pairing function. So, it's an injective pairing function, not bijective. The range will
be the even numbers. And this is a polynomial, so it's continuous if the model was continuously
presented. Okay, so from that, you can use to rule out the r to the n. In any finite dimension,
you can't have a continuous model of arithmetic on r to the n. And the reason is that if you
look at the continuous pairing function, then this is giving you a continuous injection from
r to the two n to r to the n, but there can't be any such thing. If you look at topological
dimension theory, you can't ever have a continuous injection from a higher dimension to a lower one.
But the pairing function would be like that. So, therefore, you can't have a continuous model
of arithmetic on r to the n. Okay, so bare space. So, does bare space support a topological model
of arithmetic? Or what about this space? Or any uncountable polish space? And we don't know the
answers to this. These are all open. But you can see them as motivated by this sort of classic
result. For any consistent, countable first sort of theory, you can always represent it in bare
space using f sigma or g delta relations. So continuity is a kind of stronger version of that.
And this is where the question originally came from. And the reason why Ali originally asked
the question was because of this kind of thing. So can we improve this classic result to continuous
from nearly f sigma? And of course, if you have a continuous function, then the graph is closed.
So it's f sigma graph. The graph of the function will be f sigma, but continuity is stronger.
Okay, so let's talk about the difficulty of kappa like models. So if a model of arithmetic is
continuously presented on an uncountable polish space, then you can't have an increasing or
decreasing omega one sequence. In particular, you can't do it with a kappa like model.
And the reason is that if addition is continuous, then the order will be analytic sigma one one.
But there's deep theorems that show no analytic order can have increasing or decreasing chains
of length omega one. Sorry, did I miss the definition of kappa like kappa like means that it's a model
of size kappa, but all the initial segments have size less than kappa. Right. Okay.
So in particular, every omega one like model will have an increasing omega one sequence.
Okay, but you can have uncountable models that don't have that property.
All the points have sort of all the cuts have co-finality omega basically.
Okay. So just to summarize, so every model of arithmetic admits a continuous presentation with
respect to these topologies. Of course, we always get the discrete and indiscreet topologies because
every function is continuous with respect to those ones. And we get the rational line as computed in
M. And also you can handle the initial segment topology. So that's the topology. It's not
hostile for the topology whose open sets are the initial segments of M. M is ordered, right. It's
a model of arithmetic. So it has an order. And we take the initial segments of M as open sets.
Okay. So that's a sort of Sierpinski like topology. And this is the final segment topology. And
for three and four, the key to show that say you're continuous with respect to the initial
segment, it means that if A plus B is in a certain initial segment, then it suffices to take A and B
in certain initial segments. And then you're going to guarantee that the sum is in that initial
segment. The same kind of argument about the final segment. So it has to do with a sort of
monotone nature. It definitely doesn't work if in the integers, for example, where when you're
multiplied by negative, you're switching the order. And so it's not, it's not monotone in that way.
But in models of PA, it's monotone. And so you get, you get these sort of extra kinds of topologies.
Now, if you have a question about the previous slide, for these four, do you use anything beyond
PA except this like ordered semi-ring stuff? I don't know exactly what we use, but I don't
think it's very much at all. Yeah, I think that's right. Yeah, it should be very good. Thank you.
I think in the paper, we were careful to state exactly what you need. But for this talk,
I was just assuming PA everywhere. But I think you're totally right about that.
Okay, if M is a topological model of arithmetic, then M is upward homogeneous, meaning that if A is
less than B in, in, in the arithmetic, then you can continuously math A to B. Okay, of course,
you just, you just add the difference, right? And that's, that's adding a constant. So it's
continuous. Okay, so that's a level of homogeneity. But it follows that if you have an isolated point,
then all the smaller numbers are also isolated. Okay, so if you have, if the topology ever has
an isolated point, then everything less has to also be isolated because of that.
So now, suppose M is a topological model of arithmetic, and you fix an element B.
And now let's change the topology. We're not going to change the arithmetic, but we're going to
change the topology to make every number up to be isolated. So we have, we have M, we fix some B,
and just make, declare all these points to be
open as singleton sets. So they're all now isolated. So you generate a new topology,
and that's M star. And you can show that it's still continuous. Addition and multiplication are
still continuous, as long as you did it on an initial segment. And the point is just that the
pre-image of a small value is also small. So if you ever were affected by these isolated points,
then the way that you're affected are also isolated. And so everything's fine.
And then it, it follows that every model of arithmetic has a continuous presentation where
dividing by two is not continuous. Because I could take, say, the indiscreet topology,
and then make points isolated, you know, find many points, make them isolated.
But now if I was in the, in the, in the indiscreet chunk of points above, then dividing by two,
if it brought me below that cutoff, then it would violate the continuity of dividing by two. It
shows that dividing by two is not continuous. And also subtracting one is not continuous,
for the same reason, because if I'm going from in the indiscreet chunk to the isolated point,
then I can't do that continuously. So you can't, predecessor might not be continuous.
Okay. I mean, it's a weird topology, but it's good to know that you can't divide and you can't
subtract necessarily unless you have some other reason why that should be continuous.
Okay. So is there a topological model of arithmetic having no continuous bijection? Okay,
we were kind of irritated that Cantor's pairing function has to divide by two,
which is not continuous necessarily, but we can't prove that there's no continuous bijection
in these models. So in the model I described, I think there is one, but maybe there's some other
model in which there's no continuous bijection. We don't know the answer to this question.
Okay. Now, in countable spaces, let's see. So what are the countable topological spaces that we
can realize? Well, we can realize the rationals. Every countable non-standard model is continuous
with respect to the rationals, but also we can make the rationals with finitely many isolated
points because I can just make points isolated using that process. I can also make infinitely
many isolated points. If it's a non-standard model, I can make, say, all the standard numbers isolated
in the other ones just using the regular order, the final digits order on, for example. Also,
the countable discrete metric space, of course, if I make every point isolated.
Okay. So the main theorem gives Q and the topology blending ideas give these other
spaces. But one thing to notice is that the standard model cannot use three. We cannot
put the standard model on space three because of this fact, if a point is isolated, everything
less than it is isolated. So if there are infinitely many isolated points, then all the
numbers have to be isolated for the standard model. And so therefore, this answers the question.
If a space realizes a model of PA, does it realize all of them? And the answer is no,
because here's a space that has all the non-standard models, but it doesn't have the standard model
continuously presented. So that's a negative answer to that question I asked initially.
Okay. If I have a topological model of arithmetic, then so is M star, where this is a new topology
generated from the old by taking all initial segments. So now I don't just add isolated
points up to something, I just take, I add the initial segment topology all the way up. So I
take the old open sets, and then I throw in a bunch of new open sets, namely the initial segments,
and I generate a topology that way. And it's going to be still continuous with respect to that topology.
Also, I could add the final, the final segments, if I wanted to, instead, and it's going to be
continuous with respect to that topology also. Okay. So the final digits topology already makes
all the final segments open. Okay. So here's a topology that's going to realize all the non-Kappa
like models. So, namely, so I'm going to give you a space of size Kappa that continuously supports
exactly the non-Kappa like models of arithmetic. So let X be the indiscrete space. So that's the one
where the only open sets are empty and everything, you know, and plus Kappa many isolated points.
So I've got a big chunk plus Kappa many isolated points. Now, I can't, I can't ever realize a
Kappa like model because I have Kappa many isolated points, so they would have to be
unbounded in the model, but therefore all the points would have to be isolated because anything
less than an isolated point has to be isolated. So no Kappa like model is realizable here.
But any non-Kappa like model is realized because it's continuous with respect to the industry
topology. And then I can just pick a point with Kappa many predecessors because it's not Kappa like
and make all those points isolated. And now I found this topology. So this is a space that realizes
some of the models of size Kappa, but not all of them. And now I've got another space that realizes
all the other ones, namely the ones that all the Kappa like models. Okay. And the space is just
like this. Take any Kappa like model M and then use the initial segment topology on M.
So that's a topological space now. And you can argue that every model that's continuous with
respect to that topology will have to be Kappa like, I don't want to give the argument because
it's a little finicky, but you use the main fact that you're using is that the open sets are linearly
ordered by inclusion. And you can use that to argue that any other model in which the
operations are continuous will have to be Kappa like. So we have now two spaces of size Kappa.
So that this space has continuous presentations for all the non-Kappa like models and the other
space has continuous presentations for all the Kappa like models. So it's a partition of the
models of size Kappa, depending on this topological presentation.
So of course, if you do that when Kappa is omega, then you're really identifying a topological space
X so that the only the standard model is realized on X as a continuous presentation on X.
Namely, it's just the initial segment topology on the standard model. Then by the argument I just
described, another model is going to be continuously presented if and only if it's omega like,
but the only omega like model of PA is the standard model.
But in particular, this answers the question of detecting the theory because now I've got a topological
space so that only the standard model is continuously presented on it. And so in particular, I can't
realize any theory except for the theory of true arithmetic. I mean, I've not only detected the
theory, I've detected the model itself and there's only one the standard model.
Okay, so if I have a model, well, we don't know it's those previous arguments seem to
be suggesting that if a model of arithmetic is continuously presented with respect to the initial
segment topology of another, then maybe they would have to have the same order. The order might be
isomorphic, but the proof doesn't quite give that to us, but it suggests it's very suggestive that
maybe that's true and that would be a kind of explanation of it. Of course, I think models
arithmetic can have the same order without being isomorphic as models of arithmetic.
I mean, that just follows because you can't define plus and times from the order, but
right, maybe you can get it for Kappa like models. I'm not quite sure. Okay, so
right. Oh, I see what am I saying here? Right. Oh, yeah, all the countable non-center models
have the same order type, of course, if they're non-standard and the standard one has the only
other order type. Okay, let's see. So, right, so let's go, I guess I'm almost done. So every model
of arithmetic of size that must continue can be continuously presented using a subspace of the
plane. And this is a consequence of the fact that in fact, every such model is a sub is a
submodel of the complex numbers. Every model of arithmetic of size that most continuum is a
submodel of the is a subring, I'm sorry, is a submodel of the complex number field.
And that's due to Joseph. Oh, my God. Maybe one of the, I don't know how to pronounce his name.
Milcek. Milcek. Thank you very much, Roman. Okay. So what you do is you start with M and you take
its integers. Of course, M is a submodel of its integers. And then that's a subring of its rational
field. And then you can take the algebraic closure of that field that gives you an
algebraically closed field of characteristic zero. And if it wasn't big enough, oh, I see,
you should start with a continuum. So first, you should make it size continuum and then do all that.
Now you've got an algebraically closed field of size continuum. And there's only one,
isomorphism, because that's a categorical theory. I mean, it's uncountably categorical.
So this field is isomorphic to the complex numbers. And therefore M is the submodel of it.
And furthermore, because it's a submodel, and in the complex numbers, plus and times are continuous,
that gives us a topological presentation of the original model M.
Okay. So that's it. So thank you very much. I'm happy to have any kind of questions.
Should I stop my share so we can see each other?
Well, wait, because there may be some questions about some previous slides.
Okay. So now our strange procedure is that we clap somehow. So let's clap.
Thank you. Now we're clapping. And it's open now for questions.
Well, I can think about one. I have one that
so it seems like an obstacle for continuity would be the standard initial segment in a nonstandard
model. If you look at the rest of the model, the operations have some flavor of continuity.
So have you thought of situations where we can represent the chunk then on standard,
you know, we just chop off the standard cut and look at the rest and see if this has
representation on some topological space by neglecting the standard part.
Oh, I see. Would it make any difference?
I guess in a sense, the topology blending arguments sort of have that flavor because you're sort of,
you can make the standard numbers all isolated, which is a way of excising them.
But it's going the other direction from what you're requesting because
we're starting with a topological model and then saying, well, we can also chop off the standard
part and make them all isolated. But I was thinking in terms of the negative results of
things that you cannot do in certain kinds of spaces, but maybe you forget about the standard
chunk, maybe you could.
Right. Yeah, I don't know. We haven't really thought about that. That's a very interesting
proposal. So I want to think more about that. I just don't know the answer to that. So you
want to prove that maybe sort of like almost continuous, meaning that as long as you're
operating only on nonstandard numbers, then it's continuous. So the restriction to the nonstandard
part would be continuous is what you're asking for. Yeah. Okay, that's interesting. I don't know.
Oh, can anyone hear me? Yes. Yeah, this is Ken. I can't see me, but you can hear me.
Yeah. A question about the ADA alpha orderings, the house top orderings. Yes. Yeah. Now, as I
remember it going way back there used to be there were theorems that say that for real close fields,
if the ordering is an ADA alpha ordering and the fields, any two fields that have the same
ADA alpha ordering are isomorphic. Can you say anything like that with these when you use an
ADA alpha ordering? Does that give you some, some version of isomorphism or whatever, homeomorphism
when you map your structures onto versions of the irrationals that look like an ADA alpha
order? Well, I don't think you're going to make a conclusion like that because the theorem here
is basically all the saturated models are going to be realized, but they won't all
be isomorphic. They could have different theories and so on. And so I don't think you're going to be
able to prove, well, maybe you could prove that their orders are isomorphic or something, but
I mean, because we're getting every single saturated model of size of alpha on that space
ADA alpha, that's what the corollary is giving us, right? Right. But those models won't even be
elementarily equivalent to each other, so they can't be isomorphic. And but maybe, yeah, I'm not
sure. What I don't know is, okay, although the space is the topological space is an order topology,
I'm not sure how deeply connected that is with the order of the model. Certainly,
it's not connected directly with the with the arithmetic order of the model. It is conceivably
connected with the order of the final digits order of the model, which is the same as the
rational order of the model. So maybe one could hope to prove that those orders have to be isomorphic.
I mean, I guess they would be if they're saturated. So I guess maybe a conceivable line of attack on
that would be to show if I have a model of PA and it's continuously presented on ADA alpha,
then its rationals must be saturated. And I don't know if that's true or not. It seems plausible.
Then the orders of the models would all be the same, they would all be the same as ADA alpha.
I mean, the rational orders of the model. Thank you.
So I have a question about to what extent this is about plus and times in particular.
So your divide by two example shows that just having plus and time continuous won't give you
all delta zero functions continuous. Do you know if something like that is possible? You
could have a top logical presentation where all like delta zero functions are continuous.
Oh, oh, I see. You want not just plus and times to be continuous, but all the deltas
Oh, I see. Yeah, that's a really good question. I don't know the answer to that question.
Is exponentiation any easier than the general?
Oh, it might be harder because the definition is not delta zero.
Okay, right. Yes. All right. So yeah, but you could ask about that also.
Is exponentiation continuous in my standard model?
Just having you discuss that question about trying to get continuity there also.
Well, it seems like it is under this like final digits order because if you want to
know the final digits of a number, do you know the final digits of two to the n?
I guess you do because I guess it's two to the n or zero.
Right. So the exponentiation, I guess if you just mean two to the n, this is continuous
with respect to the final digits order. Final digits are also. No, no, no, wait.
Is that what we want? Yeah, I think that doesn't that show it?
Right. But of course, one wants to consider, you know, a to the b or something, right? And
for three to the n and so on, even though you're looking at the final digits order in the binary
representation. Is that like a radix going on where it's like binary, then primary, then secondary?
I'm sorry, I can't quite hear you, Kevin. You're breaking up. Can you say it again?
But isn't it possible to represent numbers that the radix varies as you move to the left?
I thought there was some weird way of doing that. Maybe I'm right.
Yeah. I mean, sure, that that wouldn't be the final digits order, but that would be a kind of
generalization, I guess. And yeah, maybe that makes sense. I'm not sure. I don't know. It's a
great question. And I just don't know the answer. Yeah, maybe it's I think it's maybe a good project.
So, so I guess what you want to know is sort of when can you make all of the sort of simply
definable functions of continuous, I guess, factorials, right? In fact, if you take factorial,
then it's not biased towards any particular base. So does that make it easier or harder here?
Is it continuous with respect to the final digits order? See, if you don't know the last
let's see. I mean, you know,
well, with respect to this, I mean, you know that every factorial is even. It's also usable by
three. The final digits of the factorial are all zero. Right. Once you get big enough,
because it's a multiple of two to the k. I mean, once you're bigger than two to the k,
then the final digits are going to of the factorial are also going to be have k zeros there.
So that makes it continuous, doesn't it?
Because you can, you can, you can say what the final digits of the answer are,
if you know the final digits of the input sufficiently. Maybe let's see. I have to
think more about it. Yeah, don't quote me on any of that. Yeah, I don't know, but also factorial
and exponentiation aren't, well, yeah, let's see. So yeah, I guess, what's the right class of
functions? I mean, you said delta zero definable, but maybe one wants like
yeah, when you make all the primitive recursive functions continuous.
Okay. Isn't that obvious somehow? If you have a Turing machine with the tape,
you don't need to repeat certain finite initial segment to output.
No, because the Turing machine might want to see the whole input before it starts doing
anything interesting. Right. Okay, that's true. Yeah, right, exactly. That, but that's what we're
talking about. Right. So yeah, maybe making all computable functions continuous, that would be a
kind of super, super continuous presentation. I don't know if it's possible. I mean, it's quite
interesting though. Yeah, how far can you push it? What's, what's the class? Yeah, this is great.
I love those questions. Yeah, I have no idea though. Yeah, really great questions.
But you have a computable bijection between the rationals and the model and the model itself.
So I mean, could you sort of use that to build a continuous function that is purposely not
continuous somehow? I mean,
Well, what topology are you thinking about the final digits topology or?
Yeah, I'm thinking of the final digits topology. You have access to that sort of in the computable
world and you can kind of play with it in some sense. You can make a step function there.
Right. That's what I'm kind of thinking. And it's going to be definable. It's going to be
low level definable. Is that, yeah, I think that's basically going to refute it right there.
Yeah, it's even for Delta zero, right? There's going to be a Delta zero definable step function on
the, the rationals of the model. And that is order isomorphic with the final digits order.
And therefore the model is going to be able to define a discontinuous function
on the final digits order. You know, that's, I think that's great, Corey. Yeah, that basically
answers that question, I think. Yeah, great. But maybe, you know, going back to explanation
all that, it's like, can you make it so that all of the functions in a fifth grade textbook are
continuous or something like that? Yeah, right. I think there's probably a quite rich
collection of functions that you can posit that you can get the positive result for.
And the question is how far can you push that?
Which natural class of functions can you make continuous say with respect to the final digits
order, which I view as a natural topology to be looking at for this kind of question, although
one can, you know, change the topology to something else if you want. Yeah, so one would want, I guess,
exponentiation factor order and so on, all those kind of functions.
Can I ask about the connection between the topology of picking out theories?
Because I thought that was pretty interesting. So right now it seems like you can, you can
essentially pick out the standard model and all others, right, all other countable models,
which gets almost at that question, but it's really more just about the standard versus
non-standard. So is there any thought about what, like, is there a topological space which
supports one and only one, like all completions of a particular, all countable completions of a
model of PA and only those or something like that? Yeah, that's a great question. And we tried to do
that, but it seems to be really hard. And so sort of this, you're totally right about objecting to
that answer, because it's not really satisfactory. It's not about the theory, it's really just about
the standard model. So we can, topologically, we can make a distinction between standard and
non-standard, and we can also make a distinction between capital I and non-capital I. And those
two distinctions are sufficient to answer those questions that I asked, but it's really not satisfactory,
as you said, because one would want maybe a more robust way of answering the question about the
theory would be that, you know, you can, like, if you have con PA, then like a certain, it's sort
of hard to believe, right? How could that possibly be true? So maybe about that question, if you're
in a non-standard model, it has lots and lots of initial statements that are models of all
kinds of completions of PA. So once you have a continuous representation for this model,
it comes together with representations for all those others. And so that would be making it very
difficult to sort of isolate those that wouldn't really go in this category. I see, you mean some
theories imply that there are cuts among the... Right, exactly. You know, all those embedding
theorems that you can actually, you know, in an non-standard model, you can embed continuous,
initial segments that are models for continuous many different completions.
So this one. I see. That's really quite interesting. Yeah, maybe that's an avenue
to answer some of these questions. You know, I don't know the answer to the question. We only
have those two distinctions, and I find it not really very satisfactory. And so this really,
please give it a shot, you know, trying to... Yeah, right. So, do you see them? Sorry, sorry,
sorry, sorry, sorry. Go ahead. Go ahead. I was going to say, this is, that might have answered
my other question. I was going to also ask about, like, maybe you could... Is it possible to do the
same thing just for another theory, right? Do the same thing in the sense of it's a topological
space that supports exactly one model that's not standard, but like exactly one model for...
And then maybe it picks out a different... Right, so here the answer is... No, it's clearly no.
Yeah. Yeah, I would find it hard to believe, but are you saying you have a proof, Roman, or...?
Well, by that argument, because once you have a topological representation for a model,
then you... So you just cut it to representations of those initial segments, I think. Yeah, but
that's a different space, right? So if you're going to the subspace, maybe you're getting that other
space? Oh, I see. I see a different space. That's... That's a subspace, right? Oh, right. Would it be
the question is... No, maybe all kinds of things to consider if you take submodels of a given model
or cuts. How does it... What kind of space are you getting on the other side? Is it isomorphic
to the one you started with, or is it something properly different? Right. Yeah, I think it's
really a collection of questions there, I think. Yeah, yeah, that's true.
Okay, so are there any more questions? If not, well, then let's thank Joe again. It was a great
talk, much to think about. And I just want to say that we do not have any talks planned after this
one. So unless we get some volunteers, or unless I hear from some people that have been invited,
who haven't responded yet, we'll take a break and watch for the announcements for future seminars
a little later.
