Hello again, in this series I will be looking at how you can add minor details to your sculpts
quickly and easily using texture brushes.
You can find the first two videos in the description and there will be cards in the corner.
This video will be looking at how you can create your own brushes and you can find this
course and other free courses like this on gabbit.co.uk and do ask any questions in the
comments below and I'll get back to you.
Alternatively, you can go to the Discord server and ask questions there, or just chat and
maybe join in some of the competitions.
Now before I begin, I want to show you a video from John Mervin and I'll put the link in
the description.
He's done an exceptional job of explaining how to do this.
It isn't in Blender 2.8 but the process is exactly the same.
So I don't want to recreate the wheel and do the same thing as he's done.
So this is a great way of creating textures.
It's relatively complex but it does create good results.
Now what I'm going to show you in my video is how you can take any texture and turn it
into a texture brush or an alpha as it's more commonly known.
So I've typed into Google Texture and I'm going to find a random image texture.
I've got it labeled for reuse and modification and I'm going to scroll down and find the
jagged rock texture here and get a high resolution of it.
So make sure your image is high resolution and I'll download that.
Now I'll quickly set up my workspace, control 5 on my cube, apply the subdivision surface
modifier under the spanner that's been created and then add a new modifier, multi resolution
modifier.
I'll subdivide it a few times, probably turn it up to 5 and I've got 6 million faces.
That's quite a nice number for my computer to handle.
I'll go across the sculpt mode, zoom in just a touch and I'll bring out my panel on the
side and I'm going to create a new one just here and change this to the textures and also
I'll minimize this little menu here.
So that was fairly quick but that's in the previous episodes.
I'm not going to create a new brush this time, I'm just going to use the texture draw
just for demonstration and under the texture I'll create a new texture that creates over
here as well and I'll open up that texture that I've just downloaded and there it is
just there and I will change my brush type so I'll just minimize the texture for a moment
and I'll change the brush stroke to an anchor so I can now pull out and you can see the
results of the texture.
So there's a fair bit I need to do before this texture starts working, you can see that
there's far too much detail in it but it's quite clever that you can take any texture
and bring it in and get some sort of result but ideally this needs to be a black and white
texture and it needs to be blurred just a bit and kind of turn into a displacement texture.
I'll just undo that.
Let's see what happens if I turn the strength right down and see what it looks like.
So it's good to know you can take any texture like this and bring it in and it does kind
of work as long as you've got it on a low detail because of the high contrast within
the image but we want something that looks more like jaggedy rocks so let's undo that.
So in order to turn this image into an image we can use I'm going to use materialize.
I'll put a link in the description for a quick start guide but you can follow me along here
I'll also put a link in the description for the download it's completely free so all I
have to do here is I want to create a diffuse map and then from that I create my height
map or sometimes known as a displacement map and yes it is worth noting that any well
made displacement map you will be able to use as a brush alpha.
So let's open up an image.
There's my jagged rocks I'll click on that and press select and that brings it in.
All I need to do now is create my height map so press create over here and you can see it's
given me half the image and show me what it's going to look like.
Now this is still a bit too sharp so the contrast between the lights and darks is a bit too
clear.
If I click on displace now that will give me quite a nice map.
So almost any image you can just bring it into here, create your height map, press displace
you can change the final gain if you think it needs a bit of editing.
So there's my displacement map.
Like I say you can usually just press displace and that will do a pretty good job.
Usually speaking you want something that's fairly blurry looking especially if you want
bigger details.
If you're just going for fine details then you can go for something a bit sharper where
it says details for example or default.
So I'll set that map go up to the S and press save I'm going to call this test to rocks
and select.
Now when I go back to blender and I load up that texture instead by clicking on the folder
just here and finding my file.
Now when I draw I'm going to put the strength up a bit and undo that strength up I've created
some nice rocks.
Now there is one tiny issue if I zoom in a bit it's what's called banding.
Now it's my understanding that that is because this is an 8 bit image and that means the
gradients of your texture have what's called this banding going on and therefore I need
to convert this to a 32 bit image which is a bit of a pain if you haven't got something
like Photoshop or the Gimp and it's just some more steps hopefully soon Materialize will
have that option of saving us 32 bit.
You can get round this by making your brush quite big and just quickly smoothing it out
but we do lose some of our detail.
So in order to convert it we go over to Photoshop and I bring in my rock texture.
I go up to the image menu click mode and then change it to 32 bits.
Now what I've found is if I save it now it doesn't actually remove any of the banding
because I haven't actually done anything to the image.
So I just quickly go into the filter down to the blur and choose a Gaussian blur.
Yes this will blur your image slightly more but just bring it down to about 0.1 press
OK.
You can hardly see any difference but now when I save it file save as.
You can use just a Photoshop image and that will work fine and a TIF image works well
as well.
So I'll save that make sure it is on the 32 bit and press OK.
Now when I go back into Blender I'll undo what I've done here and I'll open up the texture
I just brought in this TIF one here.
Open the image and now hopefully you can see there's still a tiny bit of banding still
there which is a bit of a pain and that means I needed to blur my image slightly more.
So when you're in Materialize and you're setting your height map if you want to make it a really
good brush then perhaps go to the default rather than the displace.
Then from there take it into a program blur it make sure it's 32 bit and you'll have your
brush.
Sounds like a bit of a process but it is worth it for being able to use any image texture
as a brush especially when you can't find a particular brush to do the job.
Hopefully soon Materialize will have an option to save in 32 bit so that will negate doing
the last step there.
So that's the end of this particular course in sculpting.
I'll do more tips and tricks in future episodes so do get along to gabbit.co.uk and look out
for those.
Thanks for watching and I hope this helps.
