Welcome to BrainVR podcast.
We are sitting here with Professor Michael Levin, a distinguished professor in the biology
department at Tufts and Serves as a director of the Allen Discovery Center at Tufts as
well and the Tufts Center for Regenerative and Developmental Biology.
Our group focuses on understanding the biophysics, biophysical mechanism that implement decision
making during complex pattern regulation and harnessing the endogenous bioelectric dynamics
towards rational control of growth and form.
And you also did your postdoctoral training at Harvard Medical School where you began
to uncover a new bioelectrical language by which cells coordinate their activity during
embryogenesis.
And you also had independent laboratory at Forsythe Institute and now you are at Tufts
University and you are developing a new molecular genetic and conceptual tools to probe large
scale information processing in regeneration, embryogenesis and cancer suppression.
Does it sound right?
Did I miss something which is important or is it okay?
Oh, yeah, it sounds right.
I also have an appointment at the VISA Institute at Harvard, but other than that, I think we
got everything.
All right, cool.
So we do our interviews maybe a little bit differently because we are really interested
in people that we talk to.
So we love your work, we love what you do and what you've discovered.
It's just so fascinating, but we would like to kind of dig a little bit into your kind
of a story.
What were the moments that decided, the most important moments in your life that decided
the path that you're going to take, the path that got you right where you are right now,
studying what you studied.
Because I think you were also doing before some computational, basically like helping
science with computational stuff and stuff like that.
So could you maybe add a little bit of a story behind what you do and behind your path?
Sure, yeah.
Well, I suppose we could go to the beginning when I was a little kid and I was born in Moscow
Russia, so I lived there when I was little and I had asthma.
And what happens with asthma, of course, is that your airway closes up and so you get
nervous which makes your airway close up more, which makes you more nervous and so it's
this kind of feedback loop.
So at the time, we didn't have access to really medication, proper medication for asthma.
So as a solution, what my father used to do is you would take this TV set, which was
this giant wooden thing with a tiny little screen in the front.
I don't know if you can even imagine such a thing, but inside, so he would turn it around
and he would take off the back panel and you could see all the vacuum tubes that had these
glowing vacuum tubes and all the electronics and all the parts and the goal was to distract
it to distract me so that I would forget about the breathing and so on and so that worked.
But kind of amazing, that was for me, that was really a very formative moment because
I remember staring at this stuff and thinking, it's kind of incredible that somebody knew
how to put all that stuff in exactly the right way to make the cartoons come out the front
of the set, right?
So clearly it wasn't random, clearly somebody knew how to do it, apparently you can teach
people to do it because I said, well, where does this come from?
So in the factory, they sort of do it, okay?
So that was amazing and right from the beginning, I kind of decided that, okay, that's what
I want to be.
I want to be the guy that knows how to put these things together to make a particular
thing come out.
So for years after that, I was interested in engineering and technology and things like
this.
When I got a little bit older, I had a friend who was really into bugs and insects and so
we would go outside and he was a little bit older, but we would go and play and he would
show me all the different caterpillars and beetles and all that stuff.
And I remember thinking that, well, this is very interesting because clearly they are
made of parts too, they're different parts than what the TV is made of and they do way
more stuff and they appear, they're pretty different, they have preferences and they
have behaviors and it's clear they like some things and don't like some things and so on.
And I said, well, how does that work and where do those parts come from and who put those
parts together, right?
So it's a really kind of a, you know, it's kind of a constant and I spent a lot of time
and then, you know, what's inside of us, like we probably have parts too and things like
that.
And so when I took college, prior to that, when computers first showed up and this was
like, we came to America in 78, so early 80s, you know, the computer started to show up,
I was able to get access to some very simple, you know, simple computer stuff and so I was
really interested in programming and really AI, right?
The idea that could we develop new minds that we built ourselves, right?
And so I went to college for, I majored in computer science, was interested in artificial
intelligence and things like that.
But basically, I'm kind of pretty soon, it became really clear that we would have that
it wasn't going to be good enough just to try to do computer science and to do on its
own because we really didn't know what we were doing.
It was really very unclear where our minds come from, except that in biology, you see
this every day.
So we all start life as a single cell, you start life as an egg cell, and then eventually
this little piece of chemistry and physics becomes a mind and some bastion, right, during
development.
So that was it.
I thought, okay, I have to also do developmental biology.
And so I got a, right around the same time, I got a second bachelor's degree in biology,
and that's, you know, that's kind of, and then I went to grad school and so that's kind
of my story.
Yeah, this is how minds emerge from chemistry and physics, and even just the whole organism,
how does it even happen?
It's just one of the most fascinating questions that as humans we can have, I think.
So I just, I would like to go into this, basically into this process and go maybe step by step
into how our minds, maybe let's go there, maybe how our minds emerge from physics and
chemistry, but we have to start at the level maybe of genes, of the single cells, of the
developmental biology that you, that you do.
So could you kind of explain to us and our listeners, how does it even happen that we
have some information, maybe, you know, genetic information, how does it happen that from genes
there comes this whole thing that's us, that's any organism, basically.
And maybe we have some, you know, ideas that, you know, they are encoded, I don't know,
like plans basically for our limbs and where the head is, should be and stuff like that,
but maybe there's a little bit different story there, because that's fairly simplistic,
I think, and we are both biologists as well.
So we know it's like this kind of weird, you know, mechanism that's not really easily
graspable, but I think you have some really nice metaphors and you explain it in a really
nice way.
Could you maybe explain to us how, how does that even, how does it even happen?
How is that possible?
Sure.
I'll give you my thoughts on it.
Obviously, this is very much an open, you know, an open area of investigation.
And I should point out that my view on it is probably, let's say, not in every way the
mainstream view.
So I'm going to tell you what I think, and then you can get the kind of different perspectives
from others.
And it's a pretty different perspective than you would get from a standard, let's say,
experimental biology course or something like that.
The first thing, the first thing I would point out is that in placing the emphasis on genes
is already quite a commitment, and we need to back up for a minute.
Because especially now, I mean, this was always problematic, but especially now, we can read
genomes, right?
And we know what's in the genome.
And when you read the genome, of course, you don't see anything like what is your symmetry
type, what's the size of this organism, how many eyes it has, does it have eyes, how many
limbs, you don't see any of that in the genome.
What you see is, you see protein sequences.
And so what's in the genome is the description of the micro level hardware that every cell
is going to have.
So genomes are very much a description of the hardware.
Now we've known for decades now that certain kinds of devices, and I'm going to argue that
biology is exactly, for many reasons, is exactly such a device.
Yes, there's a hardware layer, and you can manipulate it or try to understand it at the
hardware layer, but there's a much more interesting and possibly more important software layer
to go along with it.
And we know this right away, you know right away that we have something missing here today,
because despite all of the amazing progress in molecular biology and genetics and all
of these things, they're very basic questions, like for example, in my lab, we make something
called a frog allotle.
What's a frog allotle?
Well, it's a half a frog embryo cells, half axolotl cells.
Okay, now, baby axolotls have legs, frog larvae or tadpoles don't have legs.
So if I make a frog allotle, and I say to you, well, here's a frog genome, okay, here's
a Xanophus genome, here's a axolotl genome, so you have both genomes.
Now I want you to tell me are frog allotls going to have legs or not?
And now we have a big problem, we have no idea of frog allotles ahead of time are going
to have legs.
We don't have any way of making that prediction because the outcome here is the process of
decision making by cells that are going to determine some kind of morphology.
And we get so used to, we get so comfortable with reliable development, the idea that,
okay, frog eggs make frogs and acorns make oak trees, that we think, well, of course,
that's how it has to be.
But actually, there's, I'm sure we'll talk about it today, there's incredible plasticity
in that process.
So something really important is the idea that the genome encodes for the hardware of
the cells, selection, meaning that part of evolution that selects for specific traits,
that acts on the phenotype, that acts on the final outcomes on the anatomy and on the behavior.
But the genome, but the mapping between the genotype and the phenotype is really complicated.
It's not directly straightforward, right, except for very, you know, there's this enzymes
and some things like that that are directly sort of encoded by the genes, but mostly it's
not like that.
And that internal process, that software, that developmental physiology, that's actually
the software that runs the whole thing, is to my mind, one of the most important aspects
of all of this, because it has some incredibly interesting properties.
It has some degree of intelligence in the sense of novel problem solving ability and
new circumstances.
And that has huge implications for biomedicine, for understanding evolution, for basic developmental
biology, that layer, the interactions there are really profound.
There's a lot of work that's being done by that layer.
And in addition to that, I want to, pretty early in the discussion, pull out something
else, when we try to explain things, so we see something, let's say this is here's a
creature, and it has a particular style of hand or it has some eyes or whatever it is.
And we want to explain this.
So you can ask yourself, well, where does that come from, right?
How do we explain it?
And I want to start off by thinking early on about what it means to explain certain kinds
of features.
Like what does that mean?
What does it mean to explain where something comes from?
Imagine that, I'll give you two simple examples, and then you'll see why it matters to developmental
biology.
You may have seen this thing, it's called a Galton board.
So it's a piece of wood like this.
You bang a bunch of nails into it, just sort of space regularly, and then you take a bag
of marbles, and you dump it into the top of the board.
What happens?
Boom, boom, boom, boom, boom, they sort of go around.
And in the end, if you have enough marbles, what do they do?
They land in this beautiful bell curve at the bottom, right?
You get then it's a tip, you can buy this toy on Amazon, whatever.
So you get this toy.
So you could ask yourself, okay, where does this beautiful bell curve shape come from?
Is it in the wood?
No.
Is it in the description of the nails?
No.
Is it in the positioning of the nails?
No.
Is it in the marbles?
No.
Where does it come from?
Right?
So that's one simple example.
Another example is, if you discover a transistor, let's say you discover how to make a transistor,
and for example, biological ion channels are a kind of transistor, because they can be
voltage gated, right?
So they're voltage gated current conductances, so they're basically transistors.
If you figure out how to make a transistor, you could connect a few of those transistors
into a logic gate.
So it could be and, or those kinds of logic gates, right?
Those logic gates come with a truth table that tells you how it works.
For example, the and, yeah, and with those truth tables, especially if you have a knot
and an and gate, you can make all kinds of things.
Now you can ask yourself, where did that truth table come from?
I didn't have to evolve a truth table.
What I evolved is a transistor.
It's a piece of physics, but the truth table came for free once you have certain things.
So where do those things come from?
So sometimes they come from specific selection forces.
Other times they're a kind of free lunch in a certain sense.
And there are many types of these, you know, in geometry, in basic, I mean, mathematicians
have been talking about this for a long time, right?
The truths of number theory or prime number distributions, all these kinds of things.
You don't have to evolve them.
They're just sort of given to you for free if you have the right kind of physical machine
that to take advantage of them.
So there are laws of biomechanics, biorelectrics, computation, and many things.
And so what evolution might do is find a simple machine that can harness all this stuff.
And so I think it's important to understand that when we ask, where does it come from?
There's the part that is genetic, but there's also that's the part that's generic.
And people like Stuart Newman or Stu Kaufman have been talking about this for many years.
It's sort of, there are generic laws of the universe that biology can harness that are
not specifically in the genes anymore than that nice bell curve is in the description
of the wood and the nails.
Speaking of intelligence and these generic laws, how do the cells and cell groups decide
what to make and when the process is finished?
Yeah, that's very important.
So there's two ways to think about that question.
One way is how does the decision making work in general?
So how do we scale up?
The amazing thing about biology is that evolution, unlike a lot of our engineering, up until
recently when we were engineering, we were working with passive materials, so wood, metal,
that kind of stuff.
And the thing about passive materials is that you as the engineer are responsible for all
the outcomes.
The material basically doesn't do anything except keep its shape, maybe usually, and
then you are responsible for placing it however it goes.
Evolution can't do that because evolution is working with an agential material that
cells themselves have abilities, they have preferences, they have behavioral repertoires.
So from that perspective, evolution is working with a material that already has all these
activities.
And so what you're really looking at is behavior shaping.
It's a lot more like behavior shaping where what you want is for cells to give other cell
signals so that they do specific things.
And I can give you some cool examples of that.
But anyway, so what we have to understand is how this process of competent subunits works
together to pursue bigger goals, right?
Now individual cells are very good at pursuing cell level goals.
What's a cell level goal?
pH, hunger level, right, so some sort of metabolic states, all kinds of like local little things.
But multicellular collectives, let's say cells of limbs and those kind of things, they can
work towards much larger goals.
So for example, in a salamander, they work together to build a limb.
If you cut off some of the fingers or the whole wrist or the hand, they will rebuild
exactly what goes there, right?
They will rebuild the exact limb and then they stop when they're done.
So you can see this kind of goal directed activity where the system will exert energy
to minimize the error between whatever is happening now versus what it wants to have happened.
So of course, there's many things not understood about this.
We are very actively studying this process.
But one thing that we can now see is that the process of connecting cells into specifically
electrical networks allows them to do a very interesting kind of scaling.
And it's a little bit like the notion of artificial networks in computer science,
where you can connect these little subunits.
The subunits by themselves don't do terribly much, although cells, of course, do.
But you can connect them in a particular way that enables the whole thing to have bigger
computational properties.
And I can give you just a very, very simple example of how it works.
Imagine two cells that are signaling to each other in the conventional way, which means
one cell secretes some kind of signaling molecule that floats around and it binds the next cell.
And OK, that's a signal.
So the thing with that kind of signaling is that the receiver is very clear that this signal
came from outside.
And once you get a signal from outside, you can ignore it.
You can do something about it, whatever.
You have many options.
Now imagine evolution invented this amazing thing called a gap junction.
A gap junction is these proteins that allow cells to stick together and pass small molecules
directly between the intercellular milieu from one end to the other.
The amazing thing about the gap junction, and I'm simplifying this greatly, but the
interesting piece of this is that when something happens to cell A, let's say it got injured,
it got poked or something, and there's a calcium spike that went on, that calcium spike or
whatever memory molecule will propagate through the gap junction into the other cell.
And what I say about the gap junctions is that they have this property of wiping identity,
meaning that when that signal propagates, this cell cannot tell that that signal came
from outside because its calcium spike looks exactly like this other calcium spike.
Once there is a signal, a physiological signal of something, now you don't know that it came
from the outside.
So what this means is that there's a kind of mind meld, almost a mental connection between
these two cells where memories lose identity, they lose ownership.
So from the perspective of this single cell, that molecule is a false memory because this
cell never got poked.
And from the perspective of the collective, that's absolutely a true memory because the
collective did get poked.
And so what happens is when cells get merged into these tight electrical networks, they
start to, the separated identity starts to fuzz, meaning that they're having a hard time
keeping their knowledge separate.
And when you can't, if you and I can't keep our memories separate, then in an important
sense we become one larger unit, because that distinction starts to break down.
So when that distinction breaks down and cells connect into larger electrical networks,
three things happen, those three things, let's go back to the homeostasis, right?
If you're a single cell and you're trying to keep homeostasis, you have to do three things.
You have to be able to measure what's going on now, what is my pH now.
Then you have to remember what the correct one is, what's my correct pH range.
And then third, you have to take action to bring the current pH to closer to the correct
pH, right?
Like a capacitor or something like that.
Imagine what happens to those three things when cells connect into large electrical networks,
so tissues.
When you take a measurement because you're gap junctionally connected, you don't, you
no longer just measure your own local environment, because you're all connected, you measure
something very large.
So you're taking non-local measurements, right?
Every cell knows what's going on everywhere else, because your measurement is now a function
of a much larger area.
When you try to remember what is the right set point, your computational capacity is
now huge.
Whereas before, you might only be able to remember a few very small things.
Well, now you're a big network.
Now you might be able to remember all kinds of things, right?
And your action, whereas before you were a single cell able to take local actions as
a collective, you might do all kinds of interesting things.
You might bend, you might deform like a sheet, you could do all sorts of things, but they're
large things.
So everything scales up, right?
The other interesting thing that happens here is that you scale stress.
And what I mean by that, let's just think about this for a second, why when you take
a measurement and it's not correct, why do you take any action to fix it?
The way biology tends to handle it is by stress.
So stress is proportional to that delta between the current state and the preferred state.
And what it does is try to minimize stress.
As long as that stress is high, I'm going to take action.
And when the stress goes low enough, then I can relax everything's cool, right?
That's something like that.
So what you can do is so just imagine if you're a single cell by releasing your stress
molecules and propagating them out to your neighbors, you make your problem becomes their
problem.
Whereas before, if you were stressed out, let's say you're a cell that is sitting in
some other cells and you're in the wrong location, you need to be up here, but you're down here
and you have some amount of stress over that.
If you just keep your stress, you will stay there and no one will get out of your way
and you cannot move.
If you start to propagate your stress outwards, remember, it will be the same stress molecule
as all the other cells have.
So they are stressed too.
Everything gets a little more plastic.
Everybody's sort of willing to change and it doesn't have to be in physical space, right?
It could be in physiological states, it could be in transcriptional states, whatever.
But that stresses, it makes everything a little more plastic and then you can go where you
need to go and then the stress will drop again.
So it doesn't make anybody more altruistic.
What it does is everybody acts because they want to reduce their stress, not because they
care about you, but it's a very cool mechanism to scale up goals because your local goal
becomes everybody's goal because everybody wants you to stop stressing so you can stop
stressing them up.
So that kind of process, and I'm only telling you the part that I think we have a little
bit of insight to, there are many things here that we don't understand, that kind of process
enables cells that care about little tiny things to start to have bigger goals, the scaling
of goals, whereas before your goals were physically in terms of space and time, very small.
Now they're starting to get bigger.
And this is how you have goals in anatomical space, so let's make a limb or whatever.
That could be a story of scaling.
Okay, so right now it just seems like for you it's like daily work basically and you
deal with this on a daily basis.
But basically what you just said is some really important insight starting by, okay, there
is some bioelectrically imprinted information and not, you know, neuronally binded.
So it's just by any cell and it makes sense because neurons are also a cell, so it makes
sense that other cells, they have ion channels, they have different kinds of channels and
they can make gradients as well.
So why not make bioelectrically gradients?
So this is like the first huge, huge, huge insight and I think a lot of your work kind
of stands on that as well, I think, and it's so important.
And what is, then I was listening to some other interviews and work as well and the thought
of agent, of agency, of individual, of self, by forgetting who I am and kind of mind melting
together, that's just, that's really brilliant and I wanted to, you know, there is this thing
where the bioelectrically imprinted information could also get decoupled as well and it just
came to my mind because that decoupled bioelectrically imprinted information is also, is also similar
to what happens with cancer, am I right?
Or, yeah, no, yeah, I just wanted to, I had a thought where if there is like maybe, that's
just, you know, I'm thinking out loud, but you were talking about the stress and the
amplifying of stress basically a little bit.
So what if there is like too much stress and some of the cells kind of decided, oh my god,
this is like too much out of this whole agent, like it's too much, I'm gonna, you know, head
out and leave this entity there and I'm gonna, you know, play by myself, maybe, is that something
that we might think about?
I think that's a very reasonable idea, we are testing exactly that hypothesis, I don't
have the answer for you yet, but I think by the end of the year we should know something
about this, I think, I think, yeah, I think that's completely reasonable, I mean, these
electrical networks, let's just take a, take a step back here, if we think about all the
cool things that brains do, right, so they have memory, they can pursue goals, they have
preferences, all these things, where did all these things come from?
So of course, they didn't just sort of evolve out of the rise out of nowhere, they evolved
from much more simple versions of the same thing and as far as we can tell, what basically
evolution did was pivot some very early biophysical tricks into different problem spaces.
So cells were first solving problems in metabolic space and then physiological space and then
transcriptional space and then morpho space and later three-dimensional space when muscles
and neurons came aboard, right, so we have to think about this kind of intelligence long
before three-dimensional space and in fact, evolution discovered that electrical networks
are really great for this kind of thing very long time ago, so for example, there's some
beautiful work on bacterial biofilms where even bacterial biofilms can do some of these
brain-like things, so ion channels were at the beginning, you know, there's some great
neuroscience, Koshland did some great neuroscience in bacteria, looking at how ion channels work
and now the modern work is really showing that this stuff is ancient.
So what it was used for before was to navigate something called morpho space, which is the
space of anatomical configurations, right, what shape should we be? Navigating that space is
exactly the same problem as navigating three-dimensional space. There are good regions,
there are bad regions, there are barriers, sometimes you find yourself not where you
expected, you have to figure out how to get to where you're going, you have limited energy,
you have limited ability to see where, what's around you, exactly the same problems and so
biology was using these electrical networks very early and so what happens in multi-cellularities
that cells join together into these electrical networks to more intelligently navigate that
space, but as you just pointed out, that process can break down, it has failure modes
and one failure mode is, and of course we know that all kinds of stresses can lead to cancerous
transformation, one failure mode is when the cells electrically disconnect and it doesn't have to
be caused genetically, although it can be, the first thing that oncogenes tend to do is to electrically
uncouple cells, shutting down gap junctions is one of the first things that oncogenes tend to do.
Once the cells electrically disconnect, then as far as they're concerned, the rest of the body is
just external environment, so that boundary between me and the outside world can grow and shrink,
it can grow during evolution or it can shrink during cancer where the cancer cells are not
any more selfish than the other cells, they just have smaller cells, like everybody's equally selfish
in biology, just sometimes your self is huge and sometimes your self is tiny and exactly
as you said, those cells might say okay, I'm out of this network and as soon as you unplug,
you no longer see the bigger goal, which is to build a nice limb or a kidney or a liver or
some thing like that, what you see is your ancient unicellular goals, which is what, to become two
cells, for every cell to become two cells and then to go wherever life is good and that's metastasis
basically. So do I understand it well? In my mind just appeared some hierarchy of identities,
from the little cell to the multicellular organism of or a multicellular group and I would like to
ask you, if I understand it well, that what binds these cells together, what binds their intention
together so they're able to make a limb is these bio-electrical networks and in these bio-electrical
networks, there is working some kind of memory, like can I imagine like that?
Oh yes, yes, yes, it is literally a kind of memory and I say that because, I mean, think about,
so in all of these things, all agency claims, okay, so this is my perspective of course,
all agency claims, meaning how intelligent is something, what kind of agency it has,
are really engineering claims, they're not philosophical claims, they're engineering
claims that need to be tested by experiment. So if I tell you, if I show you a new device
and I say to you, this is a homeostatic device, I say it has the cognitive level of a thermostat,
it's able to pursue local goals and that's what it has, right? What I'm telling you really
is it's not kind of a philosophical claim, it's engineering, it means that if you,
in order to test this idea, you should say, okay, if you are correct, then three things have to be
true, we have to find how the set point is encoded because any homeostatic system has to encode a
set point, we have to be able to decode that information, meaning read what is the set point,
I have to be able to read it, and then we have to be able to change it, rewrite it in a way that
does not require physically rewiring the rest of the machine. In order to change it, if you have to
rewire the whole machine, then you didn't give me a thermostat, you gave me a mechanical clock or
something like this, right, that does not rise to the level of a thermostat. With the magic about
a thermostat is that I don't need to know how the rest of it works, and I don't need to rewire the
whole thing, all I need to know is where is the set point, how do I read the set point, and how
do I write the set point, and then something beautiful happens, I reset the goal and the
machine takes care of the rest, right, that's an engineering dependency, it means that if I use this
in my, you know, in my bigger device, I don't have to micromanage the temperature, I let this thing
take care of it, right, those are, that's what an agency claim is, it's how much can you trust
something to do in your own absence, basically, right, that's my view of agency, so why do we,
so let's test this out, how do we call it a memory? If, let's say, so here it's good to talk about
this model system of flatworms, so a flatworm is a little free-living thing called a planarian,
it has a head and a tail, and you know, they're very cute, they have a true brain, lots of internal
tissues and things like that, they have many interesting properties, one of the interesting
properties is that you can cut them into pieces, and every piece regrows exactly what's missing,
not only does it regrow what's missing, but the piece actually shrinks so that by the time the
new head and tail come up, of course they're small, the whole thing will be proportional, right,
so it's very cool, everything is scaled down, and you get a perfect little worm,
so you might ask the question, okay, so you might say, okay, here we have two hypotheses,
hypothesis number one is that this is a purely emergent mechanical process, so all the cells
locally do whatever they do based on local rules, and that's it, whatever happens happens, that's
the standard null hypothesis, some years ago I made a different hypothesis and I said, okay,
I think there's more intelligence here than that, I think it's a homeostatic system,
which means that I think this thing actually remembers what a correct planarian is supposed
to look like, now that's a very weird kind of claim because, you know, first of all, people
like to reserve these kind of terms for complex, you know, they say, what do you mean it remembers,
right, well, I remember things, I'm like, well, you know, memory, there's all kinds of memories,
and you're not the only thing that can remember things, and so I said, that's okay, let's see,
let's see if the memory paradigm helps us here at all, so we started looking and we found out,
we found out three things, we found out that A, if you actually look at the bioelectrical pattern,
and the way you do that is using these voltage sensitive fluorescent dyes, so it's a chemical,
you throw it on, and it basically glows depending on the local voltage concentration,
it's a, the whole thing, by the way, is a version of, we steal all kinds of ideas from neuroscience
because it's all the same stuff, so this is basically the notion of neural decoding, right,
this idea that they have a neural science that if we just scan the brain and we understood how
to decode it, we would see your memories and your plans and all the mental content that you have,
so I said, okay, let's see if we can do this for the rest of the body, let's see, I'm going to take
seriously the idea that the body is a collective intelligence of cells, the same way that we
are a collective intelligence of neurons, right, we're bags of walking neurons basically,
so I said, okay, let's take seriously this idea that there's a collective intelligence
that navigates morphaspace, now in morphaspace there are two-headed worms and one-headed worms
and triangular heads and flat heads and all this stuff in morphaspace, these animals are amazing
at navigating that space, right, the way that rats can navigate mazes, these guys navigate
morphaspace, it's okay, well let's take seriously the idea that this is a collective intelligence,
it's navigating morphaspace, that means that somewhere there's going to be a memory of where
it's going, let's see if we can see this memory, so we found out that yes, in fact we can see a
bioelectric pattern that tells you how many heads a piece is supposed to have, we then we said, well
now let's rewrite it and so the way we can rewrite it is you can make a computational model that will
say this is what the pattern of the tissue looks like now, what channels do I need to open or close
to make the pattern be different, okay, and this of course is what we're working now for biomedicine,
this is the big idea, kind of the big idea, is that if you can predict what channel opening
and closing would get you to the right state, maybe you can address all kinds of defects and
things like that, so we found some drugs that open and close ion channels and we converted
that one head kind of pattern to a two head pattern, no genetic change, meaning we don't do no
CRISPR, no genomic editing, no trans genes, we don't do anything genetically, but what we found is
two amazing things, once you do that, if you injure the animal, it then will consult the pattern,
see that oh two heads, okay, and it builds a two-headed worm, right, no problem, the cells
don't care because that is their reference, the cells have no idea that anything is wrong because
that is what tells them what they're supposed to be in the first place, so that's the first thing,
the second thing we found is that that electric circuit is amazing because it has, it's really
is a memory because once you convert them to two-headed, it stays two-headed, so you can cut
them again and again and again and they will continue to, that circuit once you've switched it,
so you can think about it like that, okay, so then you ask, so where was the number of heads
encoded really, right, was it encoded in the genome, you might want to say that because
all standard worms look the same, so maybe the, so it has to be somewhere, it's right,
on the other hand, clearly it's not completely determined by the genome because we just made a
line of two-headed worms that has nothing genetically wrong with them, so here's the,
here's the, I mean, so here's the kind of analogy that I like, what the genome gives you is a piece
of hardware, meaning that genome sets all the channels and all the other stuff, it encodes a
piece of hardware that very reliably, when the power is first turned on, when the thing is first
alive and the physiology is going, it very reliably settles into a particular state, when you buy a
calculator, you imagine, you get a, you get a parts list that has a bunch of electronic parts,
you assemble them according to the schematic, you turn on the power and the little LCD, it says zero,
every single time, you do it a thousand times, every single time it starts at zero, okay, great,
so it's reliable, it says zero, but then you realize that, hey, wait a minute, this thing is
actually a programmable calculator, which means that if I give it some inputs, not to rewire it,
I can put away my soldering iron, right, I don't need to rewire it, but I can give it some inputs,
some brief, you know, taps on the buttons that change the electrical signal, just for brief
amounts of time, then I can make the thing instead of zero, I can make it say something else, and in
fact, it has a memory and tomorrow it will say something else again, it will still have the
same thing, so this is what I think happens, I think evolution builds hardware that is reprogrammable,
that has a default, a very reliable default state, but that's not the only state, and we have many
other interesting experiments with Xenobots and other things that tell you that the default
behavior of this thing is not the only behavior, that's just the default behavior.
So is this feature what you call anatomical homeostasis, that every cell has its local position
in some group or some body, and it has some kind of latent memory that gets activated in times of
need, for example, in some in some damage or when it needs to again, regenerate something?
Yes, except that I don't think it's a single cell level memory, I don't think the single,
I mean, single cells also have memory, of course, but I think, but the thing that we're talking about
now is a property of the network, not of individual cells, and we've shown that we have many examples
where you can mix things around and it doesn't matter where they go, the whole, the collective,
the collective is what stores, and we're pretty used to this, right, with holographic theories
of memory, with neural networks, where it's not the individual neurons that know anything,
it's the network that knows something. So I think that's, you know, bi-electricity is not a single
cell, the exciting part of bi-electricity is not the single cell property, it's the network property.
Yes, yes, I meant it this way, like, the cell perceives the information that flows from the
cells around and just this flow of information that these cells can perceive their position
in the body and their role and what they're supposed to make. As a position and function,
I mean, think about, think about, you know, in the more familiar version in the brain,
your brain is an electrical network that makes decisions and then issues commands to muscle
cells, right, to implement, to implement, to move you through three-dimensional space.
Electrical circuits in the body are exactly the same thing, but they issue commands to
other cell types, not just muscle, to move you through anatomical space. They don't move you
through three-dimensional space, although there are systems where that's the, you know, that,
that merges kind of tightly, but, but they, they're moving you through morpheus space,
and it's the exact same thing. It's the, it's the, the decision-making in the electrical network,
and then signals are passed down to let's activate some genes, let's activate, let's
activate some, some cell migration, differentiation, proliferation, cell death, all of this stuff is
downstream of that. Can you tell us more about your experiments, for example, that one that,
when you created an eye, the third eye on, on the frog? So, okay, so, so there's two,
there are two different types of experiments there. The first one has to do with bioelectricity,
and it's this idea that we, we, we, we looked at the, the early frog embryo, and in the early
frog embryo, you can see that an electrical pre-pattern that tells you where all the organs of
the face are going to be, right? You can already see them. It's, it's, it's cool, because it's,
it's a, it's an easy pattern to start with, because some of them are incredibly complicated,
and you don't know what the encoding is. The face one is really nice, because you can see it,
I mean, it basically looks like a face, so there's not much decoding that needs to happen. It looks
like a face. Some of them are really complicated. So, so you can ask the question, and we actually
did the eye experiments before we even knew about the face, but, but, you know, this, I'm telling
it in a way that makes the logic clear. You might ask the question, if this bioelectrical state
tells the system where to put the eye, what happens if we, if we copy that state somewhere else?
Because that's how you want to test it, because otherwise you might say, well, that pattern
doesn't do anything. It's just kind of an epiphenomenon. It's a byproduct, right? So, so now we
got to do the functional experiment. So long ago, and this is, this is, you know, kind of part of
the story, storytelling, but when, when we, when we first started my lab, I had a, I had a graduate
student named Ivy Chen. She was actually a dental student. She became a dentist afterwards. She's not
a scientist, but, but she, but she was doing research in the lab, and I had asked her to
inject some ion channels. They happen to be curse 6.1 ion channels. I asked her to inject some RNA
for curse 6.1 in weird places in the early frog embryo. Okay. Now, at the time, this is, this
was considered ridiculous, because I remember as a postdoc, I, I wrote away to all sorts, I wrote
letters to all sorts of people working on neuroscience and gut physiology and kidney and
everything. And I said, look, if you've cloned any ion channel genes, send them to me. And, and
I'm going to try to, to, to, you know, to reproduce them somewhere else. And they said, look, this
is, you're crazy because, because voltage is a housekeeping parameter. And if you perturb the
voltage, everything will just die. And you will have uninterpretable phenotypes. Okay. That was
the standard assumption. And I was pretty sure that that was, that was wrong. So I wanted to test
that. So I asked her to, to inject these, these things. And then, and so as we inject them, then
we come back six days later. And, and she says to me, and something funny, because she says, you
know, they're full of these black dots. And they said black dots. What is that? Let me look. So I
get that I sit in front of the microscope together. And I said, Oh my God, look carefully at these
black dots. These are eyes. And so these tadpoles had eyes all over the place. Because what you,
what we were doing is reproducing the electrical map that says build an eye here, we were reproducing
that on the tail and the gut, I mean, anywhere. And so we found out several important things that
day one is that in fact, about voltage is not just a housekeeping parameter. It is, it is
instructive for a very subtle thing for first shape. Number two, it's extremely modular. The
architecture of the animal is modular, because we didn't have to provide all the information on how
to make an eye. I mean, can you imagine how many different cell types and the, or the positioning
this goes back to your first question of where does the shape come from, right? We didn't have to say,
well, here's how you make an eye first, you need a lens and then a retina, then we have to do any
of that. We, we provide a very simple piece of bioelectric information. This is your voltage
pattern. So that looks like a very much like a subroutine call, right? When you program, you
have a subroutine call, which is a simple trigger that kick starts a very complex set of, set of
actions. Third, the eyes formed and then they stopped. So again, that, that, that module,
that subroutine is self contained, we'd make an eye and then that's it. We didn't have to tell it
when to stop. It didn't, you know, sort of make a gigantic eye that took over the whole embryo.
No, it made a paranormal eye and then it stopped. And then, so, so, so, so I, what that's, that's,
I guess, four things. So the fifth thing is that if you look at the developmental biology textbook,
it will tell you that only the anterior norectoderm is competent to make eye, right? It will tell you
that all the other tissues cannot make eye. Why does they say that? Because the PAC-6 master
eye gene in frog anyway, only works in front of, you know, basically in front of the brain,
the anterior norectoderm. That's wrong. Many tissues are competent to make eye, including gut
and tail and all kinds of other stuff. But PAC-6 doesn't do it because PAC-6 is not the top of the
hierarchy. The top of the hierarchy is the voltage and the voltage will, of course, turn on PAC-6
in these other organs so we can see it. But that's not enough. That's not, by itself, that's not
sufficient. But, but, but what it means is that our, our view of the, of the competency of these
other cells is limited by the way, the way we ask the question, how you probe it. And that's
actually really important, not until fairly recently did it, what, did I appreciate the iron,
the irony that nowadays we're, I'm studying, you know, weird unconventional intelligence
and telling people that, well, you can't guess correctly the intelligence if you don't ask it
in the right way. But we were already seeing this in 2001. We were already seeing that really,
that right, that, that, that, that that's, that that's the fact. And the other thing we learned,
which was also super cool is this, imagine that when you inject the RNA into the embryo,
you put in a lineage tracer. So you can see every cell that gets your RNA becomes blue with beta
gal, beta galactosidus. So you can tell which cells got your RNA. So what we saw was this, was
this very interesting thing where if you have a, for example, a lens sitting in the tail of a
tappel somewhere, you take a section through it and you look, only half of it is blue. So what
that means is that if we don't get, if we don't convert enough cells to do this, the cells that
are making a lens, they will recruit their neighbors. They know there's not enough of them to
make a good lens. They will recruit a bunch of neighbors that themselves were not affected by
us at all and say, Hey, you're part of this project. Now you need to make this lens. So
there's two levels of instruction, right? We instruct the cells, Hey, make a lens right here,
but I'm not going to tell you how to do that. In fact, I'm not even going to affect enough cells.
And those cells say, Okay, well, I'm going to instruct my neighbors, and then we're going to
build this thing, right? So several, several layers of instruction. So this was so, so that's,
so that's one story of the eye. There's another eye story, which is not bioelectric.
That story is that Doug Blackiston, who was at the time a postdoc in my group now,
he's a staff scientist, he, he took eye primordia cells. So the cells that are going to later become
I, and he stuck them on the back of a tappel, they have a frog embryo, they, these cells,
not all first of all, so here's the amazing things about that. First, they still make a great eye,
even though they're in a completely bizarre environment. So instead of being near the brain,
they're sitting in the middle of muscle, no problem, they make, they make an eye. Number two,
they have an optic nerve that comes out. Where does this optic nerve go? It doesn't go to the
brain. It's it sometimes it goes nowhere. Sometimes it goes to the spinal cord. Okay,
so synapses onto the spinal cord. Number three, those animals can see perfectly well out of those
eyes, because we tested them. This is the craziest part. We tested them in this visual learning assay.
So we had this like, moving blue light, and we wanted them to move away from the from the blue
light, right? And, and they do, they can see perfectly well, if they don't have any other
eyes, but an eye on their backs, they can see. And so, and so think about this, right, this,
this brain that evolved for millions of years to expect visual input from specific location.
Now, you suddenly you have this weird patch of itchy tissue on your back that's providing some
sort of electrical tingling up your spinal cord, your brain could say, Oh, yeah, that's visual
data. No problem. I can work with that. And, and it's fine. Right? This says this is massive
implications for evolution. Remember, at the beginning, I said that that middle layer has
competent has intelligence that helps evolution. And think, think about this, imagine you have
a mutation, like all, like all mutations, it has multiple consequences. One mutation is that your
eye ends up on your back. Okay, the second the way, but it has other effects that might be good.
If, if right, if a creature was hardwired, this eye on your back, you wouldn't be able to see your
fitness is zero, you're dead, that's it. And so evolution never experiences the benefits of this
other never explores the benefits of the mutation. Whereas here, for in this example, and other
examples, if your eyes on the back, I can still see it's fine. So now your fitness is not zero.
Now you get to explore. Well, what else did we what else do we have that might be good.
So it turns that competency turns negative mutations, which are most of them, right,
deleterious mutations, it turns many of them into neutral mutations, because man, we can live with
that. The developmental process can can still, they can still get their job done. You see, this
is the goal directedness of the eye, even though, even though its environment has changed and the
genes, you know, may have changed, it, it, it can still get its job done. And that means that
evolution now has a much nicer space to search because, because those competencies help smooth
the evolutionary landscape. So those are those are our two I stories. Before we get to another
experiment, I just wanted to kind of reflect and maybe sum up for me for the listeners for us in
this conversation. There are many levels to this. And we've kind of now went through in our mind,
emergent properties that weren't encoded before, as you said, with the, with the marbles, you know,
coming down and stuff like that. That this happens in our biology in our organism and stuff like
that and different kind of levels of emergence kind of happen. And so right now, if, if I
understand it correctly, right now, we can think of these different levels and kind of choose the
level where it's the best for us, like, where is the best to act on our intention? Basically,
if I, if I want to have an eye on the back, do I, as you said, do I, you know, do the molecular
things or do I imprint the bioelectrical pattern? So we found out you found out that, okay, that's
better way to imprint the bioelectrical pattern. So right now, it's such an interesting field,
because there are some, I was wondering about a question if, if, if you can basically learn
those goals throughout evolution. So in evolution, we have this random process that ends up in some
form of organism. Does it learn to have a goal basically is like, like some intentionality or
like theological side of things, because you've said in interview with Chonkerl that the biologists
and biologists like kind of theophobic, but there we can see that there are some goal and goal
directedness, and it's on many levels, not only on the basic level of genes, but okay, there is
this goal directedness developed on the level that emerged out of, you know, so that's like so
interesting for me. How do you think about that? Yeah, yeah, yeah, you said many interesting things
here. Let's, let's kind of for a bigger context. The reason for the teleophobia is that at the
beginning of science, basically, there were only two options. You were either very smart,
like a human, or you were very stupid, like a rock. Those were your two options, right? There was,
there was true intelligence, and then there was mechanics, clocks, and you know, things like
that. When you have those two options, and you want to do science, of course, you know, it forces a
binarization where you start to look at everything as a clock, because, because no one knew how to
analyze things that were smart, like humans. He said, fine, everything, we're going to pretend
everything is a clock, and we're going to just find out how the hardware works. I, I, but, but
the thing is now, now it's time to, to realize that since the 40s, the 1940s, we've had a science of
machines with goals, cybernetics, control theory. Okay, so it's no longer magic. We don't need,
we, there's nothing theological here. There's nothing magical here. We don't need any of that.
What we have now is a good science that tells us it's a continuum. It's not just dumb like rocks
and smart like humans. There are, it's a, it's a, it's a whole continuum along the way. And that
means that when you analyze your system, you don't have to pick one or the other. You can make
engineering claims about where you think it is. And then we will test those theories. And either we
will find out that, ooh, you overestimated, and it's not really that smart, or you underestimated
it, and it's much smarter than you thought. But these are all now experimental questions.
The thing that drives me crazy is that people will often vocalize their, their feelings about, oh,
this can't be this and this can't be that. These are not philosophical questions. These are, these
should be empirical questions. And so, and so you asked the most of them, you, you, you, you got right
on onto the most important thing, which is what is the best level of control? Because, because
someone might say, and people have said to me is, oh, I see, because you are showing how the
bioelectrical decision propagates down to the gene expression level, right? So, I mean, of course,
it does. They say, oh, well, it's just chemistry and physics. I said, well, what did you think it
was going to be? Of course, it's chemistry and physics, but, but right underneath everything
is chemistry and physics, obviously. But you are making a very specific claim. If you, if you try to
manipulate down at the lowest level, let's find out, let's find out who has the better control.
You can try to control 10,000 genes every couple of minutes of, you know, and control it that way,
or you can go upstream and try to change the decision making of the system. Okay, we've now
shown many examples where, where the latter is much, much better because, and we already know,
right? We already know that when I have the slide that I always show in talks of what computer
programming looked like in the 50s, right? What do you do? You sit there plugging, you know,
plugging wires back and forth. Okay, that work. Does, does anybody want to program that way
nowadays, right? For most things, I mean, it's, it's so difficult to program at the hardware
level. It's just really hard. So neuroscience is kind of on board with these multiple levels,
because you know that if you have a problem with, maybe it's a molecular problem. So maybe
somebody's missing a neurotransmitter, fine, or maybe it's a, it's a sort of behavioral problem.
So somebody might need the behavioral modification therapy or something that, or maybe it's a
psychological issue, or maybe someone has read too much existentialism and now is depressed,
you know, that's not really a solvable by, by, by neurotransmitter manipulation, right? That's a,
that's a, that's a completely different thing. So, so we kind of know that there are these
different levels and things are handled at the, should be handled at the appropriate level.
So we've made this, so we made this argument that, that a lot of interesting
regenerative medicine is only going to be achievable when we are,
when we are no longer afraid to deal with the system at higher levels. Maybe we can train
tissues, maybe we can talk about risk assessment by tissues, a lot of the things that are happening,
you know, active inference, perceptual control theory, a lot of the things that are happening in
neuroscience are directly applicable to, to other cells that are not brains. And they require us to
understand many levels, not just the molecular level, maybe not even the bioelectric level at
some point, you know, we can train, right, imagine humans have been training animals
for thousands of years, knowing zero neuroscience, right? You don't need to know what's be, what's
inside the brain, as long as you understand that, hey, the system can learn. And I know what the
currency of motivation is, meaning rewards and punishments, then that's it, it doesn't matter
what's really in there. So maybe at some point for some things, we can even go beyond and say,
I don't know what the correct bioelectrical state is, but I'm going to train the cells for a specific
outcome. Can you train a genetic, genetic pathway or something like that? Because I think you've
talked about that a little bit. Yeah, yeah, and we're not, we're not the first lab to show that
Richard Watson's group and a couple of others shown something similar. This is, this is a good
example of my point that you can't just have feelings about these things, you have to do
experiments. So for example, if I show you a gene regulatory network, right, you know, so it's a
bunch of transcriptions, it's a bunch of genes and they all transcriptionally regulate each other
up or down. You look at this thing and you say, wow, this is the paradigm of genetic determinism,
there's no magic here, there's no indeterminism here. It's, I can see exactly how this works,
it's just, it's just physics, right, it's just a piece of physics. Okay, but nevertheless,
the question might become, well, what cognitive level does it have? If you, if you assume from
the beginning that it has zero, meaning that the only way I can control this is I can change the
promoters so that I can delete nodes, I can add nodes, physical rewiring, you can do certain things.
So we and others, as I say, have done something like this, we took the, made the assumption that
actually, let's find out, right, let's find out. And so we took this, the models of these gene
regulatory networks, and we pretended they were neural networks, and we tried to train them.
What that means is that you pick some nodes, you pick one gene as your condition stimulus,
one gene as your unconditioned stimulus, one other gene as a response, and you simply ask,
does the history of tweaking, meaning up or down regulating these inputs, change the way it reacts
to those inputs later on? I mean, that's learning, right, that's the, we found, so in our work, I'll
just talk about, talk about ours. And this is Surama Biswas was the postdoc who did this.
She found six different types of memory, including Pavlovian conditioning. So like,
you know, Pavlov's dog right with the, so she found that biological networks can have many
types of memory like this, control random networks, right, so you just, you know, design random
networks, they don't tend to have this property, which suggests that evolution actually likes
this for whatever reason, evolution actually favors this property of being able to, being able to
learn. And it has, it has amazing implications for, for biomedicine, because it means imagine,
right, imagine the thing about the Pavlovian conditioning, imagine you have a drug that
is very powerful, it works very well in the Petri dish, but you can't use it in humans,
it's too strong. So now, if your disease circuit has this associative learning property,
it means that maybe you can give that drug together with a completely neutral drug,
which we called, we called it in the, in the, in the review, we called it a molecular placebo.
You take another drug that doesn't do anything, and you pair them together, and you just give
them together. If the system learns to associate them, then maybe after a few presentations,
now you can just use the neutral one, and you don't need the, you know, you don't need the
really strong one, right. So, and then maybe at some point it will give up the way the dog,
you know, if you keep ringing the bell, the dog will give up eventually. So maybe then you
have to retrain, you know, I don't know, but, but, but you get the idea. So, so, so this, this is,
this is just a good example that you can't assume about these things. You have to,
you have to make hypotheses about cognitive level, and then you have to test them.
I really like this concept of both ways of control, that the first way is bottom up,
that from genes that there emerges proteins and our other emergent structures. And the other way
around is from top down, that these electrical patterns can influence the genetic level. And
I would like to ask you, like, from your experiment with the eye, is it possible to get this eye passed
to another generation, that it's like incorporated in the genome? Yeah, we don't have any evidence
that this feeds back into the genome. So, now we haven't done the experiment, but, but I don't have
any reason to believe that the next generation of frogs would have this eye. However, in the case
of the planarian, it's a little more subtle because planaria normally reproduced by tearing
themselves in half, and then regenerating and now you have two worms. When that happens, a two
head of planarian does give rise to another two headed planarian. So it's not the same as sperm
and egg reproduction. It's not classic Lamarck, Lamarckism because you're not changing the hereditary
material. But let's be careful, you're not changing the DNA, but DNA is not the only hereditary
material. And in planaria, the bioelectric circuit is also a hereditary material. In fact,
there's others. So, so with Chris Fields, we wrote a something that showed that talked about the fact
that when you look at you, you know, look at you look at any organism and look at the history,
all of its parents, what molecules are directly conserved through that whole lineage? Well,
certainly the DNA, that's the whole point, right? The genome is passed on. But there's two other
things that are passed on. One is the cytoskeleton. Every cell cytoskeleton is directly templated off
of the previous cytoskeleton, right? And it's also the cell membrane, because the cell membrane
also is so so and also there are bioelectric circuits, who knows what else, right? There may be
nine other, you know, media that are that we just don't know about yet. I don't know. But,
but, but at least in planaria, you can take advantage of this additional hereditary medium
that's not genetic. Do vertebrates have that? I don't know. There's some nice work from
Oded Rachavi in C. elegans, where he studies transgenerational inheritance. And so there
are certainly our mechanisms for passing things back into the genome. Whether the bioelectrics
does this or not, I don't know. We were talking about different levels of emergence, basically,
but and also the phenomenal work of six types of learning of these genetic networks, basically,
and pathways and stuff like that. So I wanted to explore a bit more of these, you know, higher
levels of maybe cognition and get to minds because that's also another emergent level. And we can
think of, okay, so right now I could tweak your brain and you would get in very, very complicated
way the same information maybe as I'm speaking to right now. But it's much more simple for
simpler for me to speak these words and move in this level of cognition, basically. And I was
wondering, you know, this gets us to there are many, many weird kind of ideas how to get into
with your intention, how it affects your body, basically. And it's also possible as well,
we've talked about it. But this is so interesting, because right now we can kind of test it.
Test it scientifically and test how, how could placebo work and how strong the intention of
this level, where we kind of move together, how strong it is, and how it actually affects the
body and and the whole organism. And it does right because like, you have these, like, you can
think about something I don't know stressful. And suddenly, you know, your, your body is secreting
stress hormones. And wow, it affects the, affects the cells and the cells are connected and it
affects the whole organism. So how do you think about our intentionality, power of our intention
and how it affects the body and and yeah. Well, a couple things. First, you know, if I were to
tell you that you can voluntarily change the voltage potential of cells in your body, 30%
of the cells in your body, you could voluntarily change the voltage potential. You might say,
wow, you're crazy. How am I going to change voltage potential in my cells? But in what,
but when you're lying down in the morning and you decide to stand up, guess what you're doing,
right? You're changing the bioelectric state of your muscles. So, so we already know that your
intention can absolutely change the electrical state of your cells. And of course, the chemical
and many others as you point out. So, so lots of people study the, the interface, the immune,
the immune system interface to, to the body, many, many other things. People have found
effects on stem cells from, from meditation and certain kinds of practices. So of course,
the link, the link is strong. The thing that, the thing that I would say is that I, I, because,
because of this continuum, right? The fact that we were all one cell at one point in your life,
you were one cell, nine months and some years later, you can say, I am, you know, people,
you get a human who will say things like I am not a machine. I am more than physics. Well,
you used to be a, you used to be a quiescent oocyte is what you used to be. And, and slowly,
right? And the key, the key is developmental biology does not offer any particular point where
some kind of lightning flash comes in. Ah, now you have a mind before that you were just chemistry,
right? Okay, that doesn't happen. So, so, so this thing is completely slow, very, you know,
sort of step by step gradual. So for me, this means that if, if I like to think backwards,
a lot of people say paramecium has a mind, come on, single cells don't have mine. I like to work
it backwards. If we can agree that we have minds, then you owe a story about where they came from.
And that story cannot be well on day 59, you know, this happened. That's, that's ridiculous. And so,
so then the story has to go all the way back. And so, once you have that, you can, you can say that,
I think, I think we can conclude a couple of things. One is that minds change, obviously,
the mind of a cell is not the mind that we have now. And there are many things in between. And
there are many alien kinds of minds that we make with AI and with various other things.
And who knows what in the universe, who knows what else is out there.
They change. That's a and B. We are, I think we are very bad at recognizing unconventional
intelligence. I'll just give you a simple example. We are born with our sense organs,
looking out into the three dimensional world, where medium size objects move around at medium
speeds. And that is our training set for look for, for a recognizing intelligence. So when you see
your cat or your neighbor or a bird or something else doing something interesting, you say, oh,
look at this, that's that's intelligence. I see that, that, you know, I hid the, you know, I hid
the reward from here to there. And he still figured out how to get it. Or, you know, he made the
little, you know, the crows make the little tools to open the locks and do all this stuff. I recognize
that as intelligent. Imagine if you were born with a, an internal sense of your body chemistry.
So a multi dimensional sense of all the different chemicals in your blood.
And you knew exactly what your liver and your pancreas were doing every moment of the day to,
to adjust all of that stuff. In that case, you would understand that there is such a thing as
physiological space. You would understand what intelligence looks like in physiological space.
You would say, Oh, my liver is really intelligent, because it's able to do all these amazing things
despite different perturbations. You would recognize that implants, right, like, like,
smart insulin pumps and pacemakers and things like that, are robots that work in physiological
space. Right now, when I say robot, you imagine, you know, the, the, the, the Mars rover that
drives around and or a self driving car. Yeah, that's great. That's a robot in three dimensional
space. We have robots in physiological space, right, your, your insulin pump that measures
a bunch of stuff and gives you little puffs of, of insulin at just the right time. It's navigating
physiological space, right? But we don't think about it that way, right? Because, because we are
just, you know, sort of blind to all that stuff because of our training set. So I think, I think
that we need to understand that minds are incredibly diverse. Minds come with all kinds of different
bodies that we're not used to. And many more will come. I mean, in your lifetime, you're going to see
creatures that just, you know, are completely alien to us. And synthetic and chimeric and cyborg
and all that. And, and mind solve problems in, in novel spaces. It's not all about movement,
and it's not all about three dimensional space. There are, there's intelligences all around us
that are very hard to, to see. This brings a lot of ethical questions about how we are
moving through, through the world. What's, what's your point? What's your view at the concept of
the self identity? Because we are talking about intelligence at many layers. So what's your point
on identity? Yeah, there are many things can be said. It's a complex area, of course. I, I, one,
one thing that I have done is to try to come up with a framework where highly diverse intelligences
could all be compared and recognized on the same, in the same space. So, so what I wanted to do,
and this was, this was a challenge put to us a few years ago at a meeting in them,
of the Templeton Foundation, they had asked us to come up with a framework to be able to compare
directly all kinds of unconventional intelligences, you know, and so, and so some people think, you
know, octopus, you know, something or insects or something like that. I want to go really broad.
I want to be able to think about swarms. I want to think about alien life forms. I want to think
about AI. I want to think about synthetic and chimeric intelligences, other spaces, like really
broad. And so, so what is a self, right? What is how do you, how can you compare all these different,
different things? I think that cybernetics got it right with a focus on goals. So, so, so here's,
here's what I think a self is. I think a self is a collection of parts that are able to work
together towards system level goals, the goals that belong to that, that collection, not to the
individual pieces. Now, one thing we can do is we can map out the size of your goals. So we can,
in whatever, whatever, whatever those goals might be, how about the size of them? So if you are,
so let's, let's think of some examples. If you tell me that my biggest goal, the biggest thing I
can work and remember what a goal is, a goal is some state that you can exert energy to reach
that state. That's a goal. So if you tell me that the biggest goal you can possibly think about
is the local sucrose concentration, then I'm going to guess you're a bacterium of some sort,
and that is your level. Okay. If you tell me that you can have goals that reach forward
a few hours, and in terms of space, you can handle things that go on, you know, a few
hundred feet in diameter, but that's about it. I'm going to say, well, maybe, maybe you're about
the level of a dog, meaning that your dog has certainly some memory going backwards, certainly
some predictive capacity going forwards, it understands some amount of space, but you can
never get your, your goal, your dog to work towards a goal that's three months from now
in the next city over, impossible, right? They just can't handle that size of, that's, now,
now why do I say this, right? Somebody, if somebody, somebody could prove me wrong and train their
dog to, you know, to work towards things that are months away, I mean, that's probably, you know,
that's great, then I'll change my example. But, but you understand, these are empirical
claims, there are minds that, okay, that have those kind of limitations, then you might tell me that,
well, I have, I have a goal that has to do with the, the financial markets of the next 100 years,
or you might tell me that, wow, I'm really, I'm really sad that the sun is going to burn out,
you know, billions of years from now. Okay, then I'm going to say, you're at least a human, because,
because your goal, your goal, and so I call this the cognitive light cone, it's sort of the boundary,
it's the size of the kinds of things you can have as goals, not, not, not the distance you
can sense, right, because for example, the tele, you know, the James Webb telescope has a massive
distance of sensing, that's not the point, the point isn't about sensing, the point is about
goal directedness. So, so you could be a human, but then you might say to me, you know, I, I, I, I
really, I, I really, I feel, I feel a certain way when something happens to, to a thousand people,
and when the same thing happens to a million people, I'm not able to be a thousand times more,
more upset. I've just not, I don't have that linear range, I just can't do it. And then we can start
to think about, okay, humans are probably not the top of the food chain. At some point, there will
be a massive intelligence that can literally in the linear range care about an enormous amount of
stuff that we can't even wrap our heads around, right, in terms of being a goal, right. So for
somebody like, no, no, no, there are, of course, traditions that talk about this, right, there
are traditions that talk about, you know, some sort of Buddha nature that where, where, where
something is evolved to the point where they can literally care about all the sentient,
this sentient creatures on earth, right, maybe that's possible, I have no idea if it's possible.
But you can think about, you know, that humans are not the top of this food chain. So, so for me,
in terms of what a self is, a self is a temporary, a temporary bundle of, of activities that works
towards specific goals. So selves have goals, they have preferences, they have some degree of
competency in navigating various spaces, maybe very high, maybe low. So, so those are, those are
selves and, and of course, selves are nested. So in our body, so we are a self, we have many
selves inside of us, most of which are nonverbal, right, not all of them, but, but most of them
are nonverbal. And we are also part of probably larger selves that are, you know, social structures
or who knows what, who knows what, what's about us. And so yeah, that anyway, that's, that's,
that's my talk on the selves. That's, yeah, yeah, that's so interesting.
Are you familiar with philosopher Andrew Bergson? He's, yeah, so his idea, basically, of, of
levels of consciousness was to do something with indeterminism. And it's so interesting. And now,
you know, you have a, you just said, okay, my goal is to get this to cross, okay, it's probably a
bacterium, but you can create a space between the stimuli or the goal and the many ways that
can achieve that goal. And that's basically the inter inter indeterminism. And that's basically
the level of the self and maybe a level of consciousness that contains that self as well.
And I was just interested in the scaling of the goals. I was thinking one day, okay, what does
how am I like, how are humans motivated? Maybe a different perspective on that. And I was thinking,
okay, so let's stretch out those homo static goals that we have, you know, and the goals of,
you know, the evolution has. And if you stretch them out, you, you can maybe like, okay, why am I
sitting in this room right now? Why was this building built and stuff like that? And this is
basically this just stretched out basic homo static loop of my organism or of, you know,
this swarm of humans to get to a certain temperature. And this is for me is so interesting
like scaling of goals. And right now we are, you know, in the times of internet and we are
connecting right here right now. And it's just, we think maybe this sci fi that we're going to get
connected and have, you know, or connected, there, there is going to be some higher level
intelligence or self or something like that. But I think that, as you've said, we don't have insight
into different level of minds or different, you know, different minds altogether. So maybe there
is already something like that, you know, this like kind of this kind of hive mind, but, you know,
not really this like, like perspective, but more like realistic perspective, what's
happening right now, it's, it feels like it's actually here already a little bit. So yeah,
there was just some thoughts on that. Yeah, I think, I know, I think that's very important because
we were very bad at recognizing ourselves at lower levels, we're even worse at recognizing
them at higher levels. We don't have really any tools. So one can ask this question, if you were
part of a larger mind, could you tell, first of all, could you tell, could you gather evidence
that you were part of a larger cognitive system? And B, could you, if you could, could you gain
some understanding of what the goals of that system were, right, which is very important,
because as humans, if we're building some kind of massive political economic structure, whatever,
what are the goals of that structure, right? Well, we, this happens all the time, we do
internet of things, we do swarm robotics, and then you say, can we have any idea what this
thing's going to want to do? And when, when, you know, when it, when it boots up, right? So,
so the thing is that I have a feeling, and I don't know this for a fact, but my feeling is that
probably some version of Gertl's theorem tells you that you are never going to
really understand what the higher level is doing. Very much like, you know, when you go to work,
and you, you know, you step or don't step on some ant on your way to a meeting, the ant has
absolutely no, no capacity to understand the con, the context of what it just participated in,
you know, why this is happening, right? So, so it's entirely possible that we are the same,
right? And people have said that to, you know, the universe works in mysterious,
you know, ways, the bigger patterns, right? But maybe it's possible, and I don't know, but,
but maybe it's possible with some kind of math or, you know, causal information theory or something,
to start to gain evidence for or against the idea that we are part of something larger.
And just to give you an example, I spent a lot of time in the last few months
thinking about what it would be like to be a neuron or a subset of neurons inside a large neural
network that's being trained. And you could imagine two ways, imagine this conversation
between like two, two neighboring subnets. One says, oh, look, we live in a cold,
mechanical universe, doesn't care what we do. I can learn, you know, I can learn about things.
And, and we live in a, we are an insignificant spec in this, in this giant universe that doesn't
care about anything, there are no larger minds, we are the only thing you recognize,
like this is, you recognize this, this, this story, this is the, this is the standard scientific
story of today, right? We live in this, you know, mechanical cosmos that doesn't care what we have.
The other, the other, the neighbor says, you know, I'm not so sure. I've been, I've been
tracking things here. And I can tell you that every time I do certain things, life is good.
But when I do other things, this, this, this massive wave of punishment, right, this back
propagation wave comes and smacks me and, and, and forcibly changes my voltage and does all this
other stuff. And I'm starting to think that the universe, that my, that our universe actually
does care what we do. And in particular, for some reason, right, you know, this, have you seen
them Google deep dream? Have you seen these things? It's like it makes it, it makes it,
all these pictures have dogs in them because they're always right. Well, and so I can imagine,
right? So this is total fantasy, of course, but you get, you get, you get the idea. I can imagine
that this one says, look, I don't know, I cannot comprehend the thought of our universe. But I
think it likes dogs, because every, because, because every time I find an eye, like every
time I output this dog, I life is good. And otherwise I get, you know, corrected or something
like this, right? And, and so you could easily imagine, right? In that universe, the, the,
the one that thinks that it lives in a mindless world is wrong. It's, it's factually wrong. The
quite, right? The question. So now the question is for us, the question is,
what is the right view? I mean, there are certainly people who feel that there are patterns to life
and that they, you know, I mean, I, who knows, right? I don't, nobody knows, but, but, but I
don't think it's crazy to ask the following question. This is the distinction that I think is
really important. Are you learning or are you being trained? What's the difference? The difference is
in both, in, in both cases, right? In both cases, you are engaging in something that is designed to
change your own mind. When you are learning, you pick up a book and learn stuff with the, with
the inherent purpose of changing your own psychology. And, and by the way, we are complex
enough that we are even subject to this idea of the thought that breaks the thinker, right?
You can imagine that if you're like really kind of a deep thinker, you might come across a piece
of literature or something that just screws you up completely and spirals you into some sort of
depression and whatever, right? But, but we are, we know that we can learn and we can change our
mind. But when we do that, we assume that we are the only agent in that interaction. So there's
me, the agent, and then there's the outside world and the outside world has zero agency and I'm the
boss. I do what I want. I can learn or I can not learn whatever the, or I am provided with inputs
and I am changed the way that I would, but I don't know that the outside world has zero agency.
You know, that's an assumption. We don't actually know that. And under certain circumstances,
you would be wrong to assume that. If you're a neuron in a neural network, you'd be wrong to
assume that. So I don't know. I'm not claiming, I'm making no claims whatsoever about anything
like that. But I'm just saying that I think, I don't think it's a crazy question at all to try
to develop some sort of mathematical formalism to try to gain evidence for being part of a larger
system, even knowing that you will never understand the whole goal. You don't know what space it works
in, but maybe you can see your option space being deformed in some way that is, that is consistent
with, with a not a zero agency on the other end. So you just put a framework to a lot of, you know,
kind of these, I don't know, it feels like you are part of the universe. You are not separated
from it. And there is something maybe, something maybe mysterious. And you, you know, you have
subjective experience. And whenever someone asks me if I believe in something, you know, I usually
say I believe literally, I believe in something I can't really, I believe there is like something
else that I can actually perceive because I know I can perceive only, you know, just these little
things. And I think this is such a nice logical, logical framework to ask ourselves, whatever this
mysterious thing might be. And only, you know, only the thoughts that you put out there is so
important because many, many people are in one camp on one extreme and they say, ah, definitely
there's, I don't know, from panpsychism, from Eastern philosophical perspective, you know,
we are this one hive mind, one consciousness, consciousness and or like transmit, we are,
you know, transmitters or something like that. And now you are putting frame to it and kind of
asking real question and asking real possibility of kind of, you know, testing it maybe mathematically
sometime in the future or something. And you are kind of, okay, so you're not on this extreme or
not on this other extreme, but you are in the middle and it feels like you are trying to not
to have an agency in this or something because, yes, that's how it's supposed to be done and not
wish something is like that or like that because that's actually going to affect the stuff that you
do and that you are going to, you know, explore and stuff or discover. So this for me is really
interesting way to put these things together and think about it and kind of de-extremise
the world that we live in because there is a lot of extremes and when we can have, even as, you know,
scientists and researchers and everyone, when they can have this kind of, you know, talk or
something or discussion, I think it's so important because otherwise we can't, you know, we can't
move forward. So I really am grateful for what you do and that you are putting these frameworks
out here, out there. So yeah, thank you for that. Well, thank you. Yeah, thank you. I do think it's
important to two things. One is to treat as many things as possible as empirical questions, right?
Once you say, I believe whatever, it closes off the ability to test it. First of all, so we should
always be working to come up with some way of making this practical and testable and that's A
and B, we should realise that whatever your framework is, it limits and enables different
next steps. So it constrains, you know, if you never, if you can never believe philosophically
that gene regulatory networks could have non-zero agency, you will never do the experiment that we
did, right? You know, planaria have been studied since 1903, I believe, right? You know, and two
headed animals have been produced right at the beginning of the last century. No one ever thought
to cut, to recut them, to my knowledge, no one ever recut them. Why? Because it was perfectly
obvious that, that, well, genetically they're unchanged and when you cut off that second head,
well, of course, they're going to go back to normal. What else could it be? And so, so there are so
many experiments like this that we've done because each lens has things that it enables and other
things that it does not let you do. And as much of this as possible, and the biggest one of all
is, look, there's a, as scientists, there's one thing that we all take on faith, that all science
begins with an act of faith, which is basically this idea that the world is understandable, right?
That there's a pattern behind it. And then what we are doing is discovering a pattern. Nobody, no,
no scientist can go to work saying, I'm going to find a bunch of stuff today, but tomorrow it'll
probably all be different. That's great. And like, nobody believes that, but you wouldn't do, you
couldn't do science if you were some kind of, you know, if you, if Hume was right, and we were living
in a random, you know, just collection of randomness that has pockets of, of just by accident things
look like they make sense kind of in pockets. If you had that view, you would never be able to do
science. Science is predicated on a complete leap of faith that has no, no empirical justification
that, that behind all of this stuff, there is some kind of truth that we are getting to.
So, so I think, you know, I think we need to be honest with ourselves that, that we all start
in this, in this field anyway, we all start with a bit of faith. And then, and then you move as
much as you can to experiment. Thank you for that. Michael, what is your focus right now?
Oh, boy. Well, and I apologize, I have about a minute and then then I have to run, but
yeah, of course. You know, we do a lot of things in our lab, I would say the focus of the whole
group is to understand different kinds of minds in various embodiments. But that means regenerative
medicine, it means applications and birth defects, it means cancer, we do some synthetic biology,
synthetic morphology to make artificial new proto organisms, we do some artificial intelligence,
we do a lot of different things, all of them are around this, this kind of question.
Michael, I am so grateful for your time. Thank you so much. I think there is like
questions of consciousness and regenerate, regeneration of limbs and stuff like that.
Where do people find you? Leave us some links or I think you are part of some company as well
that is trying to research, I think regenerating limbs as well. So could you link that?
Everything is going to be in the description. And Michael, thank you so much for your time.
Thank you so much. I appreciate the conversation. I will email you a bunch of links. Yeah,
there's a couple of spin off companies. All our stuff is on my website that you can see all that.
So yeah, thank you so much. And I'm happy to talk to you guys anytime we can always do it again.
Cool. Nice. Thank you very much. Bye. Have a nice day. Bye.
