That's what I've done. I had that one plan, which is that I'm going to bring these two
fields together. They seemed like a good idea for the reasons we've discussed.
And I didn't stop. In other words, I didn't give up. And inevitably, eventually, you start
seeing the big picture. You start seeing, you start being able to simplify and see how it works.
And that's, I wouldn't have predicted that I would be in exactly this place now. I certainly
wouldn't have. I wouldn't have predicted just about all of the actual steps that I took.
Hello, everyone, and welcome to this inaugural episode of our podcast. My name is Ross Gilmore,
and I'm a PhD candidate in the philosophy department at the University of Kansas.
I work on issues of metaphysics and psychology in ancient Greek philosophy,
but I also have a keen interest in contemporary scientific approaches to these same kinds of
questions, which tend to cross disciplinary boundaries. And since first discovering his
work a couple of years ago, there's no author I've been more excited to read where it's proven
a better model of an interdisciplinary scholar than Mark Solms. Professor Solms wears many hats.
He is chair of the Department of Neuropsychology at the University of Cape Town in South Africa
and a researcher in its Neuroscience Institute. He's also a psychoanalyst and has recently
overseen the publication of the revised standard edition of the complete psychological works of
Sigmund Freud as its general editor. And he has played a pivotal role in putting these two fields,
neuroscience and psychoanalysis, into conversation as a founding chair of the Neuropsychoanalysis
Association and its excellent journal, Neuropsychoanalysis. Over the past few decades, this new field
has borne remarkable fruit. In particular, I will mention Mark's articles, The Conscious Id,
revision of drive theory and its companion piece, a revision of Freud's theory of the biological
origin of the Oedipus complex, as well as his most recent book, The Hidden Spring,
A Journey to the Source of Consciousness. So Mark, welcome, and thank you very much for
speaking with me today. Thanks very much, Ross. Glad to be here.
So I'd like to do a little bit of stage setting for the questions that follow. I'm going to be
asking a variety of questions that might seem to have this biographical bent, you know, kind of
what did you do and when and when did you learn about these authors? But I hope it'll be obvious
that they're not of merely biographical interest. I take that you might, you know, serve as a kind
of a case study for what you talk about feeling our way through life, through these decisions
that we're making in our lives, kind of balancing on the one hand what we might call these sort of
bottom-up interests, things we're interested in at the time, particular desires we have to pursue
these different avenues, while at the same time balancing to get these, you know, long-term goals
or projects, it's kind of top-down perspective. So I'd like to start towards the beginning of your
career. If you could imagine yourself back, I think you started training as an analyst in the 80s.
So when you were first setting out, at that time, why were you pursuing this formal training as an
analyst? In what ways did you think that your neuroscientific training might bear on it and
how did you think it might in turn influence the way that you conduct your neuroscientific research?
Well, the branch of neuroscience that I trained in is called Neurosycology and I started studying
in that field in 1980 and there was very little psychology in it. Even though it was called
Neurosycology, it seemed to exclude the psyche because for me, the psyche is first and foremost
something subjective. It is the lived experiencing eye and that was absolutely airbrushed out
of Neurosycology. We learned only about these third-person kind of descriptions of the
mechanisms of the mind and in particular cognitive mechanisms and I kept asking myself,
but where is the subject of these perceptual mechanisms? Where is the subject of this language
mechanism? Who is in there and where does he or she fit within these information flow diagrams?
So in a word, I was frustrated by how little psychology there was. It might as well have
been called neurobehaviorism rather than Neurosycology and the way that it treated
the study of the mental functions of the brain was no different from how we might study
respiratory functions or digestive functions. The most interesting property of the brain is that
unlike any other organ or actually any other known physical thing in the universe,
it feels like something to be a brain. So it was out of my frustration on that score
that I was led to become interested in psychoanalysis. For all of its faults, psychoanalysis at least
takes lived experience, subjective mental life as its starting point, as its central
object of study and so that's really why I did what I did. To the horror of my professors and
my colleagues, they said or one person in particular said that it's like an astronomer
studying astrology. At that time, how did you envision your career going? I don't think that
you were just planning on becoming an analyst and leaving the neuropsychology behind, but
did you have any particular notion of how the two might inform each other at that time?
Yes. Well, I don't want to give the impression that I had a richly articulated notion,
but I had the basic idea that psychoanalysis, taking the observational perspective that it does
upon the mind, in other words, the subjective perspective as opposed to the objective one,
that in doing so, it was able to study those aspects of mental life that were excluded from
neuropsychology. There was a theoretical yield from that study, a methodological yield, but
more interesting to me was the theoretical yield. In other words, there was a conceptual
armamentarium that I wanted to then import into neuropsychology and in this way to inject some
psyche into neuropsychology. I'm speaking of concepts like, well, those days, even feelings,
affect emotion, it was utterly neglected in neuropsychology. There was no neuropsychology
of emotion. I remember my excitement when, I think it was in the mid to the late 1980s,
a book edited by Halman and Sats came out called the Neuropsychology of Emotion. It was the only
book on the topic. To have theories of emotion and motivation and drive how the mind is embodied,
nowadays in the era of embodied cognition, we perhaps forget or perhaps people of your age
don't even know that it ever was the case that we didn't think of the mind as embodied in cognitive
neuroscience. Even concepts as simple as those, but also the more sophisticated concepts about
the structure of the self and to go even more deeply into it, concepts like narcissism. I don't
know how anybody can understand mental life without having recourse to the concept of narcissism,
but I can absolutely assure you, probably to this day, other than me and my closest colleagues,
no neuroscientists speak about narcissism and so on. So I was wanting, I thought that
to put it as, I'm sure you've heard the phrase, if all you have is a hammer,
then everything looks like a nail. So I wanted to bring more tools, more theoretical tools to bear
on neuropsychology so that we would have a way of describing, conceptualizing and theorizing
these phenomena, which must somehow also be part and parcel of the field. Remember,
neuropsychology is meant to be a discipline which helps us to understand the mental functions of
the brain. And if we don't have concepts like those, I think that we're really hobbled.
And I'll tell you something else. As I began to learn more about these concepts,
so exactly what I've just said about, if all you have is a hammer, I started to see things
clinically with my neurological patients, which I was unable to literally, unable to see before.
Like for example, it would be too complicated a topic for me to go into in any depth,
but I will just say patients with damage to the right hemisphere of the cortex,
they become extremely egocentric and they can't see things from, it's partly because of a spatial
problem, they're unable to put themselves in the shoes of the other, because that's quite
complicated spatial thing to be able to see things from somebody else's point of view.
But there's a very profound emotional dimension to this egocentricity of these patients.
And it just dawned on me in a flash, oh my word, these patients suffer from
narcissistic mental organizations. And that really helped me to understand much better
that why these right hemisphere patients have these curious emotional disorders.
Now, I'm giving you really just one example, but I could multiply it 10-fold or 100-fold,
that what I expected and hoped would come to pass is exactly what did, namely that I was
greatly, having these psychoanalytical tools at my disposal really enabled me to be,
to have a much deeper understanding as a neuropsychologist of the pathological and normal
functions that I was studying. Okay. And I'm interested in your kind of developing views on
the psychoanalytic, as you say, conceptual armamentarium. So when you first started training as
an analyst, what was your impression of Freud before you had done any of the coursework that
might have been associated with your training institute? And then I'm also curious what it
would have been at the end of your time training, obviously, before the rest of your career.
Yes. Well, as I told you, I began my neuropsychological training in 1980.
And I would say for the first five years or so, what little I heard about Freud was
a caricature, the usual sort of thing about Freud, that he was not a scientist,
this sort of pseudoscience, that there was no evidence base for these theories,
that this is all these old, very old fashioned notions that, you know,
even psychiatrists have long since abandoned. And so that was my prejudice. I shared the
prejudice that was imparted to me by the scientific milieu within which I was training.
But then I read Freud's book on aphasia, which he wrote in 1891,
therefore before he became a psychoanalyst. And it was a classic in the field, aphasia,
of course, is part and parcel of neuropsychology, the disorders of language that arise with
with brain and lesions. And so it was considered a classic. And what struck me about it was actually
what drew me to reading it was some very praiseworthy things that were said about it by Alexander
Luria, the great Russian neurologist and neuropsychologist. In my time, Luria was at the
absolute forefront of neuropsychological thinking. So I had no idea, by the way,
I learned only years later that Luria had in fact been a psychoanalyst in his youth.
And he had abandoned psychoanalysis during the Stalinist purges.
Psychoanalysis became Sientia non grata in the Soviet Union. And so he dropped it,
like a hot potato, did Luria. So I read that aphasia monograph, which was really very
impressive and very similar in its underlying assumptions to the assumptions of Luria for
reasons which are then subsequently understood. Then I was led to reading Freud's project for
a scientific psychology, which he wrote in 1895. And that was because another leading
neuropsychologist of my youth, namely Carl Pribram, had been effusive in his praise
of this work of Freud's, saying how incredibly prescient it was. And so I read that.
I remember spending an entire weekend. In fact, somebody asked me to house sit for them. I was
living like a student in a dingy apartment, and so it was great. I had this whole house to myself
for a long weekend. But all I did was sit there like a madman, just reading this Freud's project
for a scientific psychology. It was so enthralling. That was really when I started to take Freud very
seriously. And then my first, when I was saying earlier, I could multiply the examples of how
Freudian concepts proved useful to me as a neuropsychologist. My first exposure to that was
in relation to dreaming. My first piece of research, in fact, it was my doctoral dissertation,
was on brain mechanisms of sleep and dreaming. And it was a sort of smuggled consciousness in
by studying dreaming, because the one respectable topic under the heading of consciousness
in the 1980s was sleep and wakefulness. This kind of the level of consciousness and
the brain arousal mechanisms that underpin it, this was a respectable topic. So I studied sleep
in order to study this curious fact that the unconsciousness of sleep is punctuated by these
conscious phenomena called dreams. And so during that period, I mean, while I was conducting that
research, I attended a seminar of all things. You must remember that I was studying natural
science. Of all things, this seminar, which was open to all faculties, was led by a professor of
comparative literature. And so it was a revelation to me as he unpacked. And luckily, he drew upon
the project for a scientific psychology in order to help us understand the metapsychology of dreams,
because there were many assumptions that Freud carried over from his project to his dream theory
that you wouldn't understand the theory unless you understood those hidden assumptions.
And so that was really when the, what did they say, the bug bit or something,
anyway, I then got the, I really decided this was what I wanted to do. I wanted to train
in this stuff called psychoanalysis. And so you ask how my views of Freud changed. So it went
from prejudice to interest to fascination. But then when I went to London, because I had to
I had to leave South Africa in order to train, because there was no psychoanalytic training
in apartheid South Africa, but also because I was conscripted into the army, all white males
were required to defend the genius apartheid system. So that was the push for me to leave
was that I needed to escape the draft. The pool was the prospect of training as a psychoanalyst
in London. And I don't know if you want me to go on anymore, perhaps I've said enough, but obviously
then, you know, my views of Freud changed during my training as I got to understand him better.
But I have to say, I think that I understood Freud and therefore psychoanalysis, Freud being the
kind of bedrock of all of the subsequent developments in psychoanalysis, I think I understood him in
a way slightly, not slightly, I think, I think considerably differently from my fellow trainees
and my teachers for that matter, because I had followed the same trajectory that Freud had.
Freud had gone from neuroscience via neuropsychology into psychoanalysis. And by the way,
so-called hysteria, what we now call functional neurological disorders, you see them in our
wards all the time. I mean, these patients are to a penny in the neurology wards. So I was familiar
with these sorts of things in a way that I think that my colleagues were not. So I think I had a
kind of a leg up in that way in terms of what use I was able to make and what sense I was able to make
of what I was learning. Yeah, that's really interesting how you describe your career as
mirroring Freud's in that way, starting from the neurological side and then moving into the
subjective side of the experience, you might say. And it sounds like in your training institute,
Freud was taken seriously. He wasn't played down in freight for if other, maybe more
trendy analysts at the time. It sounds like he was being taken seriously at the institute.
Not, I think that that wasn't, it's not that he wasn't taken seriously, but he was certainly
taught as a kind of historical figure. The British psychoanalytical society is very Kleinian.
So the emphasis was much more on on Melanie Klein and the other, the Kleinians, the senior
Kleinians who were my teachers and and also the broader what's called object relations approach
people in the mold of Winnicott and Bolby and so on. Okay. And so I'm curious when you've
written more recently about revising the theory and technique of psychoanalysis and I'm curious
when you started having these ideas that your neuro scientific training, your neuro
psychological training could help you rethink how sessions are conducted or the kind of
meta psychology at work. Was it throughout your training at the institute or did that kind of
come on later? No, it was not during my training at the institute. I have to say so that I don't give
too rose colored picture of the whole thing. I was also struck by the lack of scientific thinking
in the psychoanalytic institute that I was trained in. I don't mean a total lack, but it was much more
of a kind of passing down received wisdom and there being sort of a right way to see things
without it being obvious why that was the right way to see things. So it became a very soon,
although my intention had been to import into neuroscience and neuropsychology in particular
tools that I acquired as a psycho as a trainee psychoanalyst. But very rapidly it became apparent
that there was a need for the bridge built in this way to be traversed in both directions.
It was clear that psychoanalysis could benefit from an importing of not just concepts from
modern cognitive and affective neuroscience, but also its methods. For example, in my
that research I mentioned, my very first research on brain mechanisms of dreaming.
Popper famously declared this theory to be pseudoscientific because it was unfalsifiable.
The analyst Freud's view was that behind every dream there's a heartfelt wish, but the emphasis
there falls on behind. You don't see the wish in what Freud called the manifest dream. In other
words, the actual explicit experience and memory of the dream has to be interpreted by the analyst
and the underlying unconscious latent wish is inferred. And Popper not unreasonably pointed
out that if this is the method, you're always going to be able to confirm your hypothesis
because you can interpret every dream as having an unconscious wish behind it, even if the patient
disagrees with you. There's no falsifying it. But using other methods like, for example,
in my study, I used the lesion method, in other words, studying what happened to dreams
as an inconsequence of damage to different parts of the brain. What became evident was
that the part of the brain that is most centrally implicated in generating dreams,
in other words, the part of the brain which, when damaged, leads to a cessation of dreaming,
a loss of the ability to dream, those days it was called the brain reward system.
Nowadays, more commonly thought of or called the seeking system or the wanting system.
This deep dopaminergic, it's the major positive motivational system of the mammal brain.
And that was just my studies looked at brain injured patients. But then using pharmacological
probes, because it's a dopamine system, we were able to manipulate up and down the dopamine levels
and see test predictions about if it is this dopamine circuit that drives dreams, you should
be able to increase them by giving dopamine, and you should be able to decrease them by blocking
dopamine. And that's exactly what we found. And single cell recordings of those dopamine cells,
you see that they fire more rapidly during dreaming sleep than at any other time, even during the
most rewarding of daytime activities. Positron emission tomography, which allows you to image
where the differential areas of activation are in the brain during any mental function.
Positron emission tomography of the of the dreaming brain shows this part of this motivational
circuitry light up like a Christmas tree. So the point that I'm making is that although
Popper was right, that by the psychoanalytic method, these, these hypotheses were unfalsifiable.
Using neuroscientific methods, they become falsifiable. So it's not a matter of the theory
being pseudoscientific, it's a matter of, you know, you need the right kind of methods.
So, so, so that's, so it rapidly became a two way thing. And you're saying, you know, did I,
did it, did it, how early did I start introducing revisions to psychoanalytic theory? It wasn't
that early, because it was remarkable, the extent to which what I found about the dreaming brain
was consistent with psychoanalytic theory, so there was very little to correct. But it was in
subsequent research of mine that, you know, I increasingly stumbled upon inconsistencies between
what we can learn about the, the functional organization of the mind from a neuroscientific
point of view, and the conclusions derived from psychoanalytic observations. And then it became
a matter of, you know, well, these, these two views can't both be right. And increasingly over the
years, of course, inevitably, I found in several instances that the psychoanalytical theory was
untenable in light of the neuroscientific findings. But it was, it was only after that,
that, I mean, as I started to get a bigger picture, it was, you know, that you get little
peppercorns of findings, and then you, you know, you, you, you, you, you, you, you lose confidence
in this aspect of the psychoanalytical theory, and then in this aspect, but it takes a while for a whole
new story, a whole new, a picture comprehensive enough for, for it to lead to implications
for clinical technique, that was slow in coming. I would say it's only been over the last,
well, dozen years that I've been able to make contributions via the
neuropsychoanalytical platform to the clinical practice of psychoanalysis. And, you know,
you might have thought that this would be, this would bring about the greatest resistance
to what I was doing from the psychoanalysts, but actually it's proven to be the opposite.
It's, once they started realizing that this actually has some practical utility,
that it actually makes a difference to, I mean, most psychoanalysts are not scientists, you know,
they're clinicians. And so it became more valuable to them than, and more interesting to them
than it had been. So I think the enormous recognition that neuropsychoanalysis has enjoyed
has really only come in the last 10 years. Prior to that, it was a pretty marginal activity,
I mean, from the point of view of most psychoanalysts.
Yeah, that's the impression that I had just based on the articles I've been reading.
It seems like in the last, you know, as you say, decade or so,
you've really been able to articulate this comprehensive picture of what's going on in
therapy, you know, drawing on some of these other topics that we'll talk about, you know,
PENCIP's work in effect in neuroscience and, you know, memory reconciliation and all
these different things. And so it seems like psychoanalytic community would be in this
interesting position where on the one hand, your work is validating so much of what they
have been doing this whole time. At the same time, it's, you know, taking a bit of the mystery out
of it in a sense. And so I don't know, they might have to be willing to revise some of their
previously held beliefs, but it does seem like the pieces have kind of clicked into the place
in the last decade or so. So I wanted to ask you earlier, you were talking about
how people in these training institutes, they can have, you know, they were taught in certain
sorts of ways and, you know, they're themselves not scientists. And so there can be a bit of,
you didn't use this word, but tribalism, we might say. And so I'm struck when you do write about
Freud, you do so in a way that I admire as someone who's also trying to write about a historical
figure, where on the one hand, you're a very generous reader, you try and find, you know,
as much to validate in Freud as possible, you're good at showing how there are correlates with
contemporary scientific concepts. But at the same time, you know, you're perfectly willing to
say when you think he was wrong about something and articulate that. And so I'm just curious,
you know, when it comes to criticizing someone that you admire, but the sort of historical
figure that you're revising, has that, it seems like it's pretty easy for you, but I'm wondering
if you've had, if it took a little work to figure out how to set the right tone in articulating,
you know, not wanting to downplay Freud's marriage while at the same time not wanting to
minimize your own, you know, contributions to what he's doing?
I think the main, what has guided me in that respect is that Freud, unlike many of his followers,
was very open to changing, first of all, changing his own mind, you know, on major questions.
He abandoned his own theories and came up with better ones with unfolding evidence.
And he fully expected his scientific as, whatever the right word for it is,
the people who followed in his scientific footsteps, who explored the same to the
terrain that he had opened up, he fully expected them to continue to do the same.
And in particular, Freud was very optimistic that the neuroscience of the future would make
important contributions, especially in some areas where it has in fact made important contributions
to the development of what we now call neuropsychoanalytic theory, namely the theory of the
drives, for example, you know, Freud said, you know, it's not the most propitious method for
studying the fundamental biological, motivational forces of a species by sitting,
you know, behind the couch and listening to what falls into somebody's head.
He said that really we need guidance from biology here, but the biology of his time
didn't provide such guidance. So, I mean, in a nutshell, what I'm saying is that the ways in
which I have had to revise and correct and in some instances radically revise and correct
classical psychoanalytical notions is entirely consistent with, I believe, you know, what Freud
would have wanted from this psychoanalysis of the future. So, I never felt I was killing my father,
you know, I never felt that this was a kind of a, well, perhaps that's the best way to put it.
It wasn't some kind of patricide. It was out of respect for the importance of these things that
Freud had laid the foundations for our understanding of these things. It was out of respect for the
importance of all of that, that, you know, they deserve to be taken seriously. And that means
scrutinized scientifically and developed scientifically, improved scientifically.
So, I didn't feel that I was doing anything in opposition to the spirit of the pioneers of
psychoanalysis. Now, that again, because I don't want to give you too roast into the picture of it,
it's not as if there was no opposition from psychoanalysts, there was. But I took solace in
the fact that, you know, they are, they have strayed from the way of science, you know, it's,
and unlike, you know, what I was doing was more in the spirit of what Freud had, the discipline
that Freud had founded, than what they were doing. So it pained me to be, to receive the
resistance that I did from the psychoanalytical establishment, which has greatly reduced, as I
said, happily over the more recent times. But I didn't feel particularly conflicted within myself
about what I was doing. I felt quite sanguine about it.
Yeah, and it's interesting how you say that in no small part that's probably because Freud himself
was, you know, acknowledged that he didn't have the kind of neuropsychological basis that he would
have liked in order to elaborate theories that were consistent with it. And so you're kind of
saying, hey, you know, here I am benefiting from the past hundred years of research, and I'm going
to kind of pick up where you would have left off. So I'd like to ask you now. So there's just been
the revised edition published. I've heard that maybe you've been working on this for three decades
or so. I'm not exactly sure if this was something you worked on, you know, every day, every week,
every month, exactly what the nature of your involvement with the project was. But certainly
this must have taken, you know, no small amount of time in your part. And so I'm curious as someone
who I work on Plato, I could easily spend my entire career doing nothing but working on Plato.
But I'm also interested in putting ancient philosophy into conversation with contemporary
science. And it seems like this is a difficult balancing act to strike, because there's always
more you can learn about the primary source. There's always more you can delve into the scholarship.
And you chose to undertake this massive project. So I mean, how did you think this was going to
be worth it? And was it? I mean, was it just simply love of, you know, getting into the weeds and
understanding how his brain worked? Or did you explicitly think that there was going to be some
sort of transactional benefit that you were going to learn about his psychology in a way that you
couldn't have done otherwise? I'll tell you how it happened. Upon my arrival in London in 1989,
I decided to undertake a translation of Freud's neuroscientific works.
People, for the reason that I've already articulated, you know, that I thought that
I understood better where these concepts had come from, because I had a neuroscientific
training. Also, because I understood German, I was able to read, you know, Freud's
neuroscientific writings, which most of my peers were not able to do because they've never been
translated. So I thought this is an important thing to do. I need to translate these papers.
So I was working on that, deeply involved in that project. When I was asked to
do this editing and revision of the translation and translating of some new material of psychological
interest, that revised standard edition project. Now, the point I'm trying to make is that
it wasn't my own idea. I didn't decide, oh, I'm going to spend, well, first of all, it wasn't
my own idea to do it at all, let alone, you know, to spend 30 years on it, because I had no inkling
that that's what it would take. And you're quite right in your intimating there that part of the
reason why it took so long is because it was not the only thing I was doing. I had to do it alongside
a whole lot of other commitments. But if there was any transactional, is that the word you use,
transactional benefit, it was this. By the time I was asked to do that, which was 1994,
I mean, literally, embarrassingly 30 years before I actually published it in July this year.
Let me also, sorry, I'm being a bit scatterbrained. I wanted to tell you the neuroscientific works
took up four volumes. The psychological works took up 24 volumes. It was a much bigger,
much, much, much bigger project. But the benefit to me by 1994, when I was asked to do this,
I was already somewhere along the path that we were discussing earlier of trying to integrate
these two fields and beginning to experience some of the resistance that came primarily from,
I mean, interestingly, primarily from the psychoanalytical community. Neuroscientists were
much more open-minded about what psychoanalysis might offer than psychoanalysts were about what
neuroscience might offer. And so I thought, I mean, it's not as if this was my motivation,
it really wasn't. But it certainly occurred to me that it won't do me any harm if I'm going to be
suggesting some unpopular and what might prove to be rather radical revisions of
psychoanalytic theory. It's better to do that from that very authoritative base within the field.
If you are the authorized translator of Freud's psychological works, well, at least you know
what you're talking about. At least you're one of us. If you're Stretches and you've been
entrusted with this, I mean, it really is the Bible of psychoanalysis. Freud's complete works.
So the other benefit along the way is that I really did get to understand Freud a hell
of a lot better than, frankly, if I may say so, better than anybody. Because if you want to
translate somebody, you've got to sentence by sentence, you have to ask yourself, what is the
idea that is cloaked in these words so that I can dress them in the words of another language?
You really have to make a very close study of those ideas. You have to really understand them
in order to translate them. So that's been a pleasurable benefit of doing it alongside everything
else that I've already said. And if you had it to do again, it sounds like you would then.
Well, I think I would have done it. Even had I known that it would take me that long to finish
but it's like parenthood. When you become a parent for the first time, you've no
inkling of what you're taking on. It's a commitment second to none and it never ends.
But that doesn't mean that you regret it far from it. It's extremely rewarding.
Yeah, I've heard people say that about a variety of things. I'm glad I did it. But if I had known
what it was going to entail in the first place, I don't think I would have.
All right, so I'd like to shift from Lee Ford behind for a second and shift to a couple other
figures that have proven to be incredibly influential in your thinking, namely, Yuck
Panksep and Carl Friston. So maybe we should start with Yuck Panksep. I'm curious at what
point in your career you first discovered his work and then did you immediately realize how well
it would kind of suit this, I don't know, theory of the mind that you were elaborating
or did it take a little while to appreciate the role that it would end up playing?
Well, remembering what I told you about the state of play in the neurosciences
those days, when I started out, when I came upon his work, the first paper of his that I
came across was in the Handbook of Clinical Neurology. I've said that Freud's Standard
Edition is the Bible of Psychoanalysis. The Handbook of Clinical Neurology is the Bible of
Neurology. It's now in about 150th volume or something like that. And there was a volume,
one of the volumes on neuropsychology in it was this most rare of things, a paper on emotion.
Recall what I said to you about Helman and Sats's book? Well, same applied here. It was in the Handbook
of Clinical Neurology, a chapter on emotion, and I read it. And it was just fantastic. This guy,
my thought was that this guy gets it. This is a real, not only is he studying emotion,
but he's taking it seriously and putting it at the center of how the brain works.
Every all of this cognition that I was taught about, the only reason we have all of these
cognitive capacities is because we have to learn about the world where we need to meet our needs,
and our needs are felt as feelings. So this was the sort of thing that Panksepp was saying.
And not just, it wasn't just a flag-waving exercise. I mean, he had been studying it for decades.
He'd been studying brain mechanisms of emotion, which necessarily means the brain mechanisms
of motivation and of drive, deeply. So I didn't meet him then. It was in the late 80s and maybe
early 90s that I first came across this chapter he'd written in the Handbook of Clinical Neurology.
But then his book, his magnum opus, Affective Neuroscience, was published in 1998.
And that was just a work of genius. It was the most comprehensive synthesis of a century of
work on this topic that I was describing, including the decades of his own work on this topic.
And so I asked him to engage with me in a cross-disciplinary dialogue in the very first issue
of our journal, which was published in 1999. And so that was how I came to personally engage with
him. And he really rose to the occasion. He took it very seriously. He wrote an overview of how we
understand the, well, I wrote an overview of how we understand emotion and motivation and drive
in psychoanalysis. And then he wrote the equivalent from the point of view of Affective Neuroscience.
And then we had a discussion of each other's papers in the pages of our journal.
That led, that was so satisfying, that led to me inviting him to speak at our inaugural Congress
of the International Neuropsychoanalysis Society. That was in the year 2000. The other speakers at
that Congress or the other main speakers were Antonia DiMazio, who was also doing excellent work
by that stage in that area. And Oliver Sacks, who had this wonderfully subjective
perspective upon neurological disorders, the being of the neurological patient.
So that was when my personal, I mean, I met him, obviously,
Jacques, we had dinners together, and we became dear friends. And we just, you know,
from then onwards, we collaborated very closely on these topics of mutual interest.
Until, until the, when you introduced me as the founding chair of the International Neuropsychoanalysis
Society, he was my founding co-chair. And we remained in that position until he died, sadly,
in 2017. Yeah, it makes sense that you were able to appreciate the relevance of his work
for what you were doing so quickly. I'm wondering if that's the same for this other figure,
Carl Friston, I think I've read you mentioning in some article that, you know, it takes a little
while to get some sense of what he's talking about. This is an inventoriously obscure perspective on
life, you know, it gets referred to as the free energy principle or active inference.
So I'm curious, you know, when you first became aware of it, and then, more importantly, when
you became aware that it could provide this kind of undergirding, this foundation from
a radically different perspective, almost as different as, you know, the objective perspective
of neuropsychology is from subjective experience of psychoanalytic experience, that this free energy
principle, active inference perspective, is just a complete, complete different game.
Yes, well, it's rooted in statistical mechanics, it's a computational framework.
But I just want to say before I address your comment about Carl Friston, I want you to say
one more thing about Panksepp, which I neglected to say, it was that also it was clear from his
1998 book that here we had what we were looking for, what Freud had always predicted that biology
would eventually provide us with a better understanding and classification of the drives.
And so that was also, you know, why Panksepp was so influential in my scientific life.
So Friston is notoriously incomprehensible, you know, he writes in like, you know,
I mean, he writes like a physicist. I mean, he actually started out as a physicist,
and he writes in equations. And so although I was aware of his rising influence, I mean,
frankly, rising fame, you know, during the from the late 1990s into our own century,
he was a very increasingly very, very prominent figure. But I didn't take a deep interest in
his work, mainly because it was just too hard, you know, then in 2010, to my amazement, he published
in The Journal Brain, which is a very conservative neurological journal, and highly regarded one.
He published an article saying that his free energy principle was basically
a sort of a restatement of the fundamentals of Freudian drive theory and I thought, what, you
know, Friston is claiming to be a Freudian. And all of this, this, this stuff that he writes about,
you know, he thinks it's in the tradition of Freud, which was doubly surprising because,
I mean, not only was he writing in a computational sort of language, but he wasn't writing about
deep mental processes, he was writing about perception and action and, you know, and learning
about cognition. And where and when the bits of his work that I could that I could get my head
around, which were, you know, relating all of this to the brain, it was all about the cortex,
nothing about the deeper, you know, subcortical and brainstem structures that, that is where
the deep emotional and motivational action is. And for that matter, where the front of
consciousness is. So I was surprised. I then met him a few times, I made it my business to
meet him a few times, I invited him to a few conferences. And we had conversations about
these matters. And then I realized, he's, I realized properly how much what he was doing
really was profound relevance to understanding what a mind is, and also that the way in which
he was formulating it was within this tradition of homeostasis. I hadn't properly understood that.
He published a paper in 2013 called Life as We Know It, which is, which grounds his free energy
principle in basically in homeostasis. In other words, it's how in how the organism,
in the basic motivational mechanism of all organic life. And I had to master the physics
because I invited him to be our keynote speaker at our 2017 Congress of our Neuropsychoanalysis
Society. And so, you know, but by then I was motivated to do it. I mean, that's also why I
invited him to come and speak. And, you know, I realized all of these things that I'm saying to you
then. And then he and I started to collaborate. And he was only too willing to bring his way
of thinking down into the brainstem and into affective and emotional life. So I like to believe
that it's been a mutually rewarding exercise. But from the most unlikely, as you said when you
remarks about him, you know, like why on earth would you turn to this? It's because it is fundamentally
a theory of homeostasis, therefore of drive, of motivation, of the fundamental driving forces
of living things and how mental life arises from these very basic biological principles.
But also remember what I said about Freud's project for a scientific psychology.
Freud, the project in the broadest sense of the word, Freud's project was to bring
subjective experience into natural science. It's part of nature. You know, experience exists
difficult as it may be to study subjectivity. It's there, sorry. You know, and, you know,
it must therefore somehow be possible to integrate it with our whole natural scientific
Weltanschauung. It must somehow be of a piece with everything else that we know in physical science.
And Friston's approach seemed to me to be head and shoulders above anybody else,
the most promising prospect of us really developing a natural science at the level of
of physics and of computational, you know, things that can be reduced to quantities
and measured and models. This I thought was an opportunity not to be missed to finish the job
that Freud started in his project of trying to have a truly natural science of the mind
in the sense that I've just described it. Yeah, and it's amazing to hear you say that,
Friston, I guess I wasn't aware that Friston himself was making these connections with
Freud back in 2010, as you say. I haven't looked at some of those earlier papers where he was
starting to articulate this free energy principle. I know he has published on Freud, but
yeah, it'd be very interesting to hear how he started making those connections between Freud and
yeah, what can look very, very un-Freudian in the sense of, like you say, these equations and
yeah, reducing everything down to hierarchies and neurons. And it's just, yeah, it's amazing.
So I'd like to put on the table maybe the last piece of the conversation, which is I have this
general impression that you're involved in some project to work on an artificial
general intelligence. And I'm curious what your motivation for doing that is. There's this quote,
I don't know if it's actually something that Feynman said, but I think he said that, you know,
if you really understand something, you should be able to build it. And so I'm wondering,
is your interest in this project testing your ideas? Is there something in particular that
you hope to learn? You think you could learn otherwise? What's your motivation in this project?
What you just said about Feynman is something that he actually said. In fact, he wrote it on the
blackboard that was in his office. And when he died, this was written on the blackboard. It
doesn't mean it was his last words, but it's something close to his last words. If I can't
create it, I don't understand it or something to that effect. And I think that that's very true.
I mean, remember what I was just saying, when I say our, I mean mine and Carl Fristons, but
I mean it also, it occurs to me, as I say it, mine and Freud's. Our aim is to develop a
a proper natural scientific understanding of what a mind is, how a mind arises in nature.
What are the fundamental causal mechanisms that produce sentient being? And this is,
you know, this is a very, very, very important question. It's actually been the question that
has been central to my own life. I'll have to just quickly, as an aside, tell you, not only
my scientific life. I mean, ever since I was a child, you know, for all kinds of complicated
reasons, which we don't have time to go into, you know, but questions of mortality and, you know,
what happens to me when I die and what is the relationship of me to my body and how come we
are embodied creatures and where does being come from? It seemed to me from an early age,
the only thing, if all you are going to get is these few years of biological existence and
then you're going to snuff it forever more. What's worth doing? What's the point in doing
anything? You know, it's all going to come to nothing. And I had the idea somewhere along the
line in childhood that one thing that's certainly worth doing is understanding what being is,
you know, what sentient being actually is. So at this end of my career, you mentioned in your
introductory remarks, my book, The Hidden Spring, which is very much the culmination,
not only of my life's work, but of my collaboration with Friston. It was, you know, this was the,
I think, the yield of everything that I learned from Friston in terms of trying to understand
what subjectivity actually is and how it arises within a natural scientific conception of the
universe. And if you're going to, I mean, there's a sort of hubris, you know, a sort of a chutzpah,
as they say in Yiddish, you know, like, you really think that you got a mechanistic understanding
of what causes subjective experience. Well, then, you know, going back to what you said about Feynman,
okay, make one. You know, so that was the idea. That is the idea. That is the motivation.
That if you really do have within your grasp an understanding of how not an artificial
intelligence, but an artificial general intelligence, in other words, a true mind,
if you really think you understand in basic terms how this comes about,
then you should be able to produce an artificial one that has all these properties
that minds have. And so that's the motivation. I mean, there are times, especially when I first
started this project, because it's still ongoing. When I thought I was crazy, you know,
I mean, I would suddenly wake up from my fascination with this and think, Mark,
you know, you're a lunatic, you're like a Dr. Frankenstein, you know, what are you doing?
But slowly, and also the ideas, it seems to have changed. Really, just in the last few years,
it's not such a crazy idea. Many people seem to think it is possible. You know, so it's out of a
sense of wanting to test the theories and to develop them. Because when I say we have within
our grasp, I mean, I think that the things I was explaining in the Hidden Spring are kind of the
right clues, you know, the right basic ideas. But it's one thing to write about, you know,
the in broad brushstrokes, how the thing works. It's quite another thing in the mechanical detail
of actually manufacturing, actually make engineering such a thing. You learn a hell of a lot about
what you don't know in the process. So it's been an enormously rewarding, enormously rewarding
research project, but absolutely not in my wildest dreams, did I imagine when I first started out
on this scientific path that I've trod that this is where I would end up. I had no interest
whatsoever in artificial intelligence. I thought it was the most, it was the most
inappropriately named thing, you know, it's got, there's nothing intelligent about it. But, you
know, there you go. I mean, I thought that AI lacks fundamental properties of a mind. But
I now don't think that it has to be so. I think it really is possible to make a mind.
Yeah, and reading your treatment of that in Hidden Spring definitely changed my views on
just how, you know, crazy the notion it was. And also you make the point, well, if someone's going
to, if it is possible and someone's going to do it, it's better that certain people with a sense
of responsibility are the ones to do the first place. I'm glad you mentioned that because that's
terribly important. Yes. Yeah. So I'd like to end asking a question. And I'm not exactly sure,
you know, what you have to say, but thinking about your career as a whole. So to start again,
you describe, you know, when it comes to satisfaction of drives that we've learned
from experience, we feel our way through the world. And it's just striking how, you know,
I'm asking how you became interested in Freud and Pink Step and Friston and so much of it is,
well, I found this article where I met this person, just these little pieces of coincidence in your
life and they seem, you know, potentially profitable until you pursue them. But at the same time,
you describe having these kind of overarching concerns that you alluded to things about the
nature of consciousness, mortality and things like that. So I'm wondering, is there anything to say
other than that you're just feeling your way through your career? Is there anything to say
at a high level about, you know, the kinds of projects that you might set for yourself at a
longer timeline? Or is it really just you kind of take each year as it comes?
I think I had only one idea that in terms of what I'm going to do in terms of, you know,
mapping out my scientific career and my scientific goals or projects,
it was the one that we started our conversation discussing, you know, just that it seems to me
that neuroscience is suffering from a lack of due regard to the subjective aspect of
of what the brain does. And that in order to rectify that, I think I should, I think I should
learn about psychoanalysis. That was the, and then, you know, rapidly after that it becoming this
two-way street. That was the plan. It was, it didn't have any end goal in mind. It was just,
I want to continue down this path and take it as far as I can. But I'll tell you,
since we're at the end of our conversation, I'll tell you, I believe I have two talents.
The one is that I have an ability, I don't give up. I just don't give up, you know. I mean,
obviously, there are things that are not important that you must give up on. But I mean, if something
is important, I don't give up. I just carry on and on and on and on and on because, you know,
this is important. And why would I give up? And the other is, which is probably closely
related to it, is that I can see the deep structure of things. You know, say, if you spend enough
time with a complicated, messy problem, you know, you inevitably will eventually see
the underlying structure. It will, it will, it will, you will be able to see this, this, the
simple framework, you know, through all of the, through all of the mess. And so that's what I've
done. You know, I had that one plan, which is that I'm going to bring these two fields together.
So it seemed like a good idea for the reasons we've discussed. And I didn't stop. In other words,
I didn't give up. And inevitably, eventually, you start seeing the big picture, you know,
you start seeing, you start being able to simplify and see how it works. And that's,
I wouldn't have predicted that I would be in exactly this place now. I certainly wouldn't have.
I wouldn't have predicted just about all of the actual steps that I took. It has been my great
good fortune to have had collaborators of the caliber, both human and scientific. I mean,
they are good people. Yarkpanksyp and Carl Friston. It's been my great good fortune that I,
that I was able to learn from them and work with them along the way. But none of it was planned
beyond the, as I, what I've said to you. Well, I hope you take some pride in the, the, the fruit
that it's born. I feel like in the last decade or two, it seems like these strands of your thought
in the neuropsychic analysis movement really has started to present a comprehensive picture of the
human psyche and how things go wrong, how to, you know, make things better. So, I don't know,
from my perspective, job well done. Thank you very much. Thank you very much.
Yeah. Well, I think that's about the end of our time. So I'd like to thank you very
much for talking with me this afternoon. It's been a great pleasure. It really has. Thank you.
Thanks so much.
