Defunct TV is made possible by the Defunct Land store.
Go to defunctland.com slash store and use the code Defunct TV to get 15% off your order.
This program was also made possible by viewers like you. Thank you.
In 1980, brothers Doug and Gary Carlson founded their own computer software company named
Broaderbund. The Carlson brothers led Broaderbund to develop many popular titles including Shoplifter,
Gumball, Load Runner, Karateca, and the Print Shop. By 1983, Broaderbund supported a staff
of over 40 people and sold millions of dollars worth of software annually. Despite the stable
business model, the Carlson brothers were nervous about one of their upcoming titles,
a new geography-based game named Where in the World is Carmen San Diego. Lacking the confidence for a
standalone release, the brothers opted to release the game alongside a World Almanac.
Despite the hesitation, Where in the World is Carmen San Diego was a smash hit, immediately
becoming the company's most popular title. While computer enthusiasts were impressed by the game's
four-color graphics and innovative menu system, casual gamers were captivated by the globetrotting
cat and mouse gameplay and mix of trivia and humor. The game saw players pursuing the notorious thief
Carmen San Diego and her gang of crooks throughout various countries and landmarks. Parents and
teachers saw its value as a teaching tool and the software was purchased for computer labs
throughout the United States. By 1989, Carmen San Diego was a budding franchise with the original
game spawning four sequels. Where in the USA is Carmen San Diego, Where in Europe is Carmen San Diego,
Where in Time is Carmen San Diego, and Where in North Dakota is Carmen San Diego.
The Carmen San Diego franchise was soon a significant portion of Broadarbund's $45
million in annual sales. The company had created an iconic character and it was not long until
they looked into ways to expand the brand. Broadarbund considered taking Carmen San Diego from the
computer screen to the television screen. One potential partner was Walt Disney Television.
Producers from Disney had considered creating a Carmen San Diego show for Disney Channel.
This would not come to fruition, and Broadarbund continued their search. Around this time,
the company would receive a valuable piece of advice from a producer named Howard Blumenthal.
Blumenthal had worked on shows for MTV and Nickelodeon, and when Broadarbund asked him
to consult on the development of a Carmen San Diego series, he suggested an interesting strategy.
Blumenthal did not believe that licensing the show was where the money was.
Rather, the value of the television venture was national promotion of the Carmen San Diego
software. Blumenthal recommended that Broadarbund sell the television rights to Carmen San Diego
to a public broadcasting service station, entrusting PBS to create a successful program
and deliver it to their large audience. The price that Blumenthal advised Broadarbund to sell the
rights for? $1. By giving away the rights, the show was more likely to be produced by PBS.
Blumenthal left Broadarbund with the advice and went to work on other shows.
It would take another few years, but Broadarbund would eventually take his advice.
Given the educational focus of PBS children's shows, Broadarbund would emphasize the geography of
the Carmen San Diego series. The importance of the subject matter was highlighted by the release of
a National Geographic Survey that found that one in four Americans could not locate the Pacific
Ocean on a map. With a public need for geography education and a cheap, semi-recognizable property
of which to base a show, two PBS stations, WQED Pittsburgh and WGBH Boston, agreed to co-produce
a pilot for a Carmen San Diego television series. Broadarbund opted to allow PBS to use the Carmen
San Diego name and concept for free, $1 less than Blumenthal had suggested. Broadarbund would again
reach out to Blumenthal for his help on the series, and he would join the project as a producer.
PBS ordered 65 episodes of the show, with a total budget of around $3.5 million.
The Carmen San Diego name, character, and subject matter would not be the only elements
taken from the computer software. The game aspect would be adapted as well,
with the PBS show utilizing a game show format with adolescent contestants.
The show's pilot episodes were shot at WQED's studios in Pittsburgh. It was immediately clear
to the team that the show needed work. In the original pilots, the geography aspect of the game
was educational, but it lacked the energy necessary to attract children. Blumenthal knew that the
children of the early 1990s responded to quick, colorful content, like the shows found on MTV
and Nickelodeon. After the lackluster pilot episodes, Blumenthal knew that he needed to
inject more energy into the production, and in order to do this, he went straight to the source.
Blumenthal personally interviewed over 900 kids to acquire a sense of what they would like to see
in a show. The kids told him exactly what they wanted, adventure, silly characters, comedy,
cool prizes, animation, and music. These elements were the exact energy the show was lacking.
In order to craft these into a cohesive show, Blumenthal liked the idea of a 40s noir parody,
integrating the genre throughout the first script for the game show. The format would feature three
young contestants who would be classified as rookie detectives, assigned to hunt down Carmen
San Diego and her gang. They would report to the chief, the head of ACME CrimeNet, as well as the
host, ACME's special agent in charge of training new recruits. With the new roles to fill, the
crew began casting for the series, and the production was moved from Pittsburgh to New York.
The show would find a new home at Chelsea Studios, where it would have plenty of room for a new,
elaborate, interconnected set that featured CrimeNet headquarters, the chief's office,
a city street, various international terminals, a giant floor map, and a studio audience of 200
kids. Greg Lee, a children's game show veteran that had worked as a contestant coordinator on
Nickelodeon's Double Dare and as a co-host on Total Panic, was cast as the show's host. For the
role of chief, Blumenthal fought to cast film and theater actress Lynn Thigpen, as he had imagined
her for the role when he conceived it. However, Thigpen repeatedly turned down the opportunity
due to the show's intense production schedule, as the production planned on shooting the show's
65 episodes in just three months. Blumenthal auditioned hundreds of actors for the role of chief,
but it was clear to both him and Greg Lee that Thigpen was the best person for the job.
The two met with the actress over brunch and were able to convince her that she was perfect for the
part. Thigpen agreed to play chief in the game show. The show was coming together quickly,
but Blumenthal was still needing to integrate music into the show. He researched different
musical styles, and he specifically wanted to integrate rap music into the program.
It was during this investigation that Blumenthal would watch a laser disc of Spike Lee and company
Dewitt Acapella with his family. The PBS documentary, directed by Spike Lee, was focused on
Acapella music and it featured a small band of singers named Rockapella singing an original song
Zombie Jamboree. Blumenthal's wife suggested that he should use
Rockapella's music for the Carmen Sandiego show, and he took her suggestion.
Rockapella's music would become an integral part of the show's energy. The singers,
Sean Altman, Scott Leonard, Elliott Kerman, and Barry Carl also pulled double duty as
supporting cast to Greg in many sketches. PBS assigned a portion of the show's budget for
animated segments, so Blumenthal decided to represent Carmen and her crew of criminals
as 2D animations created on a Macintosh computer. This approach was groundbreaking for the time
and logistically challenging since there was no easy way to digitize the drawings.
The workaround was sending the drawings through a fax machine and then converting them for use on
the computer. The often crude drawings of Carmen and her gang, the group preferred to as vile,
were weird, wacky, and a large source of the show's humor. Criminal mastermind Carmen Sandiego
retained her appearance from the computer game with her trademark trench coat and fedora.
Many original criminals were created for the show, including the Contessa,
Patty Larceny, Robo Crook, Top Grunge, Vic the Slick, Eartha Brute, and the Double Trouble Twins.
Each episode would feature a different crook, and the Acme Crime Net recruits pursued Carmen
Sandiego in the finale of each show. The digitally animated scenes also served to retain the feel of
the computer games. The final piece of the casting puzzle was the contestants. For every episode,
three gumshoes joined Acme Crime Net as new recruits. Lumenthal and the producers sought
out kids between the ages of 9 and 14 who could handle the pressures of a television game show.
They also made sure that the children had a strong knowledge of geography,
having them take a written exam before being selected. Every episode began with the chief
shouting over the rowdy child audience. The chief then introduced the three contestants
and the title of the episode's case, usually a pun on a common phrase. Once in the Acme offices,
Greg entered, and after a very brief introduction began the game. The chief communicated with
contestants primarily via a television that Greg would tune. Cases for each episode involved
different members of Carmen's gang stealing important cultural works and landmarks. In the
first season, this included the Mona Lisa, the Great Wall of China, the Leaning Tower of Pisa,
and even Abraham Lincoln's nose from Mount Rushmore. The chief showed footage that revealed
the crooks history and the item that was stolen before ordering the gumshoes to recover the
stolen item, arrest the criminal, and find Carmen San Diego. Greg then explained the rules of the
round, and the chief returned briefly to provide a clue.
The three contestants were asked to answer a multiple-choice map-based question,
and were awarded or deducted points based on their answers. Points on the show were referred to as
Crime Bucks. The questions in the first round were sandwiched between player bios.
Short sketches,
Oh my. Oh, that was great. You're good. Thank you. Yeah, she should see my hamlet. I'd love to see
songs. So hop a plane to these islands off the Scotland coast. Tell them nana rap sent you.
That's no boost. You got the nana, nana nana. And guest agents.
I don't have much time, so listen carefully. Brush up on your German.
Most of these segments led into the next question. Halfway through the match, a frustrated chief
would call Greg into her office, upset that he and the recruits had yet to capture the crook or
San Diego. To motivate the detectives, she offered a free trip to anywhere in the contiguous United
States, which was the show's grand prize. Find Carmen, and I will send you anywhere in the whole
country. Why not? Oh, anywhere in the lower 48 states. Hey, hey, it's still a heck of a deal.
Once back at the Acme office, Greg played a recording of a tapped phone call between
Carmen and the crook of the day. The call would contain clues to the crooks next destination,
and the trio detectives would determine where to travel to next. Head for a South American
country with two capital cities. Take the towers to the legal capital. Good thinking, Carmen. Acme
won't figure us for anything legal. The final question of the first round displayed a map with
three locations. Before revealing the question, the contestants could wager between zero and
fifty crime bucks that they could answer the question correctly when asked. So take a look at
this map and think about it. At the end of the round, the lowest scoring gumshoe was eliminated
from the competition, but they were not sent home empty handed. The eliminated contestant was awarded
an Acme travel kit, including a World Atlas, a year subscription to National Geographic World
Magazine, an official Carmen San Diego watch, and other Carmen swag. The show's second round began
with the chief debriefing the remaining detectives on a specific location that the crook was traveling
to. She presented historical, geographical, and cultural information about the destination
as a slide presentation. Greg and the recruits arrived at the terminal of the location,
and a memory style game featuring a large board was played. Contestants alternated revealing
portions of the board in pursuit of the loot, the warrant, and the crook.
The first to find all three and put the crook in jail advanced to the next and final round.
A runner up prize was awarded to the loser of the second round, which included the Acme travel kit,
along with the addition of a pocket translator and a world band radio. Before starting the final
round, the winning detective would write down their grand prize destination city for Greg.
The captured crooks called the new agent to inform them of Carmen's location, narrowed down to
either the United States, South America, Europe, Africa, or Asia. Carmen double-crossed me so I'm
gonna get even, look at her in Asia. And the chief rattled off a list of places Carmen may have traveled.
Greg then took the contestant to a giant map of the location. The contestant had 45 seconds to
race around the map, placing light up markers on the correct locations as Greg rattled off clues
followed by the location name. If the contestants set the marker wrong, they got a second chance
before moving on. If a contestant could place seven markers in the correct position before time was
up, they caught Carmen and won the grand prize. The prize location chosen by the contestant was
only revealed when they won the game. And kids who didn't capture Carmen parted with a CD player
and CDs from around the world, including the acapella soundtrack to the show. Win or lose,
every episode ended with Greg and the contestant pointing to the camera and yelling the show's
signature sign off, do it, Rockefella, triggering the band to perform Carmen's title theme.
Production of the first season moved at a pace as frantic as the show itself.
The entire 65 episodes season would be shot in just six weeks, taping three to four episodes
every workday. Being a PBS show, where in the world is Carmen San Diego aired without commercial
interruptions, resulting in 27 minute episodes. For the first season, the cast and crew performed
the episodes as if they were live. The exception was the chief, whose interactions were limited to
clue giving and skits with Greg. Lynn Thigpen prerecorded the chief segments for each episode,
and the videos were intercut and shown on monitors to the contestants throughout the show.
The game itself evolved over the first season, changing point values and dropping the three
clues for each location in the final game. Rockefella frequently had to create and prompt
two songs and parodies mere minutes before the taping of segments.
Viewers could hear the group's distinctive voice throughout the show,
including in the narration for round two's memory board.
The season wrapped on schedule in May of 1991, and PBS was pleased with the product,
wherein the world is Carmen San Diego premiered on the afternoon of September 30th,
1991 on PBS stations throughout the United States. That same night,
PBS broadcast back to back episodes of the new show in its primetime slot.
After this, the show aired Monday through Friday in the after school block.
Children across the country became instant fans of the show.
The focus on High Energy Fund paid off, and young viewers kept coming back for more.
The show also drew a diverse audience, and the show itself was focused on diversity,
both in its contestants and in its geography. Executive producer Kate Taylor explained,
quote, we did not want to have a show that was culturally insensitive,
that focused too much on the Western world. We didn't want a show that too narrowly defined
what geography really is. The show was renewed for a second 65 episodes season,
moving production to the Kauffman Astoria Studios in Queens, the home of Sesame Street.
This was not the only change made between seasons. In the early 1990s, massive geopolitical changes
were happening throughout the world, and many maps and clues used during the first season
were already out of date. Episodes after season one included the disclaimer,
all geographic information was accurate as of the date this program was recorded.
As countries changed their names or borders, the giant maps used on the show were updated,
often overnight for recording the next day. The second season also expanded the grand prize to
allow children to travel to anywhere in North America, rather than just the contiguous United
States. Blumenthal would also push for more silliness for the second season, encouraging the
staff to watch shows like Animaniacs and Rocky and Bullwinkle for inspiration. Greg Lee also joined
the writing staff in addition to his hosting duties, and the series built a world of recurring
characters and gags, frequently played by a Rockefeller member in some form. The show expanded
Carmen's Gang of Crooks in season two to include the space alien Nimoy, and the superhero character
Wunderrat. Season two's first episode was the series only double episode, where the contestants
were paired with celebrity teammates Mayim Bialik, Tatiana Ali, and Jeremy Miller. Celebrities also
supported the series throughout its run by pre-recording clips as special agents of ACME,
presenting clues to the players. Rhea Perlman, Sally Jessie Raphael, Walter Cronkite, Penn and
Teller, Zap and Turbo, Ex the Owl, and Henrietta Pussycat, as performed by Mr. Rogers, and many
more helped deliver clues on the show. In one case, Greg Lee's mother provided the information to
surprise her son. Greg, you gotta do something. This alien is in the town, and now we can't stop
doing the tango. This is corn country, son, and farm folks have to get up early. Just because
Fred Astaire was born in this state doesn't mean we all like dancing. Get here quick, Greg. Our feet
can't hold out much longer. Can we please have a nice round of applause for the finest informant
ever on this show. The second season also introduced a new game element called the chase,
where contestants answered a quick progression of questions leading to the crooks predicted
destination. In some cases, the chase was preceded by an actual chase throughout the sets and
audience before the questions were asked. In the final episode of season two, titled Gotta
Get a Yeti, the series had its only geographic error, causing the correct answer to be considered
wrong and noted as such in the end credits. The contestant, who had been eliminated in the
first round, was invited to come back in season three, where he won the game and caught Carmen
San Diego in Asia. Season two of the show increased its audience size by 16%. By the end of 1992,
the show was broadcasting on 92% of the 331 PBS transmitters in the United States. Approximately
5.4 million viewers watched at least once per week. The show won a Peabody award, as well as a
daytime Emmy for art direction and set design. Broderbund continued its success with its line
of Carmen San Diego software, releasing a deluxe version of the original game, along with officially
licensed board games. Another Carmen San Diego series was developed, this time an animated
serial produced by DIC Animation, called Where on Earth is Carmen San Diego. This Saturday morning
cartoon premiered on Fox's Fox Kids Network block in 1994. The series followed Acme in their pursuit
of Carmen San Diego and Vile, and the animation incorporated elements from both the original
game and the game show. The series would last for four seasons, for a total of 40 episodes,
with the final episode premiering in 1999. Where in the World is Carmen San Diego was renewed for
a third season on PBS. PBS created a new prize program for season three to reward the viewers
at home. The chief instructed kids to write down the loot and location of each episode on a postcard.
After listing four episodes of info, the kids mailed in their postcard to Acme CrimeNet.
If correct, they entered into a drawing and five kids each day won a Where in the World is Carmen
San Diego t-shirt. International versions of the show were also developed for broadcast.
Mimicking the show's style and friendly chief and Greg relationship.
Season three of Carmen San Diego would also consist of 64 episodes,
and it would air from September to December 1993. The show would be renewed for a fourth
and fifth season of 50 episodes each, airing in 1994 and 1995 respectively. These seasons
brought more recurring characters, including vile criminal Sarah Nade, and many alter egos
for Greg Lee, including Acme Man, Greg's retired detective father, Gus Lee, and Phil the Barber.
In the last taped episode of season five, Phil the Barber surprised the audience and
Rockefeller by cutting off Sean Altman's signature braided hair at the end of the show.
Where in the World is Carmen San Diego was a great success for PBS and the team that made it,
but after five seasons, some believed it would be easier to secure funding for a new show rather
than an existing one. Thus, Where in the World is Carmen San Diego's final episode aired on
December 22, 1995. But a spin-off game show, Where in Time is Carmen San Diego,
would air starting in October less than a year later.
Lynn Thigpen reprised her role as chief in the new series, but Greg Lee was replaced by Kevin
Shinnick as the host of the new show, Where in Time was retooled significantly from the original
game show, instead taking place in a science fiction setting and focusing on world history
rather than geography. Also, the vile characters were portrayed by actors instead of represented
by animation. The new show's animation budget was instead spent on computer-generated 3D effects.
Rockefeller was no longer featured, and a new theme song was created for the show,
performed by the show's new musical troupe, The Engine Crew.
These are just a few of the many differences between the two shows.
It's 1991. How many dollars are spent on advertising in the U.S.? 37 billion or 37 trillion?
37 billion! Yes, Gloria! We energize the capture crystal, not take it, Gloria, and run and place it
in the cryo-locked chamber to capture Carmen San Diego!
Fantastic, Gloria! You completed every one of your missions!
Where in Time is Carmen San Diego would last for two seasons, for a total of 115 episodes.
Since the conclusion of Where in the World is Carmen San Diego, the titular character has
continued her cultural relevancy through consistent video game releases. Carmen San Diego was also
given a fourth television series on Netflix, which premiered in 2019 and ran for four seasons.
This animated show incorporated elements from the original 90s animation, the computer games,
and of course, the hit PBS game show. Yeah!
Over the decades, geographical changes have made
much of the trivia featured on Where in the World is Carmen San Diego outdated and incorrect.
Fans can find VHS rips of the series on YouTube, but there have been no official
releases of the show, and likely won't be due to the now factual inaccuracies.
The game show is well remembered for its elaborate theming, high energy,
production value, and talented cast. It is considered not only one of PBS's greatest
children shows, but one of the greatest game shows created for children, impressive considering
it aired in the golden age of children's game shows. Above all, the show had a very specific
goal of educating children on geography, a goal that it achieved and surpassed,
resulting in not just education, but celebration of the world and its cultures.
All of this wrapped inside a humorous, non-stop detective adventure.
It is no wonder that the show was a hit, and it is obvious why millions of gumshoes tuned in
every day to find out Where in the World is Carmen San Diego?
