I don't have any control over what happens ultimately, you know, that isn't God's hands.
The only thing I control is this little piece of real estate inside my own shoes.
There's a couple of things that every demagogue can use to manipulate people, and one of those
is fear, because it disables our capacity for critical thinking.
There's a 2013 poll that showed that 85% of Americans under 35% said they were proud of
the United States of America.
The 2013 poll taken last month showed only 18%.
My initial bias about psychedelic drugs is, again, colored by my experience of being in
recovery for 40 years.
I tell myself at 9 o'clock in the morning, I am never going to do that again, and at
4 o'clock in the afternoon, I'd be doing exactly what I said, and it was like somebody
else had stepped into my body and was now a new driver in the truck.
In a true free market, you can't make yourself rich without making your neighbors rich and
without enriching your community.
You show me a polluter, or I'll show you a fat cat using political clout to escape the
discipline of the free market and force the public-based production costs.
We have to be able to weather those difficulties without being crushed in our soul or without
being ultimately affected by it, and that's kind of the objective where we all want to
be spiritually, where we're indifferent to the personal consequences of everything that
we do, and that we live our lives for all higher purposes.
The vast majority of people in the audience are entrepreneurs, capitalists, love to get
your views on the environment and capitalism, because that's a topic that there's a lot
of debate on.
First of all, thank you so much for having me, and thanks for the reception.
I've been working as an environmental advocate and attorney for 40 years for my entire career,
but I started out as an attorney for commercial fishmen on the Hudson River, and we built
that organization.
They launched a patrol boat, they began, these were people who were capitalists, they were
small business people, and they saw their livelihoods being destroyed by pollution on
the river, and these were people who, the Hudson River commercial fishery is the oldest
in North America, it's 350 years old.
Many of the people I represent came from families that have been fishing the river continuously
since Dutch colonial times, it's a traditional gear of fishery they use, the same fishing
methods that were taught by the Algonquin Indians to the original Dutch settlers of
New Amsterdam and then passed down through the generations, and there was nothing wrong
with their business model, but the general electric company used political clout in Albany
to get permission to illegally dump PCBs into the river, rather than properly disposing
them, and it saved them money, it allowed them to out-compete the other producers of
capacitors and to win in the marketplace, but they had distorted the market signals
by cheating the market, and these fishermen knew that their problem was not their business
model, it was that we didn't have free market capitalism on the river, we had a kind of
corporate crony capitalism that was allowing polluters to use political clout to escape
the discipline of the free market.
One of the things I learned very early on was that we don't have to choose between good
environmental policy and good economic policy, in 100% of the cases, good economic policy
is identical to good environmental policy.
If we want to measure the economy, and this is how we ought to be measuring it, based
upon how it produces jobs and the dignity of jobs over the generations and how it preserves
the value of the assets of our community, if on the other hand we want to do what the
big polluters often want us to do, which is to treat the planet as if it were business
and liquidation, convert our natural resources to cash as quickly as possible, have a few
years of pollution-based prosperity, we can generate an instantaneous cash flow and the
illusion of a prosperous economy, but our children are going to pay for our joyride,
and they're going to pay for it with denuded landscapes, poor health, huge cleanup costs
that are going to amplify over time and they'll never be able to pay, and environmental injury
is deficit spending, it's a way of loading the costs of our generation's prosperity
onto the backs of our children, and my approach has always been colored by my experience.
I worked for 40 years for the commercial fishermen and I really kind of colored my world view
about the environment, and if you can go back 35 or 40 years ago and look at speeches that
I was giving back then where people would ask me, what's the most important solution,
the most effective solution to environmental pollution?
And I always said the same thing, it's a free market, true free market capitalism, because
a free market, a true free market, promotes efficiency, and efficiency means the elimination
of waste, and pollution is waste. A true free market would require us to properly value our
natural resources, and it's the undervaluation of those resources that cause us to use them
wastefully or recklessly. In a true free market, you can't make yourself rich without making
your neighbors rich and without enriching your community. What polluters do is they make
themselves rich by making everybody else poor. They raise standards of living for themselves
by lowering quality of life for the rest of us, and they do that by escaping the discipline
of the free market. You show me a polluter, I'll show you a subsidy, I'll show you a
fat cat using political clout to escape the discipline of the free market and force the
public to pay its production costs. And what I did as an environmental advocate, I really
always considered myself a free marketer, and I was going out into the marketplace to
catch the cheaters and to bring them to court and say to them, we're going to force you
to internalize your costs the same way that you internalize your profits. Because as long
as somebody can externalize those costs, it distorts the marketplace, and none of us gets
the advantages of the efficiency, the prosperity, and the democracy that true free market capitalism
offers our country. Okay, great. Thank you. Let me ask my team, make sure we put a timer
up here so we know the time if we could, because it's not on. Thank you. So I asked the audience
to submit some questions, and I can't ask all of them, but one of them was about psychedelics.
And let me preface this by saying, you know that I've been in recovery, you've been in
recovery for 40 years, and I'm the first person in the world to have before and after
brain scans doing ibogaine and 5MEO DMT, which I did in 2015 in Mexico, and we took a film
crew and we filmed it, and then we did interviews with the doctor that did the before and after
brain scans and whatnot. And I've seen miraculous things happen, but I'm also worried about
the pharmaceutical industries like they're doing with everything, co-opping it. So what
are your thoughts on psychedelics? Because my viewpoint on it is in the field of recovery,
depression, mental illness, things like that. Yeah, I mean, my initial bias about psychedelic
drugs is, again, colored by my experience of being in recovery for 40 years and having
gone to, I go to like nine meetings a week, so 12 step meetings. I've heard a lot of
bad stories about people, you know, involvement with drugs and alcohol and pharmaceutical
drugs. My bias is that I don't think that in most cases that we can fix things that
are wrong inside of us with things that are outside of us, with, you know, all the things
that we reach for when we feel discomfort, whether it's drugs or alcohol or sex or reckless
behavior, where particularly people who are prone to addiction are always looking for
things outside of them to fix, you know, to fill this empty hole that they have inside
of them. Having said that, I have seven kids, and my wife in 2012 took her own life and
left me with six children. And so all of those kids were at risk at time. And they all ended
up doing really wonderful things with their lives and their good relationships and their,
you know, outside now of that, what I would call a risk level. One of them was worrying
to me because he never processed his mom's death in a way that I could observe. He seemed
like a happy kid. He was always smiling. He did get in a lot of fistfights, and he was
a, he became a boxer, and he won a lot of tournaments, and then he became a hockey player,
and, but everything he did, it was a little bit of violence, too. And it made me, it made
me worried about him. And he went to a couple, about five years ago, he went, he was very
self-contained. He never talked about what was going on inside of him. And he went to
Patagonia to run a white, to kayak a white water river that I kayaked for many, many
years, every year, called the Futelefo. And he went down there to do it with a friend.
And he had a five-day wait between the time that the, that his kayak trip was going to
start and the time that he arrived there. And I had a friend who, oh, I knew a little
bit of, just an acquaintance down there who, I, I, who had some lab property down there.
And I asked this guy to put my son up for a couple of days while he was waiting for his
trip to start. And that guy, the night my son arrived there, he had, that guy said to
him, I'm doing an ayahuasca trip tonight. And he said, God sent you boys to me because
he was doing it with 20 poinche Indians. And he said, I was praying to God that he would
send me a gringo to do this with. And my kid ended up doing this. And he had this experience
where after he drank the ayahuasca, they gave them all a bucket and they gave him a sleeping
bag and it was kind of in an outdoor place with a fire. And after he drank it, he felt
himself sinking through all the geological strata of the earth. And he could look at
all of it. He told me he could look at all the folds of stone and geology. And he had
a total understanding of all of the processes that had laid them out for the aeons. He ended
up being propelled out of the other side of the earth and then floating through space
for what he experienced as hundreds of years. And he would focus on a distant planet and
be transported there. And on each planet, he would have an adventure. At the end of
the adventure, there would be a moral lesson that he would learn, that he was supposed
to remember. The last place that the last planet he visited, his mother was there. And
she started passing through him in and out of him again and again. And every time she
did that, he felt all these experiences of forgiveness, of love, of understanding, of
comprehension, of empathy and compassion. And when he came back from that trip, he was
completely changed. He was very open about talking about his feelings. He was on a real
spiritual class. He was very, very openly just happy all the time. And he lived with
the reason I really know that it changed him is he started taking out the garbage and doing
the dishes. And he's done the dishes constantly without ever being asked since then. He's
a 24-year-old kid. So you know that's a miracle. So that opened my mind to the possibility
that there may be something that I didn't understand or that was outside of my bubble
of prejudices. And then I have a friend who's an ABCL who had a severe PTSD and he went
to Costa Rica and had the same kind of experience. And I had a couple of other friends who are
in the NFL and they also had severe brain injuries and depression, terrible, terrible
depression. And the same thing happened. And then I looked at Michael Pollan's documentary,
which I think is on Netflix. And there's one particularly poignant story. He goes through
each of the psychedelics, a show for each one. And I think the third show is on psilocybin.
And there's a kid on that show who had severe OCD. He literally could not go out of his
house. He had to do all of these rituals. He had to constantly clean his hands. He had
to walk through the door 10 times or 20 times or 60 times. And he had to do all these very
repetitive rituals. And it absolutely paralyzed him and destroyed his life. And he did one
psilocybin trip and it was completely gone. So my mind is open to the idea that there
may be things that I don't know about and that people ought to have the freedom and
the liberty to experiment with these things. I like what you said at the outset, which
is we know the capacity of the pharmaceutical industry to come and capture this if they
see that there's money in it and then to turn it into something very, very bad and to promote
it in ways that it shouldn't be promoted. So my inclination, and I haven't thought this
through that much, but my inclination would be to make this available at least in therapeutic
settings and maybe more generally, but in ways that would discourage the corporate control
exploitation of it.
Yeah, absolutely. No, absolutely. And I mean, we could, I believe that addiction is a solution
to pain and addiction works if you're lonely, depressed, anxiety-ridden in the moment, but
the problem is it has this thing called consequences that can destroy your life and make your life
not work. And I think we live in a culture that we have the largest addiction crisis
in human history right now. There's a lot of temptation, there's a lot of pain, there's
a lot of trauma. I think the last three to four years of the pandemic has created more
angst, more pain, more trauma that will last literally generations, and I think millions
of lives have been destroyed as a result of it, and one of the coping mechanisms is addiction,
and I think anything that could help with that, and I think psychedelics are one part
of that, is beneficial. If you become president, what could you do or will you do to fix this
issue?
Yeah, I mean, part of the addiction, like you say, it's a response to internal pain,
it's also a response to adamantization, to loneliness, disconnection to disaffection.
And we're seeing, that's now epidemic in this country, where so many of us feel that we're
no longer connected to a community. It was a poll recently that showed that, there's
a 2013 poll that showed that when asked, 80, 85% of kids of Americans under 35% said they
were proud of the United States of America. Same poll taken last month showed only 18%.
So they've lost faith in our country, they've lost hope for their own future, they've lost
the connection to community, and now we're seeing the biggest cause of suicide of death
among Black youth is suicide. We've lost 106,000 kids last year to fentanyl overdose,
or to other opioid overdoses. That's double the number of kids that we lost in the 20
year Vietnam War. We're really in a crisis now. One of my kind of moonshot program or
Peace Corps program to use metaphors from my uncle's administration will be to start,
to launch a string of healing centers around this country, particularly in rural areas
where people go there and do regenerative farming, regenerative agriculture, grow good food, healthy food
and learn to live in communities again without screens, without cell phones. I've looked at
these places for 40 years. The rehab industry in this country is, I would say, somewhat predatory
at this point, like many, many other industries, but I had a relative who was in a lot of trouble
and I started looking all over the world for places that had a different model. And I found
this place in Italy in Tuscany called San Padreano, and it's a 500 acre farm. There's
2,000 kids who live there. It's absolutely free. The only thing they ask you to commit
to is to stay there for five years. When you go there, which is like...
Five years?
Listen, if it's a choice, a lot of kids today are on a trajectory where they're gonna die,
and five years is like college. And if you can save somebody's life, it takes time because
you have to re-parent the person. You have to reorient them to live in a completely different
way. And they're taking people who are criminals, who are not only drug addicts, but people
who are headed for prison, headed for something very bad. They take them and they transform
them into good citizens. So they... At that place, they have... It's completely self-supporting
in Italy. You can do a check-off on your taxes to send $1, approximately $1 on your taxes.
There's a little check-off to San Padreano. Most of their money comes from their industry,
so they have one of the best bakeries in Europe, and they teach kids traditional baking skills.
They have an apparel center where they do weaving, and they have a...
They make accessories, fashion accessories, and they make purses for Della Valley, for Prada,
for Gucci, for these other big brands. They have a vineyard, 500-acre vineyard, and they
make some of the finest wine in Europe. They have kennels, and they have a wallpaper factory
that makes this... I hand-painted wallpaper, very, very traditional with traditional artisans.
There's no cell phones loud. There's no screens, and the people live together in very, very
tight kind of barracks. There's six girls, and my relative was a girl, and she was put
in with six girls who watched her every move, and she did something selfish. If she did
something dishonest, she was called on it, and it taught her a new way of living in a
community, and when she came out, she became very, very successful, and not only in her
business life, but also her social life. She was utterly transformed. Two days ago, I went
to a place in Salt Lake City called the Other Side, and it's modeled on San Padreano, and
they have now three city blocks full of buildings. They have 300 convicts. They take people out
of prison, or they take people who are facing long sentences, and they interview them to
see if they're suitable for the program. They bring them into that program, and they rehabilitate
them, and they have to make a two-year commitment. It's absolutely free. Anybody can walk in
the street and take advantage of it. They have the biggest moving company in Salt Lake.
They have the biggest storage company in Salt Lake. They have a thrift store that is the
size of two Walmart's. They have a construction firm that is very, very successful, and they
teach the inmates how to be electricians, how to be plumbers, all of these skills that
they can use in the world. The guy who started it was facing his fifth term in prison. He
was facing a 29-year prison sentence. He persuaded the judge to allow him to go to Delancey Street,
which is a therapeutic community in San Francisco. He ended up working there for eight years,
and then coming out and starting this place. It was so inspiring going to this place, to
the other side, and seeing what they'd done, because it's a model that can be reproduced
elsewhere. I was in prison for the summer of 2001. I won a lawsuit against the Navy
in Puerto Rico for bombing the island of Viegas. There was a corrupt judge who would
not enforce my injunction. The group, I was representing 10,000 people on the island,
and they asked me to do a civil disobedience to go under the live fire zone while the Navy
was bombing, and I was arrested. They told me, I said, how long am I going to be in jail?
They said, well, just probably a day, but I ended up being the whole summer in maximum
security prison. I had my son, my youngest son, was born while I was in prison. The first
time I saw him was on visitor's day. In that prison, which is a federal prison, much better
than state prison, there was no, I couldn't even go to an AA meeting. There was no opportunities
for any of the people living there to make their lives better. We need to do that better.
We need to make sure when people come out of prison, they're actually productive. The
guy who was running had to made that when he first started trying to place the convicts
and businesses in Salt Lake, that nobody wanted them because they're ex-cons. Now they have
such a good work record and such a good reputation. He has a list of hundreds and hundreds of
businesses on the wall, and they employ 100% of the people who leave, and everybody in
Salt Lake wants people from this program because they're such responsible workers. It was inspiring
to me to see the transfer of what ISON said happened in this country. A, the biggest industry
in rural areas in our country are prisons. I want to change that and make rehabs and
restoration of the feeling of community in this country, the skills of living in a community
to re-parent all of these kids who are lost today, an entire generation of kids who are
lost, give them the opportunity to go to places where they can learn to be productive members
of society and where they can get inspired again about their lives and regain hope in
their lives.
I love that. I love that. It's great. So you probably met him backstage. I don't know
if he's out here, but we have Andre Norman who's here who spent 14 years in maximum
security prison, and he became the number three gang leader. He spent two years in solitary
confinement, and now this guy's like an absolute angel and just helped so many people, and
he's in charge of a program which currently has 600,000 tablets in prisons in the United
States soon to be a million, and we have genius network content. We have genius recovery
content from my foundation on those tablets. 25% of the world's prisoners are in the United
States who are the highest incarcerating country in the world. I believe it's between 80% to
90% of everyone that's arrested or thrown in jail or prison. Drugs and alcohol were involved.
40% of people that are incarcerated committed a violent crime, so that's a separate issue,
but 60% had not. So we are incarcerating a lot of addicts, and when someone goes through
recovery, as you know, you can take people that were really lying, cheating, stealing,
doing bad things, and they become these incredible, compassionate, caring humans, and so I think
there's something to the whole process of healing and creating that environment. So,
yeah, I mean, we'll talk more about that. So let me, I have some questions about tyranny and all
that, but before we get to it, cryptocurrency, Bitcoin, what are your thoughts on digital
currency? Yeah, I mean, I became a converter. I really didn't know anything about cryptocurrency.
My kids all, you know, are entrepreneurial and are interested in business, and they're all in
that space, so they were, you know, they had bought and sold cryptocurrencies and talked a lot
about it, but I was really just on the sideline listening to them. And then I saw what happened
during the pandemic, what happened in Toronto, or in Ottawa, to the strikers. Oh, Children's
Health Defense, which was the organization that I ran, started and ran, had embedded in the
truckers convoy in Canada. We had a reporter embedded and we were helping them and we were,
you know, sending money and publicizing what they were doing. And the truckers in Canada
were angry at the mandates and the truckers in Canada are very, very diverse group. A lot of
them are from African descent, a lot of them for Asian, Indian, Bangladesh, and then just white
people from all over Canada, but it's a very, very diverse group. And they had started out in
BC and Alberta, and they had then done a collect and made a bigger and bigger convoy coming across
the country. They wanted to meet with Justin Trudeau and talk to him about the impact of the
mandates on their businesses and on their lives. And Prime Minister Trudeau would not meet with them.
And instead the, and it was, if you look at the videos of this protest in Ottawa, it looks like
Woodstock. You know, they had cleanup crews that were picking up garbage. They had
crews that were passing out bottled water to people that were feeding the homeless people
and hungry people in Ottawa. There was a field, there was music and there was a lot of joy.
There was nothing nasty or me inspired it about it. And it was portrayed that way by the,
by officials, government officials, and to a large extent by the mainstream media.
But what they did in Canada is they used AI, they used facial recognition systems,
and they got the identities of the people who are participating in the protest.
And they froze their bank accounts. And this was shocking to me because none of them were charged
with a crime. They also took $15 million that we had helped raise for them on PayPal. And they
persuaded PayPal to shut off their money so they couldn't access it. And it occurred to me then
that, you know, I talked to one of the strikers, the truckers, now they couldn't buy diesel for
their trucks. They couldn't buy food for their kids. They couldn't pay their mortgages. I talked to
one striker who said he was facing jail time because he had mandatory alimony payments to
his ex-wife, and he could not pay them. And it occurred to me then that, you know,
that transactional freedom is as important as freedom of expression. If you have freedom of
expression under the First Amendment, you can say anything you want about your government without
consequence. The government then can shut off your capacity to pay your rent, to buy food,
put you essentially on the sidewalk, and paralyze you. What does it matter if you have
so-called freedom of expression? And they don't have to charge you with any crime. And I had
actually, I had seen this happening, what was happening in China, where they have what they
call programmable currencies, which is, you know, in China now they use, your face is your credit
card. So their facial recognition is so ubiquitous and so refined and sophisticated that when you
go to a store to pay, you don't use cash, you know, in many places, you don't use any credit card,
you just use your face to pay. And there's, you know, you have a digital account.
But on your digital account is other information, including your medical information, including
your social credit score. Oh, if you drop below a certain credit score, your capacity to use your
accounts now ends. And they, for example, they have one system where, and I'll give you an example,
if there is a, if the government declared a mask day, and you're walking around with your mask
below your nostrils, and you're seeing on facial recognition system, which knows everybody,
you're going to now lose social credit points. Or if you're too close to your girlfriend on a,
you know, on a social distance, you're not even told about it. You're going to lose social credit.
And if you drop below a certain point, at some point, your credit, your facial credit card stops
working except in grocery stores that are within a certain radius of your home. So you can't travel,
you can't buy gas for your car, you can't buy an airplane ticket, you can't go to a hotel,
you're essentially under house arrest. If the government has the capacity to do that to people,
then it has the capacity, I mean, a government that can silence its critics as a license for
any kind of atrocity. And it is the top of a very, very slippery slope, or totalitarian rule.
So, you know, I was, again, I was struck at that point by how important it was that we have
transactional freedom. And during that period, you may remember this, there were a lot of people
in the federal government who were saying, we got to get rid of paper currency. And in fact,
many nations like in Africa and Australia, et cetera, they were taking away ATM machines.
And we're doing it that on the pretense that paper currency passes germs. So we have to get rid of it.
Well, if we go to total digital currency, every transaction that you have is not,
is visible to the government, the corporations, it's taxable, it's, you know, it's, it, it,
it, it can be monetized for profit by somebody. And you get, you have no secrets in your life.
If you, you know, if you wanted to buy cigarettes or pornography or liquor or whatever you want to do,
stuff that you don't want to share with the world, you know, somebody's going to know about that.
And that's a very, very dangerous thing in a democracy. And, and so, you know, I think it's
really important that we keep paper currency number one, at people of access to Bitcoin
and other currencies, and that, and that we look very, very wearily at central bank digital
currencies, which are, you know, which they're putting in place right now. And that is how they
did it in China. They started with a central bank digital currency, and then they expanded its reach
to become any instrument for social control. And to me, that's very dangerous.
Well, well, thank you.
Tell me something that nobody in the world understands about you.
I don't know about that. I, you know, as you know, one of the things they say in recovery is that
you're as sick as your secrets. And, you know, I understood when I was, when I was getting sober,
that I could not afford to have any secrets. That doesn't mean that you tell the world everything
about yourself, but you have to tell somebody, there has to be somebody out there who knows
everything. And so I think there, you know, I have that I have a number of people in my life
who, who, you know, who literally know everything about me, you know, and, and so, you know, and I
think that that's important for all of us. To speak to that, I'd like to get your viewpoint on,
because here you are running for president of the United States, you are openly talking about
addiction recovery, which I think is awesome. You're more focused on health than anyone else I know
that is, you know, running. So you're a great role model in that arena. And you are a sick as
your secrets. I think that is a, it's true. It was actually at one of these Genius Network annual
events in 2015, where I openly just decided I'm just going to share everything. I talked about
drug addiction, sex addiction, work addiction, you name it. And it was one of the most
freeing things that I did. But I also had been going to 12 steps for many years. And what's the
difference between how you basically, what you share and what you don't. There's secrecy, and
then there's privacy. And there are trusted people. I always caution people not to make like a Facebook
confessional, where you just go and share it needs to be done and ready to do it. So
you can't be like an idiot. Right. Right. Right. Well, and some people do. It hurts.
Yeah. You have to make prudent judgments. And, you know, we're not, you know,
Jesus said you have to be gentle as lamb and clever as snakes. And they, you know, you need to be,
you know, people, God gave us a brain to use it, to make good judgments with,
to make prudent judgments. And there's people that you tell everything to. And there's people
that you tell, you know, but you don't know why. Right. Well, you have a lot at risk for disclosure.
So when did you first start disclosing this to others? Because I think, you know, those
from the 12 step world always will mention that it's in the fourth step that you find
the cravings in the, in the, you know, we'll start to relieve when you share it with someone.
Yeah. I mean, I knew, you know, what kept me, I knew that I was an addict from when I was 15
years old. When I started, I started the year after my dad had killed, I started taking drugs.
And I progressed very, very quickly to heroin. And I was addicted for 14 years on and off. But I
always wanted to quit. Oh, I tried to earn this. I was basically, you know, I was,
I was living against conscious at that time. I knew that I did not want to be an addict. But,
and I had iron willpower in other parts of my life. I gave up candy for Lent when I was 13.
And I didn't need candy again till I was in college. And I gave up desserts the following year
for Lent. And I never had a dessert till I was in my freshman year of college when I was doing,
you know, playing sports. And, and I wanted to bulk up. And, but I felt like I could do anything
with willpower. But somehow this compulsion was utterly impervious to my willpower. And I would,
you know, the most, me, the most demoralizing feature of addiction was my incapacity to keep
contracts with myself. I tell myself at nine o'clock in the morning, I am never going to do
that again. And at four o'clock in the afternoon, I'd be doing exactly what I said. And I, you
know, it was like somebody else had stepped into my body and was now, you know, a new driver in
the truck was now nothing to do with me. And it was, it was baffling to me, just bewildering,
why can I control myself? But I tried earnestly, sincerely, honestly, for 14 years to stop and
couldn't do it. And one of the things I'd never tried was 12 separate programs because of exactly
what you said. There was no way given my background and my vulnerabilities, that I would step into
a room of strangers and start talking about what was happening in my life. And then, you know,
I came in in September of 1983. I was arrested. I was in the papers. So at that point, there was
no secret left. And I, you know, it was the best thing that happened to me because I was able,
at that point, to come in and, you know, take advantage of this program. But I knew from the
beginning that, you know, if you're an addict, you are dishonest. You're going, you have to lie.
You can't, you know, you can't, you cannot, I don't think, I think it's impossible to be a
drug addict and not lie. And so, and I knew that the dishonesty was associated with my addiction
and that if I did not become rigorously honest in every aspect of my life, that I was, I was
going to fall back into the addiction. And so, you know, I put a lot of effort into that. And it was,
you know, it was difficult. I remember one time I was in court. And, you know what, it's strange
when you're, when you, when you get, I wouldn't say I was a pathological liar, but I was habitual,
you know. And if you ask me, where did I get this shirt? I would not, the first,
the first thought in my head would not be, where did I get this shirt? It would be,
what can I say to put myself at some advantage in this relationship? I wasn't thinking, you know,
of the truth. And I had to break myself of those habits by when I caught myself saying something
dishonest to tell people right then, what I said to you just now was not per truth. And the pain
of doing that a couple of times was what, you know, allowed me to move. I remember reading very,
very early on about an obituary at C.S. Lewis, who was a great theologian who wrote the Narnia books,
and, you know, and a brilliant novelist, that he wrote this obituary about a friend of his,
where he described his friend as honest as the daylight. And I read that phrase, and I was like,
wow, I wish, I wish that someday somebody would say that about me. And around that time, I was in
court, I was arguing in front of a federal judge in white planes, and he asked me a question,
I said something that was not true. And then I sat down, and my opponent got up, and it was
something that I could have never gotten exposed on or caught. It was only slightly an exaggeration.
But I sat down, and it would have no consequence to me, could never have any consequence to me,
other than just my conscience eating at me. And I sat down, and I was like, you know, wow,
that was not true. The next time I got up, I said to the judge, I just wanted to say something,
what I said to you, you know, was not true. And there was like this stun silence in the courtroom,
because nobody'd ever heard a lawyer do that before. And then it just went on. And, you know, like,
and but the pain of doing that a couple of times, you will get honest, you will get
struck on it quickly, because it's so agonizing to give yourself up. That got me kind of a better
habit of, you know, of being honest. And right now it's critical, you know, for my, I understand
it's critical for my survival. So I'm married to somebody who I don't think has ever told a lot
in her life, you know, and she's an example. She's a role model for me, but she has no impulse to
it. It's like, she has, she just, I've never heard her say anything even slightly self-promoting
or dishonest or distorted or even exaggeration. And she still manages to be very funny and
very interesting. Wow, that's awesome. Thank you. So let me, my friend Alex Mendozian,
who's here, he sent this over to me via text, I don't know, maybe a month ago. And it's when,
it's a quote from Thomas Jefferson. When the people fear their government, there's tyranny. When
a government fears its people, there's liberty. What are your thoughts on that? I think, you know,
there are a couple of what I would call alchemies of demagoguery. There are buttons that we all have
that are, that were installed in us during the 20,000 generations that human beings
were wandering the African savannah in little groups, warlike groups, fighting with other groups,
defending themselves against, you know, lions and predators and trying to feed themselves.
And a lot of our hard wiring was installed during that key evolutionary period. And,
you know, we were following a small, a powerful male leader and doing what we were told and you
had to have a unit cohesion and you had to behave like everybody else because otherwise you wouldn't,
you wouldn't, we're arguing with the leader all the time. You had to do things and we're all
have that programming internally. And so there's a couple of things that every demagogue can use
to manipulate people and one of those is fear. And because it disables our capacity for critical
thinking. And during the, you know, during the, actually during the Great Depression, even before
the war in 1932, Franklin Roosevelt gave a speech where he said to the American public,
the only thing we have to fear is fear itself is after Wall Street crash. And what he was saying
then was that he saw what was happening in Europe, which was suffering from the same depression.
And in Eastern Europe, in Russia and the Soviet Union, oh, democracy was collapsing everywhere
because of the economic pressure. And you were seeing the rise of tyrants on the right
and tyrants on the left. And each one was using fear and the other alchemy of demagoguery, which
is racism, point to minority groups and saying they, you know, they did it to you. They're dangerous
to you. So these are all things that were installed on us, you know, during that multimillion-year
period. And people can come and exploit them today and, and disable our capacity for critical
thinking. Oh, what, what Roosevelt was saying is the fear is actually our enemy. If we have confidence,
we can restore American capitalism. At that point, 30% of the people in this country
believe that capitalism had failed and that the answer was communism and 30%
believe that capitalism had failed and that the answer was fascism. And there was a small minority
who still believed, you know, in democracy and free market capitalism. And Roosevelt,
through his strength of character, through his persuasion, through his absolute indomitable
calmness, was able to tell people, don't be scared, the fear is your enemy because fear is
going to be used by demagogues like Father Coughlin at that time or Huey Long or these other demagogues
who were trying to, you know, drum up anger and fear. And, and he said, you know, don't, don't,
that is the enemy. If we stay calm, we'll come out of this. And he was able to restore American
capitalism because of that. And it's an important lesson, you know, during COVID, you had both the
Republican and Democratic governments that were using fear to manipulate people, to tell us,
do this, do that, and not, you know, they were, they were telling us to do things that they knew
and we knew were wrong, to allow censorship of critics, to allow doctors to be silenced,
to allow people who said they were injured to be silenced, to ask people who were standing
up for the children and saying, wait a minute, how can you keep kids out of school there? They
have no vulnerability to COVID, to shut them up. And to silence everybody, silence, you know, where
I was, they were giving $1,000 tickets to surfers who were out on the ocean and telling them to go
home, or disease that even then we knew did not spread outdoors, but it spread, you know, at home
when you're locked up. And it was crazy what we were being told to do, but everybody was complying
because they were using fear. And to me, you know, my party, the Democratic Party,
I said this, you know, time and again, I said, you know, Roosevelt told us, don't use fear. And yet
the entire government strategy that time was just to scare the hell out of everybody. You
remember, they had the COVID death count every day on CNN, ticking like a time bomb that it was
going to come and get you. And everybody was put in this state of, you know, your neighbor is a
biohazard, don't go near them. And, you know, and we were telling our kids, putting masks on our kids
and telling them not to go to, not to smile at their friends, not to hug their friends.
And it was atomizing society and fragmenting it and making it, you know, and that kind of
society is very easy to manipulate. You know, I'll tell you, can I tell you one other,
there's a, there was a, another one of those alchemies, one of those buttons
is our, our tendency from all those years we spent on the Africans of Anna to follow a strong
leader, a person of authority, particularly a male leader who will tell us what to do.
So there's an experiment called that, you know, the CIA financed a lot of studies during the 1950s
and 1960s and it's here to, to remind control studies to figure out how do you manipulate
individuals to become a Manchurian candidate? How do you manipulate whole societies in order to
impose foreign control or totalitarian control? The names of the program, the first ones were
Operation Bluebird, Operation Hearted Choke. And then the later ones were called MK, Naomi, MK
Ultra. The MK stands for Mind Control and they were financing hundreds of studies in universities
around the country by usually sociologists or psychiatrists or social scientists that do
different experiments with psychedelic drugs, with torture, with sensory deprivation, with,
with, you know, sound deprivation for various forms of other psychiatric drugs, etc.
One of those studies was a, was a guy called Stanley Milgram who was an associate professor
at Yale and he did a study where he recruited about 60 people from all walks of life, students,
professors, blacks, whites, business people, every kind of American and he would bring them in
and put them in a room where they had a dial in front of them and they were told if they turned
that dial it would give an electric pulse to a person who was tied to the chair in the adjoining
room. They couldn't see that person and that person was in fact an actor who was a confederate
of Dr. Milgram's but when they turned it up he would scream and struggle and plead and beg and
cry so and Dr. Milgram would say turn it up, turn it down, turn it up, turn it down, turn it higher,
turn it down, turn it higher and people who were part of that experiment with this, you know,
the people who were there recruits the subject, a lot of them were weeping because they did not
want to do it and yet Dr. Milgram was there in a lab coat with, you know, all of these badges on
him and stuff so he was this visible figure of authority. 60, you can look this up on Wikipedia
which you should not believe for other but I guess they're actually telling the truth but if you
at 67 percent of the people in that experiment turned it up to 250 folks where it was marked
potentially lethal. The good news is at 33 percent the people got up and walked out
so there's a cadre of people who maintain their capacity for critical thinking even when all of
these sort of atavistic stimuli are applied against them to disable that and you know that I think
is our aim in a democracy is to try to be part of that group of 33 percent who can't be manipulated
by fear and can't be manipulated by racism or anti-Semitism or you know all of these other
alchemies of democracy were authority figures you know and my father told me a couple of weeks
before he died I had a conversation with him where he said to me people in authority lie
and you know that is something that is critical in a democracy for the public to know our job
part of our job in democracy is to question everything you know this phrase trust the experts
it's not a thing it's a it certainly is not a feature of democracy it's not a feature of science
in science you don't trust the experts never oh I've sued five I've had what over 500 cases
and in each one of them there was scientific controversy there was experts on both sides
when I sued Monsanto Monsanto came in with experts from Stanford Harvard and Yale
my wife who's an actor came to court that day on the last day in their testimony
and she watched these people and then afterwards and they were so convincing
she walked out and she said why are you even troubling this poor company to me
and I would like wait till tomorrow the next day we had our experts from Harvard Stanford and Yale
and the jury gave us 2.2 billion dollars they had heard both of them and they had to decide
which expert is lying and experts have their own prejudice they are their own biases
and their own ambitions etc and so it's not you know trusting the experts is not a feature of
science it's not a feature of democracy it's a feature of religion and totalitarianism and but
it's not something you do but you know we were all told to do it right again and again trust the
experts and it's not it's it's something that should settle arms off yeah so I want to so ask you about
the way that I view what has happened during the pandemic
was the biggest manipulation mind fuck that's ever I've ever seen in my life and
the 66 percent that's scary when you can be manipulated like that which means there's a
lot of vulnerability out there and so one of the things that led me into addiction was I was
raped and molested as a kid and so I view what pharma and what a lot of these agencies did was
they they raped the population they raped the globe because rape is non-consensual it's penetration
without consent and they did it with syringes they did it with drugs they did it with massive
manipulation and lots of money behind it and it was just atrocious and I feel so sad for people
that aren't in the position that myself and many people here that lost their jobs that don't have
a lot of financial resources and the people that ultimately whose lives were heard and
destroyed the most were people that were poor and and then everyone else you know psychologically
there's so many things that happen so if someone wants to get to get a vaccine okay if you want
to get a vaccine but when it's forced upon you when you're manipulated into it that's a whole
note of level and so I think there should be a hashtag that's something like pharma rapes or
something like that maybe that I don't know but there's a part of me that's like you know I really
don't want to take the get angry and you know I mean I love your approach you're very you're very
conscientious about not wanting to you know continue the battles and the fighting between
each other and trying to bring people together and that's a that's a tough rope to uh to walk I mean
do you internally are you just pissed about this or you just like you know I just I'm gonna do what
I can do I mean how do you what is your emotional state as you take on battles stronger than anyone
that I've seen at least in that department I mean this book The Real Anthony Fauci Bill Gates Big
Pharma and the Global War on Democracy and Public Health which sold over a million copies
with zero features in mainstream media you've got thousands of reviews almost all five stars it's
all cited it's all documented and when I hear people say well he's a kook he doesn't know what
he's talking about I mean you put more data here not just you but all the top doctors that have been
you know just treated so horribly I mean their careers ruined and what do they get for it
they're just trying to help people and so um you know I guess my question for you is with this is
still happening and is that I mean out of all the reasons that you're you're running for president
I mean what are the main ones what would what do you really hope to uh to do um I mean well you
know one of the reasons that this happened you know one of the reasons that that inspired me to run
was I say this chronic disease epidemic in our country and we have when my uncle was president
six percent of Americans had chronic disease and um and today and then by 1986 uh 11.8 had
chronic disease I 2006 54 percent of kids had chronic disease and we don't know what it is today
because at that point NIH stopped publishing the data they do not want us to see this happening
and to me it's it's the biggest thing that's happening right now the the cause of health
care in this country the cause of the military you know which was supposed to go down to 200
billion a year after the wall came down 1992 we were promised a peace dividend it's now 1.3 trillion
a year at the cost of health care is 4.3 trillion and 93 percent of that is chronic disease these
are new diseases mostly oh what my chronic disease there's basically four categories there's obesity
when my uncle was president uh six percent of American kids were obese today 42 percent and 75
are overweight they didn't American kids did not suddenly become lazy they're being poisoned
mass poisoned and by something and we're all being lied to about it and then neurological
diseases all these diseases had suddenly appeared in the early 90s um ADD ADHD speechless language
late tics Tourette syndrome narcolepsy ASD autism I have none of us ever heard of these diseases
when I was again I worked at the dead center of the battle for rights for people with intellectual
disabilities my aunt you know Schreiber started special Olympics I was working on it as a hugger
and as a coach from when I was eight years old I worked for 200 hours and want to say home from
the resorted when I was in high school because that this was part of our family DNA and I never
saw a kid with autism full-blown autism the the CDC's data say that in my generation today today
right now autism in 69 year old man one in 10 000 and in our children my children's generation
one in 34 what happened well congress said to EPA what year did the autism epidemic begin
EPA is a captive agency it's captured by the oil industry the coal industry and the pesticide
but it's not captive by pharma because it doesn't regulate pharma so they actually did a real study
and they came back and said 1989 it's a red line that is the year the epidemic started
well a lot of other chronic disease epidemics started at that time as well allergies I had 11
siblings 70 cousins I never knew anybody with a peanut allergy nobody but prior to 89 I heard
a peanut allergies and now there's epi pens in every classroom what happened something happened
in 1989 and and then eczema nobody ever heard of eczema when I was a kid now it's everywhere
he's all these allergies he's anaphylaxis asthma my brother had asthma he was told by his doctor
that there will never be a cure for asthma because it's so rare nobody will ever study it
well today one out of every black kids an urban area has asthma and then the autoimmune disease
120 autoimmune disease that we never heard of you know juvenile diabetes uh uh lupus
rheumatoid arthritis groans disease all of this stuff and nobody ever heard of it and suddenly
it's everywhere and why is nobody asking where is it coming from so the pharma is of course making
money on it that 4.3 trillion the 93 percent of that that goes for 600 epi pens albuterol inhalers
any seizure medications insulin syringe as they're cashing in on it and and NIH right now instead of
doing science and asking the one question they should be asking where is it coming from instead
they have changed the purpose of that agency to become an incubator for new pharmaceutical drugs
which they keep half of of the Moderna vaccine NIH owns half that vaccine they get half the
royalties they're making tens of billions of dollars on it and there are six individuals at NIH
who have marched in rights to the patent who are each collecting 150 000 a year forever
from that vaccine and so these these naturally the mercantile ambitions of the individual and the
agency subsumed the regulatory function of those agencies and i'm going to end that and i'm going
to go over there during the first week i'm going to go over to Bethesda my first week in office
and i'm going to get all of the big wigs from NIH together and i'm going to say you know NIH gives
away 42 billion dollars a year and it gives it to 56 000 scientists where universities all over the
country and what they're doing now is mainly developing pharmaceutical drugs to treat the
chronic disease epidemic and if anybody tries to study while where is it coming from they get a
threat from NIH do not study that and and NIH can bankrupt their college and NIH can bankrupt
any medical school in the country simply by not giving the 300 billion dollar 300 million dollars
you hear that that medical skills is getting every year from NIH to study cures cures and
treatments for chronic disease oh i'm going to go down there and i'm going to say we're going to give
infectious disease a break and drug development a break and we're going into the next eight years
we're going to figure out where's the chronic why are our kids the sickest kids in the world
why do we have the highest chronic disease burden of any country in the world why do we have the
highest four times highest health care costs in the world and the worst outcomes why are we 79 in
the world behind mongolia cuba nicaragua costarica in health care why why why did we have why do we
have the highest body count from covet on earth we had 16 percent of the covet deaths in this country
we only have 4.2 percent of the global population why well cdc said part of it it's just mismanagement
but the other part is we have the highest chronic disease rate a burden and covet was killing people
with great cdc said the average american who died from chronic disease from covet
had 3.8 chronic diseases so they had diabetes they had asthma they had obesity and one more
that's why that's what was killing people it was not covet covet pushed them off the cliff
but the chronic disease got them to the top of the cliff with one foot over so
i'm going to go down there and i'm going to say we're going to identify there's a and i i'll just
shut up and i oh we can go a little bit more if you want yeah there's a there's a thought i love this
there's a famous toxicologist in new york and philandrigan and i i have used him on many many
cases he's he's a genius and he's very careful now about hanging out with me because you know
the association could hurt his reputation but philandrigan has done a a series of studies
to say yeah something happened in 1989 and what could it be you need to find we know it's not
genes genes don't cause epidemics the genes can provide a vulnerability but you need an
environmental toxin so what was it what environmental toxins are there that are in the
category of suspects that became ubiquitous around 1989 that affected every demographic
from cubans and kibis game miami to inuit in alaska and that impact boys on neurological
injuries at a four to one ratio to girls what is there that could be that and he's come on
with about 13 or 14 things that it could possibly be one of those is glyphosate from roundup
that fits that timeline perfectly another is is atrazine which is another pesticide
which is now in 63 percent of the water systems in the country neonicotoid pesticides
same thing on pfoas and pfas is the forever chemicals that were put around that timeline
in all of our furniture and all of our children's pajamas their flame retardants
um uh wi-fi radiation from cell phones ultrasound radiation some of these things are to me are
not suspects but they're they're they have to be treated as suspects so we can eliminate them
um high fructose corn syrup which clearly is part of the explanation for the obesity
in the diabetes epidemic so there's only there's a small universe and we have all the data we need
already to figure out who's doing it and what i'll do is i'll go down there and say uh that's
what we're gonna do and we're gonna find out and then the vaccine schedule which went in 1989 we went
we went from three vaccines to 79 72 vaccines three vaccines i got as a kid my kids got 72
mandated so and it and the big change here was 1989 so that has to be a suspect too so let's
it's probably all of them or a large part of them our kids are now swimming around in a toxic
soup and they're getting all of these exposures and that operate as along the same biological
pathways and they're probably cumulative but let's find out and then let's eliminate them and you
can say to me well even if you find out it's a high fructose corn syrup by the way if you drink
coca-cola you should drink mexican coke and you know there's stuff in the high fructose
but if if let's say we find out it's high fructose corn syrup what can you do about it
there's million farmers who are tied in that industry there's big industrial bms like cargill
and unsanto and these huge players you can never change it but you can the same way that we did
with roundup we got roundup taken out of all home gardening because once there's a certain critical
mass of science you can get past this threshold in the courts called the dalbert threshold
where you're allowed to take that case to a jury if there's about 15 studies that say the same
thing you have animal studies bench studies human studies they also at some point the judge will
say yeah you can take this case to a jury there's not well i'm going to create the science and at
that point you don't need to change your regulations because the plane of spar will go out there and
vindicate um that product and get it off the market for that purpose so anyway that's you
know the long answer to your question now i well here's here so i've i've studied marketing and
promotions most of my adult life and use that for business and also now with a genius recovery my
foundation trying to get you know change my my objective there is to change the global conversation
about how people view and treat addicts with compassion instead of judgment and find the
best forms of treatment that have efficacy and share it with the world and just earlier today
we announced we have a we're going to launch a recovery kit to help people with that and so i
think a lot about packaging and you've got so many studies and so much data and so much research
in your book the real anthony falchi um that i communicated um to tony from um sky skyhorse
the publisher uh to create like cards and decks of all of the information in a shareable form
kind of like an eck or toll meditation deck or you know tarot cards but with all of this data
so that people can take it in sound bites because they're i'm constantly i don't know how all of
this research that you have in here exist and anthony falchi is still walking around a free man
like when elon mus said um arrest anthony falchi what is going on and and i'd be curious of
you know some of these people that seem like the just ultimate james bond villains that they just
want to watch the world burn and they it's just crazy to me so how is someone like that who in
bill gates i didn't have any idea just how behind i mean i love for you because here we are a lot of
people have probably no idea when they hear me bill gates i met him in 2006 at all things digital i
used to admire him i thought it was this incredible businessman and when you see what he's actually
doing and what he's funding and there's so much of it that it gets past the point of coincidence i
mean this person has an agenda like what are some things i'd love for you to just rattle off
some things about bill gates because you you know so much about what he's doing and what he funds
yeah i mean one of the things that i do do in this book first of all that the book's been through i
think probably about 15 to 20 editions and in the first edition and all of them
i've note in the beginning that says if you find a mistake in this book we want to hear about it
and we will then change it in subsequent editions i don't want to be pushing information that is
wrong oh you know people accuse me you know including the government of passing on misinformation
my organization has probably the best fact checking resources in the country we have a team of 350
350 PhD scientists MD physicians who are part of our our scientific advisory team and including
until he died recently luke montanier won the Nobel prize for discovering the hiv virus in 1983
and none of these people would be part of our team if we were promoting misinformation in fact
you know what we now know from the twitter files is that when they were when the white house was
telling twitter to remove me and instagram which they did um facebook actually pushed back and said
what he's saying is actually true it's not misinformation and they had to invent a new
term called malinformation which is information that is true but it is nevertheless inconvenient
for the government and so you know what i invite people to find an error there's 2,200 footnotes
and there's the new book that i just comes out today i think um on the wuhan cover-up is 3,300
what i never try to do is to look into bill gateshead or to anthony fowchee's head because i don't
know what's going on there i don't know why they made these decisions i can show these patterns of
behavior that were tremendously cynical and self-interested and i can show that they knew
or had reason to know the injuries that they were causing the the faults in the science like
remdesivir which both gates gates was the one of the owners biggest owners of gilead and
we can document that fowchee knew that remdesivir was going to kill people and that was going to kill
more people than it helped and that he he changed the study altered the study outcomes
three separate times to make it appear that it was effective and then got that approved as the only
treatment the only approved treatment for govind and it's probably one of the reasons we had the
highest death rate in this country but i can show that again and again but i don't look into his head
and say here's what he was doing he was thinking because i don't know and i only write things that
i can document and so you know what i would urge people to do is read a you know a chapter or two
and you know make a i mean yeah read it or the way what we did here is we put with each footnote
there's a qr code so that you can on your phone you can look up that study right there while you're
reading you don't have to go someplace i think it's the first book that did that and so every study
all those 2200 studies that are in there are quotes or whatever while you're reading the book
in real time you can go to that study and look at the source document um yeah and it's it is it is
amazing and what's even more is just how many copies of this you sold where there were so
much attempts to there were no no pr nothing was talking about it and you sold over a million copies
i think it's what like a million and a half or something it doesn't yeah um all right so would
you guys like to take a picture with uh with bobby in a little bit okay we'll do that quickly
so let me let me ask you a couple more things first off i won't give you an opportunity what
if i not asked you or anything that you feel would be really useful for entrepreneurs to hear i mean
you are uh you're you're running for president i mean this has got to be you grew up in a family
though i mean this has got to be one of the most stressful things but maybe it's just the environment
you grew up in and you're built for this i don't know i mean i have not i you know i've been very
i've felt very peaceful about um this what i'm doing there's not been any time
i'm weirdly since i've since i started uh since i launched this campaign that i've said you know
i wish i hadn't done this or what the heck am i doing i've had that experience with other stuff
like when i do like a you know there's many times when i like in rock climbing or when i do a white
order you know a stretch of sort of a hairy white order there's a lot of times where i've
said why am i doing this you know but i've never had one of those moments with this and my wife
is happy and you know i think my kids are are happy and proud of me but what i tried to do is not
project about things but just you know to live one day at a time um to do my best and then to let
you know the outcome is in god's hands i had i came out of the environmental movement
and i saw a lot of people who were if you're in the environmental movement every victory that you
have is temporary and every defeat is permanent you know you destroy a extinguished species you're
not getting them back you destroy a sacred piece of land and you know pave it over and it's never
coming back and what i watched during those years was a lot of people who were um who were advocates
who were friends of mine who just got soul crushed because they'd give their lives to preserve a creek
or resource or a piece of land they'd see it destroyed and they would just withdraw and go
into isolation and lose hope and i just said i'm not going to ever let that happen to me i'm good
too um i don't have any control over what happens ultimately you know that is in god's hands the
only thing i control is this little piece of real estate inside my own shoes and that's the only
thing i can control and i can get up every day and say reporting for duty sir and then go forward
and try to keep doing the next right thing you know to put uh make my bed to put the water in the
ice tray before i put it in the freezer that you know to put the shopping cart back where the
shopping cart is supposed to go you know don't do that just are you going out shopping right now
one at a time there's just a secret and that um and as long as i do that you know i can be peaceful
and it makes you know to me it gives me power because it makes me because i feel like i cannot
be defeated and no matter what kind of blow that i got dealt i get i'm gonna get up again and i'm
gonna fight because i i've detached from the outcomes i don't have expectations i try not to
so i i'll never have disappointments and that um i think you know it makes me a much more effective
advocate for people yeah i mean you you put out a video on Thanksgiving about gratitude that i
thought was just absolutely incredible and you know i i never really studied or followed politics
that much i would talk to my friends that that did prior to the pandemic happening then i really
started it was a giant wake-up call of wow who's really running things um i have no idea who's
actually running the country right now i don't certainly is not joe biden but um uh if if not
that this would ever happen but if it did if joe biden or donald trump came to you and asked you for
advice what would you tell them i would give them advice i'd say you should get out of this race
that's a great soundbite right there that's really good wow so you know this is you know with all
our flaws and the flaws of our founding fathers i still believe the great american experiment
is worth fighting for and you've uh you're taking on one hell of a battle here and
what sort of helper support uh do you need the most right now well i mean the biggest the most
support we need right now is financial support um i have to get on that because i'm not running at
a political party i have to get on the ballot in all 50 states and that's uh means a million
signatures different configurations of signatures but on average it's going to cost us about 14
dollars or 15 dollars the signature so i need to raise 15 million dollars and i you can do that
from big donors if you get one big donor and i need that you know um they can give to the
super PAC but the campaign itself has to do the ballot access and and so the the top donation the
maximum donation under federal law is 6600 dollars and they um and you know i need to raise in 6600
dollar increments i need to raise 15 million dollars to do that and then you know people who
will volunteer um go to kennedy24.com and you know if you have anything if you have resources
intellectual resources advice whatever i'd love to hear from you know but mainly right now i need
to i need to raise money for our ballot fight okay okay uh i was having lunch with uh today with
some of the group and uh a woman had said to me about protection and why have you not been
granted uh security protection by the president and this was put in place because your father was
assassinated and you who still have not gotten it uh is what need and she she had mentioned what can
we do to help with that what who do you send an email to what do you do to to get you protection
because you're paying for your own security right now yeah i mean they should people can send um
you know an email to the white house um you know what might as you said the candidates
historically the candidates did not get secret service protection until they were until after
the conventions um and then when my dad was killed in 68 and i was with him at that time
they immediately provided secret service protection to all the other candidates to
George McGovern, George Wallace, Hubert Humphrey, and Zeta who were running at the same time
and then congress passed a law that said they're every candidate is as long as they're they
exceed a certain metric which i've exceeded for six months um is uh is entitled to secret
service protection 120 days prior to the general election but in practice the the president can
provide it to anybody on request and i'm the first candidate in history who has requested it and not
been provided i've had a number of credible um death threats including uh three break-ins at my
house and uh you know a guy who showed up trying to get to me in the green room prior to his speech
in los angeles who i you know i i have a security team that spotted him because he had fake
us marshal badges a badge he had fake uh federal id and then he was carrying a lot of concealed
weapons he had two shoulder holsters with full magazines and then he had a lot of weapons in
a backpack including um uh laser scope uh pistol that with full magazines a lot of extra magazines
uh guns and stuff um my team detained him held him for the police he was trying to find me
and uh and the police then arrested him he said that he was he wanted to find me for a job interview
uh which which uh yeah um so then uh but my uncle ted kennedy when he ran in 1980 he was given
secret service protection by president carter and they didn't like each other they really had a lot
of personal antipathy toward each other but my carter gave him secret service protection 450 days
out and uh uh obama received that 450 days out i think 30 maybe over 30 candidates have received
it before the 120 days jessie jackson mit romney almost anybody that you can name received it
early so it's standard to provide it early but i think they know that i have to you know one out
of every three dollars that i raise is going to my security team so i think the white house is playing
hardball and is uh you know has uh has decided that they're you know that they're gonna try to hurt
me financially which is not really in the spirit of democracy because i you know um when my father
came in became attorney general in 1961 the first day of work he called all of the upper
staff of the justice department and he said to them we have one rule we're never gonna politicize
this agency at whether you're a republican or democrat you're treated equally under the law
and i don't want to hear any even rumors that people are giving favoritism to somebody you
know who's a democrat and that you know people believe in the institutions of our country because
we've consistently had leaders who have respected that and in the last couple of years we've seen
this erosion where a lot of the federal enforcement agencies are being politicized and i i would say
you know that it you know politicizing the secret service is just is not a good look
we're supposed to be the exemplary democracy in the world and to say that if people if you don't
like somebody's politics if they're a political threat you're not going to give them protection
is not uh you know it's just not good for our democracy yeah okay what um what is the most
significant or impactful um life decision you think you've ever made oh i mean you know i i'd
have a hard time with that i mean my marriage is is one um my um i wouldn't say that i decided to
have kids because it just happens you know but um i mean this is one you know running is definitely
running in this race is definitely life changing and how do you handle the criticism and the attacks
on you um how do you process that you know i i process it by just because i i was raised in a
milieu where we all believe that we would you know that our lives would somehow be consumed
in some great controversy and it would be a privilege for us if we were to be able to take a
important part in that and you know i've i think i understood from when i was a kid that if you're
going to do anything important with your life that people are going to attack you and that you're
going to get criticism you're going to lose friends you're going to lose relationships that
there there's going to be um you know there's going to be a hero's journey where you go through
these tremendous hardships where you go through the valley of death you feel you're completely alone
at some points and that that that's just that's part of if you didn't go through that it would not
be very important so i feel like you know whatever i go through is uh is is a privilege to be able to
you know to do something that's important and it's just part of it and and then i also
know you know i feel tremendously loved by by my wife and by my children and by other my friends
who are important to me and i feel like you know everybody else is kind of playing we're all walking
through kind of a dream right and that you know life is a dream and that we have to treat it like
that we have to treat it we have to ultimately be indifferent to some of the um to some of the
defeats that we um that we suffer some of the criticism the injuries the wounds that we suffer
we have to get to a place where we're indifferent about it there's a famous um i don't know how
famous this but it's a it's a it's a story about a monk who was um who who's who's monastery was
invaded by a warlord in china all the other monks fled and that the warlord approached this
monk who was meditating and tried to talk to him and he ignored the warlord and finally warlord
gets irritated and he says to the monk um he says don't you know that i could run you through with
my sword without blinking an eye and the monk says to him don't you know that i could be run through
with your sword without blinking an eye and ultimately that's kind of the objective where
we all want to be spiritually where we're indifferent to the personal consequences of
everything that we do and that we live our lives for all higher purposes and you know the in the
buddhist tradition the word nirvana means i'm putting out the fire and that means the fire of
ambition of pride of of anger of a desire but all of these things that we're supposed to view
is just clouds that pass over us and that we take an interest in them but ultimately are you know
indifferent and we all go through you know difficulties in our lives and we have to be able
to weather those difficulties without being crushed in our soul or without being ultimately
affected by it and just focus on what we do you know and what the choices that we actually get
to make that's ultimately the only thing that's important thank you i uh i could we've got another
evening session but thank you thank you robert f kennedy jr everyone and thank you all very much
here's his book i'll picture over here let's do a picture we'll do this with the book
thank you
