Hey everyone, welcome to my May 2023 book haul video.
This one in particular, I'm going to be quite happy.
My fruit glass is going to be quite happy, specifically because of this pile here.
I've got more books, but this pile here is making my fruit glass very happy given that
all of this costed just, I think, less than $20.
So I've got some great books here and I only paid 20 bucks for all of this thanks to second
hand shopping that I went with with with a few friends.
In fact, I looked up this sociology book.
It's just like a kind of like not a textbook really, but as the title suggests, the key
concepts by Rotolidge, it was on Amazon for 35 bucks.
I got this for less than $5, I think.
So that is fantastic.
I highly, highly recommend second hand book shopping.
It's not really something I've done a lot given that some of the books that I do buy
to be rather, not as popular as some, let's say, a Jane Austen or a Charles Dickens.
So it's kind of hard to find exactly what I've worn outside of buying it from Amazon
or some large bookseller.
But man, what I really do enjoy about second hand book shopping is that kind of spontaneity
where you just pick up great books by authors that you've been reading for a while and then
you get it for like two bucks.
It's fantastic.
Okay, let's start off.
The first book is I've already started this book, as you can see from the bookmark.
You actually can't see that.
There you go.
It's Alan Kazupanchek's What Is Sex?
Man, I've only read like what 10 pages so far because I'm trying to read quite slowly
and really, really let the idea settle in me because, you know, sexuality, sex, these
words are very loaded terms, but the kind of the philosophical and even ontological
approach Alan Kazupanchek is taking in this book, it's, at least for me, being a neophyte,
it seems rather unorthodox and I'm trying to let the ideas really settle and kind of
battle with them in some sense.
And in fact, I'll be doing a book review on this for sure because I think it's a topic
worth discussing, particularly given the current political climate.
The next book is now, you know, okay, I'll take both books out in fact.
Todd McGovern, his Emancipation after Hegel and his other book, Capitalism and Desire.
This book, I've read parts of it, but I want to get through the whole thing.
This one, I haven't and man, I am excited for this because, so for instance, here's
a review that Slavoj Zizek wrote on this book, Emancipation after Hegel.
Here's what he said, this is the book we were waiting for after long years of being bombarded
by Hegel as a closet liberal whose last word is a recognition.
With Todd McGovern, the revolutionary Hegel is back, however, it is not the old Marxist
Hegel, but the Hegel after Marx, the Hegel who makes us aware that revolution is an
open and risk process, which necessarily entails catastrophic failures.
Hegel's problem, how to save the legacy of the French Revolution after its breakdown
is our problem today.
How to save the project of radical emancipation after the catastrophe of Stalinism in a truly
democratic country.
Revolution after Hegel would be reprinted in hundreds of thousands of copies and distributed
for free to all students.
Read this book or ignore it at your own risk.
I really like the last sentence because generally Zizek isn't a very prescriptive thinker, he
never tells you what to do, he's a critique and an analyst, and the fact that he said
read this book or ignore it at your own risk.
It gives very Jordan Peterson vibes in fact, but certainly I'm going to get to this sooner.
In fact, I think too much to read, but I think after what is sex, I'm going to read the emancipation
after Hegel, not really even for the political aspects of it, but man, I've been so just
obsessed with this idea of contradiction the past couple of months.
It's been taking up all of my thinking to probably an unhealthy level because I'm trying
to analyze everything via that lens of Hegelian contradiction.
Okay, so yeah, that's that book and then of course capitalism and desire.
One of my, I'd say one of my personal goals in life, kind of like a dream is to get Tom
McGovern on my podcast and discuss this book and particularly let him elucidate as to why
Marxists really need to take psychoanalysis seriously.
So I'm going to try and work towards that and aspire towards that, but I think I haven't
even reached out to him yet, but before I do reach out, I think I need to attune myself
more with this work and give it a bit more time before having a conversation with him.
And the next book is Adrian Johnston's Jagex Ontology.
This is also something obviously given that I'm a huge jagex here, I would certainly want
to read soon.
Although I think this book is going to wait till the end of the year because I want to
get through some of Tom McGovern's and Zupanjic's work and you know, given that Djecek is this
huge figure, a delightful figure in the Slovenian school of, Slovenian philosophers, Zupanjic.
In fact, I shouldn't even say that I should say more of the kind of these new Hegelians,
the way people like McGovern or Adrian Johnston or of course Djecek, Djecek is such a daunting
towering figure that we tend to focus only on his work.
So I want to try and focus a bit more on the other thinkers, Zupanjic, McGovern, Johnston
before why I'm also paying attention to Djecek's work.
It's also the fact that Djecek is a prolific writer, so he just writes so much.
Okay, I think I went through all of that, yes.
So now let's get to my other book pile.
All of these were not really planned purchases, it's the best part of, you know, going second
hand book shopping, you just pick up whatever's there.
Yep, The Prophet by Khaled Gibran, my friend who I went with, she told me, she in fact
read this book and she told me she hated it, but I do know some people really, really
enjoy this book and it's kind of a very popular book.
So I probably won't read it this year, let's be honest, I'm reading some other stuff, but
it's just always good to have in the collection.
Ah, Jane Austen's Persuasion, I watched the film on Netflix, wasn't impressed, wasn't
impressed because to be honest, I did quite like Pride and Prejudice, I thought it was
quite good, but Persuasion wasn't all that good.
The next book is Charles Dickens' Great Expectations, this is, yeah, I want to get to this.
Dickens, man, I think it's kind of hard because I really do want to spend at least six months
getting through most of Charles Dickens' work, particularly because I think, even though
I've only read Hard Times and what's the other one, I read one other Dickens book, doesn't
matter, Hard Times for sure, but there's one other book I've read, I feel like a lot of
his thinking, I mean, obviously he's a literary figure, but just at a philosophical level,
at a sociological level, what he tries to delineate in his books is kind of what I try
to theorize on in society and make sense of.
So I got to take him more seriously.
And then another Jane Austen book, Sense and Sensibility, honestly, I don't even know
Jane Austen wrote a book called Sense and Sensibility, I only picked it up when I saw
her name and I really liked Jane Austen.
So oh, Charlotte Bronte's Jane Eyre.
So is that how it's pronounced, Jane Eyre?
Okay, this is really interesting.
My friend Tess, who I don't think she reminds me mentioning her name, she's been reading
this book right now and she recently, I haven't, obviously I love, love, love, Wuthering Heights,
so Charlotte Bronte's sister, Emily Bronte's book, her magnum opus, let's say, and therefore
I really want to get to Jane Eyre too, or the Bronte sisters, I think they're brilliant.
So from this book, she shared this quote with me and I thought it was excellent, it's exactly
why I like the Bronte's because they're so, man, I like how crude and in some sense, so
like violent their writing is, it's just, it's so, it's such good writing.
So here's a line by, I think it's Jane saying this and she says, so Tess shared this with
me, she says, I am not an angel, I asserted, and I will not be one till I die.
I will be myself, Mr. Rochester.
You must neither expect nor exact anything, so let's see a lot of me.
Let me actually change the screen so you could read it too if, so there's still a lot of
me, for you will not get it, any more than I shall get it off you.
So this is a small excerpt from Jane Eyre and I kind of tweeted it and I thought that
was so good.
I thought it was so good and I even commented, the divine feminists cringe, it's yet another
patriarchal idea that haunts women.
I totally agree.
I am not a fan of any of this idealization of women as abstract figures, in fact, that's
why I like, I think, even Emily Bronte's Wuthering Heights because it just shows, well, love
it, it's violence, but also the characters, they're such complex characters and it shows
a dark side of both Heathcliff and Elizabeth, my God, I forgot, and Elizabeth, it shows
both the beauty and the ugly of these characters, which for me is what great literature does.
And last but not least is this book here, The Sociology Key Concepts.
I'll probably never read it.
It's just more like a reference book that I'll probably use it as.
And yeah, that's kind of it.
Those are the books for this book haul.
In terms of quantity, a bit more books than usual.
The recent being is because of again, my great little secondhand book shopping thing I did
with my friends, which I'm really happy about.
Alrighty, thanks for watching.
I hope I, as per usual, gave you a few ideas, put a few books or authors in your mind, in
your head, that they'll hopefully be an impetus for you to go read these authors.
But just if you're into philosophy like me, I would highly, highly recommend looking into
the work of Todd McGovern.
He is fantastic.
And he also has a podcast.
Let me pull that out too.
In fact, while they're at it, it's on Spotify.
It's called Why Theory.
It is really, really good.
This podcast here, Why Theory, goes through so many concepts, and I've kind of been binge
listening.
I was going to say binge watching, but it's actually binge listening.
This podcast.
Sorry for the abrupt ending there.
I clicked stop recording on OBS by mistake.
Now, the proper ending.
Thanks for watching.
I'll see you in the next book haul video, or the next video, which probably is going
to be a little, little vlog slash analysis on character guard from this book, either
or perhaps it's Magnum Opus on Bodom, which is going to be an interesting topic to discuss.
Alrighty.
See you in the next one.
Cheers.
