And I'm sorry if this is a very kind of like a vague question, but are you familiar with the
philosopher? Well, he calls himself doing foundations of physics, Tim Modellin?
No, I haven't heard of him. Yeah, so basically, he works in a philosophy department, although
what he has primarily works like he's got a background in physics, I think he's got a
PhD in physics, and his work is on deriving ontologies of the physical universe based on
physics or what we know about modern physics. So he calls it the foundations of physics. And
then when I was reading your stuff, it got me thinking, is there such a thing as the,
let's say, the philosophical foundations of cognitive science and AGI, let's say, is that
something that you'd say researchers are actively working on? Or is that just what we
collectively call a philosophy of mind? So I think that with cognitive science,
a lot of it is founded in things like logic and probability theory. And like, like there's,
for example, the Bayesian brain hypothesis, which is hypothesis that the bind approximates Bayesian
inference. And there's there are at least some empirical tests that provide some limited support
for this. And there's more generally things like the problem of induction, where there's this open
question of how does the mind induce the future from the past? Even if there's no logical justification
for why the sun will rise tomorrow if it's always risen in the past, human minds will do this. And
there's some mechanistic explanation for this. So I think that some of the foundations include these
like basic things that are considered like parts of good reasoning, such as logic and probability
theory. Then there's you mentioned the mind body problem. And that's that definitely intersects
with neuroscience a lot, because there's this methodological assumption that these states of
the mind are somehow encoded in the brain. And this is like broadly pretty likely, based on current
scientific understanding, that like, for example, there aren't, if you if you notice some difference
in your mind, you have like n bits in your mental state, then that there have to be at least n bits
in your brain state for that to be represented somehow. So I would say that neuroscience certainly
has a philosophy of mind as a foundation in terms of assumptions about how the mind's processing
relates to the brain functions. Honestly, sorry, keep going. You also mentioned
the foundations of cognitive science and AI. Yeah, yes, yes. I would say that AI is more founded
in something I said before, which is just foundations of correct reasoning, which includes
things like logic, probability theory, and induction. Understood. Yeah, because the one thing I was
thinking about was so for instance, if I can kind of expand on that question, like Tim Odeland, when
he says foundations of physics, I feel like that's in a way quite straightforward. It's
trying to trying to find kind of the ontological reality of our physical world, the physical universe.
But then when it comes to something like AI, or maybe perhaps more specifically, COGSI, it gets
a bit hazy because yes, we have cognition and the human subject. But then the question is like,
what is human subjectivity? And that's a question, I guess, asked since the beginning of philosophy
in some sense, right? And then especially since the Kant and the German idealist and then that got
me thinking, do we really have people working in cognitive science that are trying to kind of,
let's say, speculate and derive meaningful foundations of what a human subject is
based on cognitive science and AI. So would you say from what you just said that the answer is yes,
or is it still more like I'll just focus on the science itself, forget about ontology or philosophy?
Oh, I would say yes. And I think that it might be hard to notice this if you're just looking at
papers published, because partially the papers are assuming some amount of background of people
in the field already share certain assumptions. And partially also, when people are presenting
their findings, they're not trying to look too speculative. Like I think a big thing in science
is that you, an under-specified part of the scientific method is how do you even come up
with these hypotheses in the first place? Like the method says once you have a hypothesis,
you should go out and test it. But how do you come up with the hypothesis? It can be very
intuitive. It can come to you in a dream even. So I think when scientists are presenting their
findings, they might have gotten their hypothesis in a certain manner, which might be intuitive or
based on kind of philosophical thought, that they're trying to show their finding in a non-speculative
manner. But I think certainly I've talked with cognitive scientists and they do tend to speculate
about the human subject. So I mentioned the Bayesian brain hypothesis. And I've learned that
hypothesis when perhaps the primary thing that humans are doing is constructing a model of the
world based on sense data that is meant to do things such as predict future sense data.
And then you can even go from that to think about values and what are values. And there's
things like planning algorithms, which might tell you if I have a certain value that will tend to
cause me to take certain actions that will achieve that end. And there's various algorithms that
approximate that. And it's very much like that if you're having these sorts of thoughts about
what it is like to model the world and to want things and plan towards them,
that can certainly influence your own understanding of yourself or other humans as well.
Yeah. What was the algorithm just for? You said Papeni algorithm?
Yeah. So if you, I guess things like reinforcement learning use some form of this.
Or like an alpha code has like an evaluation of board states and some kind of Monte Carlo
tree search to search among the game tree. And there's other algorithms like there's like in
simpler logical problems, you can do like back chaining to start from a goal state and ask like,
what is the state before the goal state look like? And then like, what does the state before
that look like and try to get back to your current state?
