I do want to say something about the way in which Heidegger
defines phenomenology.
Because I think it's a very brilliant sort of description
of it.
And so Heidegger, when he's describing
phenomenology and being in time, but also in the lecture
course given a few years before he
published Being in Time, and that lecture course is called
History at the Concept of Time.
Sorry, just to clarify.
So Being in Time is Heidegger's Macdemopus, right?
We should probably put that out.
Yeah.
Sorry, I didn't interrupt you.
Jacob, keep going.
Yeah.
No, no, you're good.
Yeah, Being in Time is what he's most famous for.
Even though he wrote a lot.
He has a lot of books.
He has a lot of papers.
His later work differs a little bit from his early work.
But there's also the disputes as to how real the turn is.
The later Heidegger and the early Heidegger, yeah.
And I'm not really knowledgeable enough to comment
on how different those two things are.
I'm kind of working my way chronologically
through some of his work.
But yeah, in Being in Time and his earlier lecture course,
he describes phenomenology by going back to the ways in which
the Greeks use the term phenomenon and logos.
So he's kind of taking apart the term phenomenology
and separating it and looking to the Greek definitions of this.
And in the book, Heidegger says that the Greeks understood
the term phenomenon as this is going
to sound very obscure and esoteric,
but I'm going to give hopefully an easier
to understand description afterward.
But he says, phenomenon is that which shows itself in itself.
It's a manifest.
Typical Heidegger.
Yeah.
And the term for the Greeks also carried connotation
of bringing something to light and eliminating.
And then the logos, Heidegger explains,
the Greeks understood by the logos something like discoursing.
But not just dial-clock and not just a verbal utterance,
but it's more of a discursive communication
that lets something be seen.
And so you could think of the logos as words, whether uttered
or written down or what have you, that point to something.
They've let something be seen.
It's kind of bringing something to light.
It's bringing the phenomenon to light.
And so we want to understand this in a less obscure and difficult
way than Heidegger likes to put things.
We can say something like, the logos points to the phenomenon
in such a way that the phenomenon becomes un-concealed,
or the logos allows the phenomenon
to come into view by looking and out of experience
in such a way that it can be seen.
And so really, it's almost like your word
should connect with something that
can be pointed out in experience or can be shown in experience.
And so we're not, and he contrasts this
with the idea of free-floating concepts and words and ideas.
And by that, he just means something
like we don't want to abstract away so much from experience
that we're just playing language games.
We want our words to be able to meet up with experience
in such a way that if I say something,
so like in some of my papers about meaning
what I'm trying to do, that I'm trying to point to experience,
I'm trying to point to particular experiences
and particular moments in particular experiences
where maybe someone might find meaning.
So I'm not, I'm just trying to bring something into view
using words and concepts.
I'm glad you said that, Jacob, because in one of your papers,
I forget which one, you've sort of touched on this,
but a question that came to mind was,
so from the definition you gave, definition of phenomenology,
how does that differ from, let's say,
the empiricist tradition or the empiricist approach,
which tends to be quite popular these days,
especially in the world of artificial intelligence,
where we think that our epistemology or our knowledge
or our truths of the world is revealed purely
based on empiricism, which is experiencing,
measuring things, and that in some sense,
the mind is a blank canvas
and the world just gives us information and input.
So from the empirical approach,
how does phenomenology differ?
So phenomenology is gonna differ in the sense that,
okay, so if we think about the empirical approach,
specifically as it pertains to the sciences,
we're trying to get a collection of experiences
that kind of compile and point toward the same
sort of thing in experience.
Now, a major difference, I guess,
is going to be what it is we're trying to discern
in empirical science, as opposed to something like
hydrographic phenomenology
or the way that I just described phenomenology.
With a scientific and empirical approach,
we're usually looking at objects
and we're trying to figure out
what sort of properties these objects have.
And so, I mean, I guess physics or chemistry
is a great example of that.
And we're trying to see maybe what
how two entities interact with each other.
And we're going to perform experiments to do that
and we're gonna try to replicate the experiments.
And we're gonna try to not let our first person,
perspective influence exactly what we're investigating.
So phenomenology is gonna differ from that.
In that we're not collecting data
and we're not measuring stuff.
We're experiencing, we're trying to pay attention
to the experience as it's experienced.
So you're not gonna measure your experience
of meaning, say, you're going to more so,
if you're doing a phenomenology
and you're trying to discern maybe what you find meaningful,
you're going to more so reflect on maybe the way
that you feel when you were participating
in a certain activity.
And from there, you might also start to look
at the structures of the experience,
more so than just the feeling of the experience
which might be what's involved in this activity
or what's involved in this experience.
What are the things that are essential
to the experience without which I could no longer say
that it was a meaningful experience?
Those are the sorts of things that phenomena,
that sort of questions phenomenology is going to ask.
And specifically high digger,
because specifically for high digger,
he's wanting to discern the a priori structures
of existence and experience,
which is just to say a priori meaning always already there.
Like what's necessary?
What are the, what structures are necessary
for this to exist or for me to have this particular experience?
Yeah, I guess I'll leave it at that for now
because otherwise I'm gonna get into a really deep,
or you can ask a clarifying question,
because otherwise I'm just gonna go on at the end.
No, no, that was perfect, mate.
I think in many ways you lead me to my next question.
I mean, I thought we were gonna discuss existentialism too,
because obviously it's kind of like the precursor,
not the precursor, but it's highly correlated
to phenomenology.
But perhaps since we're already on this topic,
in some sense, I kind of regret even asking that question
because I'm coming to realize that maybe it's not fair
to ask questions such as, oh, what's the difference?
Oh, what's the stark difference
between phenomenology and science?
Because if you think of a field like, let's say,
psychology or cognitive science,
those fields have had a massive influence
by thinkers like Merleau Ponty
or high digger, by phenomenologists.
So, well, the question I was gonna ask is,
how does phenomenology, and I was also gonna say,
existentialism, but we didn't get to that still,
but let's just say, how does phenomenology differ
from a more scientific approach?
But maybe to make things even a bit more interesting,
let's talk about, in fact, how does it relate
to fields like psychology and cognitive science,
where in the world of, in the scientific approach,
what we always try and do is take the, remove the subject.
So remove the subjective experience.
But clearly, there are some fields,
even within science, but you can't do that.
You can't remove the subject
from cognitive science or psychology.
So maybe to make things a bit more interesting,
how do they correlate, how do they connect
to phenomenology, those fields I mentioned?
Sure, sure.
So I wanna comment on cognitive science
just a little bit first, and I wanna maybe dive
into a little bit of neuroscience
and how phenomenology might be related,
because I actually, I presented a paper last year
at a philosophy conference hosted by a university
in the Czech Republic on this topic
of phenomenology and neuroscience.
But before I get to that, something that I really appreciate
about cognitive science is that it really embraces
the subjective experience.
And like you said, you can't remove that
from cognitive science, cognitive science.
And I mean, so they're, I think the most prevailing approach
in cognitive science right now is 4E cognitive science,
and that's just the 440s.
I always forget one, but it's the same,
it's embedded in its embodied, inactive.
And I, like I said, I always forget the fourth one.
I don't know why, but-
I'll leave a little caption or whatever,
just too far, it was all good, yeah.
Yeah, have somebody place in the comment.
Kind of take the video, yeah, yeah, yeah, it's fine.
But a lot of the, so a lot of those ideas really,
I mean, I believe we have an inception in phenomenology.
I mean, they're, you know, especially in Heidegger
with Heidegger's idea of being in the world,
you know, which we'll get to.
But it's just this idea that there's a more holistic structure
to the world and the existence
that we need to take into consideration
when we're trying to understand things about the world
and trying to understand things about ourselves
and maybe the way in which we interact with the environment.
And so I think phenomenology played at least the role
in trying and getting a lot of those ideas
going for cognitive science.
Now, as far as neuroscience goes,
Anil Seth, I'm sure you've heard of Anil Seth.
Yes, I have, yeah.
He recently wrote quite a popular science book
right on the brain.
And so he does a lot of work trying to map
the brain correlates of certain experiences.
So he's trying to see like what's going on in the brain
at a given time when someone's having a particular experience.
And he's trying to build that map out.
And you can't build that map
if you don't have good phenomenology
because if you think about it simply,
as far as, okay, let's say brain region X lights up
when I have experience Y.
And let's say we can gather all the data we want
about the brain structure
and we can reproduce it and map it as much as we want.
But if we don't have a good description of the experience,
we're not gonna know what we're mapping
this brain activity to.
And so in order to have good correlative mapping,
we have to have good phenomenology.
We have to have like a good description of the experience.
And we have to have people, the participants in the study
that they're studying,
trying to get this correlative mapping going.
They have to be familiar with the experience,
not only as it is experienced,
but they have to understand what it is
that the neuroscientists are trying to map.
Like, what experience do you want me to have?
So then I can tell you what I'm having
so you can mark down what's going on in my brain
when I'm having that experience.
And so you have to have a whole lot of phenomenology going on.
Not only the person being the participant,
being able to recognize the experience
and being able to communicate that to the researchers,
but the researchers also have to have
a pretty rich phenomenological description
of what it is they want their participants to experience.
And that way they know precisely when the experience
has started, because you might, I mean,
there might be like a very important,
as far as neuroscience go,
there might be a very important spike
in a particular brain region
that they are trying to map to a very specific,
maybe milliseconds of an experience.
And if you don't get that right,
it's just not going to be correct.
Your description is going to be wrong
and your correlative mapping isn't going to mean anything
because you might have one side of it,
but you're going to be missing the other side of it.
