Hey, everyone. Welcome to this conversation that I had with Professor Iris Berndt.
It was a riveting, engaging and fascinating conversation.
We discussed some of her work in our blindness to human nature,
how that blindness is innate to human nature itself.
We spoke about the twin principles of essentialism and dualism,
some amazing work she's done on, on how the kind of the beliefs that us lay
people have.
And I even managed to, in fact, ask her a lot more speculative questions,
which I really haven't heard her, you know, publicly at least discussed before
on call here and consciousness and even psychoanalysis.
And our old mate Freud and she gave her views on those two.
Of course, given I'm a neophyte, there were certain parts where I was in too
familiar with the specifics of her research.
So forgive me if I didn't do a good job at engaging a bit more with more
of her specific points.
And nonetheless, you could find most of her papers online on open journals.
And well, firstly, a bit of a formal introduction, let's say.
Professor Iris Berndt is a cognitive psychologist at North Eastern University.
She's the author of The Phonological Mind and The Blind Storyteller,
which we discuss rather extensively on the podcast.
Her research seeks to unveil human nature and our intuitive understanding of it
to shed light on human nature.
She explores the human capacity for language using phonology as a case study.
Saying all that, without further ado, here's my conversation with Professor Iris Berndt.
Firstly, if you don't mind a bit of a personal question.
If I'm not mistaken, I believe you initially studied musicology
and then you sort of transition into studying psychology and currently
your research is more in specifically cognitive psychology.
So perhaps you could just kind of give us a few ideas on as to what you find
interesting in this field and what made you want to do research in cognitive psychology.
So my background is very varied, but to me, it's all a single story
that's completely coherent, because I think, you know, it's interesting
how you look at your life history and you discover that in retrospect,
it was all the same thing.
And it was all really interesting human nature.
It's really this question of why we know the way we do are the things
that we are bound to think about, to entertain.
Are there certain truths we are bound to hold just by virtue of the fact
that we have, you know, a human genome, basically.
And that always really, really kind of bugged me.
I think it came primarily from reading Chomsky very early on when I was really young
and it kind of stayed with me for many years.
And at first, this was a question that I explored with respect to music.
So there the question was, are there some structural properties
that are common to all musics, if you will,
that we are born with and make us perceive music in a certain way?
And that was super difficult at the time.
So we gradually, you know, transitioned into easier question about language
and finally kind of remain more in the domain of human nature and itself
in the sense of, can we understand our own human nature?
And that's where I am right now.
Excellent. Yeah.
I mean, before I jump into your book, of course,
I kind of want to ask a few more general questions.
So you said that it was, well, initially human nature or understanding human nature,
but also reading Chomsky, which is clear from reading your work,
your, I don't want to call you a Chomsky and that's like a crass fear of putting it,
but it seems like you're settling more on, let's say,
Chomsky side over somewhere like BF Skinner.
So if I would, if you don't mind, I would love for you to sort of elucidate
this ongoing, I don't want to call it a war, but debate between
the Skinner side and Chomsky side.
And in fact, in one podcast, you even said that this debate is still ongoing.
It's not like it's done. Yeah, very much so.
Nothing, nothing changes.
Yeah, there's not a conclusion.
This is the answer sort of thing, which is what's lovely about science
in my view.
So what's this debate in linguistics and cognitive science between Chomsky and Skinner?
So that debate at the time was how to explain behavior
and generally in linguistic behavior in particular.
And Skinner was hoping to explain that in terms of
properties of the information that's available to us,
so what's out there in the environment and
responses and the links between them and associations that we form between them.
And basically, the idea is that to explain how we behave,
which is all he cared about, all we need to do is look at the properties
of what's out there rather than what the organism brings internally to
that how the organism views the stimulus and how the organism chooses to response.
And what Chomsky made very clear is that the study of behavior
ought to start with the study of the organism.
It's really kind of maybe you can think about it as a form of biology,
thinking about what is it that the organism brings with themselves to to this task.
So to make it very concrete.
So why is it that you understand a sentence?
How is it that you have a sentence such as John is eager to please?
How do you know that it's John who is being pleased?
Being pleased, whereas if John is easy to please, then sorry.
Put it the other way around.
So if John is easy to please, it is the one who is being pleased is John.
Whereas if John is eager to please, then he is pleasing Bill or somebody else.
Right. And what Chomsky made clear is that interpretations such like that.
The only way to make sense of them is to figure out what is it that the person
knows about language and how they encode information that's available to them.
Any point of doubt that our ability to do so to encode information that's available to us
is constrained in part by innate principles of language that he called Universal Grammar.
And would you say that's sort of something like innate knowledge that you write about in this book?
Yeah. Yeah. So as I read Chomsky, this is primarily a treatise on human nature
and about innate knowledge, which he happened to advance in the domain of language.
But I always read him as a philosopher, essentially.
Certainly. Yeah. I mean, he, in fact, I believe he was the,
he chaired the Department of Philosophy at MIT probably for a long time.
So he has a really good background in philosophy, certainly.
Also, Professor, so with the idea of Universal Grammar, I've always been thinking about
that idea, like, is Universal Grammar itself this type of innate knowledge?
And is it something that we can sort of study analytically?
And empirically.
I would say experimentally. Yeah. So all you need is to start with a good theory
of what you think Universal Grammar is all about, and then go to the lab and try to figure out,
do you have evidence for this thing? And it's not easy, but it's doable.
I see. So if we could play a bit of devil's advocate, because I've read,
in fact, apart from Chomsky's political work, of course, I've read his book On Language,
which was an excellent read. And I found it quite hard to read as a neophyte, to be totally honest.
But I do know there are certain people still in the field, as you said, it's an ongoing debate,
that kind of are either critical or disagree with some of Chomsky's ideas or let's say
values of Universal Grammar. So what are the current criticisms of this idea of
innate knowledge or Universal Grammar? So to make it clear, I think that in fact,
the majority of the field no longer sides with Chomsky. I'm not totally convinced in my reading
of the evidence that that's right, and that's the right conclusion. The debates as I see it
in the domain of language have always structured or have always centered on two issues.
One is, what is the machinery that you need to represent language? So what kind of representations
that you have? And what, and what, and do they, are they structured? Are they structured in a
systematic way? Do you need something that is akin to algebraic rules? Or all you have is basically
associations, very rich set of associations, which apparently this is what GPT is doing,
you know, AI is doing today. So A is what kind of representations do you have? And do you need
explicit structure in your data, so to speak? The second question is, where are these representations
and the rules, the way you operate over these representations? Where is all this machinery
coming from? And is it in part specific to language? So are you born with some principles
that are unique to language? And that's what allows you to acquire language? Or are you
relying entirely on generic mechanisms that operate across domains? So what is your machinery?
And how specific it is, where and where it's coming from? These are have always been the questions.
And the debate these days are centered on a whether there are in fact algebraic rules. So this
is huge debate about that, which has been increased and confounded by the rise of AI because
proponents of that state, like, look, you have the systems that seem to do just fine. And
it's not clear, but some people, there is a question of whether they in fact have any
algebraic representations at all. And the range of possibilities range between those who say
there aren't any structured representations in there at all, or that maybe they start without
them and they grow them somehow. And all this becomes really difficult to tell, just because
there is so much data that these systems are exposed to that it's really hard. So one of the
tests that you know, how do you know that there is an algebraic rules? One of the way to test it
is to look at generalizations. Can you generalize two items that are not similar to anything that
you've seen before? But if you basically your data set includes everything that we have, then it
becomes very difficult to know whether you'd in fact generalize or not. So that makes the whole
question of machinery very difficult to decide. Questions of innateness are difficult to decide
for two reasons. A, the success of AI, that kind of presents a big challenge.
The other reason is, oftentimes when you point out that there are universals across languages,
so, and this is one of the main argument or an important argument to foreign
innateness is to argue that, hey, we look at language after language and they all show a
certain property. So in my work, we looked at syllable structure and the fact that languages
prefer structures such as log to structures such as olbog, lbog. That seems very clear,
but the thing about this, as well as many other preferences, is that there is a correlation
between what languages like to do and what the functional pressures of our body dictate.
So if I ask my undergraduates why log, then everybody tells me that, what to say. And then
intuitive theory behind it is that it's those functional pressures, meaning
how is it is for you to say the constraints on your articulatory system and an addition that
they are driving the force. And in every area of language universal, in many areas of linguistic
universals, you find such correspondences between what languages like to do and some
functional explanation. Phonology is probably the area where you see those things most clearly,
but nowadays people are exploring those ideas elsewhere as well. And the problem is that
when people find those correlations, they assume causation, meaning they, if you find any functional
explanation of what's going on, people kind of jump to the conclusion that it's this functional
cause or functional factor that is causing the structure that you see. So in this specific case,
so why do you prefer a blog? Because it's easy to say or because it's easy to hear. That's
what my undergraduates think. And so do professional scientists. And to me, it's not a done deal.
To me, this is an empirical question that you need to go and explore as indeed we have
and there are ways to do so. So the fact that you find correlation in principle is
ambiguous between two explanations. One is it's not language, it's not your G, it's the functional
system, the sensory and motor systems that are driving the cart here. That's what makes
language the way it is. But the alternative possibility is, well, maybe it is abstract
linguistic principles that are doing the driving, except for those principles are not entirely crazy,
they're not entirely arbitrary, rather they have evolved so that they optimize those sensory
and motor pressures, which I don't think is super surprising. So that predicts that, yes,
you will find some correlation between, you know, putative UG and those sensory motor pressures,
but what's pushing the cart, so to speak, is UG rather than sensory motor system. And merely
showing a correlation doesn't adjudicate between these possibilities. So in my work, we took it
very seriously. So for example, to figure out whether it's blog that's doing it, I'm sorry,
whether the preference for blog is coming from, it's easier for you to say than in collaboration
with my colleague, Alvaro Pascualeone, who is a neuroscientist who does transcarnial
magnetic stimulation. What we did is zapped the motor system that controls the articulators,
the leaps specifically, and looked at what this is doing to your linguistic preferences.
And conversely, what happens when you zap Broca's area? And what we found is a dissociation between
them. So the point is, these are questions that you need to explore. You may or may not like the
evidence that we produced. I think they're clear, but my point is not to defend the solution, but
rather to defend the method. I am very concerned about that time to jump from correlations to
causation. I think this needs to be sorted out. And I think it's this disagreement that is behind
a lot of the ambiguity that we're having in the field right now.
April 1st, I did in fact read a blog post written on your work from your lab by Northeastern
University. And so correct me if I'm wrong, in like a very elementary level, if I could put it
this way, is it that you're at the moment claiming that it's as if these like UG or these abstract
principles, they are, first of all, they aren't arbitrary and random, but they've kind of evolved
to suit our existence as Homsapians. The same may let's say a physical limb or something has evolved.
Exactly. Yeah, that's the working hypothesis. But again, I think for me, it's more important to
tell people that just showing a correlation isn't necessarily proof. It's not a smoking gun
of causation. It's more important for me to emphasize this methodological claim than to push my own
interpretation of the data. So I think that there is, you know, there is probably a lot that need
to be done, many more controls, and to completely look at this question. And we have contributed some,
but by no means I would argue that we completely resolved the issue. What really bothers me is that
the attempt to view the correlation and to jump to the conclusion that, oh, we know what's going on,
I think that's really unfortunate. I see. As any honorable scientist would say,
it's we need more empiricism, more testing, more experimentation. Love it. In fact,
Professor, maybe this kind of opens the way for us to jump into a question that I've been
fascinated by pretty much all my life and kind of obsessed with. I'm so glad you mentioned
this in your book. So if you don't mind, I'm just going to jump back to your book at once here.
And this is this question on abstract knowledge and embodied cognition. And I very much related,
yes. Yes. And I love the part in your book. So if you don't mind me just reading out a small excerpt
in page 138, you state in chapter nine that abstraction and embodiment are not mutually
exclusive. Cognition could well encompass multiple testing mechanisms that run according to different
computational principles. The conclusion that one mechanism exists does not automatically preclude
the other. And I, again, as I said, I loved what you wrote on this. So this also seems like one
of those ongoing quote unquote wars in the world of cognitive psychology. Yeah. If you don't mind,
please kind of elucidating and educating us on why you believe that they don't have to be mutually
exclusive. They're not at conflict with each other, between abstract knowledge and embodied
cognition. And kind of what's your current working thesis on these two ideas? So I think
why they don't have to be mutually exclusive is pretty simple, logically. I mean, you can have to,
so maybe we should start by talking about what should we clarify what they each mean?
Yes, that would be great. Yeah. So the notion, so the so-called classical view of cognition,
which more precisely is known as the computational theory of mind, assumed that what's doing the
causal work in cognition is algebraic representation that are structured. So there are symbols and
the symbols have form and structure of these symbols that drive mental computations. So for
example, if you know that I have a big ball, you know that I have a ball. And that's a property
of human cognition. Every time I say I have a big ball, it implies that I have a ball.
The goal of cognitive science in this view was to explain what is it about the structure of
the, what is it about the structure of my representation that not only enables that,
but in fact require that each time you think about, you know, a big ball, you imply a ball.
And they said, well, you have these complex symbols. There is a, every time you represent
the big ball, it's not like a whole, you know, complex, it's not an analyzed item for big ball,
but rather it has components, formal components that correspond to the semantic components. So
there's going to be a representation of your brain that for the ball and for the big. And
therefore, if you have big ball, it literally implies ball as well, because
the interpretation of the complex symbol depends on its part. So that's kind of the
computational theory of mind. It's view of language basically as literally a mechanical
system that works on those symbols. And since the symbols have structure, formal structure,
and they have certain meaning, it follows that if you know the A component of A and B, you must know,
if you know A, B, you must know A, for instance. So all this has to do with the structure of
having these abstract symbols and mental representations. Now, embedded cognition
jets this for the most part. So why is it that, you know, your encoding of concept is not based
on this algebraic discrete symbols with this combinatorial structure, but rather by the
all my experiences with events in the world. So, you know, why is it that this ball, this,
you know, battle is blue? What is my concept of a battle? Well, I don't have any abstract
symbol in my brain. It's how this battle feels. It's how it's how cold it is and how
shiny it is and how round it is in my hand. And if I didn't have a hand, I would not have
the same concept of the battle because my physical interaction with the battle forms part of what
I understand as a battle. So this is the notion of embodied cognition. It's really embodiment.
It's the interaction of my body below my brain with the world that dictates my understanding of
it. In principle, you could have both, right? You can have a rich sense of sensory-motor
interactions and symbolic machinery. And, you know, you can encode them in both encode the world
in both ways. But proponents, many proponents of embodied cognition take the strong position that
not only you have it, but you only have it. So you don't need so all this business of
structured representations, the computational theory of mine is completely baloney. You don't
need it. You can explain everything in terms of these sensory-motor interactions. And when
stated in this way, I think this is an empirical claim that, again, you can test. So as we said
before, if your understanding of phonology was entirely dependent on the motor system,
then breaking the motor system, disrupting it, say by TMS, or to have disrupted your
understanding of language. And it doesn't look like it's the case. Only it doesn't completely
eliminate your understanding of phonology, which is an area that should be very strongly dependent
on the motor system. So I'm not arguing against the motor theory. And in fact, there are certainly
other aspects, low-level aspects of speech perception, such as how do you tell Bach from
par, where there's very strong evidence that you rely on embodiment. So I think I jump to this
notion of motor simulation. Part of what this embodied cognition theory is saying is that
not only what you know consists of this sensory and motor interactions, but in order for you to
conceive of a notion, you need to simulate what it would be for you to act on this
in a particular way. So for me to think of battle, I need to simulate what it would be for me,
for my hand to grab the battle, and how it would feel, and so forth. And this is an empirical
claim. So you can see whether, so as I started saying, sorry, at the low levels of cognition,
there is evidence that indeed such simulations take place. So what we have found, and many other
people have found, is that when you hear the sound ba, you enact the lip motor area of the brain
that controls the lips. And therefore, if you're going to disrupt it, you're going to selectively
impair your ability to say, perceive the sound ba, and note the sound ta, which involves the tongue.
So evidence like that suggests that, yes, there is embodiment, and there is motor simulation,
just as this view predicts. So the view is not incorrect categorically. What seems to me incorrect
is the strong claim that this is sufficient to get language off the ground at all levels.
And then if we, so how, then, how do you propose then that these, both of these can,
kind of, let's say, you said, yes, logically, they could coexist. But what would be an example
when you say that embodied cognition on its own can't explain how languages form?
So the example that I gave you came from this case of syllable structure. So we asked, why do you
prefer a blog to a blog across languages, which does seem to be the case. In fact, it's not just
these two structures, there is a whole hierarchy there that certain syllables are better than others
and those are better than others and so forth. So it's a complex hierarchy there. And the question
is, is it that because the good guys are easy to say, and the bad guys are hard to say. And
embodied cognition predicts that that should matter even if the task at hand is just to listen.
So even if all I'm asking you is, listen to blah, tell me if it has one syllable or two.
You're not supposed to say anything. And yet, according to embodied cognition,
for you to just hear it, you need to simulate what it would be for you to say it. So if this thing is
presumably easy to say, you should be accurate. If it's hard to say, you should be less accurate.
But critically, this ability to say, to literally control the motor program of, in this case,
your lips is going to play a causal role in your ability to perceive it such that if you
can do that, if you can move your lips, you should not be able to perceive it properly,
to hear it properly. So perceiving depend on acting, perceiving perception and action are
intimately linked together. And that predicts that if we would not enable you, if we disable
the motor system, then perception of language structure ought to be impaired. So if language
structure is all about this simulation and how easy it is to compute, then if there's no simulation,
you shouldn't care about language structure. You should know, show no evidence that about,
that you are sensitive to that. And that's not at all what we found.
I see. And that's where you would say, okay, there's some kind of, let's call it UG or abstract
knowledge that does still allow us to... Yeah. So abstraction and UG are not synonyms. From this,
all you can conclude is whatever you know is not just the result of motor simulation.
Whether or not it's universal is a separate question that we have explored elsewhere.
But it tells you something about the role of abstraction, which is further strengthened
by the fact that in the second paper in this series that came last fall, if I remember,
what we did is simultaneously in the same participants looked at both how they respond to,
how they identify simple sounds like bah versus bah. So very low level properties versus how they
look at syllable structure. And what we found is, yes, the lip motor area, this motor simulation
business certainly plays a role in low level perception just everybody else thought. It's
specifically in the syllable hierarchy that we didn't find in language structure, namely,
that we didn't find a role. So this selectivity really suggests to us, whereas Roca's area did
play a role. So this double dissociation as it's called technically suggests to us that
you might need both. Excellent. Yeah. You truly are a bona fide scientist, Professor, because I
tried to jump across and kind of conclude that your experiment on embodied cognition probably
means we kind of, we need abstract knowledge too, but then you claim that no, no, what that really
says is that it falsifies the theory that all we need is abstract, sorry, embodied cognition.
So I'm glad you clarified that. So just to clarify again, what the experiments show is that
you need abstraction, they don't necessarily show you need the neediness.
I see. I see. I understood. Yeah. Okay. So again, I'm going to jump back to like a vague,
more and more like a naive question. Clearly, you probably can see that I'm still a neophyte,
I'm still getting my hang around this field. But great question so far. Oh, thank you very
much. I appreciate it. But I guess this is, I don't even know whether this is an unfair question
to ask because this is pretty much a question we've been trying to answer since time immemorial,
really. What is unique about human language? We don't know, for sure. Again, like everything
else, it's an empirical question, but we have some clues. So people, so I think we need to
distinguish between two questions. Is this a definition to the notion of natural language?
So is natural language a kind in the sense that there is something that defines all languages?
So English and French and Swahili and Mandarin, is there something that's common to all of them?
And the second is, is it unique to them? So is it only defining these languages and not other
systems? Right, so that there are different questions at hand. You can look for those
characteristics at two levels. One is to ask, are there some, as the linguist Charles Hockett said,
are there some design principles that share the cross all languages? And you can then look at
more intricate aspects of language structure. And that's really what Universal Grammar is asking.
This is really a question of, is there something that defines human languages as such,
because they're all molded by the same cookie cutter, so to speak, by the same Universal
Grammar? We talked about Universal Grammar, and I see some evidence for the possibility that maybe
it plays a role, although, as we had discussed, this is only open to discussion and debate in the
field. With respect to design properties, so the linguist Hockett came with all those design
principles of language and the fact that all languages have meaning, and they talk about
things that are not here and now and so forth. But many of those things are also shared with
other systems of non-human animals, for instance. There is one component, though, that seems to be
one design principle that seems to be unique to language, and that is this notion that is called
duality of patterning. And that is, so it's kind of the double helix of language, so to speak,
in the sense that language has patterns, so the whole point about language is that it's not just,
you don't just memorize and analyze whole, but rather there are patterns with structure,
but those patterns exist in two levels. The one level that everybody is aware of is syntax,
so if I say the dog, you know, dogs bite men or men bite dogs, it gets used completely different
meaning, which means that in this case, the syntactic organization matters, and if you change it,
you change meaning. So that is this area in which you take to simplify, you take words which have
meaning and how you order them, how you pattern them makes a difference. This is one level,
but there is a second level, which is every such word is not an atom, but rather it's a molecule
that is further constructed from meaningless elements. So if I say dog, you get the ga,
one combination of those sounds, you get one meaning. If I say ga, you get a completely
different meaning, right? So the ordering, there is pattern, that's the fact that when you change
the ordering, you change the significance of this, of the sequence means that the patterning
matters, but this is not a pattern of meaningful units, but rather of meaning less units.
Spoken language, those languages, those elements are sounds, are phonies, but you can also have
other types of meaningless elements in sign languages. So there are hand movements,
hand shapes and so forth, but they too are meaningless elements. So it turns out that
every human language has this trick, every human language has these two levels of patterning, and
I'm not aware of any exception to this rule. We are not aware of any system of animal communication
that has this trick. So animals can communicate in very complex ways, they even have rules.
So animal communication is great, but the design is different to ours. It's not a value statement
of which one is better and which one is worse, it's different. We have this double layer of
patterning and we are yet to find an animal that has that. So I think that's such as something
that's unique to human. But again, the field is very much divided as to whether there is anything
beyond that, in fact, it defines language that is unique to language and whether it's specific
to language and this debate is ongoing. Yeah, and of course, I'm assuming this opens up many other
avenues such as if you want to create an agent, let's say an AI agent that engages in language the
way humans do, we need to understand first of all what our design principles are to even build
something. Well, this is where we get to the Skinner Chomsky debate, right? Because the AI,
the current AI view takes the view of let this all emerge if you feed it enough data and you have
a very good learning algorithm, this system will figure it out. And we don't know what is it that
it figures out that it figures out. Yeah, something it figures out. And this is really open to a big
debate right now. Certainly. In fact, I heard Chomsky, which is unbelievable, he's in his,
I think late 90s, and he's still doing interviews and podcasts, truly. He was saying that with
LLMs that yes, they're marvelous engineering tools, but he disagrees with the kind of the notion that
as you said, if you just keep feeding it more data in like a black box kind of way,
eventually we'll have some sort of AI, let's say an AI agent that engages in language the way we do.
I think his concern is, what does it really tell you? So it's a piece of engineering,
but what kind of explanation does it give you about what is the cause of every child speaking
a language? So obviously, children are not exposed to this massive data. So what it's giving you is
kind of it's mimicking the ability of a child to form data, to form sentences, but it's not clear
that it's doing it in any way that is remotely similar to what the child is doing. And so doing
this does not provide an explanation of how human language actually works. And I agree with this
concern. So again, this is getting to this notion of, to what extent do we need to worry about what
human beings bring with them to the learning acquisition task as organisms? So to what extent
do you need to look at the organism as opposed to assuming it's all out there in the data? So the
answer is it's mostly out there, we need to just find a good way to milk it. And Chomsky's
approach was to start from the inside and it remains in a huge debate to be determined.
Yes, certainly. And sometimes even a contentious one. So the other bit is, and what I love about
the book is this is also in a way sort of like a book on social psychology, because it's a lot on
what laypeople believe. And in fact, being a layperson myself, I kind of had this belief too
for the longest time, which is I always equated what we call human language to reading.
And in the the blind story teller you state in page 203, if you don't mind me reading it, you say
many people think of reading as a process of visual pattern recognition, for example, being
able to consistently register the contrast between symmetrical letters such as D and B.
If that is the case, then it stands to reason that when reading goes ory,
the culprit is a visual deficit. But but in reality, visual patterns are just a means to an
end, which is language. Reading is a technology that gets you there. So Professor, if you could
delineate what the difference between reading and languages, that would be great, please.
So there are two things we need to explain. What is reading and how it differs from language?
Yes, the true theory, what is the true science about? And the second is what people think,
how this all works. So there is that theory, and there is the intuitive theory, which happens
to be in disagreement. And that's where we mess things up. So there is a sense in which reading
is very different from language. I often start my psychology of language classes by working really
hard to disabuse not people of the notion that language and reading are the same thing, they
aren't. Language is natural, you take every child, they will develop language. If you don't expose
them to language, they will grow one naturally, even they're not exposed to a language. They do
it naturally, they don't need language lessons. Reading is not like that. So most children,
if you don't teach them how to read explicitly, they will never read. There are tons of societies
that are doing just well without reading and writing, not so for language. So language is
universal to all human societies, reading is not. So they're divorced in this sense, for sure.
Nonetheless, there is this interesting property of human brains that the neuroscientist Stanislaw
Szehan has pointed out, which is when human brains come to invent a new system, they don't
invent it completely anew. But rather what they do is recycle existing systems that are innate
and kind of repurpose them for this new purpose. And the link between reading and language
exactly follows those lines. So when you look at how reading systems are designed,
they could have been completely divorced from language, they could have been completely arbitrary,
but that's not the case because the letters that we use for a system like, a phobetic system like
English correspond to linguistic sounds for the most part. Even in writing systems as in
Mandarin, it's true that there are visual origins of the symbols that they call, they also have
some banding component, but eventually what they stand up for is also phonological sounds,
they stand for syllables. So it turns out that when people come to invent language,
they kind of design it on the principles of how language works. You can think about it in terms
of human brains, when they start processing language, they start with the phonology. And then,
so when you perceive speech, that the first thing that you get is the sound structure of language,
and from there you proceed to syntax and so forth. So it's like to go on the linguistic
highway, so to speak, in the brain, you need to start by having some phonological code.
So if you're trying to hijack the same highway to create reading, you better start by doing,
by encoding phonology as well. And that's how explain the correspondence between how reading
works and how language works. Reading as a system is taking the language or hijacking a component
of the language system and repurposing it for a new technology. And that is why
all reading systems that we know encode some phonological units at some level, it doesn't
necessarily need to be at the level of phonemes, it could be syllables, but there is also some
phonological component. There is ton of research that shows that when you and I read, well,
I'm not a native speaker, but when I read in my language and you read in your language,
even though we read silently, we will automatically extract all this phonological component
as integral part of the reading process. So you think about reading as a visual affair,
it's something that happens only in your eyes. Of course, it begins with the eyes,
but it looks like it invariably goes through the phonological system at some point,
or else reading does not work as it should. So you must get some aspects of the phonology of
what you read. How do we know that? Because if you get two words that have the same phonology,
such as rose, the flower, and roses in two rows of chairs, people confuse them all the time. Even
if you have ROZE, which is not the word, people will also confuse them. And using the proper
experiments, you can show that it's really the phonology that confuses them, which shows that
people have consulted this information, or else they would not have been confused.
So the point about showing how we stumble is to show how reading actually works and the fact that
it actually works is using phonology. It's using this part of language. So that's the real theory
of reading. And we also know that when the ability to perceive sounds is, so it's not just phonology,
but also speech. When the ability to perceive speech sounds is impaired, this is a characteristic
of dyslexia. So people with dyslexia have problems with perceiving speech sounds. Now,
that's not what laypeople think. So if you ask a layperson, you know, Johnny can't read, he is
a six-year-old and he can't read, what do you think is wrong with him? And invariably, people tell you
there is something that's wrong with their eyes. And if they think that there is something that's
wrong with Billy because of Jimmy, whatever he is, that if the problem is congenital, which we
know that's the case in dyslexia, that it is a congenital disorder, people invariably think the
problem can only be in the eyes. It can't be the substract phonological thing. This arises from
this intuition that people hold, that what we hold innately. So if you know that the problem is
congenital, that he was born with that, then it must be somewhere in their body. The people don't
think just genes, they think like in the eyes, in the ears, it can be something that is abstract,
that doesn't make sense, that the ability to, so what dyslexia really is about is in part the
mechanism that allow you to map letters to sound, which is an abstract kind of cognitive
mechanism. And people have trouble recognizing that something like that could possibly be
involved or impaired innately. So this is unfortunate because it's, first because people
misunderstand what dyslexia is all about. And that's a problem because if you think that,
you know, if you have a child and you think that the only signal of dyslexia is switching letters,
then you will fail to identify and help these children early as they need to, as you need to.
But indirectly, it also tells you some something about how we think about what is innate and what
is innateness and explain some of the other biases that I've shown in this book that show how
our misconception about what is innate lead us to this crazy conclusion that
what we know cannot possibly have an innate basis.
Yeah. And of course, this probably leads us to your twin principles, the twin principles of
essentialism and dualism. Now, I know you've spoken about this professor in many podcasts,
but I still want to ask because it's a fascinating idea. Well, to put it simply, sorry, you claim that
our blindness to human nature is rooted in human nature itself. Sorry, I've got a bit of a cough.
So firstly, I'm wondering, could you kind of flesh out what that statement means by the fact
that our blindness to human nature is sort of innate to, it's sort of a part of being human
itself and then maybe from there develop the ideas of essentialism and dualism. Sure. So
maybe let's start with with the background. So the first thing to show is that people are
blind to human nature. It is a thing which people may not necessarily accept because
so many people so you know, assume that when a child is born that newborns know nothing about
the world that they have no abstract concepts whatsoever that there is no possibility that
they would know, for example, what is an object or that they will have a notion of number or they
will have even a rudimentary notion of good versus bad in very basic form. And we know because we
asked these questions and it turns out that it's not the case that people simply think that nothing
is innate. So if you ask them, well, do newborns prefer happy faces to angry faces? They'll tell
you, sure, yeah, of course they do. That's actually wrong. They don't. So when the experiments have
been done, there's no preferences for the happy face. But when you ask them, well, will a newborn
infants understand that three sounds and three lights share something in common? This thing from
say three and nine, three seven and three and nine lights, and they will look at you like, what? And
even though when, you know, you can explain how this can be done. So you can, these experiments
have been done in fact, and you can give people the exact description of how the experiment was
done and ask them to make a prediction. So this is how we can study that. And here is how the
experiment was designed. Now tell us what will the infants do if they appreciate this fact and
they'll tell you there's no way that they will do so. And that is wrong because the experiments
have been done and newborn infants can appreciate abstract number in the sense, as well as they
have a concept of object and so forth. So there is a problem here, right? Because
science tells us that there is stuff that infants know, and there are good reasons to think that
this knowledge is innate. A, because it's very difficult to explain how this can be
learned from the experience that's available to the infant in utero. And second, because you
see it in other animals. So in many of these experiments, there are parallel demonstrations
in human and non-human animals, say in chicks, and you find similar things. And this evolutionary
continuity gives you further room to believe that this knowledge can be innate. And yet we don't
accept it, right? So when you ask late people, they cannot conceive of the possibility that
knowledge can be innate. They even kind of look at you like this is really, the very proposition
seems to me less to them as an oxymoron. So the question is why that's the case,
where this bias to innate knowledge comes from. Now, there can be many reasons.
There doesn't need to be a single answer. And there have been other proposals in the literature,
such as perhaps you have a lot of experience with learning, but yet you can learn also motor
actions. You can learn how to swim. So why is it knowledge specifically that you have trouble with?
Maybe it is you're worried about the social implications, right? So if we're innately the
way we are, then maybe we're different and that's a concern. What it tells us to explain is why is
it knowledge specifically that gets us exercise, right? If it's we're worried that about social
discrimination, why does the notion of object is a problem? Very hard to see what social relevance
it has. So here's my proposal. The proposal is that this bias arises from two intuitive principles
that are based on innate principles. So whether or not these two guys that I'll explain are in fact
innate, the note is less clear, but the roots certainly are. So let me explain what I'm talking
about. So the two partners in crime, and one is called intuitive essentialism and the other is
called intuitive dualism. And there's lots of literature that shows that each of them matters
as we think. Intuitive essentialism governs how we think about what's innate. So when children think
about what makes an animal look the way it does, why does it have a tail? Why does it have this
color? They're telling you there is something in insides, the animal that makes it what it is,
inside it body. So that the notion is that there is this essence that doesn't change,
it lives in your inside and it's in the body. The problem is that people also think about knowledge
that as if it's not in the body, people think about the knowledge as it's something that's
in the mind as if the mind is ethereal and distinct from the body. So there are intuitive
dualists. This is completely under the hood. It's not something that it's not a doctrine,
they're not philosophers, but even if you ask children, beautiful work by Jesse Bering, by
other people who show that children think about the mind as a ethereal distinct from the body,
and knowledge lives in the mind, not in the body. Here's the problem, right? If you think about
knowledge such as your understanding of number as it's not in the body, and if you think that
everything that's innate must be in the body, it follows that knowledge cannot be innate because
it's in the wrong place, right? Here is the body, here is the mind, there is my knowledge,
there is what's innate, and you know, that's in the wrong place. It can't be innate.
And this is how the bias we think arises. So what I've told you so far is how our
troubles with the innate-ness arise from these intuitive principles, but then where do these
principles come from, right? Hard to tell. Essentialism, in both cases, those are principles that are
observed across cultures, even when what children, for example, believe is different from what
the adults. So the anthropologist Rita Astuti has done really beautiful work that shows that
children in Madagascar, in a small community there, the adults talk about why is that a person has
something wrong with their leg? Well, their mother talked ill of some person and they cursed her,
and that's how, you know, that's affected. So this is a very Lamarckian view of, well,
not evolution, but basically you bodily traits are acquired through social transmission.
So when you do the same experiments with children in this place, they do show evidence that they
understand essence. So they think that if you have two animals and one is the biological offspring
of the other, what's true of the father will be true of the son rather than of an adoptive,
and it won't get what it gets its biology from the biological parent, not from an adopting parent.
So that's just to us. So essentialism is not something that's innate in the sense that you
see it in very young infants, although it has some roots very early on, but it seems to do
something that we just develop naturally for whatever reason. You see the same with dualism,
it's extremely prevalent across cultures, belief in afterlife and the supernatural and of course
religion and all this stuff you find it very, very broadly across cultures, even in cultures that
do not tend to speak about those things openly. Why that's the case was never clear.
Problem has long suggested, the psychologist problem has suggested that maybe intuitive dualism
arises from core knowledge. So what is core knowledge? Core knowledge are those innate systems
that infants are born with. And two of those systems are critical here. And one system guides how we
think about people and another guides how we think about objects and these two systems are in contrast
with each other. And because of this contrast, that's what leads to dualism. So the idea is that
so basically, the way it works is you think about objects behave, what makes an object don't move
on their own, they can only move if there is a physical contact between objects, people can move
on their own because of what they think, what's because of what they what's in their mind. And
there's obviously a tension between these two ideas. And recognizing this tension, a child might
decide that the mind, what makes a person behave, is not embedded, it's not part of the body,
because you don't, it doesn't obey the laws of physics that other objects do. And that's how
you become a dualist. In recent work in my lab, we tested this theory. And what we found is that
the logic was very simple. We reasoned that if dualism really has its root, if in these core
knowledge systems that are innate, then if you find a group of individuals in which one of the
system is impaired, then that should have downstream effects on the dualism, and far the more on
their ability to accept the innateness. And that's exactly what we found. So in one study,
we looked at people with autism, who are famously ones that have difficulties reasoning about the
minds of others, so the people system is weaker. And indeed, we found that they're kind of released
from the curse, so to speak. So they are less dualist than neurotypicals, as you would predict,
and they also are less biased against innateness also, as you would predict. In another study,
we looked at males versus females, so males also tend to be lower on the people system than females,
and we found the same. They, too, were less cursed by dualism and less also cursed by this
rejection of innate knowledge. So that suggests to us that dualism itself, so now I'm talking just
about dualism, may not be specifically innate. There may not be any selective advantage of you
being a dualist directly. But maybe the roots of dualism, the constellation of our core systems,
is such that they lead you towards dualism. And that's how all this series of unfortunate events
arises. Certainly. Professor, I don't know if you've written about this or worked on this
in some other areas, but would you say, again, a bit of a speculative question, that there are
certain evolutionary advantages to having these twin principles of being
essentialists and dualists? As in, I don't want to just say that they're arbitrarily kind of
in our nature, so to speak, but rather, do you think there are any, okay, as I said,
there's a recent evolutionary speaking, that we do have this kind of core knowledge?
So the core knowledge has advantages, for sure. So there is definitely core knowledge to understanding
what an object is. You want a chick to go after its mother, not after it. You want to recognize it
as an entity. Her body as an entity. And having understanding of the minds of others is definitely
advantage. So you don't need to assume that dualism has an advantage. It's not to assume that its
engines, the two engines that make you a dualist are innate. You don't need to assume that dualism
is innate. You get it for free, so to speak. In recent work, I'm actually exploring the
possibility that dualism might do some good, but until I know about it, I don't want to talk about
it. So talk to me in a year or so, and I'll let you know about it. I would love to. I would love
to follow up on that. And on the note, again, of dualism and essentialism, one of my favorite
chapters from the book, which is your chapter on neuroscience. What is irrational love affair
with neuroscience? And I think this is in chapter 11, where you say, insane about the brain. And
interestingly, just a bit of a funny anecdote, in the podcasting world, currently the most listened
to podcast is, in fact, a podcast by a neuroscientist, Andrew Huberman. So it's people, you are
absolutely right that people have this, as you said, irrational love affair with neuroscience. So
yeah, from this lens, a lens of essentialism and dualism, can I kind of explain as to why
lay people are insane about the brain? Yeah, so I think one clue comes from the fact that
I don't think that people care so much about the details about how the brain does it specifically,
as much as the fact that it does it. So I think what kind of every time people are kind of marveling
at is the fact that the life of the mind has a basis in the brain, which should have been obvious,
right? What else do you expect, right? Science tells us that thinking is a physical affair that
affects physical processes in the brain. So of course, thinking is going to show up in the brain.
So what the technical literature in neuroscience is to show exactly what happens and how the brain
gives us to thinking, which for the most part, we don't understand. So we don't understand, say,
anything about the computational theory of, or for the most, we understand very little about
the computational theory of mind and how it's actually implemented in the brain. But for people,
that's not what they care about. So when they hear this, it's really like, oh, it's actually in the
brain, that's the news for them, which is very strange indeed. If you're a dualist, then that
would be big news for you, because in fact, if you're a dualist, you have troubles understanding,
how is it that the mind can actually affect behavior? So if you think about, I want this
battle and this wish that people theory tells you, it's in your mind, causes my very material
hand to rub the battle. And how is it possible? How can mind command matter? This is something that
was a problem for the carts. And we did the cart and we did some research that suggests that it's
even a problem for laypeople. When laypeople think about such interactions, they have kind of a
dissonance, this notion that the mind can command the body when you look at that carefully. And
neuroscience solves this problem because it's telling you, listen, it's not the mind that's
doing the lifting, it's the brain that commands the hand. So body interacts with body and
basically the problem is solved. Far the more if you're an essentialist and you believe that
what's innate is in the body. And now you see it's the body that causes, that's the cause of
my behavior. And then you're beginning to think, well, maybe this is something that's kind of
telling us something that's very deep in me. It's something about my essence. It's something that
I'm born with. So if I have depression and you detect it in my brain, so all of a sudden, oh,
there must be something that runs in the family and you better not marry this person and you know,
and then you would discriminate against them. And it's all baloney because, you know, the fact
that something manifests in the brain tells you nothing about whether it's innate or not. And
yet what we have found is that when you give people this information, they jump to the horrible
conclusion that this trait, depression, for instance, is more likely to be innate. And that
an end, they show more stigma. So that's a very serious problem. So dualism makes you super
curious about the brain because it solves the mind-body dissonance. If you're an essentialist,
you look at the brain as providing further evidence about what's innate and therefore
speaking up to your deep, deep essence, what makes you who you are and both of them are based on
misconceptions. Yeah, interestingly, I wrote a funny essay. Even Descartes was trying to,
he was wrestling with this problem. And then he theorized that in our brain, we have this thing
called the pineal gland or something. And that's what gives our abstract mind to manifest in the
material world. And so not only a great philosopher like Descartes, but as you said, even laypeople
struggle with this question. I'm a bit cognizant of the time, Professor, but a quick tangential
point, tangential question. In fact, it's on the idea of emotions. And in one part of the book,
you say that this idea that innate computational mechanisms are alchemy. And I believe, in fact,
let me just read out the excerpt if that's okay. On page 168, you say that it is bad enough to
assert that emotions are computations, claiming that these computations are innate goes way too far.
But this is precisely what evolutionary psychology asserts. And in doing so, it challenges our co-beliefs
to the max. Not only does it claim that emotions are computations, rather than bodily states,
it further suggests that the mechanisms that affect this reckoning are innately specialized,
that there is one innate program for shame, another innate program for maternal love, and so on.
So I guess my question would be, what is the layperson's understanding of emotions?
And then would be what this, at the moment, the current science tells us or the truth, let's say.
So laypeople consider emotions very important for who they are. They think of them as part
of their essence. But of course, they think that anything that's innate must be in the body.
So when we ask them to predict whether certain emotions are innate, what we found is that
people think that emotions that they consider to be embodied, that you can see them in the face,
or they think they manifest in your stomach and so forth, those are the emotions that are more
likely to be innate. And you can find, that's exactly what, of course, essentialism predicts,
and you can further show this causal link such that if you give people information that
a certain emotion is in the body, so if you tell them you made a brain scan and you can
detect it in the body, they jump to the conclusion that this emotion is innate. So people think that
again, link innateness to being in the body. And as we said, people don't think that
thinking, generally, what you know cannot possibly be innate. So because of this, you think about
emotions as bodily states rather than as cognitions, as a way of thinking. It's interesting, though,
interesting when you look at the history of the field and you see how these debates are running,
that the question of whether emotions are innate is very, very controversial. And most of this
literature about whether emotions are innate really looks at the question of whether emotions show up
mostly in the face, also in the voice, but mostly in the face. And then there is a huge debate
between those that say that facial emotions are universal and those that are not.
And I'm just sitting, I mean, that's not my field. I'm reading this and I see that the results are
very mixed and then there's evidence to support both sides. But you wonder why people are asking
this question in the first place. So why assume that emotions are just facial expressions to start
with? From a methodological perspective, I could understand why people started looking at that
this way, because that's an easy way to look at people in small-scale societies and to look at
their emotional understanding. But it shouldn't, there's no reason to assume that it must be this
way. There's no, in fact, there might be an evolutionary advantage for not revealing your
emotional expressions and then to be, you know, to being a poker player. So notion that if it's
innate, it must show in the face, seems like, like, why make these assumptions in the first place?
I don't know, you know, there might be, as I pointed out, why scientists think the way they do,
it's hard to tell. But one wonders whether this resistance that there is to this notion that
emotions or computations might come from this same empiricist bias. And that's exactly what
evolutionary psychologists claim, right? So if, you know, there's research that asks why
what is the basis of shame? And the answer is it's not necessarily that it's a certain facial
expression, but rather it's a computation that is designed to protect you from social devaluation.
So the idea is that you want to keep your good standing in society. And if there is a danger
of it being devaluated, because somebody observed you doing something awful, that will cost you,
you don't want that to happen. And shame protects you from this, from this kind of internal signal
to attend to this problem. That makes predictions about what circumstances should elicit shame.
And when evolutionary scientists have looked at this question, they found support for this idea
across cultures. So for example, if you do something, if something awful happens to you,
if you do something shameful, if other people watch it, then your shame, you predict the
shame response to be more serious. And which is exactly what this theory predicts.
So in the segment you've read, I tried to answer the question of why people do not
think about, typically about emotions in this way. And the answer is that such computations
do not intuitively seem like they could possibly be innate, because people don't think that knowledge
can be innate. So that can explain the resistance of this notion.
Excellent. All right, Professor, since we've only got a few moments left, I would love to get to
them off the speculative questions. I don't want to miss out on that. And I was glad to hear that
you said before we started recording that you, in fact, are in the process of publishing a paper
on a Corlea, or the question of consciousness. It's published. It's already published.
Excellent. And it pertains to dualism and essentialism too, right? The work you've currently
been doing. Yes, to infect both of them. Yes. Excellent. Yeah. So just in general, what are
your sort of intimations on the idea of Corlea? And then a bit more specifically, how would,
how does cognition differ from what philosophers call Corlea? Oh, in fact, does it differ at all?
I'm not in a position really to answer this question. People have a sense of their
conscious experiences. And they have some intuitions about what they are. And in the research that
and I think that the big debate in the field is how we, what is consciousness and what is the,
its place in, you know, in reality in ontology. And the work of the brilliant philosopher David
Chalmers has long argued that consciousness is distinct from the body. So, for example,
you can think about other creatures that will have your body, but will not have the same
conscious experiences as you have. And that to him, I'm not doing justice to his argument,
but basically what the conclusion that he arrives at is the notion that consciousness is not
physical properties. It is distinct from the physical. And this is not because you think about
it this way. It is this way for him. So he believes that this reflects how things are ontologically,
that in reality, consciousness is distinct from the physical. But of course, we just spent like
an hour and a half talking about how we are intuitive dualists. So one wonders is that really
because consciousness is distinct from the body or because it only seems distinct to the body in
our human eyes. And in many, so Chalmers gives several examples in which those things go together.
And it's really difficult to tell which one is going on. But in one of these examples,
which indeed concerns the conscious experiences of, say, seeing a red rose,
these properties dissociate in a way that one can, I don't know if we have time not to go
into all the predictions. But basically, this is a case where if you take dualism and essentialism
together, it will make you predict that people should think about what it takes for you. So what
happens when you see a rose for the first time, if it really alters you in a significant way,
then it must be something that pertains to your essence and whereas your essence, it's in your
body. So that would predict that the properties that the conscious experiences that are possibly
transformative, the ones that are really important to you are bound to be those experiences that you
can link to the body, or else they can't pretend to your essence, they can't be transformative.
As I read the Chalmers view for him, consciousness is distinct from the body. So it should all
experiences should be separate from the body. And it should not depend on how significant that is,
is your experience should not depend on how embodied it is, because it's not an embodied affair.
But that's not what we found. What we found was that when people are given those vignettes and
asked to make predictions about that, what they believe is that if you're going to gain a significant
experience, you're seeing a rose for the... So one of these famous examples, Mary in the Black
and White Room, Mary sees a rose for the first time, and we're asking people, well, is it significant
for her? And they say, sure it is. And if you're going to run a brain scan, is it going to show up
in the brain and tell you, yes. Which means they think about this conscious experience as part of
the physical world. And in fact, you can make various twists on that. And the bottom line is,
as you gain a conscious experience, if you compare that, an experience in which she just sees the
rose and she's not conscious of it, and one in which she sees it, and it is conscious,
what's the difference? Well, being conscious is more significant. It's also more likely to manifest
in the body. And the more likely it is to manifest in the body, the more physical you see,
the more the stronger is the experience. Which is not what you would expect, right? But if the
original explanation, Charlesman's explanation of Mary in the Black and White Room is,
the conscious experience is distinct from the body, and somehow you're privy to this fact or
else why we care about your intuitions about this case in the first place. So consciousness is
different from the body, and you're privy to that. And yes, people have intuitions about that,
but in their view, consciousness is actually an embodied experience. And furthermore, in
other research, in another experiment of this series, we found that the more dual is there,
the more likely the stronger their intuitions about Mary. So there is very strong evidence
that suggests that the source of what you gain in consciousness, people think about
that conscious experience as something that is very physical, very, very much in the body.
In this paper, I explain exactly how dualism and essentialism conspired to give you this
intuition. So how you can be both dualist, but also essentialism can make you think about that
transformative experience of being in the body. But I think it presents some challenge to this
notion that, so you can explain everything that's going on. So either you assume that the initial
assumption that we can have intuitions about consciousness is false. This is one possibility.
Or if you do assume that we have intuitions about consciousness, then what this suggests is that,
well, at the very least, what this suggests is that the reason why we see consciousness the way
we do comes from our internal biases. There is no need to assume anything about ontology here.
So of course, I can't tell anything about what ontology is. But the psychology of that gives
a very compelling story. Yeah. But interestingly, it's only a philosopher that would kind of
ontologize and try to maybe argue like Achalmas does, that consciousness is something separate
from the body. Yeah. But it has been a very influential argument and one that neuroscientists
have been quite engaged with. Yeah. Okay. Professor, is it okay if you go about five
minutes over time? I just want to ask you, I'm quite curious about this question,
given you're a cognitive psychologist. So psychoanalysis, I've been fascinated by
for a long time, in fact, but more from a philosophical angle. And in fact, I got into
it through philosophy and this, the late Mary Rudy, who was working in an English department,
in fact. So it certainly isn't a science. But just as a cognitive scientist, what are your
intimations and views on the field of psychoanalysis?
I'm not as educated as I would want to be. There are definitely some very concrete,
empirical criticism of Freud that I think are very well placed about the falsifiability of
his proposal and its empirical adequacy and all that. All this criticism is very well placed.
But I think he was a genius. I think he gave cognitive science two of its most precious ideas.
The first is the idea of the subconscious. I mean, I don't know the history of ideas
sufficiently to know whether we should really credit him for that, but some way he got it right.
This is certainly the core of everything. Everything that's interesting about cognition,
generally in language specifically, happens totally under the hood. It's not something that
people capture. And he had the stature to have this insight. And I think this is
very significant. And we owe him a debt of gratitude. The other debt of gratitude that I
think is important. And people sometimes look at that as kind of, they take it against him.
And I don't, was this notion that thinking about the psyche in physicalist terms. So he had this
thermodynamic notion of the psyche. And people say, oh, yeah, you always apply the latest in
science to study the psyche, but it is not trivial to think about the psyche as a physical system,
because we are dualist. So this is the farthest from us to think that one can explain
psychological processes in physical terms. But this is exactly the basis of the computational
theory of mind, the notion that the reason the thinking is a mechanical process that manipulates
this form of representations. And this notion that you can think about the psyche as a physical
system is brilliant. Not something that's available to us intuitively at all. So I think Freud had
two very big ideas that, again, it's, I'll leave it to somebody else to make the analysis of where
these ideas came from and how they stayed with us. But for nothing else, I think that these are
really one of the most important ideas that stay with us these days and that we should be very grateful
for them. Certainly. I mean, in line with this book, you'd say that at least Freud could go
against his human nature and overcome the blindness to study the psyche as a physical
system. Excellent. Thank you for that, Professor Barron. I know that these are highly speculative
questions, but they always do fascinate me. Well, I'd love to ask, so sorry, just one other thing.
The paper that you mentioned when we were talking about qualia and consciousness,
what exactly was the name of the paper? It appeared in the journal Open Mind and the name
of the paper. I'm the author on that and I should have known. What is it called?
Is it if I email you afterwards and I can put it in the description down below for people to read?
I can tell you in a second. I look at my references and this one is called The Heart
Problem of Consciousness Arises from Human Psychology. Excellent. I shall find it and
put it in the description. And it's an open access so you can read it. That is lovely.
Professor, what other projects are you working on? Are there any books in the pipeline?
I'd love to hear. Give us a bit of a teaser on what's next.
There's a project on dualism that's coming and some of the obvious problems of dualism,
but possibly also some of the silver lining of being a dualist and how you live a dualist life.
Yes, how to live a dualist life, but it's probably going to be a self-help book.
No, that's not the intention. I'm joking, of course. But no, thank you so much. I'm grateful
for your time, Professor. This means a lot to me, especially given hopefully next year I'll be
doing my master's program and then I'm certainly more excited than I could put it in words.
So thank you. Thank you so much.
Pleasure talking to you. Good luck on your master's. I look forward to seeing what you do.
