Hole to put it very generally is a youtuber and commentator. However to get a bit of a let's say comprehensive
Bio, I'm just gonna read out his YouTube channel bio as an introduction to this episode
It starts off by saying make centrism greater gain
So you I guess you need a not a mega but like a mega. Yeah, I want to make it like the centrism great again
So mech oh, that's sorry make enlighten the centrism
Would be the mech oh on it give me a vol that I can make a slogan out of that could be now make centrism great again
We'll be good for now. That could be a much idea. Um, yeah, and then you state on this channel
I upload videos that can more or less be described as cultural than political analysis
Just as importantly I talk about my experiences as a person and how they inform my beliefs and most importantly my actions
Pause just a comment there. That's something I I love about your channel. I think you
uh, you always connect let's say
So-called abstract theory into your own personal life
I think it's quite important, especially
Given that we have embodied physical beings and we aren't just ideas
Uh, so I just want to put that out there. I really appreciate that you do that
Even in the wash debate, uh, you didn't talk about your experience with Jordan Peterson
Which I'm hoping we could discuss today
Uh, anyway, I'll I'll continue. Um, I believe the best way to resist
Ideological extremism is by offering a better path forward through
multidisciplinary
majoritarianism begin to
Kind of flesh out what that term means
This is a multifaceted attempt to reaffirm the beliefs that I think the southern majority of people still hold
A desire for unity individualism and common-sense reforms of by decaying
cultural and political institutions
I reached out to paul, uh
asking if he'd want to do a follow-up episode after his debate with the wash
um, and uh
The floor is yours paul. There's yeah, well you missed you missed the last line of my youtube bio
The last line let me let me there's a line that you missed at the end I copied across, uh
Oh, is this the part about you being a comedian?
For legal purposes everything I do is comedy. I certainly I certainly have read that out. Um for legal purposes
This is a comedy channel. Oh, that's right. Or should I say for legal purposes paul is a comedian?
Exactly. Everything I do is satire. It's just jokes
Yes to any people who may be offended or current or future employees. Everything I do is comedy. So yeah, because you know, uh
You now use your real name, isn't it the last time we spoke you went by pf young
I didn't I didn't even call you paul. I was just calling you pf young. I think oh
Yeah, I think early early when I first uploaded the videos. I just use my real name. I mean, I'm paul on
I've said my last name before. I just I just generally don't say it to add one more step in case anyone wants to
Docs me and send dead animals to my family. Um
But uh, no, I I made a conscious decision
I didn't want to pf young as a channel name
And people can call me pf young, but I you know, I always introduce myself as paul and it's actually interesting because
um
Usually
I do
This paul
p
There that's how I usually have my uh
Message oh in zoom. No, I changed it my little name at the bottom
parentheses also known as
Because to your point about like
I talk about my experiences. I am a real person here and I don't like
The idea of like I'm you know, I'm pf young and I'm some sort of character that I'm not
Yeah, I'm not behind the camera, right?
And uh, so yeah, so that's there's a there's a conscious element of that
I would I would I would just go by my full name if I you know, wasn't worried about crazy people constantly trying to
ruin everyone's life, but it just one added an interesting thing
Especially when you're on the internet man, and you I mean, I mean the other thing is uh
You're not a guy. I don't know that does
let's say
Well, I'm gonna assume this innocuous tech reviews or
Oh, something that's like, I don't know lifestyle blogs you in fact
I talk about controversial stuff. So it's quite controversial. So I right certainly good to take some measures
But yeah, as I said, the flow is yours. Uh, Paul just I
Appreciate like a stream of consciousness. Just what are your thoughts on the wash debate? Sure
Well, it was interesting. So I went into that debate
prepared for a wide range of
Potential outcomes. I did not know if Vosh was gonna come out saying
Jordan Peterson's a Nazi and so is this guy and he was just gonna start throwing dirt from the beginning
That was a potentiality. So I had to mentally prepare like
I gotta get ready to do that
Um, you know, I've watched plenty of Vosh's videos for like years. So I knew
I knew what he believed well
I knew what part of him believed. I knew what part of him professed on his videos
And I knew that you know, I at his best. He's a very different person from
Who he is at his worst, right? Which, you know
But I think you could say that you could say that for everyone but
For him and when you have an online persona, I think that's amplified that spread between who you really are and
The character or the persona you play
Um
So
Yeah, I you know, I didn't know how I was gonna go. So I had to prepare for a wide range of outcomes and
I'm not gonna lie and I said this in the my reflection
I was very nervous in the first couple minutes. My heart was beating
Like to the point where I was like, I might have to turn off the camera and
Take a lap or something because I might have a panic attack. Um,
Which I was interested. I knew I'd be nervous, but you know, I just I guess when you're in the moment
It's different and there was a strange element of you know, I watch vosh again for years
and I see him on the camera talking and then
It was kind of a weird feeling for a minute where it was like he's responding to exactly
I'm on the camera next to him and he's responding to what I'm saying. So it's like
It was it was it was you have the virtual
screen and then
I was somehow engaged with it in a way that I wasn't before even though it was the exact same format that I consumed it
So it was very interesting. It was just an interesting
Uh
feeling and perception. Um
But overall, you know, I came in my goal is
I didn't know what
I had to approach this whole thing carefully because on the one hand
One could argue
What's the point of even engaging with someone like vosh, right? There's the very cynical like, okay, it'd be
You know, I've watched him for a while and I want to argue with him about the stuff. He said, you know, he's got a big audience
It's nice to get that exposure. There's like those cynical reasons
But the the reason of like and I don't mean cynical and that's those are non-factors. Those are just less than the
It's it's ultimately more than about that. Um
You know, it's like
do I
come in with a bunch of quotes prepared to like
Pin him down and say you said these things and I can create a bunch of clippable moments of all the dumb, you know
Of of me pulling up a quote directly at contradiction with what he said like for example
I I don't know how much you wash vosh or the people watching watch. Oh, I you know, just just to I guess
To clarify. I am very much on voshers side politically and I pretty interesting
Yeah, that's interesting. I mean I I I that's so funny the way to label myself probably would be well
I probably call myself a christian socialist, but I think real more realistically. I'm a libertarian socialist. So
politically, I'm very much on voshers side
Exist probably the the trans stuff
Uh, and some of his I think unwarranted criticisms of conservatives
But politically, I'm very much on his side. Yeah, so you don't think that all conservatives are the equivalent of kukluck's clan?
Absolutely not right. I can okay. Yeah. Yeah, that's fair. You're politically from like
Like from a policy prescription on certain things that makes sense. I mean, I would agree with him a lot in on certain policies
um
Okay, so so yeah, so you know, so you know his drama was shoe on head
Oh, yes. Okay
Full disclosure. I didn't follow the drama. I know it was a huge thing
You know, uh, but I didn't follow that bit
What I normally do is when there's some when I'm especially given that I live in Australia and
You know, it's hard to keep up with what's going on in
In your country, man, because bloody hell, man, bro. It's hard to keep up. It's never ending
It's never ending. What's what like, you know, it's like, uh, I think I already told you this but when america
Uh, sneezes the whole world gets a cold. So whatever happens to america just kind of spreads across especially the western world
Uh, but whenever something breaks break, let's say there's like a news item or something
Happens in america. I generally go to like wash
I generally go to let's say, uh, david pacman. So I'm I'm gonna be totally up front with y'all. I'm very biased
I I normally go to leftist channels because my it's so interesting
I would not have gathered that from at least our last conversation and
But but you know, it just it speaks to people are different and have different perspectives and we can still
I mean, it's interesting because I
I don't know. It's it's uh, this is where I I really appreciate
conversations like this
In many many issues. I'm agnostic
However, I'd say when it comes to politics and especially economics
I'm pretty much a socialist almost a socialist or or or to put it lightly like a social democrat
And part of that is probably because I live in australia where look man, like over here
The the the political party. So we've got the we've got labor and the liberals. So the liberals are right wing party
They're
You know, they're quite
They kind of have similar prescriptions in general like no one if a politician comes here and says, let's you know, let's get rid of
Medicare, which is a public health care service. Yep. That's no go putting my mistake
You know, they have mandatory voting in australia, right? Was that don't you have mandatory voting? We do. Yes
I'll be look some people just pay the fine. It's like a small amount
But I think that's a good thing
Honestly, like even though I'm quite cynical about democracy
And that's just my personal prejudice. I do think it's a good thing. I think I think oh Pearson talks about this that it's
In fact, like a civic duty for a part of the country
Sure. Yeah, sorry. I don't mean to
Well, yeah, so this is well tight. So back to shoe on head. So for people who are not aware or kind of aware
Shoe on head is an online influencer. She's like a century. She's a bernie. She's like a female bernie bro in the most stereotypical sense
Right. Um, she's like socialist, but she's got some I would say common sense perspectives on when it comes to culture
She broke or was it had a big hand in bringing the belenciaga scandal to light
The whole thing about the the the children in the photo shoot with the very questionable to questionable to put it lightly
That was that was
stuff right so
She brought that to light and rightfully called it out as creepy weird bs. Yeah, and
Of course on the far far left. There's a small minority of people who say
that is like somehow
bigoted to call out
bdsm stuff with children
because there's a whole history of like
queer extreme queer
Like kink type stuff is a form of revolutionary
Engagement with the world or some shit. There's some intellectual rationalization for why
Leather fetishism around children is somehow, you know, this morally sophisticated belief and shoe on head like most people said
Yeah, bullshit
And a big chunk of the left got upset with shoe on head and a big chunk of vosh's audience got upset with shoe on head
So vosh came out with this whole criticism of shoe on head saying
basically shoe you
Gave fodder to far right activists to be transphobic and bigoted and all this stuff
But we're still friends because they're friends in real life
So what I could have done in that debate is like and I had and I was prepared to do this if it got
To the point where mud was being slung back and forth, but I was I was like I'm not going to go in trying to instigate that
I was I could you know, I could have said something effective
Hey, you know how you just labeled Jordan Peterson of fascist for these reasons
Explain to me right now and I would just read off a quote
You said shoe on head is literally feeding fodder to far right homophobes
You know
And and feeding into conspiracy. How does that not make shoe on head a fascist?
But Jordan Peterson is a fascist and that you know
There's all the drama of a big chunk of his audience doesn't
Like shoe on head for the reasons we just described because they think she's doing far right reactionary stuff somehow
They unironically refer to shoe on head of fascist. So the point of all that is
Had it gone south, I would have been prepared, but I didn't want it to go south
I wanted to bring out the best in vosh. That was my goal was let me be as honest and authentic as possible
say what I believe to be true and
ask
And and talk to vosh the person rather than the persona that has all these
ideas that are you know
intellectually interesting and
questionable
um
And I wanted to get to the person. So what so what ended up happening is
I ended up just kind of going with the flow of the conversation a bit more than I think I would have liked to on
unreflection because I would have liked to have have engaged directly with some of his
Critiques about for example moral anti realism. We had that discussion about what do you mean by evil?
And I knew what he wanted to get into in that level of conversation
But I again, I was kind of interested in sticking with the well look we can have a discussion about what we mean by evil
but
We're going to end up on this we're going to both agree that the nazis were evil
so
like let's just
The conversation I want to have is more about why do you call conservatives kkk members?
And do you understand how that makes people feel and stuff like that versus just engaging at the purely intellectual level of here's why I don't think
You know here's morality and stuff
It would have been interesting conversation though because moral realism versus moral anti realism is interesting
um
You know one thing that factored into the whole debate was
A lot of my friends were watching the debate live and you know, they're not people who are really interested in these topics
Or you know, some of them would barely even know who Jordan Peterson is or even Karl Marx or anything like that
So there was a part of me that's like I all
I want to speak to someone who doesn't have who's not
Who doesn't even know what moral realism or anti realism is right?
Which is most people because most people have actual jobs and lives to live and they don't have all this free time to
obsess about philosophy and stuff which
That's a that's a cynical way of looking at things oftentimes. There are that what I just described is a subset of people
Arguably philosophy is the most important thing because it you know
We're all nested in philosophy
But but when it's just like well, it's what is evil like to the average person is just like what what kind of conversation is this?
What do you mean? What what it's like the Nazis were evil. Can we can we just start there and move forward?
so
You know, I was sort of like let you know, let me let me have the conversation that's more relevant here
Which is boss. Do you understand why calling conservatives KKK members is not good, right?
independent of all this intellectual stuff
um, so there was that the other thing I would have liked to have gone into is the cultural Marxism bit and um,
I you know that again that would have been the same thing. We're going to go deep into the intellectual stuff and
You know, how
Relevant that is for people watching how many minds would be changed that way. I'm not sure, you know
My perspective is
You don't change people's minds by logic you change people's minds by
embodying
authentic
Behavior right honest and that's what I was trying to do. I'm not coming in to dunk. I'm not coming in to
Be you on the intellectual grounds. I'm coming in to articulate what my problem is with you Vosh
And honestly and give credit where credit is due because I know because like and I've seen him give good advice
And he's a real person
And he's not this one-dimensional
Troll demon as Jordan Peterson would say, right?
so
and it's funny because
I was talking to some people
And their opinion is no Vosh is like straight up evil and like he's a bad faith bad person
And I was like that's so
Simplistic and you you're getting a narrow view. You're taking him it is worst, which is bad
and using that to to
Him it is worst is him all the time and and I I've just from watching him over the years
Know that that's not the case and it's funny because you mentioned you you said you you agree with Vosh a lot. It's like
This is my point. I have a friend who's a big fan of Vosh
from from college and
And the idea is like if you who in my opinion, I don't know you you know well at all really but from the conversations
We've had more than reasonable person, you know, we could I could easily see me, you know hanging out with you and whatnot
Yeah, well, there you go
I shall introduce you to something called a chicken pama
And you want to change melbourne specialty. It is it is well, I think it's an Australian thing
But uh, but in melbourne, it's huge and you I'm a show
I'm going to convert you fully to an Australian you're gonna you're gonna denounce you american citizenship
Take it. Yeah. Sorry. Sorry. Thanks for having to keep going. My point is
how I
I don't like you are not someone who I think would
I like would be a fan of someone who was genuinely evil or like a genuinely bad person, right? Like if you were a fan of
Who's like a like david duke? You would be you would have a different personality, right?
This interaction would not be going the way that it is. I mean you can not to say that
You know far-right people can't be polite and can't hide their beliefs
But like, you know, it's just the nature of it
Like if you really believe some people were superior to others then
We wouldn't be having this conversation as equals almost, right? So my my that's a roundabout way of saying
I wanted to bring out the best I wanted to speak to the best part of vosh
And I wanted to bring the best part of myself and I and I was prepared to kind of
Go nuclear if need be
But that wasn't my goal and I think part of the reason the debate didn't go as
Didn't dig into the topics I would have left like two is partly because it was just
That navigating that split the first 20 minutes. I'm like, I don't know how this is gonna go, right?
And when I settled in then it was kind of like well
We're having more it's almost like we're having more of a conversation and of an exchange and
to
Force the cut the debate into one topic or another then becomes a little unnatural
And that's that's not me being as authentic as I could otherwise be
But now that I've established some rapport with vosh if there's an opportunity to speak again, you know
We could I would love to go into for example, like cultural Marxism specifically and just have a whole debate about that
And the last thing I'll say it's interesting
When it came to the trans issues I said specifically
Anyone watching this I'm willing to
Have a debate where we can pull up the studies in advance
Send me one
quality study that demonstrates the efficacy of medical transition in children
There are none the reason I said I'm confident they don't exist is because I am confident
They don't exist and it's funny because that debate has 200,000 views or something and I know for a fact there's a lot of
vosh orbiters and and and people who
If those studies existed it would be glad to take me up on that debate and I've heard nothing yet so far because it doesn't exist and so
You know that so the the points that I wanted to make or felt were important to make were made
At least from my perspective so
But yeah, that's that's my initial reflection and kind of on a pastor. I guess yeah
Well, two points. The first thing is I think
And I'm not trying to you know, um, I mean the sincerely I'm not trying to like I'll flatter you or anything
Sure, I wouldn't mind if you were though, but yeah, but you know, like sometimes flattering can be insincere, right?
Yes, I think the sake of saying nice things. Um
I think the because you started off
by kind of let's say, uh
With the caveat or the proviso that you in fact have
personally being
Helped by Jordan Peterson that you in fact just leaving aside as politics just
applying practically applying
let's say his his
psychological prescriptions or his self-help prescriptions have helped your life
That instantly built like a bridge like a human bridge between
Wash and yourself. I might want to be like, oh no, that means you both are on the same page. In fact, look, uh,
This is where again, you and I may disagree. I don't believe one can be a centrist
So I'll get into that a bit later. Sure. Okay. Very theoretical. There's a very theoretical reason for that
And I get it from Slavoj Zizek
Who I happen to be a big fan of like I'd consider myself essentially to zizek here. Exactly. Uh, yeah
The second point is so I I do want to give you credit for that
Um, I I'm not a big fan of debates meant to be honest. I generally after a political debate
I come off feeling de-spirited feeling a bit cynical feeling like both both sides were just either
uh, you know
throwing mud at each other or just purely
Talking past each other, but this for the first time after this debate. I I I felt good just leaving aside all the
intellectual systems
I was like that was a good conversation like this this guy Paul who is someone I like I enjoy his videos
And then there's this guy of wash who I watch quite a lot now
and politically we we aligned quite a lot and I like there was a dialogue going and
Correct me if I'm wrong didn't even wash wash say that it was the end of it that he in fact appreciated the conversation
Yeah, yeah, the um, it's funny. I didn't know this until afterward, you know, we
The debate ended and then wash was still streaming on his side
And I found you know as soon as the debate ended he said
something like
I actually really did enjoy talking to Paul. Um, you know, he's a real guy, you know, obviously he's and he said what you said
You know, Paul said up front. He's
emotionally invested in these issues
But he wasn't lying about it, which is like
about you know a step above all the I think he said giggling frenetic
Liars that he normally argues with who you know misrepresented views and all that stuff. Um, and
Yeah, and it's funny. So the first to to the point about building a bridge kind of the beginning of acknowledging my biases
It's almost like
From my person the bar is so fucking
Forgive my French. The bar is so fucking low
online
where
Just being honest like hey
The reason I spent all this time talking about topic x y and z
Is because it is personally in you know, not just interesting but impactful to me in these ways
and for me, it's like
You know, I went to therapy and so I can I made that connection explicit of the topics I talk about versus
Why you know how it affects how it relates to me as a person
But it's it seems like just second nature almost of like
You know that like in most political debates, well people wouldn't do that
You know, they wouldn't say out front like hey, I'm biased and and I don't know maybe certainly the online politics space
there's just a lot of people who are
probably
and no names or anything but
Probably a good chunk of them are narcissistic and only care about the money and care about the attention and could you know
Would just as avidly argue for one side of the political spectrum as they would another
And so that's I think I totally understand when it's like I watch political debate and it's just like, okay, this was pointless
um, but you know, I
I just my thought is like
Okay, if my parents or my friends or my family or if they watch my video would they think like this is a different person than
who paul is in real life
Then I've failed somehow that's it's a form of lie. Right, you know, and there's obviously nuance in like
You know, I'm not going to have a conversation exactly as I do in private as I would if I know
You know, 8,000 people are watching live in 200,000 people are going to see it
But for the most part, you know, if I'm
Careful and conscious I can have a pretty open honest conversation and
So, yeah, I think the biggest issue online and it's funny because we're in a generation where this is a challenge for us
that other generations haven't faced before is
Exactly, how do you navigate the online persona versus who you really are?
right and some people do it by
You know, some people say like I don't want to talk about private life
like their academics or or or people who do like video essays who are like a private person
I don't like talking about my life at all. I just like talking about the idea is and that's fine, but that's
Limited I think in a significant degree because how do I know I don't know your motivations, right?
You're just a disembodied voice that does a video essay. I don't know anything about why you're doing it and
How often I think it's important when you're evaluating the merits of like a political idea
You need to understand the motivations of the person reporting those ideas, right?
So like for a mathematics, you know, someone teaching you calculus doesn't matter if they're sociopath or not
The math is the math what they say can translate one to one. There's no
Band there's no bandwidth loss because they're a bad person
But when it comes to like political or psych psychological or philosophical ideas, it's the opposite
It's like you have to it's all about
The character the philosophical temperament of the person putting forward the idea. So I'm always
trying to operate at the level of
I am here not just on a screen talking about ideas. I'm a person
You know, you know real life context coming into you in this moment
but to to view it anything other than that I think is
dangerous and
uninteresting and ineffective
That makes sense
Now, I see what you're saying. I think I mostly agree. Um, however a part of me also
So you made the point previously that most people aren't interested in theory and philosophy
Uh, and I happen to be one of those weird guys that just likes reading philosophy and same. Yes, me too. I've got
Yeah, I've got Ian McGill christs masters
Right, this is most people and it perfectly intelligent people would go
That's kind of nerdy and whatever and I'm not going to take it that any particular interest in it and that that's perfectly acceptable
That's exactly how I feel about like quantum physics, right? I'm not really that interested in theoretical physics
Maybe eventually I will be because it appears to be merging with religion and psychedelics, but you know, that's a separate thing
Yeah, but well, I mean, that's where it comes in. Uh, so the idea of like one one
Well, there are many definitions of philosophy
But one definition I like is what we're very key points out you take all these different disciplines
So you be it cognitive science or quantum physics or
Sociology for god's sake and you try to bridge and find connections between them
Which is where I think an eclectic
kind of thinker
Okay, uh, one of my heroes zhecek does where he connects all these different
His his kind of like his magnum opus
Let me let me get it. Sure. Um, I I'm slowly going through it. It's
It's his book on hegel. Uh, it's called less than nothing by zhecek. It's just look at that. It's a big boy
I'm I'm still going through this and like in this book. He takes
There's a chapter where he connects
A quantum physics with this hegelian idea of of he calls it the
incompleteness of reality
and
Some people would find that bizarre because he also brings up
Uh, you know, like pop culture movies like batman and harry porter while also ringing up on a physics. So it's it's very interesting
But yeah, but then I do think and here's where maybe I sort of disagree with you, uh, paul
Sure is I still think it's important
to focus on theory because I think thinking is quite necessary and
what I mean, so
Just just to clarify that when I'm saying it's important to focus on theory. I'm not saying
Oh, that means one is indifferent to it or apathetic to it. It's impossible. You know, I I I don't think you could just be interested in theory
without in fact
Being a a a an embodied being with a life with with motivations emotions and and all the uh,
It's kind of like what niche has said. He you know, niche has famously said that
Every philosophy is the biography of the philosopher. So for niche
Uh, philosophy doesn't just exist abstractly out there, which is why he's like the proto-exception. That's like william james philosophical temperaments, right?
Interesting
Yeah, that's that's that's you know, there are different different personalities
project different philosophies. It's like a super
Left-brained to put it simply kind of like engineer type person will have a very analytic
Jeremy Bentham, uh, I think it's
rationalist philosophy. It's just pure abstract and then there's the more
um empiricist side rationalism versus empiricism is his dichotomy where it's like
In the world sensory type stuff versus at the abstract. So it's different philosophical personalities temperaments
So that seems to line up with niche's claim that you just made. Oh, yeah, certainly. And you know, here it's funny. Um
Hidegger in one of his lectures on aris soto famously said, uh, aris soto was a man that was born
He philosophize and he died. That's all that matters
Nothing else about aris aris soto matters and and I think what had had it was trying to do there was in fact say
Forget about getting too kind of obsessed and building this kind of cult cult persona or aris soto or whoever just
focus on the theory just
That's a theory itself. Nothing more. Nothing less
um, and I the reason I say that that's still important is because
Okay, this is a bit hard for me to articulate, but I'm gonna try my best. So please stay with me, Paul
I think we we are making a mistake in contemporary society where we
medicalize and
Psychologize everything
So the even even a human being is reduced to like you said a dichotomy machine. Yeah
Yeah, the left left brain or right brain and and I see the I see the temptation to do that because like, you know
I'm a soft engineer. That's my day job and I love I love thinking analytically
And I love thinking in like a very uh systematic way. Let's say
However, the more I've I've got
Into a more deeper philosophy like laconne for instance like laconne believes for instance that an authentic person doesn't exist
so like laconne talks about that year of uh
He says that the way we form our desires
Is not but is not by what we authentically won't but in fact the other he calls it the other
tells us what to desire
And someone like jet connects that to consumerism and you know, commodity finishes him and all that
That sounds like uh, renais jarard mimesis too, which is interesting. I'm not familiar. I mean, I I'm only just getting introduced into jarard
But yeah renais jarard mimesis m i m e s i s
That's the whole
All of our desires are just other desires other desires. How do I desire what other people desire?
How do I how do I spell that m renais jarard g i r
No, jarard. No, I I go I go run a jarard, but the yeah mimesis m i m e s i s m m e s
And and then gotcha. Yeah, so which is different from memetic
The richard docan's idea, which is m because it's there's a medic from the jarardian
Yeah, so there's
So there's memetic from the jarardian point of view then there's memetic from the richard docan's point of view
Which is like the word meme came from that
Meme mimesis in the jarardian point of view is different subtle distinction, but but no, but this is this case in point
Here's what I mean. So
What i'm trying to say is I I do think
It's important that the in fact
Sit down and think like we so so zizek has this really good line
He he and zizek is a as a communist, right? He's a leftist. He's a radical leftist and he says
Yes
You know what I would like is the day the the revolution in before and later
What happens after the revolution, you know, that's fine with a couple with a couple in there
That's my terrible zizek impression. But the phone is trying to make us
And and and he's this is why I like him because he's as a leftist
He's he's challenging the left and he's asking hey, okay
The revolution's great. It's the romantic feeling. Let's overthrow the system
But what happens the day after and here's where he says theory and philosophy matters where we don't we don't say that
Oh, let's just explain everything everything via psychology. Oh, let's let's let's explain everything via
Neuroscience or cognitive science
Let's let's sit and think and he even connects that to this idea called
I would prefer not to what what he means by that is sometimes the the greatest act of let's say, uh
Some version of the system is in fact not taking part in the system. It's saying no, I'm not going to buy that thing
I'm not going to buy the next generation of the iPhone or whatever and not buy not let
The the desire of the other affect my own desire even though again
Not to get too technical
But like corn would say that's impossible that we are always desiring like what it means to be human is in fact
You desire which I think I agree
Uh, and and now maybe uh, Paul if you don't mind I could connect this to my my point about fascism. So
After
listening to the debate for the
Well, I kind of got this for some but I I re listened to it
Here's where I think where wash was coming from and I'm I'm kind of here thoughts
so
for for wash
a fascist where he defined fascism wasn't
He was being purely theoretical about it as and he wasn't trying to say a fascist is an evil person
He was he was trying to be so the the way I put it as that he was trying to get rid of the moral baggage of what fascism is
And you find it as a let's say a social structure
As as a theoretical social structure as a as a phenomena in society as to how fascism comes to comes to be
which is why he used uh
Uh, umberto echoes a list which I think is a pretty good list to be honest even though I kind of come
I take my definition of fascism more from hannah arendt's
book because I think she is a lot more uh
comprehensive
And then what what he was trying to say is
You know, we we think of and you know, you probably would agree with this because jordan peelsen talks about this
You think of a fascist as some crazy
You know, forgive me for being a bit racist, but like german-speaking guy
You know, there's a crazy
That was a pretty good. That was a pretty good. You even did that in a debate, didn't you?
I thought you were actually speaking german. I know I know it's pretty good. Um
And and you think that this angry guy who who looks like
You know
The devil himself
But no, it's in fact fascism is a a social phenomena
It's it's it's something that's rather banal in fact and all of us can can become be fascist if we have a certain way of thinking
Which is why I think it's important to to study the phenomena as a sociologist should
And then try and lay down some kind of theory for it because if we don't have theory then
Everything we leave to the whims of let's say emotion or psychology or we or we overtly
spiritualize it which is another thing another element of fascism
so
Again, just to reiterate. I'm sorry if I'm uh, you know being a bit liquidious
the
Well, I think what wash was trying to put forward is that yes, of course
He certainly hates conservatives. You could see it vehemently, but
he's also trying to state that
Hey, uh, you know
Fascism isn't something that was unique to the 20th century. It wasn't something that was just like this once in a moment thing in human history
It's in fact a recurring social phenomena, which we can study theoretically historically and it's it's it's in fact
rather
naive and dangerous to think that
Or it was those people led by the fascist. It was those crazy Germans or the crazy Italians
It was in but the social phenomena
In the structure of society can emerge anytime and he believes and to a certain extent
I believe this too that there's a
there's a kind of a let's say
a resurrection or
or there's a
And another form of fascism that's coming into our society right now
You know kiss in point, uh, the ccp the chinese communist party. I think they're in fact a
I think china is very much a fascist state
Sure. Sure. So, um
Canada seems to be going that way a little bit too
Well, yes, I know that he seems to be in fighting a lot about that. But yeah, but you see the point, right?
Yes, because you think, you know, canada or liberal democracy, right?
But yeah, so the merge, uh, but anyway, yeah, that makes sense. Sorry. I was from yeah, no that all makes sense
and it's interesting. Yes, so I so
um
Well, I got a couple things
So first off, I absolutely understand and agree
With the idea that fascism is not just a some mystical
Abstract idea it it can reemerge and is reemerging in many ways
that
And maybe
And again, there this
This was partly a consequence of what conversation I was trying to have
rather than
Not
well
I didn't the conversation didn't go the way that it, you know, we might have right now
Because it was a debate with a, you know, there was all those other factors to consider
And I was again more interested in having the meta conversation about vosh's
Conversation rather than on the topic itself. So what I would say is
The idea that fascism is something that could reemerge is like that's the central idea in Jordan Peterson's work, right?
I'm gonna teach you how to that I'm gonna teach you that you could that you would have been an Auschwitz prison guard
had
The same circumstances
Arisen in time every one of us contains within us the capacity for evil the moment you say
Those people are uniquely bad
You are now exactly the kind of person who would do bad thing, you know, the worst type of things because you have no idea how
You have you have no understanding of your own capability of evil and therefore you have no way of preventing yourself from being tempted into that
so I believe that
The and I did say this more. I think I said this
I said fascism means bad person
and
I meant in that the average person
That's what that means, right? Nazi means bad person to the average person, right?
Nazi just Nazi doesn't mean a national socialist person from 1940s who was interested in the 15 point Nazi plan
That Hitler laid out 1930 Nazi just means
Nazi equals bad and it's an archetype
Yeah, can I
For a bit there. Sorry. I know you were kind of going on a point there
But yeah, no, go ahead. This is where I think
Washington fact makes a good point because
you know
The average person who thinks Nazi means bad person just a bad bad guy or whatever is wrong
And here's where theory comes in because
Of course, Nazi is a terrible
I've got to say
Complicated right because it's a nuanced point because
You know Gizek talks about this idea of uh, you know, Heinrich Himmler and Goebbels
These guys plan they they architected the holocaust and at night they were listening to Wagner and Beethoven and they were playing classical music
Yeah, you know, they were living a typical visual life, you know and and you think oh look at these sophisticated posh people
Ha ha and they're very educated. How could they be Nazis?
But that that is in fact why I love uh, again, Hannah Aron
I keep I know I keep going on about her but she is my one of my favorite political philosophers
It's that there are these structural
There are these structures that can give rise to fascism, which I think is what
Wash is more concerned about
And of course, he's got his own, you know personal proclivities to hate conservatives. That's a different story
But I think he has and it's not even and structure. I think his persona hates conservatives
I don't even I don't believe he does personally. I think he
Plays the role of someone who hates conservatives, but he certainly doesn't I bet if a conservative he met on the street
He would not treat them the way that he would treat a kkk member. He met on the street
So I think that's a persona that he's playing and putting forward but that's
Separate issue we could go into that probably you have a point
I mean, I've been having this thought about uh, Peterson ever since he joined deli wire to be honest that he's now becoming this
You know, call it up conservative guy different to what he was
Yeah, you know prior to his fame, let's say
certainly, yeah
well, so so
Because there's multiple doors open we could go to yeah, I know I know I know
It's just look man. This is as I said, this was not supposed to be a structural thing. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah
Well, there was there was I'm trying to remember because it was one thing I wanted to say in particular
but not leave evil
um
Okay, so the point about the average person thinks fascist equals bad, but that doesn't is necessarily true
so here is where
and and this it's it's
Life is full of paradoxes and every day I realize I'm realizing that life is a paradox in and of itself
It's a point zhecek makes he makes the he says in this book the only universal is conflict
The only yes, okay, perfect. Okay, perfect. Yeah, yeah, because
So
Is it true that nazi equals bad person? They're more or less synonyms. Well
From a pragmatist perspective
Uh, yeah, it's like saying is it is it true that satan equals bad? Yeah, it's like
Yeah, it's like well is satan bad. It's like, yes satan is bad. You know, that's how everyone uses it
Something says this is a satanic act
You know, that's bad. Yeah, but like satan was an angel, right and there's this whole complicated like thing of like well
there's a hit
People
are embodied people act in the in the in the in the day to day world and
What's something whether or not a whether or not a statement is true is dependent on the behavior that it
Uh corresponds to so like
And this is the whole the and the reason I said it's a whole paradox thing is like because pragmatism is all about
Truth is a function of utility and so if people are using that language in a certain way, then it is true
Then then it's true in that sense
But like the whole nazi is bad thing. It's like nazi's equal bad. Yes, but
You could you have the capacity to be a nazi. So just saying
It's bad people is wrong or that bad is something outside of you and that you're not capable of partaking yourself. That's wrong
and
my
Goal and the way I approach this channel, you know, and again, this is of course the comedy channel. So I say this as a joke
but
The root of all comedy is truth
um
Like sometimes certain discussions. It's just nerd shit. That's what I call it
So like for so for example, this is my favorite
example I give
If someone's is it an objective fact that um, you know, I'm wearing a black hoodie. Is that an objective fact?
Well
To every person who is not ingrained in philosophy. The answer is does
Right and and you even asking that question now. I'm suspicious of you as a person because what kind of game you trying to play
Yeah, what's funny is man when you said nerd shit and the moment you asked me that I was in my head
I was like, well, it depends. What? Well, so this is the thing. So the so the answer
Exactly. Well, those notes that like philosophy and I'm in the nerd. That's what I am in the nerd shit as well
Because you could just as easily point out and say well colors technically do not exist in the exterior world
Right colors are the experience qualia. Right the experience of seeing
You know, it's like the whole your blue is my red classic thought experiment
And cut like and black is the bad example. We should use green. So I've got slothers of katana over there. So that's green
For people who are red green colorblind
It's actually it's like that's a very practical example of like no, no, no
That actually isn't just green in and of itself or I don't actually know if they only see green or red or whatever
How it works, but theoretically if you couldn't see the color
It's not it's not an is it an objective fact that that's green even if
There's people who do literally don't perceive it. It gets complicated. So there's nuance
but
Now but then but but like if if the nuance forces you to say that it's not an objective fact that this is the color red
It's like you're speaking in a way that doesn't
That you know, most people just don't
Can't get can't even understand or get behind right
And so the whole when I was saying like nazi, you know, nazi equals bad person fashion equal bad person
I was sort of approaching it from that perspective where it's like
Yes, i'm aware there's nuance here
But the conversation that i'm trying to have is one that we can start with
Like whatever our definition of bad is we're going to come to an agreement that nazis are bad
Or at least doing nazi things are bad nazi activity is bad activity, right? Whether they're bad people it gets nuance but
Doing things that nazis do is the same as doing bad things and it's not that it's not as simple as that
But because again vosh has a big audience and when you get to the mass media perspective
I would say the simpler new the simpler
way of thinking about things is actually the more
Relevant way of thinking about things because that's how most people interpret it. Again, you know, what most of his audience is probably like 15 16 year olds
You know, they probably don't know
the you know
Not that I know anything but like they don't they're not approaching these issues from a
philosophically interesting like okay, how can we separate it's just like
You know, uh, the the conservative kid at my school who's bullying me as an asshole
And so this guy reinforces my perspective and you can switch that around to the conservative side where oh these liberal pretentious assholes are
You know and now this concerns guys telling me why all my liberal pretentious friends are asshole
So I like it right that's the that's the plane that is more relevant because if society collapses
It will be at that level of analysis. It will be at that level of conversation that failed that will cause society to fall apart
It's not well. We didn't properly articulate the differences between the objective reality and subjective reality. It's
Nazi's bad
communist bad
And we need to be able to from people like me whose fundamental goal is I'm trying to avoid
The end of the world. That's one of my many fundamental goals. Let's prevent society
For a comedian. It's a laudable goal for exactly. Yes, right
And I'm doing it through and and and to that point it's kind of like
I need to the theory is correct and I and this is like conversations you and I are having are
Sort of you know my bread and butter and that's what I live for
That I want to engage at this level, but when it comes to
how do I
go from this abstract conversation to
How do I communicate this to someone who?
You know has to work all day
To support a family and doesn't have time for all the stuff that I'm fortunate enough that I have time to dig into these books and all that stuff
Right and that's the approach I take on things for what it's worth. So that whole thing is a
I don't know. I we compassed a lot there. No, no, no, that was perfect
I think this is exactly what I was trying to get from me Paul as an
Like a manipulative very what I was trying to clarity for the farthest sake because I think I get it now
You see, I'm going to be totally upfront with you here. Uh
this is
The goal of my channel
Is not I don't care about saving the world. I don't care about even doing I care about doing good
Of course like to certain extent as a christian. Why not but but it's I'm purely interested in theory
Like I want I want to move my channel to its philosophy and theory and then my other love which is computer science
so
So now but but I can see and correct me if I'm wrong here, please
Your goal isn't pure purely to talk about
Jack that it does
Different so or episteme and then go on or even draw Peterson's about that, right?
Like I will do heavy theory videos
Right that are like, you know, we're I'm pulling from
directly from a george lay cough
neuroscience lecture
so I do do that but all of that is in the context of
utility like I'm
I'm pulling all this theory for the purpose of
making a moral prescription maybe okay, okay
Or at least even if that's not if I don't explicitly make that claim which in those videos I often do but sometimes I won't
but like
There is an element of it always comes back to how does this why is this relevant, right?
Versus sort of the it sounds like correct me if I'm wrong you have sort of an aesthetic appreciation of
The ideas and the theory themselves
That there's just some it's like art where it's like there's something in and of itself that speaks to you
all right, I'm not a pragmatist certainly
What's that? I'm not a pragmatist. I don't do things for pragmatic. I do right right
You put it perfectly aesthetic appreciation like I love and I yeah, and I again go back to paradox is like
I'm not saying that that that I don't have that
That's not like I love
movies and I love like
like Star Wars universe and fantasy type worlds and stuff like that
And obviously there's a huge aesthetic component of that certainly
but but the but for me the the aesthetics
Are also a function of utility in some sense where it's like like I take the evolutionary perspective where
You know, like you see a sunset, right? And we know from like a scientific perspective that
the the a sunset in particular
evokes a certain emotional response
um
That like fosters cohesion and stuff it like puts you in like a like a meta like a relaxed state of peace
and it's a in you know, you can be a reductivist and say visual stimuli emotional states
and
So the aesthetic is a serving a very functional purpose
But I kind of turn around the head where it's like it's not like
it's not like
The aesthetic is still fundamental where it's like this emotional response is not just like oh, it's just for survival
It's like no, no, no, it's
It's it's putting yourself in contact with the metaphysical
foundation of reality, right? What is that sunset?
Represent or what is that suns?
You know, I'm I'm I'm
Falling apart here because it gets so complicated. I mean, yeah, yeah, but but but
But
For me because I feel like I've always been more on the how does this relate to the thing in front?
I hated philosophy
um up until about
Freshman sophomore year of college in part because I had friends who studied philosophy
Who were just intellectual masturbators who would just string together those I told you well, no, you're not because you know
At least you're not to the degree that okay, okay, some of them were because
It was it was literally like
Poetry
Where I would say something like what is it to be in relationship to the object of our desire and that
the metaphysical reality of this that and it was like
It wasn't that you were saying anything it was the
It was the act of putting together these complicated words in with some rhythm and some poet and like, you know
That can be interesting from like a you know
Poetry without explicitly saying anything is still interesting
But that's all that's all that it was like it wasn't helpful
Like like philosophy wasn't when I first encountered it in the way that I encountered it. It wasn't being used
To elucidate anything it wasn't being used to improve your life
It was just here all these abstract concepts. I remember saying to my friend like
It is such a privileged arrogant thing to be able to sit back and say
What is the relationship between me and my consciousness and the objects around me?
It's like dude, there are people starving. There's there's shit. We have to do this is a waste of time
and and now
The reason I'm interested in philosophy is because in order to be able to to do those things
You know people are starving. Let's go address that there's shit to do
You have to like you have to get to you have to do philosophy to
Put yourself in the best position to be able to solve problems
So that's where I'm coming from
And you you know, it's a blend of both but it sounds like you
Maybe are also on the like there's just something about the aesthetics of it
Of you know being like being with a capital B
I remember first understanding that phrase was like, oh, that's cool
Like, you know independent of this didn't help me solve a problem or anything
but like oh oh being with a capital B is
There's reality as it manifests in front of me, but then there's reality as I experience it and there's
you know, that's an important distinction, but like
Some there's something about that distinction that speaks to you that that's aesthetic
I guess to some degree and so I value that as as well, but
Yeah, because you know in a way Paul then
Forgive me if this comes the wrong way you're kind of trying to do an impossible thing
Because it could be unfair to say or all you like if if if if someone says
Pf young your channel is a self-help channel. I mean, that's besides it's not a self-help channel
No, it's not just because you you talk about you in fact do talk about metaphysics and theory you talk about
archetype psychology all of that and that is
very much I believe
Grounded in your aesthetic appreciation of these concepts
Though yes, you also try and build a bridge. I don't know if that's a proper word
But you try and see how that can have a material impact on the world
And I think all philosophers do that for instance again one of my my hero Gizek
He'll take Hegel's metaphysics
Or Hegel's lack of metaphysics different conversation and then Lacan's
you know psychoanalysis and then he
Takes a Marxist perspective and he connects them and he he finds a synthesis into the real world where there's political action and whatnot
so
and and that's that's where
Maybe now we could connect this back to the the fascism bit where I kind of want to maybe I want to make it like an episode in this
in this conversation so that I can kind of
You know, uh, have it as like one one flow. Yep. Let's say. Um
It's that so Gizek was asked in in one interview
What's the purpose of philosophy?
and he said oh, it's it's a difficult question to answer but but
generally
Philosophy comes to salience in times of crisis because philosophy isn't about giving solutions. It's in fact
Learning even how to formulate the questions. It's not even about giving the answers
It's about it's about figuring out figuring out what questions to ask in the first place
That's I like that, you know, and I I certainly at a very pragmatic level. I agree with him there
Like I think philosophy isn't even about going and finding solutions that can be done in different disciplines like like science
Of course or economics. There are many other disciplines where we could focus on on on on solutions on palpable material solutions
But that is not philosophy, you know, and I think philosophy is the questions, which is why
Perhaps we could connect that to the uh
The fascism part where
Okay, so
uh
There are there are two two thinkers here. There's there's hannah arwin and then there's uh
I keep forgetting the guy's name um burto echo burto echo his list so
When when wash wash colds uh pizza the fascist, uh, here here's
Is it okay if you go there now to to like kind of yeah, yeah a bit. Yeah. Yeah. Um, so just for the videos
I'll put up the list on the screen. Uh, but I'll I'll first read it out
Um, you could even it's up to you. You could share it with me now. So we're both looking at it
But that's the idea. Yeah, but you know, if you don't want to have us be minimized. It's not that's the idea
Oh, we could both then refer to the same point that could work. The problem with being a nerd is man
I've got multiple screens and
Yeah, I'm doing you see like a bath the app spot. Yeah, so let me zoom in
So this is from open culture. I just found this list, but you could find it like on Wikipedia wherever
Um, and we could probably discuss this and then if if it's okay with you
There's also a small excerpt from uh, hannah arwin's book that I'd like to read out. Yeah, so
This is the list in fact that bush was referring to and I think this is a pretty good list to define a fascist from a theoretical perspective
Um, so, uh, there are 14 points here. Uh, I'm just gonna firstly
Go through
read out all 14, uh
The cult of tradition the rejection of modernism
Modernism, sorry the cut of action for action's sake
Disagreement in treason
fear of difference
appeal to social frustration
The obsession with the plot
The enemy is both strong and weak
pacifism is trafficking with the enemy
contempt for the weak
Everybody is educated to become a hero
What's that word?
machismo machismo and weaponry
uh
selective populism
Irv fascism speaks new speak. So it's like an owellian thing new speak
So firstly paul, let me just ask you up front from this these 14 points
If you were to give the devil his deal, let's say in this case the devil is wash
wash
Would you say is that is that a connection you can make to to any of peterson's work his persona even his twitter whatever he does publicly
From these 14 points
Yes, so I was I was looking over this, um
Prior to this conversation and what stood out to me is
A lot of these points
Are not just the descriptions of fascism but the description of
Tyranny in general or authoritarianism, right now. It's funny because
Uh, I think vosh has claimed like Stalin was a fascist
Right, so that that to my point it's like everyone who's a thought Mao Stalin nazis
fascism
What we normally think of as like kind of you know, the nazis equal fascist fascist is like a right-wing thing
and i'm pretty sure there's a lot of
Thinkers that would say that fascism is a right-wing phenomenon
Um, I think mark who's that's like his central idea is less. Yes a don't know. It's less. Yeah, it's a right-wing phenomenon. Yeah
Yeah, it's inherently right-wing
Which means Stalin was right-wing even though he called himself a communist so we get we immediately get into the realm of
Depending on how you define fact if fascism just means like you said ccp is fascist
It's like well, they're communist, but I get your point if if we're going to define fascism in the way
Yeah
Yeah, so, um
Like cult of tradition
One only has to look at the syllabus of every fascist move to find major traditionalist thinkers
The nazi nazis was nourished by traditionalist syncretists the cult elements
so
It's kind of like a matter of interpretation
And so is anyone who appreciates tradition at risk of are they somewhat fascist?
So if I if I have a minor appreciation for tradition if I get married and my wife takes my last name
For no other reason than its tradition
Is that am I semi-fascist in that regard?
Uh
And I hope well, I hope that's not well. I don't know if that's what vosh was saying given that we're talking about
You know his because he brought up the the the it's the reason we're having this conversation is because of him
So I'm going to riff it here. Yeah, but a lot sure. Uh, but well, here's where I
Think of Peterson as falling into some maybe let's take the cult of tradition, right?
so
Partially from my understanding, uh, I haven't got much of an understanding
Or like the details of this list by umberto echo
But Hannah are and certainly talks about this cult of tradition idea where she says
so, you know, uh
Peterson says
The the west is in crisis from the postmodern new marxist. So
Or from these radical leftists or from uh woke people the west is in crisis
Where uh, we are going through a downfall in our civilization
um, and
and the idea is
the the cult of tradition the way I read it is that
We have all these crazy people that are
Creating havoc and chaos in society
We need to go back to something of more more ordered something more of a conservative
Way where there was hierarchy and structure where
Men knew men knew what men were women knew what women were everybody had a place a role and for me
That's fascist when the moment we start prescribing on how
individuals should should fit into
a certain
Let's say we prescribe how people should live their lives within broader society and we
Say, uh, you have a place. So, you know, it's it's funny, uh
Nature who's a proto postmodernist in fact believed in hierarchy. He said that everybody has a place
There are the the masters and slaves. There are some people
Yeah, we're much exactly some people fit in the hierarchy
And and which the irony there is of course that uh, he was a postmodernist
They didn't believe in any any objective morality. Not none of that. He he didn't even he believed that we should reject
Uh tradition, but he called christianity slave morality
Exactly, and he he said he believes that christianity was the worst thing that happened to the west
Which I women to disagree with him on, uh, but anyway, sorry
I'm going all over the place here. The the idea of for me the cult of tradition is where
To put it very very plainly
When people say oh the good old days the good old days where
You know when you know where there was monogamy where there was you know, many women got married where you know
People all over the church, uh, everybody knew their place in society
But now we live in this chaotic times. Firstly, I don't think the good old days existed ever
There's never been the good old days in my opinion. I think in in some sense
I'm here very much a judge here and where the only university is is conflict
Society is forever going through this antagonism. Let's say
uh, but when
Yeah, when Peterson does those kinds of prescriptions, I do think I'm not gonna that's for me. That's not fascism
But I think there are elements of fascism that can come through him saying
People should find their place in society
if that makes well, so okay, so that we can have a whole interesting conversation on that point, I think because
I so
I'm not sure what the difference between you said like you said prescribing
people
prescribing, you know, what people how people should live their life in a social hierarchy, correct
Yeah, perhaps we're prescribing their place in that society. Yeah, that's probably a bit of if putting so, okay
So let me complicate that because I would say for example children obey their parents. Is that fascistic?
Well, to a certain extent, I would say yes
I mean, this is where this is where things get a bit iffy and you know, we go on the nerd theory shit
Right, which is fine. I'm happy. Let's we're here for that. This is not
Because this is like 200,000 people will not see this. So, you know, it's not about appealing to the masses
It's about not at all, man. Like I just want to purely speak about theory today if you don't mind and I know you
So I don't I don't feel guilty for doing so. No, totally. Totally. Okay. So to that point to that point
You know children obey their parents is you know, it's it's it's at least in this regard. There's some element of
fascist fascism to it
And it's like, okay
then
This is where
This is where, you know, equivocation aside because we're not having a debate and it's not too a thing
Then fascism isn't a bad thing
if that's the case
or at least like or at least
The lack of fascism is a bad thing because if if if children should obey their parents
is
Fascistic like there's no society that's ever existed that isn't at least somewhat fascistic because every society
Children obey their parents, you know, it differs what age and all that stuff, but
And in Christianity too, right Christianity is like there's a whole honor your mother and father
Yeah, submission is a big part of Christianity. Yes. Yeah, so I guess how do you think about like
Do you think fascist fascism is bad?
And that's just so this is that's too simple of a question obviously, but I guess
Even if we're just talking about intellectually
You know fascism purely descriptive or or is there some
You know, it's it's there's an implication that it's a negative thing, right? That's that's a good point
I would say
intellectually and here's where I'm very much going back into philosophy. It is purely descriptive
Whereas the prescriptive element, okay, I would say, okay Hannah Arendt's different
She certainly makes moral claims in the book like in in origins of totalitarianism. She certainly makes moral claims and
and for good reason given that she was a Jew in Germany
and she
Was exiled
When the Nazis came into power. So she has a she has a right to make moral claims, but as as at an intellectual level
I I would say
It has that kind of here's where I think the descriptive element matters because
Uh, the descriptor a list like this theory, let's say is in some sense the canary in the coal mine
It's an harbinger of what's to come. It's it's a way of of analyzing and making sense of reality
Via a a theoretical framework
therefore
you know, if if
For example, if I say yes, you know, forcing children to listen to their parents, even though
Look, I'm not a I'm not a father yet. I'd like to be one
I would certainly warn my kids to to listen to me to a certain extent, you know, not all that much, but sure
Definitely not completely. Yeah, if there's
That's bad. Yeah, yeah, because then it then it, you know, they kind of become like
Hux
to you the technical
The technical to the theory
You got to be able to sometimes break the rules a little bit. Uh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah, and and I don't know so
If I could connect this to something a bit more tangible, let's say we're we're getting
Way way too abstract here and I apologize. It's my nature. I can't
You know, Peterson always talks about cleaning your room, you know personal responsibility
Look look look what burdens of the world you want to take upon and and live in life and and so it's it's it seems as if
It seems as if from his rhetoric, there's very little
uh
Let's say dialogue a conversation about in fact
No, not focusing on myself not focusing on on what I can do within the structure of society
But what about changing the structure of society itself? What about challenging?
These hierarchies itself because for me, that's essentially what leftism is left leftism is it's it's quite simple
it's it's simply wanting to
uh
To challenge the existing social hierarchies or to a certain extent abolishing them even though that's perhaps an impossible impossibility
Yes, I would say likely an impossibility. Yeah, nonetheless. It's it's still challenge. It's this constant challenge of existing
structures and social hierarchies
Yeah, making hierarchies more equal or yeah, you know
I mean them. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah
So, okay on that point in particular
Well, first off, I would say
Uh a thorough reading of peterson. I don't I think would
What's the word?
I think would absolve not absolve. I think would
Banish that idea that you just put forward from your head. Sure because one
Yeah, yeah, it's a petersonian meme almost where his phrase is
You need to do what's good for you
What's good for your family? What's good for the society? What's good for your community? What's good for society? Right?
That's that's the p that's the
I believe that's the highest form of piagetian
Moral
No, no, no
Piaget is concerned with moral development, right?
Like first you play first you can like play play with another child without having explicit rules
Then you can play a game with explicit rules
And then the final stage the highest order of moral development for human beings is being able to generate new rules to new games
and another
that's
The consequence of that is
Human beings can act in ways that are good for themselves
And also good for their families
And also good for their communities and also and it just expands, right?
There's and and the the fundamental petersonian claim is like
Your brain is wired to tell you when you're doing that when you are most deeply meaningfully engaged with something
whether it's pursuing art or
You know creating some code that's useful or doing whatever when you're develop when you're developing yourself to the point
Where you can become the kind of person that's as good for yourself and society as you can be
You're adapted to that and so the whole idea of like hey the reason that you pursue
Personal responsibility the reason that you clean your room
Is so that you put yourself in the position to be able to make those broad social changes, right?
Because you need politicians you need people that do that, you know
that
You know, like he's a fan of Tolstoy and uh, Martin Luther King and Gandhi and all that right? It's like
That was clearly all social action. So, you know collective action
And again, and this is funny your point about centrism. I don't know if we'll uh
Time to go over, you know, we could we I'm more than happy to do a separate thing just on centrism
That would be really interesting. Yeah, I mean, I have a
Impossibility theoretical reasons as to why I sure I'm as impossible. Uh, but nonetheless, sorry to interrupt
Sure. Well, just to preview what my at least argument would be or my perspective is is that
The best elements of leftism and the best elements of conservatism
Are encapsulated in centrism and it's just a matter of adapting to the circumstance. So for example leftism as you said
it's about
Equalizing hierarchies and addressing corrupt social structures. It's like
There you and Peterson's whole point is the whole reason there are people with personalities that we would describe as liberal is because that's a necessary function
You need people who can who when society is getting corrupt, which it always does because it always leads towards corruption
and and the world is constantly changing new technology is created and
The laws that you had in the past aren't going to apply
Like, you know, with like ai for example, we that clearly needs to be regulated, right or or anything the internet, you know
Like free speech like, you know, we still don't allow child abuse to be videotaped and distributed
Like that's not even a remotely contentious philosophical. Well for some people it might be a remotely just philosophically contentious at you
but for most people it's not and rightfully so and so
Um, why did I even bring that up? So so you need people on the on the left who can say hey
these these traditions and these rules if they can't just be
They have to be interpreted to the modern environment that we're in and the the process of that interpretation is inherently left-wing
What we're
Right and then the conservative flip side would be like, hey
I know that you guys want to change all this shit, but we've been doing this shit for 2000 years and it turns out that all of these changes
um, didn't consider why we were doing things for 2000 years to begin with right like, um, a good example is
Like this like the sexual revolution, you know
The you know in the victorian times people were super prude and repressor sexual quality and that was clearly unhealthy
Okay, so what was the flip side of that the sexual revolution the 60s and all that well, okay
You know, there's clear benefits to that people are freer and you know, it's not constrictive and you know people can in principle
You know get compatibility with partners before they get married and stuff. There's all kinds of good reasons. I think you can make
But what's the flip side of that? Well, you know how much sexual assault occurred at woodstock
You know how much sexual assault occurred in the sexual liberation where oh, we were just we're just liberated. It's like
Consent was not nearly as emphasized during the sexual revolution and it's funny because
the current sort of left-wing perspective on
On um, like consent and all that
It's sort of doubling back to the conservative part where it's like you need you need, you know, it's very
You know no room for or you know, what is it? Uh for messing around you need you need
You know strict verbal consent on every post-movement. Yeah, it's it's pathetic. I mean I mean anyone who's been with uh
Well, because I'm straight. I'm gonna be with a woman. I don't think anyone's gonna go and be like before you make out with the girl
Hey, could you sign this?
Well, dude, there's black. There's black. There's a black mirror episode about like someone like can you sign off all the consent forms
Of all the things we're about to do or whatever. It's like something that'd be great sex, right? Yeah, imagine that
Yeah, exactly. Yeah, that's all the that's all the mystery. Yeah, that's the foreplay
Signing that's in forms. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So so the whole point of that is to say
the left is needed half the time or
For half of the problems and the conservatives are needed for the other half of the problems
And you have to adjudicate between both because the environment is shifting around you
and so
I I'm not I don't buy the idea that peterson is an anti leftist in its most positive form
He's obviously anti extreme leftist just as he is extreme against extreme right wing to tell the terrarianism, right? I mean he's whole
analysis of nazi germany and his old thesis is like
This shit was bad and I'm trying to you know get everyone to understand how bad it was and how
You could have easily played a part in bringing about that terrible situation and why it's important to understand that so that we don't bring that about
Yeah, okay. So here's here's a follow-up question. Um, I I think I mostly agree with what you said
But then and forgive me for name dropping, but I've got to do this because I'm a nerd
so, you know, if you ask someone like
like
like data, let's say, uh
What do you mean by okay? You ask from them. Uh, it is truth objective
But perhaps what data would say is you know, we got a question the question itself
He'll speak about the episteme where can we even to even have that question
What structures do we have to ask that question? Like that's how data would impose that
Which is that's the question the question the question exactly
Yeah, there's a clip of peterson doing that exact thing where it's like, well, what do you mean by god?
What do you mean by you? What do you mean by god? So that's funny because it's it's he does the same thing in some
And I think it's you know, you know in a certain to a certain extent. I like that person does that
Yeah, I don't know what I mean if the devil is do
Yeah, of course. Yeah, what yeah, yeah, who knows what what do you mean by god? It's it's difficult
It's it's perhaps the question what all right, right, right
The the way I would
connect that to this first point the cut of tradition is
So you said there are there are there are people in the left people in the right and we're trying to find the best of both worlds
and kind of create this kind of synthesis
And and then maybe come to a higher truth or a better way of life something
Beyond something. Yeah, let's even say morally better than what we have right now
but
what if
There can't be a synthesis. What if in fact there is this inherent conflict
Between what right wing people believe or left wing left wing people believe so kiss and point is
to connect it to the gender issue, uh, which you and wash went into deeply
what if
fundamentally
The people in the left or people let's say in the in the in the far left or the woke moment
Had a different idea of what gender is
To conservatives like a person. I'm sorry to say this, but I I'm gonna say I fucking hate matt walsh
Uh, he he really just angered me. He's a fascist. He's someone that I would describe as fascistic
I mean, you saw his proto fascist about killing drug drug dealers
He he tweeted beautiful airport in singapore and he was like we would have a put like this if we kill
People who smoke weed or something. Yeah, so, uh, yeah, I think like for example, he would easily fit into most points on this list
Easily we wouldn't even have to have this conversation calls himself a fascist democratic fascist. So yeah, exactly
And it's like ha ha it's a joke. It's like, yeah, well root of all jokes. Yeah, I mean, correct
Right. I mean, he's got a million followers. I don't think, you know, I disagree with that kind of cynical thing
When people say oh everything's a joke. No, man, sometimes the things you say
Recently, I don't know if you were familiar with this. Oh wash in fact covered this but that 16 year old
Transgender girl. She was she was murdered in high school. Yeah, Brianna in England, right in England
I mean, so no no no sometimes not everything's a joke and sometimes
You what you're trying to do is very much warranted and needed where
Yeah, you do try to take these theoretical concepts and
Connect them to real life because there are real material impacts. Sorry. I'm going off on a tangent here
What I'm trying to make is so my question is what if there is that inherent conflict? What what do we do that?
Well, we for well fair enough
I think I'd say we first identify is that conflict because it's inherent or is the conflict because of breakdown of communication
So like you gave the example of
Look ahead
Well, no, I would I would say at a very conceptual level. It is just fundamentally inherent. So, uh
That I mean communication is a complicated topic, but like for example if
a
let's say a leftist believes that
Gender is a a social phenomena. So, you know speaking about people like Judith Butler
It's it's performativity where where what gender is is a performance or it's it's how we view ourselves in the
Gaze or the perspective of the other that society let's say for all the innocent purposes
Whereas they put it on the right would say no
Gender is it's it's rooted in something more innate objective
Be it biology or be it our hierarchies or be it our traditions gender isn't something that's malleable. It is something
Uh, well, you don't even have to say have to say binary, but it is something that you just can't decide for yourself
How do we find a how do we reconcile these almost?
irreconcilable
Uh assertions or proclamations
Yeah, well
So my perspective is there's four
There are four different perspectives on every single issue every single contention. There's four different perspectives. Yeah
There's the far right
perspective, which is incorrect the far left perspective, which is incorrect
Then there's the reasonable left and the reasonable right perspective
So like
As a side example like abortion
The far right perspective is the moment of sperm fertilized an egg. That's a human bean. That's wrong. I don't that does make any sense to me
That's unintuitive. It's it's a silly position
The far left position is we can abort a child even after it's born. Okay, so those are the two extremes
Yeah, so the what's what's the what's the correct left wing perspective?
um, the moment of sperm fertilized an egg, it's not a human bean at some point it does become a human bean
but
We have to allow abortion prior to some for some time after the sperm being fertilized or the egg being fertilized
Right, so there's some perspective where abortion should be allowed. That's a reasonable left wing perspective
The reasonable right wing perspective is at some point that sperm that fertilized egg does become a human bean
And we need to not allow abortion for that
So the the there's two far extremes far right far left
Those are wrong and then and then the middle left and the middle right gets synthesized
So I that's like a and that's just one example
I believe that I believe you can take that approach on every single issue immigration abortion
And you can even in a weird way to you know, break it down to like if you have a personal disagreement with someone
Like if you're in a relationship and there's some argument
You can use that map
In the same way it obviously doesn't apply because it's not like a political ideology
But every belief there's too far of one, you know, it's like the golden middle right Aristotelian mean. Is that what it is?
Right, there's always a little way
to evaluate
any moral issue, right?
So I don't actually
So the you're you're put you're saying if it was the case that there's a fundamental irreconcilable difference
between
Broadly the left or the right on a particular issue. How do we go about doing that? I would challenge
I would say I don't believe reality is set up such that that actually exists
I believe that so we have multiple differences. Okay. Yes
I don't think I think I think to the degree that something appears to be an irreconcilable difference and it's like
You know to your point like to your credit like
We are in a very polarized state right now, which would very easily lead everyone to believe of course this is irreconcilable differences
duh
But I would say that fundamentally I think is a breakdown of communication and the gender example. I think is a good example because
like
Gender and sex I
I conceptualize is different gender is socially constructed and sex is biological male female and then masculine
and feminine now man and woman is just whatever dude if
Sometimes I'll refer to it biologically and if I'm talking to a trans person, maybe I'll you know refer to them as whatever
It's just it's it's it's that's not a big enough deal
to
to
To die on a hill of how many use the words in this way
But certainly masculine and feminine socially constructed spectrum male and female is a binary. There's intersex, but
For all intents and purposes. It's a binary, right?
So the irreconcilable difference I think is if is just a
if we could get all the conservatives to agree like hey, you know how like
Chuck Norris is a man
and
uh
You know, who's a fucking super skinny kind of you know, you know how uh mick jagger is a man
You know how like yeah, yeah, you know how like they're both men
But mick jagger is a little bit, you know more kind of flamboyant and
Yeah, and Chuck Norris is like, you know, this kind of classic masculine type whatever
We can recognize that there's a there's a spectrum in there, right?
And it's and it's influenced by you know, how they're raised and their culture and all that okay
Boom masculinity and gender is a social construct, right? Okay
sex is so that we that the
The the centrist's job is to get conservatives to recognize that okay, and then to the leftists
Or the far left or whatever so hey male and female there's some variation, but like
every possible
Male and female are fundamental biological categories that are that are older than
uh
You know like billion, you know billions hundreds of millions of years old like plants have gametes, right?
Plants have pollen and other like male and female are fundamental categories
And there's a lot of differences between males and females that are clearly biological and not socially constructed
and
Our socially constructed roles do have some correlate like masculinity correlates to maleness
right like us like, you know
Why are what, you know, if we're talking about gender roles, why are most of the physical labor jobs all met?
Well, because males on average are stronger
So the social so the socialized role of masculine being physical labor physical
Clearly has something to do with being male, but there's women who are strong as well
So there's no reason to have that social distinction be binary
Even though the underlying biology that the social distinctions related to is binary, right?
There's there's room to expand things and also with technology. We decouple social roles from biology
So like as a male, I I've I've never hunted
Right, and if the world all ecstasy went out tomorrow, I would starve. Um, I am not
I'm not, uh
What would you say the may the traditional male role of like hunting all that shit
It is not it's not something I engage in because technology has decoupled the need for me to be a hunter
Versus I can go to the grocery store and I can press, you know, do other things, right? So like
Clearly
There's a social aspect and the more technology we have and the more society changes the more we can
Differentiate the gender role from the underlying biology, right? Like the birth control pill, right? Like, you know women
It was it would be much more difficult for women to
travel the world in the ancient times
Because, you know, there was no birth control and no tampons and no any and like, you know, any of that stuff and it's like
I'm not a woman, but I bet if I asked most most women, hey
If all tampons and birth control and all of that went away tomorrow
Would that make your life more difficult in virtually every way?
Yes, it would and so
You know, you just think like that's that was the norm for 2000 years and
You know, maybe it's like, okay. That's why
Women weren't, you know, for we're not leading armies as often aside from not being able to fight, but it's like
You're just weighed down by this biological burden that women have that
Technology has been able to alleviate in a lot of ways. So anyway, that's a whole roundabout way of saying
I don't believe that was one example of where I don't think there is an irreconcilable difference and I
ontologically disagree that
There are such things as
irreconcilable
Um
Positions now there are people who are erect like there are people who are so far gone on either side
That they're that they are irreconcilable and also like psychopathy exists. Yeah. Um, we're talking about
Yeah, we're talking at a yeah, I see that. Yeah, I think, you know, this is why because like for me ontologically
I'm completely in the opposite side where I think essentially
Reality is a conflict
Uh, you know, and this is where I'm I'm even a christian here where
There's a brokenness of reality. It's as if something
went terribly wrong
You know in christian I would call it the fall, but there's this so for me, which is why I think in fact
There's a Lacanian point truth is found in the conflict itself
And I don't think the the conflict is ever reconciled
Which is why here's where I'm sure you'd agree agree with me on this. I am a strong
believer in dialogue
And conversation even if conversation can be heated and it can get ugly. I still believe we ought to
Converse at all times and I'm a free speech absolute absolutist
um, so
So, okay, uh, I think we kind of touched on the point a
A lot more than we should have but I I see that I see that um, yeah, here's here's the other thing
I was thinking let's probably go if you don't mind pull to point number five
Sure feel of difference
The first appeal of a fascist or prematurely fascist movements is an appeal against the intruders
Toss or fascism is racist by definition. I believe that's how you pronounce
So this is again
It's I don't I don't mean to connect everything to the trans issue, but I feel like it's something that's just
Yeah, it's a cultural touch point. It's a cultural touch point and
Therefore, it's just like an easy thing to point to there. Certainly. I you know is
Society is fundamentally
Currently in a point of change. We have all these new ways of being we have new ways of people expressing their their gender their sexuality
and I would say
Peterson for me athletes seems like he's touching into
Uh
Or at least he himself, which is quite ironic given that he is such an open person who who you know
Focuses on philosophy and ideas all the time
He has hey, he has this kind of
I would probably I wouldn't even call it like a spite or a hateful thing. It's not I'm not trying to moralize it
I put put any kind of moral baggage, but
He he has this feel of difference of what's happening in the
the the trans movement, uh, and and and and the kissing point is
I think a few months ago
Kyle Kalensky again a person I really like I watch the time secular talk
Interviewed Peterson and asked him would you would you ban?
trans uh, oh a conversion surgery even for adults. Yeah for adults. Yeah
Yeah, I was like personally for me. I would say unequivocally. No, I wouldn't if you want me to just you know
Do what do what you want to do? Uh, right
You know, um, but he said, oh, I've got to think about it because he was and here's where I think he was trying to
Play, you know, daddy who's telling society how to be, you know, like you should live this way
Which is which is fine. Like I mean we look I think he's got uh, I I believe this
Sincerely, I think he's trying to do what's right. He's got good at least to us at least
To to to the extent that one can have good intent. He he does have good intent
um, and so do you think?
He he unfortunately
Falls into this point here where he does have this kind of fear of difference where the trans thing isn't just merely about free speech
It is something beyond that to this idea of
breaking down binaries, let's say
Yeah, well this um, and maybe in just f y maybe this is
The last point we can wrap up on and then because there's there's when we're done
And when we're done this conversation, I want to ask you something after we're done recording
Absolutely, man. Yeah, but this yeah, maybe this is we can we can end here and have a chance for another one
um
This goes back to the point about
Again, I feel like this can be used to describe basically anything that is bad
Where like fear of difference
That's a human universal doesn't fascism or otherwise
That's like tribalism. These people are different from me different equals
Potential but also danger
I don't know if that's true though when you say it's a human universe
So sort of interrupt you because I would say I am very much
Inaminated by difference like my my whole life is
Looking into difference like I constantly look into what's novel what's new
You know, I in fact get aesthetic pleasure from it. So
sure, but that but
You know, it's it's it's it's a it's relative difference, right? So for example, if I'm comparing two cars
You know, uh
Pick up truck in a Lamborghini. There's a lot of different
You know, there's a there's a lot of difference there, but they're both cars
And if I'm comparing two different cultures a lot of difference there, but we're both we have some common understanding
If you know, like a psychopath who literally sees the world differently from you
You know, it's like how much difference are you when I see you I'm saying like the difference
I see that you know saying yeah, so
and and and that's
You know
Like we loved we love to travel
precisely because
and it's interesting because like
It's I think it's the opposite we love to travel not because we like to experience different cultures
But because in the experience of the difference we recognize our commonality
Right that wherever I go people still love each other and you know, they eat and share meals and all that stuff and it's kind of that
the
By exploring the differences we have a deeper appreciation for our commonality
But if we truly went somewhere where it was different like we're like no children are abused for fun and ritual here
There's a reason you'd be afraid of that, right?
So fear of difference
You know, I think
Again, I think that's inherent and it's the quit like the quit it's like is but again, peterson's whole thing is
No differences where opportunity lies, right?
Like you have to you know get out like the whole abraham story get out of your dad's tent
get out of your dad's basement and go out into the world because
Chaos, you know slay the dragon to get the gold you have to confront difference and fear and the you have to confront
Confront the unknown to bring about order you have to make order out of the unknown because if you're just in order all the time
You have nothing to just become stagnant. Yeah
So the fear of difference, you know, but again, I like I also think
Well, is is is the far left, you know, the the the super
Gender ideologues are they not also fear of difference from their orthodoxy?
Well, yeah, yeah a conservative christian or a conservative
Muslim or something like wouldn't they be
Wait a second. This person has a very rigid
Appreciation for these traditions that we hold to be bad
So they would just you know, their fear would be just as much as anyone else's right? That's why I'm saying it's a kind of universal
So you're trying. Yeah, I see that. Yeah, I have a few points about difference
But I think
We're short on time and you said you've got a question to ask from me
But before you do ask that question, Paul, could I
Could I just request I I really want to read the excerpt out of the
Hanaran book because it's connected to a lot of the points here. It's connected. Yeah number 10
um
So do you want to first ask me the question and then I'll read so I want to ask you something after we record
Or after the recording's over when we're done. It's absolutely a logistical question unrelated to that. Oh, yeah, absolutely. So, uh, anyway, uh,
There are there are a few other look
I'm not certainly saying from my point of view that
Peterson perfectly aligns to all 14 of these points that would be bizarre and insane
I'm just looking at a few points here. I'm trying to view his work
via this framework
And a big thing
Here's okay. This is going to be a difficult thing to articulate, but I'm going to try my best. So
A big thing for him
Which I
Was initially quite enamored by this idea of strength
I've always appreciated strength the appreciated competence
and this kind of being the best version of yourself to use like a
terrible clich clich term
and the the importance of putting yourself together and and and trying to
In some sense be be a gold, you know, just like aspire towards this highest ideal
and in in in many ways he himself is
Very much enamored by the strongman persona. He loves people like jaco or people like, um
Even Joe Rogan, um, yeah, Joe Rogan is a complicated
case, but
Sure, not all complicated. Yeah, aren't we aren't we all? Uh, so the point Hannah Aron makes though is
Peterson and in his book maps of meaning he he's I recall I read it a few years ago. He says
the the cause for uh totalitarianism or fascism just to keep it within context
Is apathy indifference this feeling of uh, I don't care. I'm not going to carry the world's burden and do something about it
But funny enough though Hannah Aron makes the complete opposite point and and she says no in fact
Indifference by itself isn't a reason for fascism or apathy by itself
So people just minding their own business that say I'm not caring about what's going on in the world
isn't a reason for fascism, but it's
quite the contrary the opposite where it's people who think
That they have to be this great person this this strongman this this hero who
carries the burden of the world and and lives his like Nietzschean life
Uh, those are the people that end up becoming fascists and so this I've just for this conversation
I I I had I read this a while back, but I had to like I
I was I I did highlight the point so I could find it easily. Um, this is the penguin
The the penguin modern classics version so page 100
Uh, sorry page 410, uh from Hannah Aron's the origins of totalitarianism great book
I recommend it. I recommend everyone should read it. It's it's a it's a very easy read too
Like she's a really good writer. So I'm not gonna page 410 though. It is page 410. Yeah
I'm into this nerdy shit. You know that, right? You probably already figured that out. Right, right. That's fair
But here's so I'm not gonna read the whole page. That'll take way too long, but there are two excerpts the first is
She states this is about what leads to uh totalitarianism
Now this is in the context of post world war two
Indifference to public affairs
Neutrality on political issues are in themselves no sufficient course for the rise of totalitarian movements
so
That that's the point I made before indifference isn't particularly a bad thing and then she goes on to explain
that
But the problem though is in fact when she calls it the bourgeoisie society the bourgeois society
When they start feeling some of the things
animated in this list things like the fear of difference things like uh
Where's the other one? I'm not content for the week. Sorry. Uh selective populism where
The majority of people are feeling threatened by these
Minorities like it could be the lgbdq folks or you know migrants or whoever
I don't think most people in the west are afraid of migrants. I would let's just focus on uh the lgbdq
That that group so and then she says the bourgeois feel threatened by them to their way of life to their traditions
And therefore what happens is they they look for this strongman this this failure and then she states
sorry not this failure this uh
this this person who's gonna
Kind of embody all the the burdens of the public and do something about it like let's say even like a trumpian figure
Uh, these but these bourgeois attitudes are very useful for those forms of dictatorship
So the attitude she talks about is kind of what I describe this feeling of or what's going on
We're living in uncertain times our way of life is being challenged. It's being
Destroyed by these outsiders by the other
These bourgeois attitudes are very useful for these forms of dictatorship in which and here's the important point
A strong man takes upon himself the troublesome responsibility for the conduct of public affairs
They are positive hindrance to totalitarian movements which can tolerate bourgeois individualism
No more than any kind of individualism
So the the the point she's trying to make is that the the latter bit didn't really matter
but the point point point she's trying to make is when
The strong man
Beals the kind of burden of society and is that it places heroic role almost
You know messianic role to to to save people
That is what leads to this card personality and she goes on to like mob rule and whatnot and gives rise to a fascist like like a hitler
Or like a miscellany or
Uh, like i'm at waltz sometimes. Um
so
Anyway, just that that's the point i'm trying to make here because he does emphasize a lot on the importance of strength and the strong man and greatness
Do you think that?
i'm not saying there's a direct correlation, but it's a there's this like
fine line where it could
Either inadvertently let's say lead to fascistic tendencies in society as a whole
In peterson's work or in waltz
Oh, no, no, not not. I don't I don't care about waltz. I in fact think he's his peterson's work. Uh, peterson's work. Yeah. Yeah, I agree. I agree here. Yeah, um
So
and this is such an interesting topic because
It gets into the archetypal structure of the human mind
where
I believe and I think it is
the case
that to be human
means
you have you have within you
a predisposal to respond to certain
What would you call it? Uh
Certain
Symbols and words and
Psychological content, you know in a certain way you are predisposed to respond
To certain psychological content in a certain way and the example of that would be
Exactly your point about strength. Why why why are
Why is it the case that all human beings
would be wired
for
To admire strength inherently. Well
From an evolutionary perspective, the obvious reason would be you need strong people to keep you from getting eaten by, you know
Werewolves and all that shit or not werewolves, but you know, yeah
Well, well that affordably werewolves and all that dragon. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah
No, but hold on. Just just just wait a minute. I think I didn't make myself clear
Hannah. Yeah, go ahead and make a naturalist naturalistic claim. Sorry. I can't talk today
I'm getting very kind of excited about this topic because this is something I've talked about a lot. It's more
She's she's in fact making a very marxist point here where she's she's despite. She's not a marxist
She's saying it's the bourgeois society. So that's essentially most of us
Yep, who kind of have this individualistic way of life. They do they do things how they do things
And then when that way of life feels threatened, so it's not all human beings feel threatened by
Different sure it's a certain. Okay, you know people which is let's say the majority
I'm not saying that's the case, but just for all the interesting purposes
That when the majority feels threatened a strong man comes into power and this is a cult personality
Sure. Yes. Yeah. Yeah, that's fair and I so
I would tie that into what I said. So there's there's that universal element
There's the archetypal element where to be human means you are wired to respond to certain
You know content or behaviors or symbols
and I would say and so
Recognizing that so when it comes to what happens when the middle class what happens when my way of life gets threatened, you know, it's like
If you know if we can talk about this like it's like the school shootings, right? You know how many like in America
People view as this epidemic while he's you know, like in you've all day and in new town and all these different places. It's like, yeah, that's bad
You know, obviously, I don't feel any
You know unless your psychopath you disagree
But you have to remember like
That happens every day in Chicago in every day in these inner cities
You know how many kids are shot and people are shot every day and we don't hear about it
But as soon as the massacre occurs at a place that looks like where I would have gone to school
Now it's a significant issue
and to me that
I don't know that when you were describing what Hannah was saying that evokes of that kind of idea where oh now my
School is getting shot up. That's not supposed to happen. Everything else. That's that you know, that just
I don't think about that. But what now it's in my the bourgeoisie kind of perspective and
Yeah, it's like
So, you know in some sense, I just agree straight up, you know, I I think uh
Yeah, I don't I don't
Because it is it is the people who have to live day to day and don't concern themselves with
That's the shootings are their way of life. So there's no
tension that
catalyzes some
broader movement because that's just how they're in on the day to day
But yeah, when when it's the bourgeoisie so to speak that gets the privilege perspective like it's threatened
I can see that in many ways what
What kind of saddens me is I think
unfortunately
Peterson's work has now just become a way to just justify the status quo
It's it's become a way to justify the typical visual way of life which as a leftist and again
I'm biased here because I come from a left wing point of view. Um
Pull on a leftist
What even that like because you're not fully a leftist at least not my definition because
You don't you know if you don't buy into what I would require to stereotypically leftist like
Children like kkk is you know the conservatives are kkk and children. I don't know your perspective on children being a lot of transition
I'm very much. Um, yeah, that's tough on man. I mean, I am more on your side with that
Right and that's a function of just the medical literature. That's almost not even a philosophical
Exactly. Yeah, whether or not what is the empirical data? I think yeah, look mate like I
When I was I interrupted you I interrupted you
No, no, no, that's that's totally fine. But I'm just too on your point like when I was like, I didn't even know
you know if
I don't even know if I was real, you know, like
It was probably my whole other traumatic different thing. I need to psychoanalyze myself, but
Therefore one should be yeah, I think I'm more on the idea of uh over there. Perhaps I'm a bit more conservative when it comes to children
uh, but but
Especially when it comes to economics, you know, I I believe I strongly believe in unions, you know, I think most
Most things should be public and and you know, anyway economically speaking. I'm certainly a leftist
And and my problem though is that's where that's why I was I was really keen to read out this this excerpt from Hannah Aron's book
Because what she says is these these people who feel threatened aren't
Aren't she she doesn't say everyone feels threatened. She's very specific to to put it to because she's a social social philosopher
to a
To a certain group of people which is a majority that the bourgeois the bourgeoisie for the bourgeois way of life and and
Here's where I mean, I get very very, uh
Kind of if you know, um, I would consider myself an anti capitalist
Even though I see
Capitalism has has its merits too
uh, you know, like where Peterson says
You know, you you go and do your thing, you know, like focus on your life be be great
You build your business
but
But here you know at one point though
I think we should all go back to good old christianity and be like no
I had sometimes, you know, you shouldn't go and do your thing even though your life is in shambles
You should probably go and be live a life of service and yeah question
You know, you know, maybe live live via christian metaphysics and yeah, I don't know if you saw my critique of jordan peterson
It's called rest in peace or we need to rescue jordan peterson from the belly of the whale
I watched that. Yes. Uh, my whole point was like, hey, I don't know if I mentioned it in that one, but I mentioned it somewhere where
I was good. Yeah, it's like, hey, there's
Peterson's really fallen into this like I'm a dirt. I'm an evil capitalist and I don't apologize about it
It's like, okay. Well, that's a problem
Because there's problems with capitalism and like I'm gonna I think I'm gonna do a video on
Eric Weinstein's marxism is what I'm gonna call it something like that where Eric Weinstein has some very
salient critiques of capitalism
That are, you know, map on to marxism and not derive from marxism per se, but it's like
So when you say you're an anti-capitalist, I'm like I
completely
Maybe I wouldn't go so far as to use that term, but I'm certainly sympathetic to whatever you for the same reasons
I would call I would consider myself a post capitalist. I think we live in post. Sure. That's fair
Yes, we have surplus value and we need to figure out how to make society more. Yeah, especially with ai coming
Last thing we need is more innovation. We need to figure out how to get this fixed
Yeah, and you know the reason and again, you know, here I'm very traditional the reason I am that it's because I'm a christian
I believe in the teachings of christ that we in fact should
base a society not that not a society that's transactional but rather a society that's
undergirded by love
And here I'm very much a christian so
And then that's where I'm wondering and I look paula. I may be being a bit unfair
You know with you here because you certainly
Are true to what you proclaim and you do criticize peterson like in that video
When do you see he's wrong?
but
In some sense by being kind of an apologist for peterson
I wonder if if you can miss out on that that idea of oh
He's just defending the status quo now. Like, you know, he he's critical of virtually everything. He's critical of greater thunbergs
You know climate climate change book
He's critical of any any kind of leftist movement that tries to make society a bit more egalitarian
It seems like and maybe this happens since you joined deli wire. I don't know, but I think that's great
That's doing more harm than good. Sure. I would push back on some of those. I don't think he's critical of every leftist movement
because again
I think he makes in my opinion
The best intellectual
Philosophical case for why the left needs to exist
Right, like his case for why we need liberals
Is compelling even to conservatives. I think
Um going back to that point about you need the left to be able to update the current structures to new environments. Yeah, yeah, yeah
so
but to your point
In my apology for jordan peterson. I may be missing the degree to which she values the status quo
Certainly possible. I mean, I'm no I'm biased so I'm
I know I'm dumb so I'm missing things off that regard and I know I'm biased so I'm missing things on a whole lot
Yeah, so the the idea of I'm missing things for sure
the I don't
That point about I may be defending the state or you know, could be defending the status quo too much. I would kind of
Push back and say
The status quo needs to be defended to some degree status quo does not mean bad
per se
Even though like when we use that phrase like you're just defending the status quo the obvious implication is that that's not a good thing
and the simple interpretation of why that is the case is
Well, the status quo was you know slavery was a thing and then black people were indiscriminated against and then the status quo was women
weren't getting right so
When people say the status quo, they're usually referring to the moral failings of our current society
But if but if the status quo just means like, you know, the current state, right?
Or I don't know what actually the latin, you know, you know, whatever that means, but like
You could very easily say like well, the status quo includes like the first amendment like we have free speech. That's status quo
So that needs to be defended, right? So it's so
It's it's it's a back and forth in in that I think I think you know
I know kyle our mutual friend. He's a he's very much a fan of john vakey and here's where again
Come Maxwell. Yeah, um, you've had you've had him on a couple of times. Yeah. Yeah, definitely
In fact, I found you via his uh, okay. That's right. Yes. I was trying to remember how how yeah, we came in contact
Yeah, yeah, and and I kind of cause a huge fan of john vakey
Vakey, yes, vakey. And so vakey has this idea of dialogues, which is I certainly I fall on that camp to it
But there's like there has to be this constant to and fro
But vakey because he comes from like a kind of like a holistic perspective. He's like, uh, we we all have a conversation
You know, it's like we all see kumbaya and it comes like this higher truth. Now. I personally am more of
I'm a a nazi zhikian where I think it's this truth is found not in a higher truth itself
It's found in the conflict itself and the conflict is ongoing. It'll never end. It is like a sure
So like the the hagel's idea a lot of people mischaracterize hagel and I'm not saying I understand hagel because I absolutely don't
But they say oh, there's a theses a theses
Antithesis and there's a synthesis a higher
sublation hagel's and say that hagel says in fact, it's a
ongoing thing where spirit unravels where it's just
There's a theses antithesis and there's a synthesis and there's another theses antithesis synthesis
So it's it's as if and it kind of relates to what you're saying too because the left and right have to be in conversation
Or sometimes conflict hopefully
Without too much bloodshed or violence that in fact that's reality itself. It's just that it's not some higher outcome and
and okay, I'm going off on a rant here and and kind of nerding out on hagel but
One thing I think we can all agree is that point you made that we are all
equally ignorant or
As vosh said in your debate. He said that most people are retards, but
No, he's right man is retarded. Yeah, but he's right, but he's right, but he didn't go fine
Well, the way he implied it. I don't think was right, but the point
The the charitable interpretation of that point. Yes, we're all dumb. Yeah. Yeah, because you know zhecek zhecek makes a really good point
He says
I'm not saying that there are these smart intellectuals and then there are these common people who are stupid
He's saying everyone's stupid. Even the intellectuals are stupid. That's what and I agree with him. I agree with him
and
and yeah, look, mate, uh, I feel like
We've been a bit over the time. I hope you don't have anything else. So no, no problem. I've got no other
Obligations today that are but I think we did touch on I don't know personally for me
I I wasn't planning to go through the whole list because that would be I think a waste of time
But I think we did
I don't know if you made I wouldn't even call it progress. Well, we did clarify some
Some points pertaining to fascism at least from my
Uh point of view, but before you know before I put words in your mouth
Is there anything else that you want to elucidate or clarify? Not just regarding to the fascism, but but even yeah
Yeah, yeah. Well, no, I just the most interesting watchers debate. Yeah
Yeah, well on the on the debate, you know, I think
I
When I sit at the beginning, I think stands. I'm you know, but there's other stuff I might think but in this conversation particular
I was
Again, you being a vosh fan and you being a self-described, you know
Pretty hard leftist or certainly economically and all that and I'm I would actually like economically. I'm pretty far
I don't do that many videos about economics
um
But I think that'll might dip my toe into that to some degree
And I'm so I'm so I certainly feel you there, but it was just interesting like
I prior to this the last time we talked I would not have
Characterized you as or I would not have guessed that you were like a big vosh fan or or anything like that
um, and I and it just it just reaffirms my belief of like
The attitude I went into that
debate with of I'm going to speak to the best of vosh
Which in part is like I'm trying to speak to the good faith people who listen to him because they clearly are
Right if he was if he was as bad as people say he is
People like you I don't think would be fans of him, right?
Yeah, yeah, so and I like I said I have a friend of mine who's a fan of his and there's no chance
I'm just gonna yeah, this you know, he's a bad person because he likes bad people
um
So that was so I enjoyed this. Yeah, it was it was just it was interesting to
Elucidate that out and I'm I'm reaffirmed in my belief that
You know, I could have done things better
But I think the attitude that I went in was the right attitude and so I appreciate it
Yeah, but we could you know turn the table so to speak and be oh
Vosh's fans would see you
Who I think you were
You you you you were kind of like a great interlocutor for for vosh. Let's say where
Certainly you were coming from the point of view you you were in a difficult place because you had to defend peter sin
It's always harder to defend a stance than to critique and
And fought with a with a person or a
Especially when peter sin tweets so goddamn much and he says some of these stupid things, right?
Correct. Yeah, and he's like he's everywhere and he's he's he's in fact a chaotic guy like he's all
Oh, yeah, he goes on all these podcasts. So it's it's not easy to do that
But then I I would say like for me personally because I knew you prior to the vosh debate
I knew you were a good bloke
but
now
So-called radical leftist or whoever that's on vosh's side that think all uh peter sin bros, uh, are these like I don't know
Why it's bad if morons. Yeah idiots would probably have the same. Um, let's say
I don't know revelation or or same kind of
Peterson's fans the way you did about vosh's fans and I'm glad that there was that
Yeah, I got probably a dozen or so comments saying yeah, hey, I'm a vosh fan
But I really appreciated the conversation. But I'm like that's good. That's a win as far as I'm concerned. Yeah
awesome, uh
Thanks a lot. Paul. I really appreciated this
Uh, as I said, but I think you're a great bloke and congrats on all the uh success you're having with your channel recently
Hit 3 000 subscribers man
I reckon you're gonna you're gonna be at 5 k 10 k no time
Yes, we'll see we'll see what kind of risks and responsibilities that opens up
So, uh, but you know, that's that's the point. Yeah, the risk of responsibilities is uh, is uh
It's certainly that comes along with great power as they say
That great philosopher. Um
I haven't watched your video on the postmodern
New marxist the recent one. I think you like that one
I probably would especially being a theory nerd. I take a look at that but uh,
not very uh
It's it's very it's theory presented through the it's it's theory
through the lens of
This is nerd shit, but we need to talk about it type stuff
I'll leave it at that. It does. It does. That's kissing point there, right? It comes from the real world. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah
Yeah, it's just it's communicated in a way. That's not your traditional. Oh, this is how we talk about theory
Well, you are a comedian comedy. You are a comedian. Exactly
That's why that's why that's why I put it in there. All of this is jokes
It's just everything life is a joke, you know life is a joke thing. Yeah. Yeah, it was right. It's all absurd
All right, thanks. I think I'm gonna stop recording now and that works
