The part I sort of love most about your work
is your teachings on the Lacanian perspective on language.
So I kind of want to ask from you
what the kind of the meta psychology of Lacan
tells us about human subjectivity apropos language.
And if I may, I want to read out a short excerpt
from your book, is that okay?
Just on the topic of language.
So on page 215, you say the autistic subjects in this case,
there's no other as language for them.
But then in the introduction,
there's this really good excerpt that you give,
which I love to be honest.
It says, according to Lacan,
language precedes the existence of an individual
in the sense that if it exists before he or she is born
and subsists after his or her death,
as Fink emphasizes in his book, The Lacanian Subject,
before a child is born,
he or she is already endowed with a name as well
as assigned with the personality,
all of which are imagined by his or her parents
through their use of signifiers.
These signifiers used to endow the child
with an existence in language
are not uniquely invented by the parents,
but are acquired from a symbolic order
that has been accumulating for centuries
preceding his or her conception.
This system of signifiers is governed by a set of laws
and is determined by Lacan as the other of language.
And I was thinking if anyone needs
kind of some kind of motivation to read more Lacan,
this excerpt itself should be good enough,
especially if you're interested in philosophy.
So Leon, what does Lacan have to say about language
and why in particular is language so important
or I would say crucial for Lacanian psychoanalysis?
Yes, you know, it is language that is important.
And I'll just say it here,
but it is the way that language impacts the body
which is at stake.
So we have to remember that,
but let's get to it maybe when we continue
and I'll just try and say this a common sensically.
There's a certain idea
that we might simplify by saying that
when we look at, let's say,
or organisms like humans,
we clearly notice that our existence
has a certain continuity to it.
Many philosophers try to think about this
and I think John Locke had a certain idea
of sort of a string of consciousness
as long as the same consciousness remains there
so that I can say I was here three months ago,
it's still me, then we say,
oh, there's a certain identity to this prolonged experience.
But even prior to this question,
in order to conceive of a certain continuation,
a certain, let's say, relationship
between what one experienced at point A
and what one experiences today,
we have to assume that something is,
let's say, inscribed somewhere.
I'll give you an example, a very simple one,
let's say a camera has a lens
and has some film.
Now, if we take out the film,
the camera, the lens will still see the world,
the futons will still go through it,
so things will be, let's say, perceived in the world.
But in order for there to be a memory
or to have a certain testimony to that thing that happened,
we need a film, we need something to be written.
So language for me, and I think for Lacan,
it's this very essential thing,
it is whatever is used to write, to inscribe.
So in this sense, it is not the English language
or the Farsi language or the Japanese language,
it is whatever means one uses,
in order to inscribe something that remains,
so it could be just something like this.
We speak about it in many ways,
it's like I do speak about it as sort of neuronal connections.
It is a writing in the flesh, so this is language.
Now, why language is so important for humans?
And this is something that Lacan already says
in his paper on the mirror stage,
which is a very early paper, and he says,
look, human beings are born underdeveloped,
they're born half-baked,
and you see it in comparison to other animals,
some of which are born and just start roaming the world,
if we speak about, I don't know, insects or lizards
or stuff like that, but also mammals.
If you look at mammals, they are born,
they can start walking, they can start sniffing, many of them.
So when we think about the organism
and sort of the hard-wired level of the instincts,
for many animals, these instincts are sufficient
for them to exist in a world, in their world,
from the moment of birth.
But for humans, this is not the case.
Our instincts, all the things that we are born with instinctually
are completely insufficient for our survival in the beginning.
A baby cannot do anything, basically.
And without the caretaker, there will not be any chance for survival.
So, you know, we say that the baby is in the womb, let's say,
the baby has a need and these needs are answered,
but as soon as the baby is born, it might be hungry,
it might be, I don't know, it might need a diaper change,
but this does not happen automatically, immediately.
So we say that after birth, there is necessarily a certain lack
that is presented in the child's libidinal economy.
Something is needed, but it's not satisfied.
Let's say, mommy is at the toilet, dad is not here,
the child is hungry, now the child is not there immediately.
What the child has to do is to take on itself
a certain representation that is linguistic
and address it to another person.
So this is the cry.
So the baby cries and then the parent starts to guess what is at stake
and then maybe the baby is fed.
But what you see here is the fact that language is necessary
in order to, let's say, compensate for this inherent inborn gap
between the level of the instinct and the world for the human baby.
Humans are born into a reality where our instincts and our, let's say, reality,
our human reality, the humanized world, are in a complete separation.
There's a schism.
And the only way to connect them to gain access to this world
is by addressing another using a language that is not mine.
This language is used to inscribe something in this gap
between the instinctual level and the humanized world.
And let's say, this inscription and the way that languages use to inscribe
is what we might identify in the clinic as a clinical structure.
So everyone relies on language to attempt to compensate for an inherent gap,
an inherent schism, an inherent split in every human's existence.
And we use language in different ways in order to compensate for it.
No one is able to bridge this gap.
There is no one that lives in nirvana, sadly, in a place where it is true.
The inner world and the environment are in complete unicity.
There is no such thing only in our fantasies.
So everyone uses language in a different way to do it.
And what Freud was identifying, I think in his beginning of his work,
is these particular ways that people use language in order to compensate.
And he was saying, look at this.
This is the neurotic way to compensate for this inherent schism in human existence.
This is the psychotic way to compensate for this inherent schism.
What I argue in my book is that there is an autistic way to compensate for this inherent schism.
I go to great lengths to describe it because I think it is very different
from the neurotic and psychotic way.
And I say that it is different to such an extent
that it necessitates a different clinical approach.
And this is why I say that autism is a distinct structure
because I'm basically saying when we work with these particular subjects
that compensate for this schism using language in a particular way,
we have to situate ourselves in the transference in a different way.
