Then I was reading that chapter and listening to your lecture
on the set theoretic multiverse.
Obviously, my head went to the current sort of ongoing debate
on the multiverse theory, or let's
call the interpretation in quantum mechanics or in physics.
Oh, I see.
Yeah, I'm so.
Because according to my understanding,
what you're putting forward with the set theoretic multiverses,
these separate multiverses, let's call it
axiomatic systems for different worlds of set theory,
they can still talk to each other.
Whereas there are still correlations, let's call it.
Whereas I don't think that's the argument
someone like a Sean Carroll would make
when it comes to physics, where there's this reality,
there's another reality.
So speaking ontologically, are you claiming that the nature,
let's say, the ontology of mathematics
is that, yes, there are some universes
where the continuum hypothesis, it works,
and in some it doesn't.
Do they have relations, or are they completely
independent realities, if that's right?
So that's a good question.
So I guess I have a few things to say about it.
So first, I think it's probably important to,
there's this unfortunate overlap in the term multiverse,
but there's this whole physical multiverse theory
that you were looking to, which I don't think of as connected
at all with this sort of debate on pluralism in mathematics.
It's just a totally separate topic.
So for example, the physical version
is connected with superposition of worlds
and whether they can interact and so on.
And I think that's part of what your question was about.
And there are versions of those phenomenon
in the set theoretic multiverse, but I
don't think of the set theoretic multiverse as connected
at all with any of those physical theories.
It's just a different topic.
It has a family resemblance because it's
about many different mathematical worlds,
and the physical one is about many different physical worlds.
But I think that's the end of the family resemblance.
And I'm not claiming or positing
any kind of deeper connection between the sort of set
theoretic pluralism kinds of multiverse and these physics
theories that talk about a multiverse.
I think they're just totally different topics.
But in terms of whether there's interaction,
I think that's an extremely profound philosophical question
on the mathematical side, which is where most of my work is.
Namely, so we have these different models of set theory
and the method of forcing.
And there is a way that a one model of set theory
can somehow get access to the forcing extensions
because the ground model, the smaller model,
has names for all the individuals that
exist in the forcing extension.
This is one of the ways that forcing works.
We have this concept of having a name.
And then we have this forcing relation
which expresses in the ground model
sort of the truth conditions of what could be true or might
be true in the forcing extension.
And this is a degree of access to the extension.
And so it isn't like it's not just
this kind of pure S5 model situation
where we have these totally separate set
theoretic worlds that don't have any connection with one
another.
And when you move from one another,
they cannot see each other.
Or it's not like that at all.
Rather, every model of set theory
can look down inwardly at the inner models that
are defined inside it.
For example, this is how Earl approved the consistency of CH.
He said, well, take any model of CFC.
And then inside that model, define
what's called the Constructible Universe, which
is a kind of the constructible version
of the cumulative universe where you only
add the bare minimum at each step you iterate along.
And whenever you've got a set that you've built so far,
then any subset of it that's definable in that piece,
you add that at the next level.
And so you keep iterating this definable power
set operation.
This was Gerdl's genius idea.
Then you get this inner model of set theory.
And he proved that all the CFC axioms are true there,
including the axiom of choice, even if it wasn't true outside.
And the continuum hypothesis also.
And that's how he proved the relative consistency
of the continuum hypothesis and the axiom of choice.
By showing that inside any model of CFC,
there's this deeper model called the Constructible
Universe that satisfies DFC plus CH.
And the forcing extension idea is looking sort of outwardly.
It's a measure of access that a model has to the larger models.
They can't have fully complete access.
And one can refute the idea.
There has to have to be certain kinds of limits.
But there is some kind of access.
And I find that just fascinating when the,
I mean, it's a deeply metaphysical issue
about these sort of possible mathematical worlds
with different truths.
And yet because these worlds, these mathematical worlds,
have by means of the forcing relation,
this definable access to these other worlds,
they become mathematical questions with precise answers.
And you can prove theorems about it.
And so it's fascinating when these deeply philosophical,
metaphysical, mathematical, metaphysics questions
turn into mathematical theorems.
And maybe it comes back to the first question that you asked me.
It's really showing the way that these philosophical issues
come directly into the mathematics.
