And I know you don't like compliments, but I'm an evil guy.
So I'm going to compliment you.
Uh, my favorite theories of love, uh, ever since I started reading
philosophy was, uh, Alain Bargeau's, and then it was top McGavin's.
And now I'd unequivocally say it's yours.
Um, the way you've articulated it in your book is, I don't even know where,
where else to go from there, as in the way you laid down the idea of love
around like loss and this dying and negativity.
But, uh, just, just again, I know you, you've spoken about this in a,
in a couple of places, but yeah, through your, uh, framework of let's say,
or worldview of depressive realism and negative philosophy, what is love?
Thank you.
So love is comprehended in everything else from the negative perspective as the
based on negativity, uh, trauma, love, lack, and all of those.
So love is traumatic.
And at the same time, impossible in its nature, love as suicidal,
as self-destructive and the very, uh, connection between others, uh, what
structures the bond, the romantic bond, uh, love relationship is the rapture
between, uh, between us, which makes, which destroys us at the same time and
creates the connection.
So when you reach the core of love, it hurts and you die.
Um, and maybe the other person also dies and the healthy relationship was
just considered the healthy relationship in a psychotherapeutic society.
I think it's just concealing enough, this painful, impossible core of love
for us not to notice it, but, uh, I'm sure people know that healthy
relationship, they're very boring and they don't feel like love.
That's the problem.
Like you can have it.
Um, it's not a problem to have healthy relationship.
It's just super boring and it's not love.
Well, what we call love, unfortunately, um, just a very cruel joke.
It's the, when you're dying into it, when it's, you encounter the impossibility
of it and it's the only way to feel it, um, which is super, uh, horrifying,
especially for the Valentine's day, the revelation, but the isolation also
doesn't help.
The other is the one who hurts and the only, uh, the only
we only feel them in a way, I think, uh, that they hurt us.
The other is the one that hurts in us.
The isolation would be also not the protection from it, maybe protection,
but, uh, also a certain type of social bond that also hurts.
The other hurt you can constitute relation with them by isolating
yourself from them and, uh, being isolated.
It's still the, um, uh, condition that hurts because you're isolated precisely.
Uh, so you also feel the bond, uh, with the other through pain.
And with the, uh, attachment theory, uh, which gives the hope of healthy
relationship, of healthy, uh, attachment type, I think that it, which
principle is like, we hope that the healthy one doesn't hurt.
It's the, the best one.
And I think that, um, it hurts, but when you just reduce it, conceal it enough.
Uh, the pain, when it starts to be boring, then, um, then it just possible
to bearable, right?
But it just doesn't feel that it's, there is a connection anymore.
It's presently bearable because it's not the attachment that might
needs concealed.
Yeah.
Um, so Peter Rollins, I didn't mention him too.
He, he too really influenced my thinking on the idea of love around loss.
So, so for him, he, he, he asked, he let's us quite well in the previous
conversations we had, he said that, uh, which, which I love this.
He says, uh, communion is building a community around a shared loss.
Uh, and well, I'll just put it, put it this way.
What, what are your just intimations on that idea that, you know, loving is, is
kind of feeling this, this loss, ontological loss, uh, within us.
Um, and, and yeah, does that, does that sit alone with your philosophy too?
Or would you radicalize that even further?
Yeah.
Peter rolling, uh, distinguishes, which is great, uh, between, uh, community
and communion, community would be more a conventional way of people getting
together because they share something like they share enemies or certain
goal, a certain identification, they have something in common.
And, uh, he doesn't like it.
And he suggests what he creates is communion.
And when people share nothing, loss, uh, luck, and this would be authentic
relation, I would radicalize it.
I think in a way that, um, you know, it's like, it presents itself as if this
is the proper way of, uh, how things supposed to be.
And I would, uh, think of, uh, was trying to think of a therapy as the
communion, uh, instead of treatment, instead of, uh, fixing someone, instead
of hierarchy of, uh, bringing to a certain healthier conditional improvement.
Like the communion, sharing nothing.
Um, I still has hope to it that this is the happy thing.
This, the way it's supposed to be.
If you, if one thinks about love in these terms, it gives the hope that
there is a way how to, uh, what we have to do and that it brings harmony,
something that there is a luck and we need to connect through this luck.
And then it's going to be authentic, equalized with, uh, harmonious, happy
relationship, uh, to be honest, I don't think there is happy, um, like
this is harmonious relationship.
I think it's also one of the ways, one of the illusions, how, uh, we would
like, we would like to hope that it exists, but, uh, it doesn't.
And still talking about, um, how it should be done.
It's still trying, we are connecting, I think, uh, ontologically through it.
There is no other ways to connect.
It's not what we have to do.
It's like, uh, it's maybe comforting illusion in a way.
It's like, um, training a cat who are impossible to train, to sit, for
example, and it's telling the cat to sit when the cat is already sitting, you
know, it sits, it starts to sit, you sit and you have illusion that the cat obeys
where it's just your operation upon the cat to comfort you.
This, this similar thing with what we have to do with love, you know, to, it
just, it's already there, uh, in a horrifying way.
There is nothing you can do.
You have to do it to, uh, make it better or to do it properly.
That's the, it's not a problem.
It's just different comprehension, maybe.
Uh, either you discuss love and trying to, um, figure out the correct
form of love that would bring happiness, won't hurt anyone or like hurt less, or
you're just horrified of love.
That's what I'm rather, yeah, like its presence, um, in inevitable nature and
a horror of it without trying to, uh, any more escaping into how to fix something
or what's the correct form of attachment.
Just I'm horrified without escaping from it.
And I'm not telling, saying that this is how the proper way to think
about it and just a certain state of, uh, my existence.
Yeah.
I do like what Jojak says.
I think in one of his, it's probably in a documentary in one of the
Pervod's guides, documentaries, he says that, you know, love is a disaster.
It's a catastrophe, but then there's also when I'm not in love, I'm sad.
So it's like, whereas you're saying both when you're in love and not in love, you're
going to be sad, you're going to be a, regardless, just face the catastrophe,
so to speak.
Yeah.
So I think that the, um, and Kierkegaard, one who knew that you both get married
and you don't get married, you regret.
Either way, we have the hope for being saved.
Simone de Beauvoir talks about, uh, women who, um, treat men as the form of
salvation, the most immediate one.
When you're alone, you're expecting for man to save you.
Um, and, uh, one, this, this illusion, once you're in a relationship because
it's, you're in a relationship, but no one is saving you, like you encounter
the horror of being in relationship, being disillusioned in this, um, salvation.
It's not heaven.
Didn't work.
So you, once you are not in a relationship, you expect to get rid of the
horror of being alone while you're in a relationship and in relationship, the
other way around, you, you expect to be saved of the horror of relationship,
uh, ending relationship or proceeding to find someone else better, something
like it, but it's the horror every time.
It just, for a while, you remember the, the previous horror, the previous
type of horror, and you think that this is improvement.
It helps you to hold on for a while.
Then you forget about it.
It's like encounter a horror of this situation, of relationship, for example.
And then you're hoping for opposite, uh, salvation in the end of relationship.
It just never comes.
So it's both horror of, in, when we are in relationship, you'd be addressed
from the previous type of horror and then the dialectics, uh, forever, or you
just get adapted for, uh, to a certain type of horror, uh, being alone or being
with someone, uh, the tolerable horror and to settle.
