Hey everyone, welcome to the reading of my essay, The Metaphysical Case for Love. Now in this video
I'll only be reading the introduction because the whole essay is 15,000 words long, therefore
I'll probably read it in parts and upload it as a video series, but today we're going to start off
with the introduction. Here goes, The Metaphysical Case for Love. Love has to be rescued from the
love industrial complex. The following is the third of my tripartite essay series on love,
Why It Matters and The Dying Need for Love's Reinvention. I'll leave the links for part
one and two in the description down below, and this is the most philosophically dense piece
in the series, so risk yourself. Our culture endlessly speaks of dating, yet rarely of love.
Partly the reason is the death of sincerity and our overall apathy towards life, expected in
a culture void of metaphysical foundations. Most of us live innocuously, as the saying goes,
we approach life by not touching it with a 10-foot pole. As is the time of nomadism,
where cosmic couchsurfers seldom do we commit to anything or anyone, be it a political struggle,
what's family, or a passionate romance. We'd prefer, quote-unquote, my freedom over being
bothered by the messiness of an engaged and old consuming life. But, as Marxists understood,
the freedom we speak of is a pseudo-freedom to sell our labor, succumb to the demands of the
market economy and be a consumer, that is, the freedom to be a slave to capitalism.
Footnote, consumerism acts by creating false needs in us, the subjects. They aren't genuine
needs that satisfy us but are imposed by our society or life world. When you succumb to
ideological demands and strive to fulfill these needs, you realize they're unfulfillable,
nonetheless, you will keep desiring more, consequently loosing your freedom. For more
context, read Chapter 1 of Herbert MacCousa's One-Dimensional Man and watch this video by
Julian de Mineris explaining Gisec's theory of Coca-Cola, which I'll link down below, and
footnote. Love also is difficult to speak of because it only makes sense in retrospect.
Doesn't Soren Kierkegaard's best known saying,
life can only be understood backwards but it must be lived forwards, apply the most to love?
Footnote, the original quote from Kierkegaard's journals,
it is really true what philosophy tells us, that life must be understood backwards. But with this,
one forgets the second proposition, that it must be lived forwards. The proposition which,
the more it is subjected to careful thought, the more it ends up concluding precisely,
that life at any given moment cannot really ever be fully understood. Exactly because there's no
single moment where time stops completely, in order for me to take position to do this,
going backwards. And footnote, there perhaps isn't anything more unfathomable than love.
Falling in love is a bizarre experience because it always hits you by surprise,
thus it's aptly called a fall in English or Tombaire Merro in French.
You may be casually dating someone for a while and suddenly you realize you're in love,
and afterwards, you attempt to rationalize and retrospectively give meaning to your fall.
If the point of love is that, despite it appearing to be predestined, the fall always comes first,
it's fully contingent and unplanned. Therefore, within eros, romance has no technical strategy.
The secret of love is that there is no secret, such as why,
Savva Rijak says, the modern dating approach is flawed.
Start quote. The problem with online dating is that it automatically involves an aspect of
self-commodification or self-manipulation. When you date online, you must present yourself in a
certain way, putting forward certain qualities. You focus on your idea of how other people should
perceive you. But that's not how love functions, even at a very simple level. The English term is
endearing foibles, an elementary ingredient in love. You can't ever fall in love with the perfect
person. There must be some tiny, small, disturbing element, and it is only through noticing this
element that you can say, but in spite of that perfection, I love him or her. End quote.
So, self-help books, dating, and relationship coaches are useless in attempting to make romance
a tactical game, epitomized in the self-commodification done by users of dating apps.
If all of poetry, literature, and cinema has shown us one thing since time immemorial,
authentic love has no recipe to be conveniently followed.
Does this mean, speaking of love is futile? No, because as Peter Rollins writes with a twist
on the famous Wittgensteinian proposition, footnote, a little bit Wittgenstein wrote,
what we cannot speak about, we must pass over in silence. End footnote. But Peter Rollins writes,
that which we cannot speak of is the one thing about whom and to whom we must never stop speaking.
Love, not unlike God, is inexhaustible, therefore it ought to be spoken of for eternity.
Now, more than ever, philosophers, poets, artists must tackle the subject of love.
It shouldn't be left to be exploited by capitalism and violated by its actors of the
love-industrial complex. Dating coaches and apps,
pop psychology and self-help books, relationship podcast, pickup artists, etc.
Now, more than ever, philosophers, poets, artists must tackle the subject of love.
It shouldn't be left to be exploited by capitalism and violated by its actors of the love-industrial
complex, e.g., dating coaches and apps, pop psychology and self-help books, relationship
podcast, pickup artists, etc. Abha Kamu famously wrote,
there is but one truly serious philosophical problem, and that is suicide. Judging whether
life is or is not worth living amounts to answering the fundamental question of philosophy.
All the rest, whether or not the world has three dimensions, whether the mind has nine or
twelve categories, comes afterwards. If I ask myself how to judge that this question is more
urgent than that, I reply that one judges by the actions it entails. I have never seen anyone die
for the ontological argument. Galileo, who held a scientific truth of great importance,
exerted with the greatest ease as soon as it endangered his life. In a certain sense, he
did right. That truth was not worth the stake. Whether the earth or the sun revolves around the
other is a matter of profound indifference. To tell the truth, it is a futile question.
On the other hand, I see many people die because they judge that life is not worth living.
End quote. Coincidentally, since it's been a predominant reason for people committing
suicide, love too ought to be placed in the position of suicide as a philosophical question.
Kamu continues, suicide has never been dealt with except as a social phenomenon.
Similarly, love in our times is dealt with psychologically and scientifically through
neuroscience, neuropsychology, sociology, etc. And this mechanization of love is to our own peril.
A case in point is when psychologist Dr. Shannon Currie
testified in the spectacle of the death versus her trial. Notwithstanding her necessary role
evaluating the parties for legal and judicial proceedings, she seemingly played the role of
a high priestess for the general public. When her truths are absolute, especially in matters of
romance and love, of course neither Currie nor anyone else explicitly states this. But what
matters for critical analysis is what is not said over what is formally proclaimed. Society
tacitly accepts what public-facing psychologists like Currie or more politically Jordan Peterson
says to be truths about being as such. That is ontology, the study of the fundamental
nature of reality. The psychologization of existence is distinctly manifest in our times.
So when a psychologist makes claims on love, or politics for instance, we subliminally accept
these as metaphysical truths. i.e. when Currie was a guest on Lex Friedman's podcast,
she went on to describing falling in love as being high on heroin due to the chemicals pumping in
your brain. Since she does not stipulate her statements with this is only a neuropsychological
view, we implicitly take her views to be absolute and boil down love to be a neuroscience of sorts.
There is no room for the unknown and no for the speculations that are allowed, or worse,
are considered a waste of time if they don't serve the aforementioned love-industrial complex.
Footnote, I'm not criticizing Dr. Shannon Currie as she doesn't need to include this caveat in every
public conversation. Expecting her to do so would be unreasonable. Unlike Jordan Peterson,
she never claims to be more than a psychologist. However, I only point out the error of our
cultural zeitgeist. Her case serves as an example of this phenomenon.
End footnote, it was Fyodor Dostoevsky who critically delineated the phenomenon of
psychologizing the human condition best. In the brother's Karamazov, during Dimitri Karamazov's
trial after being accused of patricide for murdering his father, Fyodor Pavlovich Karamazov's
defendant Dimitri's attorney, Fyodor Dostoevsky, says he was forewarned in St. Petersburg and I
quote that I shouldn't counterhear as my opponent a deep and more subtle psychologist who has by
this quality long acquired by merit and a special reputation in a still young judicial world and
continues sadonically but profounder psychology is it's a knife that cut both ways end quote.
In other words psychology allows us to interpret the same facts in different ways or in a way that
suits our pre-held beliefs. Ergo we should be wary of treating the discipline as a whole form of truth
because it too like all human practices is placed within an ideological structure.
During Dostoevsky's time forensic psychology was a discipline in nascent forms and he had a great
interest in how it was practiced in the Russian courts. If he were alive today he'd have similar
comments about the depth be her trial. He wouldn't find fault with science or the practice of psychology
in fact he'd load the findings of psychoanalysis not a bane Dostoevsky heavily influenced Sigmund
Freud with his theories yet he would be critical of ego psychology today's prevalent form practice
in the western world and being the romantic Dostoevsky yes he'd find the desire to reduce
the human condition to an essence within the bounds of any academic discipline as an eye.
The point being is yes love is a psychological phenomenon but it is that and much more.
To love in all its beauty and terror is the epitome of human existence
so if there's one thing philosophy needs to tackle it's what love entails or the rest whether
or not artificial general intelligence is possible whether capitalism or socialism is the viable
system for our times comes afterwards. What is love is the question worth asking till the end of time.
