Firstly, I would say, in my view, self-help is a post-modern phenomena, and what I mean
by that is that, which is perhaps why that self-help, as you said, Joanne, it doesn't
really have, it doesn't question the odds, it doesn't question what's driving us towards
the point B from A to B. So it's purely focused on the systems.
It's like a ruthless pragmatism.
It's just get it done.
This is how you get it done, apply these frameworks, you know, James Clears Atomic Habit, so what
not, right?
My critique of self-help comes in two ways.
Firstly, in a more extensional sense, and then afterwards, certainly my political critique
where I critique the ideology of self-help.
Okay, so the, the, the, the existential one is rather interesting because here's what
I put it this way, right?
So as you were talking, it reminded me of Camus quote from the shoot, The Fool, he
says, a man, sorry, a man wants to earn money in order to be happy and his whole effort
and the best of the life are devoted to the earning of that money.
Happiness is forgotten.
The means are taken for the end.
So I'll just replace money with self-help there, right?
It'll go like this then.
A man wants to practice self-help in order to be happy and his whole effort and the best
of a life are devoted to the earnings of that money or to the, to the practice of self-help.
Happiness is forgotten.
The means are taken for the end.
Now, happiness is forgotten.
Again, happiness is not a big deal here, but let's assume in the context of this quote, the
happiness is an ought, I ought to be happy.
It's the B, the person's moving towards.
So within this though, what I've seen with self-help is that essentially speaking, the
means are taken, then the means replace the end.
The means don't become just a means to an end, they become the end in themselves.
So what happens is when people get obsessed with self-help, like all their life, all their
life, all they do is try to optimize everything.
They try to, you know, they try to meditate, run, cold showers, read, read, marry
at self-help books.
In fact, I saw this really interesting statistic.
I can't pull it up now because I got to find it, but it said that majority of people who buy,
so majority of people that buy self-help commodities, so except for products, whatever,
courses, books, all that, they're generally a really high number, like 80 or 90 percent
that they're recurring customers.
It's the same people that keep buying this stuff.
Because what happens is, I think people get to use a Lacanian term, a sense of Jewish
zones from just the act of engaging in self-help.
You know, I'm going to read 10 self-help books, despite all of them virtually saying the same
thing.
Like it's not that advanced.
It's just basic stuff.
You don't have to be a genius to have habits, be disciplined, have some framework, have a
calendar, have a to-do list.
I mean, no shit Sherlock.
You don't have to be a genius to know that, right?
And so, but then people get, like, you know, what's this, Tiago Forte is a second brain
thing where you optimize everything's productive from the, from the processes itself, people
find a great sense of pleasure, although I would use a more psychoanalytical term, Jewish
zones, where then it's not, there's no, there's no real, they really aren't really doing anything
apart from optimizing their lives, apart from self-helping, you know, and that becomes a
whole lot.
And it's kind of a sad existence if you think about it, because like, there's no creative
outlet.
There's nothing, there's no creation per se.
It's just this like very, in a peculiar sense, narcissistic obsession with the self.
And that's, and my question, the way I like always think is like, I like to think of we
humans, you know, I'm a Hegelian.
So we're historical beings, right?
Imagine if Napoleon or Churchill spent, you know, six, seven hours a day focused on
self-help, like imagine Napoleon, before he went to, you know, was trying to beat the
Nazis, woke up in the morning, meditated, you know, had the cold shower and did all
these things.
We would probably all be speaking German and you and I probably wouldn't even be born.
We've probably been some, our parents would have died in some concentration.
One would imagine Napoleon to have been more effective, but I don't think that would be
the case.
I don't think it would be.
You would have not stopped reading.
Yeah, you see a self-help ideologue would say, oh, if Napoleon or if Churchill did all this
optimization things, they would be even better at that.
Whatever they did as leaders, let's say, I disagree.
I think the greatness that doesn't come from this very little tweaks, optimization here
and there.
It comes from something even beyond what you can articulate.
It comes from Tuesday and each and term from trying to be that Ubermunch, you know.
So, so it comes from a, in some sense, the greatness comes from some kind of insanity.
There's like a sense of insanity to what they're doing.
And it's a self-help ruins all of that.
It makes you a very tepid vanilla kind of person.
And that's why I'm going to be totally honest, man.
Most people I talk to who are hyper obsessed with self-help.
And I used to be one of these people.
So I kind of know a few people who I, I used to be a part of a pyramid scheme at MLM.
Unfortunately, I got sucked in as a kid.
So I still know a few people who are in that circle.
Great people.
Love the people.
We all do.
We all do.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Everyone's in a part of M-Way, right?
It's just like, I think Bill Clinton was a part of M-Way.
So anyway, lovely people, but man, they're so boring.
All they do is obsess over, like, focus on your dreams, your goals.
I think the interesting thing is they're very, you can say they're boring,
but they're also very obnoxious in a very interesting way.
Oh, I mean, look, okay.
I can't speak for being obnoxious because I'm an obnoxious guy.
That's true.
That's true.
I think I tend to be this.
I didn't even tell you how I'm going to do it.
Okay.
So maybe just what I wanted to mention earlier as well, and you will tie here.
It's like how self-help used to look like was morals, right?
It's a lot of morals and ethics, but then that wasn't the end alone.
You weren't always doing that.
I would say it's phrenesis to use a tone by Aristotle.
Phrenesis is kind of this like pragmatic wisdom.
Pragmatic wisdom.
Yeah.
Aristotle uses phrenesis, which is like a very interesting.
I haven't heard of that one.
So yeah, it's like how to engage in the world as a virtuous person.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
No, that's right.
And I think that's, that's the, like it's, it's along the lines of
how to conduct yourself, it's virtue, right?
But it's actually, that's like, in that case, it's not the means becoming the
ends.
Like I think the means are still the means and the answers to the ends, right?
Like when you look at it, people in ancient times, like you, there's no way
to parade that you're someone who's, you know, someone who's thought
about all of these things and someone who does all of these routines on the side.
Because they're actually operating things.
Well, they can only embody it really.
I mean, the only way to be a virtuous person is.
Exactly.
Embody it.
Exactly.
As in the surfer, people can vary.
I mean, we all do this.
I do this with philosophy, for instance.
It's to use a term by Judith Butler, performativity.
We show that, look at me.
I'm doing all these things.
And I'm, I'm, I'm performing the role of what a self-help person would typically
do, which is, yeah, productivity, meditation, all of this.
But then, but then that's, it's a bit unfair to say it's just something
self-help people do.
I think in post, which is why I said it's a post-modern phenomena.
In post-modern culture, everyone does that.
We are all performing something, we are all putting on a performance because
we, we, we live in this kind of groundless existence.
Our being has no true, true.
But I have one more point to make on, on the, on the political side.
Can I make that point?
I'll let you go.
Is that all right?
Uh, yeah, yeah.
Okay.
Or do you want, do you want, do you want to respond though?
To the, the point?
Actually, maybe I'll go first because you probably take a while with that one.
Knowing you.
Um, no, no, no, this is actually, no, I think I already, the, the, okay.
To be honest, the existential point for me is the important one because
the political one, it's not just self-help.
I think it's given, given our, given our current.
Million ideology and many things connected to this, but I would put it simply.
I think self-help is also a conformist category because it's this idea that this
connects to the whole therapist and all the conversations we've been having before.
The idea that I'll focus on myself, don't critique society.
You know, the Jordan Peterson thing, clean your room before you criticize the world.
I focus on myself, focus on improving, focus on my immediate life, getting my
finances in order, getting my personal life, my personal, whatever, health,
wealth, whatever in order, spiritual life, whatever you may call it.
And, and don't critique structures.
Don't be critical of new liberalism, the capitalism, whatnot.
So it's, it's the moment one steps into the ideology of self-help.
You already taken on many, um, ideological, there's a lot of ideological
baggage that comes along with it.
It's, it's not, so self-help certainly is not a political thing.
It's not something that just exists again, independently.
This is within our culture.
So, which is why that account, again, it's the funny thing is that
existentialist critique, I think it perfectly connects to the political critique
because the existential essentially, when you replace the, uh, the, the, the means
when the means become the end, then there's no real end, right?
Because it's a postmodern phenomena.
The end of, let's say, again, to, we want to create a more just society.
We want to create a society where there are less people suffering, where we
want to create a society where there's more love, let's say, we want to create
a society which is perhaps a lot more like what Christ taught us.
Now those things matter because the end is already there.
The end is engaging in the self-help things and not critique society.
So then there's no, there's no, it's like this very kind of like, yeah, it's,
it's a slave category.
It's like this tepid existence where you never question society.
You kind of live this, um, zombie existence in many ways, you know,
which is, which is really interesting because if you look at people who are
engaged in self-help, you're right.
They are rather obnoxious.
You think that, man, the people who are getting things done, they're so productive.
But no, sometimes, sometimes you should step back and question why you're
doing what you're doing, doing, just do it the way Nike says it itself is a
ideological imposition.
It's an injunction.
Do what, you know, do what, do what, mate.
But that's why I think they, they're both, it, there are many existential
drawbacks, but certainly there are many political drawbacks of self-help
pism, the ideology of self-help.
