We're researching this, it's always about lifting the hood and looking what is the reality on the ground.
I'll say something that might shock a lot of people, but basically in the Persian period, we have thousands of documents from
yeah, whistic slash Jewish sources.
So when I look at all of this data, all of it together, there is literally zero evidence for any knowledge
and any familiarity with the Bible throughout the entire period.
Historically, it is so clear and so conspicuous that up until the library was established late tail end of the 4th century,
beginning of the 3rd century BC in Alexandria, up until that moment, we see zero evidence of any type of knowledge of the Bible
anywhere in any of the Jewish diaspora, whether in Egypt, Babylonia, Judea, Samaria, etc.
This changes at the beginning of the 3rd century.
So clearly we start seeing those names appearing in the Catechus of Adara or whatever text that we have there.
People start knowing something about the Bible, referring to the Bible.
But you see elements like that.
You see Anatyahu, the goddess Anatyahu.
It says that they brought an offering to Yahweh and the line under that says that one atrodan, that they had an atrodan there.
Now atrodan today in Zoroastrianism is in Atashtan, but that is the fire holder of Zoroastrian cult.
So in their temple, in the Yahweh's temple, they had a fire holder.
Is that an invest in term that you just used?
Yeah, it's an invest in term.
That's not a Semitic thing, that's an invest in thing.
Absolutely, absolutely.
A major people who were called Maghush and one of them was Moses.
How Moses was an Alchemist, to make nature do what he wanted.
But also that Moses was the teacher of Orpheus.
My special guest today, Professor Gad Barnea, who is a lecturer at the Department of Jewish History
and Biblical Studies at the University of Haifa, as well as a research fellow at the Bible in its traditions.
A research project and flagship in the field of digital humanities.
Barnea's scholarly focus is directed at researching and teaching the evolution and character of Yahwism under the Iranian Age of Empires.
From the rise of the Achaemenidid Empire to the fall Sasanian Empire.
Specifically in the realm of cultic practices, Barnea's scholarship examines the dialogue and symbiosis of early Zoroastrianism and Yahwism or early Judaism.
The Iranian Age of Empires was instrumental as the historical and ideological background for the composition, addition, and redaction of the Hebrew Bible,
which took place in the Hellenistic period.
Yes, you heard that right according to Dr. Barnea.
The Bible that we have in our possession is a product of the Hellenistic period at the library at Alexandria,
which produced the Bible, the apocryphal text, early Christianity, and the so-called Gnostic writings as well as rabbinic and early mystical Judaism.
We're going to talk about all that in this video. Buckle your seatbelts because you're going to want to strap in for this one.
And welcome back to the Gnostic Enformment and you are about to attain true gnosis.
And today I'm joined with Professor Gad Barnea all the way out.
You're over in Israel right now if I'm not mistaken, right?
And high five for university.
Yeah, your work is really fascinating because things that I've stumbled on in the couple of years that I've been doing this channel and talking to experts in the field like yourself.
One of the things is the question of what was going on in these different temple periods.
We call it the first temple period built supposedly by Solomon.
And there's a second temple period supposedly when they come back from Babylon.
And you have a book coming out that a lot of people are really waiting for me myself.
Link's going to be in the description where it's coming out in a couple of months.
I think, is that a couple of months?
It's slated to come out on November 4th.
Yes, okay.
So only a few months away.
And I'm telling all my followers get this book because it's going to shake some things up in this discussion.
And the topic of this book is what was Yawism like under the Achaemenidid period, the Persian period?
And so what are some of the misconceptions that people think about this time period and what was going on with and also why do we call it Yawism and not Judaism?
Great.
So two great points, great questions.
So the first, I'll start with talking a little bit about Yawism.
Yawism is a cult.
I mean, speaking of religion for that period, I mean, the word religion doesn't really apply to that early period.
By religion, I mean a system of rules to follow observances and things like that.
So I use the term cult.
So Yawism is a cultic system where the main, the head of the pantheon, the main deity is, but not the only one, is Yahweh or Yahu as they wrote it.
And so that is really the simplest definition is simply people who adhere as their main ethnic deity to the deity known as Yaw or Yahweh.
That's really the simplest definition and it's a pretty good definition because there wasn't really a lot more to it at the time.
Okay.
I'm putting the biblical image of that period aside from now.
I'm talking purely from historical perspective or archaeological perspective and things like that.
And so the Yawism at the time was simply people who had their main ethnic deity.
But I'm stressing that the main deity, not the exclusive deity, main deity Yahweh, but they certainly believed in other deities as well.
In local deities and imperial deities and things like that, they certainly believe that these other powers, supernatural powers have power over their own lives.
And so Yawism is really just a form of cultic adherence to the deity known as Yaw, but with no specific observances and things like that.
Now, what's interesting, many scholars and certainly many lay people who are interested believe that Yawism morphed into Judaism later on.
It became more specialized, became adopted the features that we now associate with Judaism.
And that's not the case.
Yawism kind of spawned Judaism off.
Okay.
And by extension also Christianity and other Samaritanism and things like that.
But Yawism continued full force, at least until the fall of the Roman Empire.
So in fact, in fact, what is absolutely fascinating and it's another book I'm working on, is that if we were to travel back in time, 2,000 years or even less, you know, 1,700 years or so,
to the Roman Empire and wanted to know what is the form of Yawism that is most popular, most well known.
It wouldn't be Judaism or Christianity, it would be Yawism.
And we see that in, you know, many, many, many thousands of amulets and magical items and things like that.
Medallions all across the Roman Empire, where Yaw in the Greek.
Okay.
I run into this a lot and it's a big topic on my channel.
So yes, please.
But that is a form of Yawism, because the head of the pantheon is Yaw.
And that continued alongside Christianity, alongside Judaism for centuries.
Of course, I assume that you have that.
You see that a lot in your chow.
And if we're talking on the so-called Gnosticism, which is a term that I don't like.
It's not a scientific term to call it Gnosticism.
That's not how they identify.
I've established that a million times.
It's an umbrella term.
It's like, yeah.
Your viewers are familiar.
Yeah, great.
So Gnosticism, in a sense, is an outgrowth also of Yawism, an expression of Yawism as well.
There's a big discussion, as you probably know, whether Gnosticism has any Jewish roots in it,
or is it only a Christian phenomenon.
Actually, in reality, it's neither.
It's just a continuation of Yawism over the centuries.
Yawism simply was the greater force in the kind of cultic community that worshiped Yaw.
It started much earlier, continued while Judaism was being developed and Christianity,
and continued until at least the fall of the Roman Empire.
But we can also, in a sense, it continues to this day.
For example, in Kabbalah and things like that, it continues, in a sense, Yawism continues to this day.
We want to have time to get into that, but that is the fundamental form of early Judaism.
Again, early Judaism is not the correct term, but what will also spawn off Judaism later on.
Okay, so there's a few different directions that I want to go.
Just before we do that, excuse me, I just want to make sure something's clear.
It's not my book.
It's an edited book, so it has a lot of different authors in it.
I just edited, and I have also a chapter in that book, but I edited it together with Professor Reinhard Kratz
from Gottikin University, so it's not just me.
Well, even better, more expertise and more opinions.
I love it.
I always love books like that, or papers that have multiple people involved.
Those are good stuff to read.
Yeah, we have great, we have really, I mean, top leading scholars.
You know, Conrad Schmeet, Margarita Fulmer, Tony Holm of Penn State University,
Stefan Schorsch and many, many others.
Karl Van der Toen, of course, Reinhard Kratz as well.
So you really, in this book, you have truly the leading scholars in the field coming together.
Initially, it was a conference that I organized at the University of Haifa at the end in December of 22.
And the book came as a result of that.
It's not a proceedings book.
It's not just a list of, just a collection of the papers that were presented.
These are papers that grew out of our interactions at the conference.
The conference was kind of a workshop, and we interacted a lot during the conference and even later on
to produce, to think together through all of these issues that concern the Achaemenid Empire
and the Yahwists at that time to produce this volume.
Okay, so it's, I mean, of course, I'm biased in a sense, but it is a truly a groundbreaking book.
We all have our biases, but no, I can't wait to read this.
So, okay, so here's the two things that I want to get into.
One of them is Elephantine.
Another one is that you mentioned this Yaho, this three-letter Yaho, or Yahoo.
And in the Greek, so I actually have a screenshot that I had prepared.
It's from what we found in Qumran.
I think Qumran.
Yeah, yeah, Qumran, okay.
And this predates all these church Septuagint, the Codex Vaticanus, the Codex Sinaiticus, the Codex Alexandricus.
And it shows you right there in Deuteronomy, I think.
Is this Deuteronomy?
Leviticus.
Leviticus.
Yes, thank you for correcting me.
Right there in Leviticus, you have the name Yaho.
And so, there's that.
There's also, you also have in Aramaic, you have Yahoo on these coins.
And this is Persian period, I believe.
And so, there's three letters.
And we're all used to the Tetragrammaton, the four-letter name of Yah Yahweh, or we don't even know how it's pronounced, actually.
Just kind of guess.
So I'm saying Jehovah.
That's all totally more modern way to say it.
But I'm wondering, because there is a lot of theories on this name.
Now, there are some who point out, Diodorus of Sicily says this is the name of Dionysus.
There's actually a text in the Chaldean oracles.
I actually screen-shotted it.
It's the English translation, but it's the Thomas Taylor translation of the Chaldean oracles.
And he says, and right here I circled it, and I'll read it out just in case you can't see it.
He says Dionysus, or Bacchus, was called by the Chaldeans, Yaho, instead of the intelligible light.
In the Phoenician tongue, he is frequently called Sabaoth, such as he who is above the seven poles, Demiurgus.
What are your, are they wrong?
Oh, and then one more thing I wanted to point out.
Plutarch in the early second century also says that Yahweh, or the question in his text is called,
Who is the God worshiped by the Jews?
It's one of these dialogues that he puts together with Ammonius and a couple other people that he's with.
I forgot their names, but there's a whole list of them.
And he's like, who is this God that the Jews are worshiping?
He goes, it looks like to be like either a Donus or Dionysus.
And he gets a bunch of, he gets a bunch of really good arguments of like the similarities between the ways the priest and the Ellicinian mystery dress.
They had the same colors.
They had the same tassels hanging down.
They played the same flutes.
They do Psalms, all this stuff.
I'm like, whoa, this is actually really, I was expecting to hear a really like kind of a weak argument of why they think that.
It wasn't Plutarch lays it out.
And I'm like, I wonder what scholars think about this.
And you don't hear about it a lot.
Now you've been digging into this from the expert, from your expertise, from a scholarly position, looking at the facts.
How do we sort this out?
So two things.
I mean, first of all, that has, that's really appeared much later than the book that we're talking about.
So, and so I will talk about this very quickly, but then I'd like to refocus our discussion on that on the Achaemenid period.
But I mean, the points that you're that you're that you're making are important and interesting.
And of course, very, very, very, very apropos as well to the development of yawism.
You did not mention also Macrobius.
That's later.
I didn't want to go too late.
Well, it's the same.
It's exactly the same vein.
I mean, we are talking later.
But Macrobius, you're right.
It's later.
But the way he, I mean, and he's quoting, he's actually quoting a text from the second century.
Yeah.
He's right here.
Yeah.
Wait, right.
He says this.
Yeah.
Oh, I'll read it out for people so we can all be on the same page.
He says, the Orpheans calling Eubola good counsel point to this God having been provided for the plans of the mind are born of conception.
The authors think that the mind of the world is the sun.
From which the principle of understanding flows into men.
They believe that the sun stood before the merit of good plan.
Orpheus clearly pronounces that the sun in this free verse.
And then that says in Greek, Helios own Dionysus.
Epic Klessin.
And then he says underneath that, he says one Zeus, one Hades, one Helios, one Dionysus.
And then this is the part that you're getting into.
He actually calls.
He actually names this syncretic God.
Yeah.
Oh, the three letters that we just talked about.
And he, he, he, uh, cites this oracle of Apollo.
Clarius is basically saying that this God is like the supreme God.
Okay.
So now we're now we're getting later in time.
But as you mentioned, he's citing earlier sources.
This is something that I've been talking about on my channel for a while.
So let's.
All right.
Now we have everyone on the same page now.
Now this is, this actually goes back to the point I was making.
Yawism continued.
This is, this is an evolution of Yawism.
And the last thing, the chat, the match, the Greek magical papyri.
Yeah.
Oh, it's all over the place.
Every single passage.
Yeah.
So, and that's why I'm saying if we were to go back in time, you know,
1700 or even 1600 years back, or of course 2000 years back.
Um, and, and, and we wanted to know what is the, um, the most popular form of Yawism
of, yeah, of the, the, the data.
Yeah.
Where is it?
Where is this daily being most, uh, kind of worshipped or, um, for lack of a better
term, uh, it would not be in Judaism or Christianity.
It would be much more.
And it's not only where Yawists in a sense, um, uh, very popular.
And the reason I'm saying in a sense is that this was not, nothing was exclusive at that
time.
You could be, uh, you could believe in your magic amulets and, and, and, and, you know,
in texts and things like that and curse text that Yaw is going to protect you, but at the
same time go and offer sacrifices to Mithra, you know, and, or to the Roman emperor or to
the, or different deities, et cetera.
Nothing was, nothing was absolutely, um, uh, exclusive and also Jews and Christians also
had, um, you know, moments where they went and, and, and, and, um, became Yawists for
a while, at least in terms of curses and, um, and, and, you know, magic, uh, uh, formulate.
So, um, so Yawism was always there.
Not, not in the background, but in the foreground, um, in terms of, of, and it was an extremely
popular, I mean Yawism was extremely popular also across the empire.
Now this also helps to, to explain, because you know, the Roman empire was at a point
where it's in the fourth century where it was almost, it kind of had, it would have gone
all either with Mithra, Mithraism or Christianity, you know.
And what, and let me guess what you're about to say.
I just, I have to, this is so exciting because this is something that I've really been, I,
and me, I went into this evidence kind of blindly, just kind of leading where it, see where it
takes me.
And I came to the conclusion that like this explains the rise of Christianity in a way.
Right.
Exactly.
Exactly.
This is what made Christianity a lot more palpable to, to the Romans.
And this is why the church, the early church fathers had to combat the remnants of Yawism
all over the empire.
Right.
So that's, that's what he wrote against what we call the Gnostics.
In a sense, the Gnostics are simply Yawists.
Okay.
Um, and so, um, and so the, or what they call Gnostics again, this term is so, so misleading,
but all of the different sects, you know, the Sethians and et cetera, um, all of these
different, uh, different forms of Yawism are simply forms of Yawism.
A lot of them call them just Magus too.
You hear that Simon Magus, Marcus Magus.
So there, there's some sort of Persian stuff going on here, which is what we're going to
get.
Well, you know, the Magus, so Magus, now we're, we're starting to go back to the, to the Persian
complex.
And I'd like to, to, to continue with that.
But the, but Magus, you know, in the Greek sources, there were several, um, major people
who were called Magus.
Uh, and one of them was Moses.
Wow.
Um, so one of them, they considered Moses to be a Magus as well in several Greek sources.
Yep.
That's fascinating.
Yeah.
They considered Moses was, what's really interesting about Moses, about the figure of Moses, is
if we were to go back even further back in time to the third century, uh, and even the
second, early second century BCE, uh, but mainly in the third century, uh, and, and
even late fourth.
So late fourth to the early second.
Um, and what we wanted to know, what people think of Moses, we would get at least five
completely different stories.
You got Hecatecum Abdera, right?
Hecatecum Abdera is probably the first person.
That's right.
That's right.
That's right.
Well, that's one of the sources.
Absolutely.
He was, Moses was seen as this military leader who defeated the Ethiopians or one that defeated
other, uh, Nubian tribes or a Magus, an Alchemist, or, and it has echoes in the Bible, you know,
how Moses was an Alchemist and, you know, was able to do all these, all these, uh, to,
to, to, to make nature do what he, what he wanted.
Um, but, um, but also that Moses was the, the, um, the teacher of Orpheus, uh, because
he was.
I've been all over that verse because I want people to look guys, these Alexandrians, these
Jews in Alexandria, they're calling themselves Orphics, basically.
They're saying, Mousseus, this guy from Athens is the same as Moses.
And there's all, tell us about that.
And then let's get back to the Persians.
Yeah.
I mean, that's just typical kind of popular etymology in Greek.
Mousseus sounds like it's the muse, you know, the muses.
And so, um, and so you hear that and you're like, yeah, that's the teacher of Orpheus.
Um, he was also seen, as I said, as a, as a magush, as a mate, as an alchemist, as someone
who can bend the rules of nature according to his will.
Um, and so, yeah.
And so that also shows that the story of Moses and who that, who that was was not decided
even in the third century BCE.
Okay.
There was not, there was no canonical version.
They, what's interesting in these versions of Moses is that they're not polemic.
You know, they're not even debating other versions.
They're not trying to show how their version is correct and like the biblical version is
wrong.
They're simply ignorant.
They don't know of the biblical version.
Right.
That's another important thing is like this Moses is completely different than we think
of today.
That's right.
Well, that's what's interesting is it's not completely different.
The Bible shows, I think, took all of these images of Moses that were already current
in the region in Ptolemaic, you know, in the Ptolemaic regions.
And, and, and is the Bible is polemic, polemic with those versions.
So it is, it is, it takes elements.
We do see elements, for example, of Moses being doing supernatural things, parting the
seas, although all of the, you know, and tossing the rods and they become, so we do see elements
that were popped or in the Greek culture being adopted by the, by the, by the biblical authors.
But, but we don't see the other way around.
The, the, the, the more the earlier sources are not arguing.
They are simply unfamiliar with the biblical sources.
They present him as sort of like a superhero magus character who's correct.
Yeah.
Doing a bunch of magic and he's kind of a hero type typical of Hellenism, Hellenistic hero
character.
Um, and it's fat.
Okay.
That is fascinating.
You got this mousseus character in Athens and then there's Moses down in Alexandria and
they're sort of trying to figure out, they're trying to figure out if it's the same person
or not.
Orpheus also.
Um, and in, in the James Charles Worth student picker father, there's a whole chapter on
the Orpheka texts that are these Jewish Orpheka texts.
And look at what Orpheus is.
He's a, he's a psalmist.
He's playing music on a harp and it's theological, theological music.
He's called theologian.
That's where that word comes from.
The first time there, the first time people ever use the word theologian, it's for Orpheus.
And some of his texts are referred to as apocalypses, revelations.
So a lot of the same technical terminology we're seeing for Judeo-Christiani.
We're seeing in these Orphics in Alexandria.
Yeah.
Absolutely.
So what's interesting is also, even in the second century, the, the, the, um, the exagogue
of Ezekiel, I'm assuming you're familiar with that.
Um, that's a play, a Greek play that was written in Alexandria, probably performed in Alexandria,
where a Jewish author that is completely canonized.
I mean, he writes perfectly.
Tragedy, and if I'm not mistaken, right?
Exactly.
He's an Ezekiel Tragedy and, um, and even his version of Moses in the second century.
So relatively late, uh, second century BCE is not exactly the biblical version.
It's also kind of a mishmash.
He is familiar now with the biblical version and he is dealing with it.
Or at least the version that is very close to what we know from the Bible.
But it's, but even in the second century, in Alexandria, second century BCE, that's the story of Moses was still not completely canonized.
It was not, it was not completely, uh, did not reach the form that we are familiar with today.
You ready for this?
This is a question and I, I will, I will, this might, this, your answer might shock some people with this.
Who is the first person that we can say with a name, not just always mentioned in some biblical text, but that we can put a name and a date on?
Who's the first person to mention Moses?
Well, I mean, it's hard to tell because we do have some sources that are, that seem to mention Moses, but they're quoted in much later sources.
Um, in that we need a huge grain of salt for that.
I mean, we do have Hecateus of Abdera, yeah, Hecateus of Abdera, but only quoted in much later Christian sources that are trying to make point and are polemical.
Oh, so you're saying, you're saying that's the one they're citing?
That's right.
Because we lost the Hecateus of Abdera.
Correct.
Yeah, we lost the original.
So they're citing him.
Now, in many cases, the citations are fine, but we need to take each case, each case independently and evaluate how, you know, how likely it is to be, to be, to be accurate.
Um, in many, in many cases, um, I have my doubts, but let's, you know, let's, let's be very open here and say, you know what, let's even accept that we're talking about Hecateus of Abdera late fourth century.
Um, so what's that?
Like 320 BC, something like that.
Right.
So even then, even if that is the first time a Moses is mentioned, that's very late.
Very late.
That's what I mean by like, this might shock some people.
Um, how often is, because, okay, here's another thing that I, because I've been bouncing these ideas off with biblical scholars who are more on the not, I wouldn't say conservative side.
They're not conservative, but like, they're more on like the, they're going with the, what's the earliest we can date it.
We're kind of going at, we're trying to find the exact time where we can date things based on what we know for sure.
These, these scholars, and I'm thinking, I'm not going to name names here, but like, they're going with like, oh, what about seventh century BC?
There's a, there's a reference here in one of the prophets.
Is there, do the prophets seem to know Moses?
I don't think they do.
Well, I'm laughing because, because, I mean, I cannot take the Bible as an historical source.
Okay.
I have to say that very clearly, no one should.
Now there are, the Bible does have, of course, how to phrase that, does have historical elements in it, but he's, but it's not a historical source.
Now, like, for example, for example, there are, you know, certain Assyrian kings that are mentioned in the Bible and are mentioned within the context that makes sense.
But the Bible is not interested in them as a historical source.
It's interested in them.
It's interested for different reasons.
And, and it's very, very easy to take historical, a kind of a nucleus, a seed of, of historical fact and make out, make a story out of it.
We do it to this day.
And so, and so we need to be very, very careful with the Bible in terms of historical and to say what the prophets knew.
That is, that, that statement's the prophets knew of, or Hosea knew of X, you know, Hosea knew of the Exodus from Egypt, for example.
I get that a lot.
What, I mean, how do you know that that particular verse really was not edited into the text in the third century or second century BC?
You can't know that.
And let me jump in right there.
Because we know that the version, the, the, the, the condition, I don't know how to say condition or the form that we have our prophets.
We know that there is layers that are added layer.
We know that there is additions that are changed.
We know that there's edited edits.
I'm sorry.
Redactions.
We don't.
But okay.
Is it possible that there's a layer from Isaiah that dates back to whatever, sixth century BC or something like that?
Is it possible?
Yes.
But, but is, and I would say yes, I would say fine.
Yeah.
There probably was a guy named Isaiah, but the form that we have it in today, there's no way you're going to sit there and tell me that this is exactly how it was.
Right.
Well, I mean, to be very scientific about it, I, and that's really what I'm trying to do in my research and with my students and to go and to be as scientific as possible about this.
I would not be able to say that as a historian, I would not even be able to say there was an actual person called Isaiah, because there's simply not no scientific proof for that.
But I could, but, but is a text, some pericope, some text is currently in what we know from Isaiah from the book of what's called the book of Isaiah is that was already offered in the seventh century.
Sure.
Why not?
We would agree with that statement.
But, and I have an article, for example, about about the, the introduction, right, the oracles against the nations on in the book of Amos.
Okay.
Just this particular, only these verses just this, and I'm not dating the entire book, I'm just dating the oracles.
And I'm dating them because, and I was able to date them to the late eight and beginning of the seventh century, because I can relate them to, to new Assyrian sources, and I show that whomever wrote those passages are these verses new very in great detail.
So, I can date, and again, I'm not even saying that they were written.
I mean, they could be already transmitted from that period, but whomever, whomever came up with these texts and might have transmitted them, you know, right from father to son or whatever orally over the centuries, before they were written down.
But the, the seed for these oracles was late seventh early, late eighth, early seventh century BC.
Now, I was able to do that because I can, I can show that they take new Assyrian imperial idiomatic expressions and implement them very systematically within the, the, the Amos, the introduction to Amos.
That's what you have to do.
That's scientific. Exactly. You have, you always need to have a reference outside the Bible in order to date the Bible. You cannot date the Bible from internal data.
Right. You need something relative to base it off of.
Correct. Correct. Yeah.
This is now this is where we get into the whole, how do we test people because people think I'm biased. I'm trying to attack the Bible. I'm biased.
And I'm like, no, no, no, no, I really, I really don't care how old it is or when it's Hellenistic or Persian or what.
I just want to know, and like, there's ways we can test this. So, for example, you mentioned that there's a lot of, I was watching your lectures, and you talk about this, how these, these, there's idioms that we can tell that are either Persian period.
Sometimes they use words that are from the Avestan language, which is an Indo-European language.
So it's like, that can't be, that can't go beyond, well, maybe it could, but I'm saying it's not likely that it can go past the Persian period into some sort of archaic period.
And then there's even some that are Hellenistic that we were like, whoa, that's got to be written in like 200 BC.
So to sort of bring it back to the Persian period, how do you test and determine what is a Persian period versus what is not even just the temple?
Like, how do we describe things in the temple?
I'll say something that might shock a lot of people, but basically in the Persian period, we have thousands of documents from Yawistic slash Jewish sources.
When I combine all of the documents from Egypt, not just Elephantine, mostly in Elephantine, but not just, and Babylonia, the different settlements in Babylonia, El-Yahudu and others.
And in Judea and Samaria, these provinces, which we have very little texts from Judea and Samaria, but we have coins, we have representations and things like that.
So when I look at all of this data, all of it together, there is literally zero evidence for any knowledge and any familiarity with the Bible throughout the entire period.
Okay, hold on. Let's explain this now. This is a lot. This is a big claim right here.
So when you talk about, first of all, if anyone doesn't know what we mean by Elephantine, so in 597 BC, I think that's roughly the date when Nebuchadnezzar, Sax, Israel, Jerusalem, and the north, I don't know, maybe it's the north or the south.
Well, I mean, yeah, there were waves, but we were usually talking about 586.
586, okay. So what happens as a result, as you said, there's different dates and different battles that happen, different attacks.
But roughly around this period in the 6th century BC, Israel was under attack and they start to flee south to Egypt, almost in a reversal exodus, in a weird way.
They're leaving, except there wasn't an exodus.
Right, right, right, except there wasn't an exodus. My channel has established that many times.
But that's a whole another, we can get into that, another time probably, because that's a whole another can of worms.
But we're talking about later, we're talking about, well, actually, that does kind of relate in a way, but we can circle back to that.
Alright, so we're talking about 6th century BC, there are Israel, Judeans, what did you call them, Israelites or Judeans?
Well, I call them Yahwists. I call them Yahwists.
Now, I have a number of articles about this. I have an article about the date in which the Colony of Elephantine was established, about the migration under the Egyptian king Amas is the second.
So I have an article that establishes that date from a lot of different perspectives.
And I show that all of these different perspectives meet around 540, 550 BC.
Oh, so okay, we're a few decades later then, is when they flee.
That's right. But I have another article about Yahwistic identity at the time.
And I show that Yahwistic and on this article, people couldn't even call me, might even call me conservative, but I just follow the data.
How the data?
And so, yeah, I just follow the data. I don't care if you call me minimalist or maximalist or conservative or whatever, I just follow the data.
And so, and so I have an article about the Yahwistic identity in the Achaemenid period that just came out a couple of months ago.
And that article, in that article, I show from archaeological evidence, names, mostly onomastics, at the time, that there was around the time of the sack of Jerusalem, around the time of Ndukhid Nassar.
I mean, it started earlier, it started at the end of the 7th century.
But there was already a shift, a kind of a cultic reform that created a unified Yahwistic identity, not just Judean.
Okay, but a unified Yahwistic identity that was pretty, pretty uniform in Judea, in Samaria, in Babylonia, and later on in Elephantine, and of course other places.
And we see it in the names so clearly.
Now the names are, the names are, personal names are really your most kind of intimate identity, right?
That's your, usually you inherit it from your father or your grandfather and things like that or from your mother.
And in people, you know, it goes from generation to generation, it is your identity, your familial identity.
It's a big part of who you are, your personal name, certainly in antiquity.
And we see that in Samaria, prior to the end or to the end of the 7th century BCE, in Samaria, most of the Yahwistic names had the the the the the the the the deity part.
Usually names in antiquity are composed of an adjective or a verb with a name of a deity.
So for example, Hosea means Yahweh has saved or redeemed or Yahushama Yahweh has heard and things like that.
And you have it for a lot of different deities across the region, not just for Yahweh.
And so these are the theophoric names, right?
Names that have the theos, the deity embedded in this.
In Samaria, it was for uniform for a long time that the Yahwistic element in these names is Yo, not Yaho or Yah, but Yo.
Okay, that was the name.
And in the south in Judea, it was Yah or Yaho.
There was a very clear distinction in how you write the name or pronounce the name in the in the names of the divine name within the personal names of people.
That stopped, that shifted.
I mean, the data is so clear.
The names shift very clearly to the Judean form, okay, to Yah or Yaho towards the end of the 7th century and into the 6th century.
But after the fall of Jerusalem, it becomes uniform, completely uniform.
Whether you're in Samaria, whether you're in Judea, in Egypt or in Babylonia, it's all Yah, Yaho everywhere.
This is clearly a cultic reform that was very powerful.
I mean, when you give up your name, okay, when you, if you're from Samaria and all of your, you know, all of your genealogy is all Yo, you know, names.
And now you change it to Yaho.
And in fact, we have, we found an example in the archaeological record of the same person switching their name from Yo to Yaho.
And so that, and I mentioned that in the article.
And so there was a major cultic reform among Yahwists in the end of the 7th century and into the 6th century BC.
Now, this is just a name reform.
We don't see any other, it's not like they had new observances or new, you know, new laws that they had to follow.
We don't see anything like that at that time period.
But somehow there was a, this idea that we need to form one community across.
And this is, this is probably the result of these waves of exile that started from the end of the 8th century through a little bit to the 7th century and into the 6th century.
All of these waves of exiles and communities leaving, living in different places start wanting to have a more unified identity.
And yeah, yeah.
And so they're, okay, so they're going from what we would call Canaan, Judea, Israel, modern day Israel, whatever, Palestine, that region.
They're leaving that region because they're being sacked by these Assyrians.
And there's waves of them moving south into Egypt and they're settling in this city called Elephantine.
Island, yes.
And they're all the way, they're way far away now.
And they set up in this island there.
And then so what I'm gathered from what you're saying, what other people are saying is like, we have a lot of evidence of what they, what we have tons of papyri and we have Ostraca.
We have a ton of evidence and we can look at what these people believed in and what their culture was like to a certain extent.
And so this is where people, this is where things get kind of crazy because the narrative is that these Israelites already had this sort of religion.
This is second, or at the end of the first temple period.
So they already know about Solomon and David and Moses and Noah and Abraham.
And that's, of course, they already know about that stuff.
And they probably already read Isaiah.
They probably already know some, right?
This is, this is whatever one assumes.
But then, so you're thinking these Jews that came down from, or Yahweh's that come down from this, this region into Elephantine.
We're assuming that we're going to find stuff about Moses, stuff about Abraham, stuff about Noah, because that's, that's predating the first temple period.
Of course, they know this stuff.
But what's the, what really do we find there?
Right.
So of course, none of this predates the, the, the Persian period or even the Hellenistic period, I would say.
I mean, very little, I wouldn't say none of this.
But so, I mean, I'm sure that the editors and the redactors and the, and even the authors of many parts of the Torah, of the Pentateuch used older material as well.
So some strands of older material is there, certainly in even going back centuries.
I wouldn't go back as far as, you know, you know, the, the, the late Bronze Age or early Iron Age.
But some of the material is certainly older, much older than the, than the Hellenistic period, where these things, according to my research, have been put together.
So, but in Elephantine, it's fascinating what we, the community at Elephantine, as I said, not just Elephantine, everywhere, I mean, we, as I said, we have thousands of documents.
If we combine everything from Egypt to get not just Elephantine and Babylonia and the provinces of Judea and Samaria, if we combine all of this together and look for the smallest hint of familiarity with the Bible, there is none.
They simply, none.
They did not, the Bible simply did not exist.
So how many thousands, how many texts do we have?
First of all, how big is the, the sample size of texts that we have there?
Can you, can we get some estimation?
Is there a thousand texts?
Is there a hundred?
Is there 500?
What do we?
When I say texts, I mean, I, I'm combining Ostracar and Papyri together with tablets in, so in, in the El Yehudu, we're talking about hundreds of tablets, several hundreds in Elephantine and, and in Egypt in general.
So, and of course, all of the, the, the, the numismatic meaning coin, coins that are also very important, different short names, things like that.
Even Wadi Dahlia, the Wadi Dahlia documents which were found in Samaria in the late fourth century or middle fourth century BCE.
Those are really interesting because these, those papyri that were found in Samaria, written by Samarian Jews, Samarian Yahwists, are contracts in which Yahwists are selling Yahwists, slaves who are also Yahwists, two other Yahwists.
And this of course goes against, against what's written in the Torah.
But they are clearly doing something that, that is completely against the, we have a lot of examples of things that are completely against the Torah.
You can excuse every one of these single examples, say, and start to explain, well, you know, maybe profit was more important than, than adherence to the laws.
You can excuse every single, but, but when you look at the totality of the, of the data, okay, it is absolutely, there's only data that, of stuff that either is completely ignorant of the Bible or, or completely goes against it.
But there's not one single piece of evidence that we can point to that says these people were familiar with the Bible.
Nothing. I mean, look, people often ask me, well, what kind of documents do you have at Telefonstein or in other places?
Most of the documents are legal documents, contracts and things like that.
But we do have personal letters.
We have Ostracah.
Ostracahs are like basically the, the WhatsApp of the ancient world, right?
These are short messages that you give, that, that, that you, you know, give to someone in the market to pass on to someone else.
And so these are kind of the, kind of the quick communication methods in the, in the ancient world.
And so we have, we have kind of, you know, the equivalent of a WhatsApp messages, we have, we have personal letters, we have contracts, we have a formal letters written to,
I mean, we have, yeah, a lot of data.
How much time does it span?
So you're saying you said in the fifth, or is it sixth century BC?
Yeah, five, about 54550 BCE to 399 BC.
That's elephanty.
We're talking two centuries worth of data.
A century and a half of data.
And in, according, I mean, my research points to the really good possibility that after that, they also, they migrated up the river up the Nile to Edful, which where we have later on in the fourth century, we have a very interesting community of yaos as well right there.
And several concepts that will make it into, into quote unquote, Gnosticism are already found in elephanty.
Especially if you, you know, your channel probably knows a lot about dedicated to, I don't know, dedicated, but a lot deals with Gnosticism.
You know that the deity Khnubis.
Khnubis very popular deity in, especially in Egypt.
It comes from Khnuma, the deity Khnum, that is the main deity of elephanty.
Yeah, he's that.
He's that horned ram head.
That's right, the ram deity from elephanty.
And he is the really kind of the one who dwells in elephanty.
And the first time the form of the name Khnuma changes to Khnubis.
The third time we have it recorded is in elephanty among the yaos there where they, when they write to the Persian authorities about the, the attacks on their temple on the island.
So first of all, they had temple and I need to tell that to the, to the viewers.
Of course, the yaos had a holistic temple on the island that was very similar in size to the description that we have in the Bible for, for the Solomonic temple.
And yeah, so it was, it was a major, you know, it was relatively major.
Very little has remained to this day, but we do have some of it has remained to this day.
We do know where the temple was and we still, we can see if you visit the island, which I highly recommend.
You can see the kind of the pavement of the, of the, of the temple in one wall or kind of an angle.
In any event, that when they talk, they always throughout their, they often referred, I mean, not often, but they sometimes refer to, to Khnum in the records from the early 5th century on, they refer to the day to Khnum.
But only when they talk about how the priests of Khnum attack their temple, then they say Khnub.
Okay, so they move to this term Khnubis that will become very so popular, as you know, in, in, in so-called Gnostic circles.
But the first time it is recorded is actually among the yaoists at elephantine as a pejorative almost term, because it only in when he attacks, when his priests attacks, attack them.
So that's a fascinating thing that needs to be studied further, of course.
But, but you see elements like that, you see Anat Ya'u.
So Anat, the date, the, the, the, the, the, the goddess Anat Ya'u, which is a kind of a dyad of the two, of Anat and Ya'u.
That in one of my articles about the interpret Tatsu Yudaika in the Akemi period, I also, I show that this, this deity had a very long life.
And we see that deity as Anat Ya'u also used in amulets and medallions and so-called Gnostic medallions.
So, so a lot of these things that were, that are recorded for the first time in the, in the community at elephantine, find their way into yaoistic circles or so-called Gnostic circles that are recorded centuries later.
So somehow they were transmitted over the centuries and over the generations on and in the recording later on.
So this, this community at elephantine is extremely important, not just for the study of yaoism slash Judaism, but also for the study of Gnosticism and again with all my, my, the problems that I have with that term.
And it's so, so it is a massively important community.
Now, as I said, my research shows that they arrived around mid, in the mid-sixth century BCE.
They established a, they probably arrived first at Aswan, which is the city facing the island of elephantine.
Now, elephantine, it's important to understand, elephantine was a major cultic, Egyptian cultic site for thousands of years before the hours came.
Herodotus writes about it too, Herodotus.
Herodotus was there when they were there.
Right.
And he doesn't mention them, but he, but he was.
He says there's 12 gnomes, I think he kind of says it.
So there is something like, I don't know if that lines up or not, which is a coincidence, but he does say something like that.
But you're right.
He doesn't say anything about Jews or Yahweh or anything like that.
No, I mean, for him, because he probably saw them as Persians.
I mean, for him, they represented the empire.
But Herodotus was there and certainly recorded that.
But I, but my claim is that, and this is what archaeology shows us for the island is that he first came to Aswan.
Aswan is, you know, you know, maybe a hundred meters, 200 meters away from the island and it's really close.
And so they came to Aswan, settled there for a while, built a temple on the island.
That's another mystery.
We don't really understand the only cultic system, the only people that were allowed to build a temple on Elephantine.
But again, Elephantine was, as I said, the major cultic center in Egyptian theology for thousands of years before the Jews came, before the Yahweh came.
And so, I mean, it was believed.
I mean, it was the reason it was so important is this is the first cataract of the island.
Okay.
So if you navigate down the Nile, that's where the waters start being unstable.
You know, it's a cataract.
And you can't really navigate the waters anymore.
So in Egyptian, in Egyptian, you know, world conception, the waters of the annual inundation of the Nile came from Elephantine.
Okay.
So they had an idea that there's a well and there are two caves under the island from which the waters flow and flow into the Nile and in fact, into the entire globe.
And that's the source of waters for the entire world.
It's sort of like a border of the empire in a way.
Yeah.
I mean, kind of the border of the empire shifted constantly.
But this was in terms of the waters, this was the source of the waters for the entire, because it was the first cataract, it was such a big deal.
It is still the first cataract, of course, and it was such a big deal for them.
That was the source of the waters flowing from, you know, into the Nile and then from the Nile into the Mediterranean, of course, and into the entire world.
It's funny because I was in Elephantine last June, and I was sitting there with some of the old, you know, the elders of the island, just a great lunch and, you know, just talking.
And they started telling me, of course, they knew nothing about me and my research, but they started telling me about the well that they have there and how this is the source of the water for the entire world.
And I felt like Herodotus, you know, you feel like, I mean, that's exactly what Herodotus heard in his day.
I mean, he heard the elders of the island saying exactly the same legend to him as if it was, you know, that's what they believe in, that's fine.
I respect that. But still, that I, you know, for me, that was, I was really moved by this because, you know, you hear firsthand the same story that Herodotus wrote down, you know, 2,500 years ago.
It's pretty, it's pretty amazing experience.
Anyway, so this island was a major cultic center because of the annual inundation of the Nile, and therefore, you know, the cult of Knu, of the deity Knu was so important there.
And it literally affected your, the economy of the entire land of Egypt.
The fact that they allow the Yawists to build a temple that was literally adjacent to the temple of Knu is something that we can't really explain sufficiently yet.
But there must have been some very, there must have been some kind of, another term that I'm not a fan of, syncretism, some kind of connection that the Egyptians also accepted between Yahu and Knu, which is why they would allow that.
But again, this is speculation. We don't really have a convincing explanation for this.
Yeah, and then they continue to live on the island up to, yeah.
Well, that god, Knu, is sort of a demiurgic god. He's depicted as holding the potter's wheel. He creates humans. He's very...
Which is a thing that you also find in the Bible, right?
Also, not just that, but he also creates man from the earth, right?
And one of his daughter, Anoukis, puts Anoukhet in Egyptian, puts the Ankh into the nose of the people that are...
So that's also very similar to the story in Genesis, of course, that moving life into the...
And so, yeah, we see a lot of that happening there as well.
Yeah, wow. That's so fascinating.
All right, so we establish who these people are and how important this was.
Now, this is something that I want to highlight because, as I mentioned, you would expect...
If we're looking at the timeline of what we're told, the tradition says, you know, Noah and Abraham and all this stuff, and David, they all predate this.
So, of course, they have to know. There has to be some knowledge of them in these texts, right?
But do we find Noah, Abraham? I know Noah. We find no Joseph or Jacob?
No. Again, not just in Elephantine. Not just Elephantine.
We find no Onomasticon, meaning in the list of names for that period in anywhere.
None of the biblical names from the Pentateuch.
I mean, we have names like Nathan, for example, or Hosea and things like that.
We have names like that in Elephantine, but that does not show any knowledge of the Bible.
These are just names that were common at that time and continued being common later on and even today.
But names that are clearly biblical, like the names of the 12 tribes, for example,
or the names of Aaron and Moses, or the names of the patriarchs.
None of these appear in the Onomasticon until the early Hellenistic period.
Yeah, early Hellenistic period.
That is fascinating.
Okay, I don't even know where to...
Well, I mean, I'll take it even further. I'll take it even further.
That's relatively easy, okay, the Pentateuch.
According to normal biblical chronology, Nehemiah came to Jerusalem in the mid-5th century.
With Ezra and Zerubabel, right? That's the story?
Well, yeah, people are debating who came first, Nehemiah or Ezra, etc., and Zerubabel, all of that.
But I'm talking specifically about Nehemiah coming to Jerusalem in the mid-5th century and then becoming governor.
And ruling there for a while, going back to Babylon for a while and going back all of these decades, you know, past, and then going back to Jerusalem.
In 407 BCE, so about 40 years after, supposedly, Nehemiah came to Jerusalem,
we have two drafts of a letter that was sent to Jerusalem by the people of Elephantine.
Okay, and they sent it to the governor of Judea and to the high priest in Jerusalem.
And so this governor in Judea was either the immediate successor of Nehemiah.
If we suppose that Nehemiah was a historical figure and that he was...
And the biblical chronology is correct, then this governor that they're writing to is either the immediate successor of Nehemiah
or maybe, you know, the successor of the immediate successor because we don't know how long the successor...
I mean, we don't know exactly what the list of governor was, but Nehemiah was clearly still in living memory in 407 BCE
if the biblical chronology, the accepted biblical chronology is to be trusted.
Now, what are they asking for in 407 BCE?
At Elephantine, they are asking the Persian authorities or the representative of the Persian authorities in Jerusalem
to help them or to authorize the rebuilding of the temple that was destroyed at Elephantine
to authorize to them the same thing that basically they authorized Nehemiah to do, right?
I mean, people of Elephantine are asking the same thing that according to the Bible was allowed to Nehemiah
but they don't mention Nehemiah.
See what I'm saying?
As if they don't know, I mean, they're talking about their temple, they explain it in great detail how it was destroyed
in really great detail, very similar in a sense, although without any knowledge of the description at the end of the Second Book of Kings
of the destruction of the so-called Second Temple in Jerusalem
and they get into a lot of detail, they talk about how their own temple was built before the Persian conquest
and it was left intact even under the Persian conquest date
so they have no problem going into the past to provide precedence to their case, they have no problem giving a lot of detail
but they don't mention an almost identical case to their own that was supposedly happened only a couple of decades or few decades earlier, right?
Now, if you are making your case to the Persian authorities and asking them to help rebuild your temple
you would either say, I want you to do to us as you did with Nehemiah, as you did with Jerusalem, I'm asking that you do with us
that would really help your case or if we want to just be devil's advocate here
let's assume that in actual historical reality the whole story with Nehemiah didn't work well
and they simply didn't want to remind the Persian authorities of some problems that they had with the rebuilding of the temple
you at least would need to explain why you would be different but you can't ignore it, right?
So the fact that they simply don't mention it I think is significant
and it shows that there is a very high probability that Nehemiah either did not exist in history or should be dated to the 4th century rather than the 5th century
I mean, the implications for malephantine are not just with regards to the Pentateuch or Moses and things like that
but also with regards to taxes that are dated to the 5th century, Ezra, Nehemiah, etc.
I get told by scholars all the time that be careful using elephantine to draw a holistic conclusion on the period because they're just some fringe people over there
What would you say to something like that?
Well, I mean, we should be careful always with the data and certainly that's a very valid point, very important point that I repeat constantly
The prism of elephantine is not everything, it's certainly not everything
and that's why I always look at other places, so I compare elephantine to other places in Egypt or if possible or to other locations in the provinces of Samaria or in Babylonia
and very often you will find a lot of symmetry
So I look at all of the data that I can and I only reach decisions when I do that, I don't only rely on elephantine
So that's a very valid point, so it's true, we shouldn't, but at the same time there is no counter example
That's what I'm saying, what else do you do? How else do you test the data?
The Bible is simply not a reliable historical source, we need to understand this
The Bible, often people ask me also, well, you accept Herodotus and why wouldn't you accept the Bible? What's the difference?
Now, it's true, first of all, I have to say I don't accept Herodotus, you know, blind
You always examine it with exactly the same kind of skepticism that we do with the Bible
But let me say something on Herodotus, people are citing Herodotus right away
Or even like for example Homer, Homer's Iliad, we have Nestor's cup and it quotes Homer on the cup
And it's dated to 750 BC, so we're like alright, we can put Homer in that time period at least to some degree, maybe not the form that we happen
But you don't find, there's not like a Moses cup where it cites the words of...
There's nothing from the Bible at all, nothing from the Bible
Now, they have no problem citing other things and they had, for example, the Wisdom of Ahikar, which was a very famous book
And they did have that, we did find that on the telephone team
They had a copy or a version of the Bessotun or Bay student inscription in Aramaic
So they had literary texts, they had no problem with that, they just didn't have the Bible or any quotes of the Bible they didn't use
Ijeumatic expressions from the Bible, they write, they are being persecuted, so that's really important
In from around, you know, around 415-ish BCE to when their temple was destroyed in 410 BCE
But they were persecuted, again not for cultic reasons, for political reasons
But they were persecuted for a while, for several years, and then their temple is destroyed
They write to the governor and the high priest in Jerusalem, by the way, and in Samaria
So both in Jerusalem and Judea and in Samaria and the high priest, they write to them, to their co-religionists
Without any mention, I mean, these are Jews persecuted in Egypt, writing to their co-religionists in Judea
Not a word about the Exodus, about Moses, about...
I mean, again, that's pretty...
Again, every story, every element like that, every data point like that can be explained away
You can say, well, maybe they didn't want to go into that
You can explain everyone independently and excuse it all
But the overall picture is there is not a single counter example
Right
So again, yeah, you can excuse all of these, everything that I'm saying
And say, well, maybe they didn't want to do this, maybe they knew about it, but they ignored it
You can explain that, but give me one counter example, one counter example
There is none
And this is such a good point, but even let's try to explain
So what are they worshiping? Are they just worshiping Yahoo? Or is there other gods?
Other gods, definitely
Can we tell us about what they're...
They're straight up polytheistic, there's no question about that, right?
Again, another term that I'm not comfortable with, as you know
The terms polytheistic, they're so... I agree with you
But just for people who understand these terms
Right, they are not... There is no monotheism in the ancient world
I mean, strict monotheism in the ancient world at all
It wasn't even a concern, it wasn't... I mean, strict monotheism, by the way, is an Islamic innovation
Really, the tawhid, the uniqueness of God, an absolute monotheism, is an Islamic innovation
And so... But what they had at Elephantine, so their main ethnic deity
The deity that you find in many of, not all, of their personal names is Yahweh
And the temple that they built, and they certainly invested a lot of resources into building
Is the temple for Yahweh
And they also claim that Yahweh dwells in Elephantine
Literally, he dwells at Elephantine
You don't hear that, I've never heard that before
But they literally say that
And so, they don't say he doesn't dwell in Jerusalem, or in Mount Gerizim, or in other places
But they say he does dwell there at Elephantine
Now, and again, the temple is a very... The temple was with cedar wood ceilings and bronze doors
I mean, it was a very sumptuous temple
And so, their main deity, certainly, the main ethnic deity was Yahweh
But they also take oaths in the names of other deities
They also say that Khnum is against them, is attacking them, because of something that happened
He's like, us Satan, or ones...
Right, right, right
And so, and also, very interesting, really in the last year or two of their time on the island
We have a fascinating document, again, in this article that I have on Interpetatsu Yudaika
In the Kemeni period, I go into detail on this
There's a fascinating papyrus, long papyrus, of contributions that the Yahwists on Elephantine make
Two shekels, two shekels, two shekels, they are making contributions
It begins with these, this is the contribution for Yahum
And at the end, after all the accounting is done, of all of the contributions
You have a list of the monies that were... I'm just translating it in my head
But the monies that were collected on this day, to Yahweh, Anatbetel, and Eshenbetel
So, there's a triad
They begin the document with saying this is for Yahu
But at the end, they say this amount of money goes to Eshenbetel
This amount of money goes to Yahu, this amount of money goes to Anatbetel
And in Eshenbetel and Yahu, we get almost exactly the same amount
I mean, very, very small difference between the two, Yahu gets a little bit more
But Eshenbetel, and there's a discussion, whether it's a feminine deity or a masculine deity
Anatbetel is clearly a feminine deity
But this is a triad, a Yahwistic triad
And interestingly, two of those deities are really dyads
Because Eshenbetel is Eshem and Betel
And Anatbetel is Anat and Betel
So you have three or five different deities that are receiving significant contributions from the Yahwists
These are mostly people with Yahwistic names
By the way, there were Yahwists that had Egyptian names
So we have, or even Persian names
So if the name is Yahwistic, it clearly shows that the person was most probably a Yahwist
But we also have clearly Yahwists who take on Egyptian names
We have people with Egyptian names who give their sons and daughters Yahwistic names
We have a Yahwist who gives his son a Betel name rather than Yahw
So they had, now around 420 BCE, there was some kind of reform on the island, very clear reform
That changed, I mean, this community has one form before 420 BCE and another form after 420 BCE
And so there was clearly a reform
I won't get into that because that will probably add another hour to the discussion
But there was clearly a reform, but in that reform got them a lot closer to the Persian slash Achaemenid Zoroastrian
Or really early Zoroastrian format
Really interesting
That is, again, one of the, my article on the Incapitatsu Udaika goes in a lot of detail on that
Is that they say when they talk about the destruction of their temple
One of the documents, they have several documents talking, describing it
But one of the documents talks about a, it says that they brought an offering to Yahweh
I mean, it's very fragmentary and the line under this, under that says that one Atrodan, that they had an Atrodan there
Now Atrodan is in today, in Zoroastrian, is in Atashdan, in just a different format
But that is the fire holder of Zoroastrian cult
So in their temple, in the Yahweh's temple, they had a fire holder
Is that an Avestan term that you just used?
Yeah, it's an Avestan term
That's not a Semitic thing, that's an Avestan thing
Absolutely, absolutely
Now I've had people say, and this is in my article that is in the book that we're talking about
My paper in that book goes into a lot of detail on this
And some people say, well, you know, it's a fire holder
A lot of people translate it as a fire altar
I don't use the term fire altar because it is not an altar
It's a holder, there's nothing to sacrifice or offer it on it
The Zoroastrians don't offer anything on this
Yeah, but this is exactly what the Zoroastrians are using to not worship
They're not worshiping the fire, but they're using the fire
That's correct
That is the center of the Yasna, the Zoroastrian cult
So they had this and they use, I mean, if they wanted to just simply say we have something that holds fire
Not necessarily Zoroastrian, but something that holds fire in the temple
They could have used the Aramaic, Duda de Noura or something like that in Aramaic
But they used the Avestan term
They used the technical cultic term, the Avestan term in that to describe what they have
So the level of assimilation is there
I mean, when you have in your own temple a Zoroastrian fire holder
And you're using that term, that cultic term
I mean, you know what you're doing when you're using this technical term
Again, if they just wanted to say we have something that holds fire
It's very easy to say it in Aramaic, right?
It's really easy
And in fact, in the Talmud where they lived in Sasanian times and they live among Zoroastrians
They had no problem talking about the fire temple
Bi de Noura or Bi Noura
So they have no problem using pure Aramaic to describe what it is without using a Vestan term
And Aramaic is the imperial...
Oh, it's a Vestan slash Persian, it's not purely...
I mean, the Atar of Dan is in the Vestan or really Iranian term
In that case, it's an Indo-Iranian term that is of course also very frequent in the Vesta
Wow, imperial Aramaic is that the imperial tongue of the Persians, if I'm mistaken, right?
It's the imperial tongue, I mean, it's the lingua franca of the day
It's not a Persian language
But Persians and Aramaic have a very long story, history together
I mean, middle Persian of course takes a lot of the...
That kind of explains why Cyrus the Great is considered to be the messiah
And some of these later texts that come in the Hellenistic or Persian period maybe
Is that what you would date Isaiah to, a Persian period text? What would you say about that?
Or who knows, right?
It's really who knows
I mean, Cyrus's renown
I mean, you know that Alexander the Great revered Cyrus
Yes
And so the fact that someone makes a big deal out of Cyrus does not help date this
I mean, you can have Cyrus as a big name centuries later
So that doesn't really help
The question here I would ask as a historian is who has the interest in introducing Cyrus as a messiah
What was the reason to do that?
That makes sense for a Persian period thing though, right?
No, not just. I mean, Cyrus was very popular also in Hellenistic times
So...
Yeah, it's hard to say
It's hard to say
You know, I don't want to focus too much on that part
I wanted it because I wanted to ask you, I don't want to get too far off
I wanted to ask you, is this just an elephantine's yahoo temple where they're using the fire or is this also in Samaria?
Well, excellent question
We don't know. I mean, we know there's only one mention of this fire holder at the elephantine
Fascinating. I mean, the context is really clear. It's the temple. It's also in the context of offerings and things like that
It's a fascinating little, but it's very fragmentary, but it does appear very clearly in that fragment
Again, it's purely speculative, but I do think that 420 BCE was a watershed moment in the relationship between the Persian Empire, the Achaemenid Empire, and the Yahoists all across the empire
Now, when I started looking into that, I said, well, we see it very clearly at the elephantine
We really see after post 420, which is Darius II, so post 420, we see a major shift and a lot more assimilation with Persian ideals, Persian ideas
And even going to a really extreme measure, extreme in our eyes, but a very significant measure of having a fire holder within the temple to Yahweh at the elephantine
And that must have been because it's a relationship with the Yahwists and the empire. That must have been true of all Yahwists everywhere
Now, if you dig a little bit deeper, the temple complex at on Mount Gerazi, which was also Yahwistic, of course, was constructed around that time, depending on who you talk to
So the likelihood of it, if it's built around the same time, the likelihood of it having a similar feature is a lot higher, right?
Well, I'm not talking about the architecture because the architecture was certainly different, but what I'm saying is that there is an investment
Because building a temple like this requires imperial, of course, authorization and investment
And so the empire not only, so at that, around that time of the 420 reform, 420 BC reform that is documented very clearly at elephantine
We see that the temple in on Mount Gerazi is being sponsored, so to speak, by the Achaemenid Empire
And a lot of scholars, and I agree with that, claim that the temple in Jerusalem was also built at that time
This is why, throughout our talk today, I said so-called second temple, because these terms are very misleading
The first temple is simply the first temple that the Bible acknowledges or the Bible talks about
Clearly, I mean, we know that Jerusalem was an important city also in the El Amarna period
There was certainly some temple there, although not Yahwistic
And certainly there continued to be temples there even after the Bronze Age collapsed and later on
Because there is no city without a temple in the ancient world, simply there must have been a temple, you can't
Even if it's under the sky, but there's some sacred space within the city
In the ancient world, it's completely inconceivable to have a city without some kind of temple
A city would simply be not protected if it didn't have a deity protecting it
So the concept of a city without a temple is impossible
So there was some kind of temple, and so the whole concept of a first temple is not historical
I mean, the concept of a first temple, there was a temple, whether there was a historical Solomon is not a question
Whether this one is a, whether he actually constructed the temple is yet another
But let's say we call that the first temple
Then what is the second temple?
When was another sacred area built or accepted in Jerusalem?
The normal chronology says 516 BCE according to the chronology that's suggested in the Bible
But that date is simply there in order to provide a 70 year gap between 586 and 560
I need that to happen
You need that to happen, yeah exactly, so you need to have the 70 years because that's prophecy
And so that is not established, that's not historical
If I'm looking at it scientifically, I cannot take that as a historical fact
And then clearly there was something that was built with someone at the time, a Nehemiah or someone like that somewhere in the 5th century
And we know from archaeology that on Mount Gerizim which was as Yahwistic as Jerusalem was
There was no difference in terms of authority between, and we also find Judean's offering, making offerings on Mount Gerizim
So Mount Gerizim was a completely legitimate temple for Yahwists at the time, not less than, not less so the Jerusalem
And there was also definitely a Yahwistic temple also in the town of Samaria as well
We talk about this in the book that we're, the book that we're actually talking about, supposed to be talking about here
There's also articles that talk about that refer to Samaria and the Celtic context in Samaria at the time as well and they came in the period
So yeah, so we're talking about a very complex picture at the time
And we start seeing towards the end of the 5th century BC, again there are people who date the construction of the Mount Gerizim temple to the mid 5th century
Based mostly on coins and things like that that were found
Coins are not enough to date because you can have a coin that comes from an earlier period
Simply, there's no reason to switch to a new type of coin so long as the weight of the coin doesn't change
So people use coins for a long period of time even after they were issued
So that's not a, these are not good reasons, but I think there are much better reasons to date it to the last quarter of the 5th century
And that fits this Persian support for the Yahwists
And probably the temple in Jerusalem was built at the same time as part of the same policy towards the Yahwists around the same time
Now then you have Herod's temple, right? Is that the 3rd temple?
If you're talking about the 2nd temple, is that the 3rd?
I've always asked that, I've always said that too, how do you call it? And that's funded by Augustus
Yeah, so this terminology of 2nd temple, 1st temple, this is completely, it's not a scientific terminology
Yeah, yeah, now when I first encountered you on the internet, there was actually, I'll just say what happened, tell the story real quick
Dan McClellan retweeted a post about the elephantine community was just like the Israelites, they had a Passover and everything
And I saw this and I just thought to myself, this is so misleading
And I started, so I went in there, keyboard warrior style, wait a minute, they don't even mention Abraham, there's no Moses, there's no Noah, there's no Jacob
I was like, what are you talking about? And I didn't even know that there was a Passover, and then they were like, oh here's where it says Passover
It's talking about the letter from 419 from people saying that Darius is allowing us to have a Passover
And then you came in and said, wait a minute, not so fast, it's not the Passover you think, the Pesach is being used in a different way
So explain what you meant by, this Passover letter is not what people think
Right, right, well that's a huge topic, I'll try to make it short
So the term Pesach in Aramaic is mentioned early in the 5th century
So if we're talking about this 420 BCE document that's erroneously called the Passover letter, that's much later
But the term Pesach, this term that is a cognate term to the Hebrew Pesach appears already early in the 5th century BCE in elephantine
But the problem is that the contexts are not remotely related to what we know of the biblical Pesach
So first of all, it appears only in 2 slash 2 and a half Ostraca in all of the elephantine records
Either way real quick, this is all the way at the end of the period too, we're talking 419, but they've already been there for 100 some years
But also the term Pesach has been there already from the beginning of the 5th century, it's something else
And in these 2 and a half Ostraca, the reason I'm saying half is that there's another Ostracon that I refer to in a different article
That has a word that combines Pesach with another word, that's a different story
Let's focus on these 2 Ostraca that mention Pesach, clearly there's another Ostraca where people suggest that it might because it has a pain
A pain, people complete this as Pesach, because it's too speculative I don't really deal with that
But there are 2 Ostraca where it clearly uses the term Pesach
The first one is a very short Ostracon, the first one is very short, the second one is actually a very long Ostracon relatively speaking
But the first Ostracon talks about the family, about children being in some kind of danger and the person writing the Ostracon says
Keep a close eye on the children, don't let them out of your sight until their mother comes, need the bread until the mother comes
Send me news of the children, always inform me, so there's a lot of anxiety in that Ostracon
Clearly the children are in some kind of danger, maybe there's some kind of epidemic at the time or whatever
There's a lot of anxiety and then at the end he says, tell me when you're doing the Pesach, the Pesach
Let me know, now the Biblical Pesach is one event for which you can never ask when is it going to happen
Because it's always in the night of the 14th of Nisan and it's always in the sunset, between the evenings as it is mentioned
So the time between the sun starts to set and the time when it's completely set
So the fact that they ask, tell me when you're going to do the Pesach means that it's not set, it's not fixed
I didn't think about that, that was a good point
And by the way, to my knowledge I did some research in this for a video I was working on
And there already are tons of festivals throughout times in the Assyrian period, the Persian period
That celebrates some sort of agricultural rebirth of the sun, New Year festival at this time
And it's usually right around the Nisan 14th date
Correct, absolutely, Nisan 14th, so just to finish with the Ostraca, the Ostraca are not related to any specific date
So it's not Nisan 14th or anything like that, but simply not, it was a completely movable ritual
And it was probably an apotropaic ritual, meaning something that basically how to fight evil, how to form exorcism if you will
Or apotropaic ritual, and we have actually an echo of that even in the Bible
In Exodus chapter 12 it says that the quote-unquote original Pesach was when you put the blood on the entrance to the building, to the house
To make sure that the evil does not come in, that is probably the biblical echo of how this Pesach was actually performed
Basically a ritual that was performed whenever you wanted to make sure that evil does not enter your home
And so, again, it's even echoed in the Bible, and it was probably the thing that they did in order to save those children that they mentioned in the Ostracon that were under some kind of danger
I have an article that is about to come out on another Ostracon that mentions Pesach, also a very anxious situation
People are very anxious about some people who are coming to Aswan, to the city that is facing Elefantin
Elefantin is mentioned, the context is also in Elefantin there
And they mentioned the Pesach, we don't really know, it's too fragmentary, the area that mentions where the word Pesach appears, so we don't know exactly what they mean by that
But it is the same context of high anxiety, something that is, I mean, before the text on this Ostracon prior to the word Pesach appears
Is this some kind of letter that they receive and they really need to understand it well, so they send it to some other person to explain it
And then they send it to another person to explain it and they really need to understand what's going on
Because some really important people are going to come to Aswan on that day
And so there's a clear sense of anxiety and again the word Pesach appears
So my sense is that Pesach in the beginning of the first century Pesach has nothing to do with its biblical, the use of its biblical cognate
But it's simply some ritual that was enacted to combat evil, to make sure that evil does not attack you, does not
So that's, and again it's echoed in the Bible as well
Even Passover is a debatable etymology, but the idea that this is something that you put blood on the entrance to your home to make sure that evil does not come in
That seems to be the actual original ceremony that was not fixed in time
And this letter from 419 coming from the Jews under Darius doesn't say anything about a lamb or...
It doesn't use the word Pesach
They even use the word Passover, they call it a Passover letter, but it doesn't even use the word Passover
It doesn't use the word Passover or Matzah, or Matzot, you know, or Unliving Bread
Oh it doesn't mention the Unliving Bread, I thought it did, does it?
No, no it doesn't
So there's assuming that it does
You're right, I mean that's just the restoration that was done
Ah, see this is blowing my mind
So alright, so they're at this all up, this is crazy
Let me actually go a little bit further
And so my chapter in this book that we're talking about goes into is a very detailed epigraphic analysis of this papyrus, so-called Passover letter
Again, very erroneously called the Passover letter, but I'm providing a very detailed epigraphic analysis line by line, word by word
But also then I provide the context that I think it really should reflect
Now what's really interesting is that if we remove all of the proposed reconstructions
I mean Zachau, the German scholar who published it initially in 1903
The first one to publish this papyrus
He said that he was able to reconstruct this to understand this papyrus based on Deuteronomy in Exodus
That methodologically is unacceptable to us today
I mean this is one of the great scholars of the beginning of the 20th century
But today if someone would tell me I was able to restore this based on Deuteronomy in Exodus
I have a methodological problem with that, you can't do that, right?
You have to establish first that there was such a thing as a Passover in the 5th century this year
Or that there was a Deuteronomy before
Or there was exactly
Because no one's mentioning Deuteronomy ever until-
That's right
That's right
But not only is Passover not mentioned or unleavened bread
But there are no prohibitions on anything at all
In the reconstructions that certain scholars have done over the years
They restore do not eat, do not drink
But it's only restoration
The actual papyrus and I did go to Berlin and studied it in person
And took microscopic-
Microscopic infrared and multispectral photos of each word independently
And studied it and made sure that I'm reading this as scientifically as possible
There is simply no-
Nothing is prohibited
There is no do not eat, do not drink
But drinking is very central to that document
Drinking something
And it says be pure, keep yourselves pure
He does not describe what he means by be pure, by the way, which is really important
So clearly they understood what he meant
The person writing this extremely important document is called Hananya
And they clearly understood what he meant by being pure
He didn't have to explain to them what that means
And then in the next line after that he says drink something
He doesn't say don't drink
He says drink something and then continues with it
So clearly there was something really important about drinking something on that document
Again, I make all kinds of proposals in my-
Maybe the haoma drink, right?
That's what I-
Okay, so you do know what I'm saying
So yeah, my suggestion is that this was a haoma drink
The yazna, so yazna is the-
Real quick, just for anyone who has no idea what that is
What is the haoma drink?
I mean, I'm not in any rush to finish as long as you're not
Okay, great
So the yazna is the large Zoroastrian ritual
Beautiful, impressive, fantastic
I really recommend that people go and check
There's a website called the Multimedia Yazna
Where you can actually see it in an interactive video
That was created by SOAS University in London
Amazing project
And a lot of information about the yazna ceremony
Yazna is not a festival
It's kind of like a Catholic mass or an Orthodox Christian mass
It happens every day, okay?
Every day there's a yazna
And it also happens for special occasions, okay?
So it's simply the liturgy that happens constantly
And it's several hours long, by the way, in the Zoroastrian liturgy
So that's the yazna
We know that the yazna-
So with the Passover, as we said
There is simply no records of it extra-biblically
But we do have records of the yazna in the Achaemenid period
Okay, we have pictographic representations in the Achaemenid period
In Persepolis and other places
Where in several places across the empire
That show clearly that the yazna was already practiced in the Achaemenid period
So we have on one hand the Passover that is simply not documented anywhere
Or this yazna, which is amply documented in the Achaemenid period
Now in the pictographical presentations of the yazna in the Achaemenid period
We do have the preparation of the halma drink represented on these inscriptions
Which is a mortar and a pestle
That's how you press the halma
That's how you make the halma drink
That is a major part in the yazna
It happens twice in the yazna ceremony
And that's what you make this drink, which is an intoxicating drink
It doesn't make you drunk, but it's...
It's like the Kaikyan of the Greeks
But it's also like a soma for the Indians
For the Indians, exactly
And it has, I mean, in certain places it is repressed by wine, actually
Because it's also pressed and also intoxicating
And we see it also in China
There are also later communities in China
Does it have psychedelic properties? I've heard that before
Or do we not know?
We really don't know what exactly was the halma at the time
What the Zoroastrians or Hindus today use as the soma
It's a different... it's probably a very different...
So we don't really know what it is that they actually used
It's also being debated
But we already... what we do know
Is that the Yawista community at Elephantine assimilated deeply
I mean, we talked about the fire holder, right?
Deeply assimilated Zoroastrian elements into their own cultic sphere
Right?
Now, this document that is erroneously called the Passover letter
Is much closer in what it describes to the halma, to the Yawista ceremony
Than to the... of course to anything that we know from the Passover
Now, the date, the only thing that...
The main reason that people refer to this as the Passover letter
Is because it refers to an observance that starts on the 15th of Disan
And goes on for seven days
Now, the thing is, the 14th of Disan is simply the first...
The 14th... the night between the 14th and the 15th of Disan
Is simply the first full moon of the year
Disan is the beginning of the year and it's the first full moon of the year
And it's the beginning, it's the sign for the beginning of the harvest
So in the ancient world, the first full moon of the year
Was a major event, that's... I mean...
In the ancient world, people need to understand
Because in the modern world, we don't understand just how precarious life was
But in the ancient world, you live or die based on the results of the harvest
Of just how much you got from the harvest
That keeps you alive for the next year
Now, if in the end, towards the end of Disan
And that time period of spring
When the harvest begins, if your deity rains hail or floods
Or thunderstorms, you know, all of that, that can literally kill you
That could destroy families, could destroy villages
And so that period was extremely important
And the first full moon of the year in Disan
Was a period of, you know, trepidation
You're really concerned, you're worried about the immediate future
And you want to make sure that this harvest is important
So all across the ancient Near East
The 14th of Disan was a major, major date
Let me just... people whom you might not understand
So 14 days after Nisan won, which is a lunar calendar
So the first of Nisan would be a new moon
14 days later would be the first full moon
Is that how we would do it?
And so no matter what the situation is, we have a solar calendar
So our calendars sort of just are like automatic every 12 months
And we have 365 days in a year
But they had to tune their calendars to line up with the moon
So that on the first of every month would be a new moon
So it's really lunar solar calendar
You know, you adjust it with the sun
It's a lot more complicated
It's more complex, but it served its purpose
Certainly in the ancient world
Calendars in the ancient world is another fascinating topic
And Nisan was the first month?
The first month of the year, right
Oh, there we go
So Nisan 14, by the way, that's the date Jesus crucified on
Nisan 14 happens to be the first full moon of the year
Wow
It is every year the first full moon of the year
And it is the beginning of the harvest
Okay
And so that is a major, really important day
Where people really did everything they can
To make sure that the deities are not angry with that
The Assyrian had a big festival
The Assyrians had it called the Kisu Festival
Huge festival, it was a week long
And they actually did, I have an academic paper
Who wrote about this in my folder here
And they had 72 gods under Dagon
Was the head of the Pantheon
And they all got dedicated to them a lamb sacrifice
So there is a lamb sacrifice happening in this time
By the Assyrians
Now the Persian period, I don't know if they did something different
But we're talking, let me just ask you this
Do you think it's safe to say that whatever was going on
In the Persian period for this festival
Was being adopted by Alephantines, Samaritans
All these different groups of people?
Well, it simply wasn't a festival yet
It was a one-time observance
You know, this happened in 419 BCE, this particular letter
Really at the beginning, so this is 420
I mean, the letter was sent in the first two weeks of Nisan
Because he says this year you should do this
So the year begins in the sun first
And he's talking about something that should happen on the sun 15th
So clearly he's writing this somewhere in the first and the 15th of the same year
Brand new observance that they're introducing
Well, again, it's not necessarily an observance
I think it's really the reason that they wanted to do that
Because we already talked that there was some kind of close relationship
That started around 420 BCE
Between the Achaemenid period
And we talked about Mount Gerizin
We talked about the fire holder
And we see it also in coins from that period
But there was a lot more, a lot of the imperial Achaemenids
Who started around 420 to be very close to the Yahwis at the time
I think that this particular document is the document
Because in order to be close, to be promoted
As a people group, as an ethnic group
To be promoted to being part of the dominant ethnic class
You have to be pure
And in order to be pure, in the Zoroastrian view
In order to be pure, you drink the halma
Halma purifies you cosmically according to their understanding
It really recreates you
And Herodotus talks about this as well
So I think that this document really describes their kind of ceremony
Of becoming an organic part of the Achaemenid empire
Rather than anything related to the Passover
But I do think that the Passover decades later
Is based on the Zoroastrian yasna
And that was the first time it was kind of done
And connected to the dates of that festival
But you know, ceremonies where you have pressed
A drink made out of pressed natural ingredients
That is also intoxicating and unleavened bread
There are only two rituals that I know of that have that
The Passover and the Zoroastrian yasna
So the Zoroastrian yasna also has unleavened bread
Yeah, I know, I mentioned this in one of my recent videos
I did a whole video about the spring equinox festivals
In Oruz, in Yasna, in Kisu, in Passover, Easter
And that was one of the things that I ran into in the academic papers
Was that the unleavened bread was a big deal for the Persians
That's right
It is to this day, the Zoroastrian still have, we call it the drone
Which just means a portion
The drone initially, in the Avesta drone is actually an animal sacrifice
In the Avesta
But I think, and I think that I can also show it from archaeological records
In Persepolis, that's a different story
But I think that when the Zoroastrians had started having an empire
Early Zoroastrianism with the Achaemenid Empire
When you have Zoroastrians across the empire
It becomes really just unmanageable to have them offer animal sacrifice everywhere they go
Especially if you have an entire military of Zoroastrians that have to travel
It really becomes extremely expensive and heavy to have animals for sacrifice travel with you
And I think that the shift from animal sacrifice in this speculation
But it makes a lot of sense, in imperial times
To shift from animal sacrifice to an unleavened bread
In the Achaemenid period rather than later on
And I think this is also supported in some ways
In Persepolis and in pictographic representation of the Yasna
Because in the pictographic representations of the Yasna ritual
As I said, you have the pestil and the mortar where you crush the halma and make the drink
You often have the sponsor of the ceremony represented and one of the priests represented there
But it never shows like a head of an animal sacrificed or some body part of an animal sacrificed
Which you do have in representations in other cults
So it never shows that
There are some cases where it does show that
But in most cases in the main representations that we have we don't see that
And so I think that that was the period of transition from animal sacrifice
Maybe in Persepolis they still did animal sacrifice but across the empire they didn't
So that was a period that makes a lot of sense for transition into an unleavened bread
Already in the Achaemenid period in Zoroastrianism
Wow, you've just covered so much in this, this is very fascinating
So if I just wanted to run an idea by you and you can say if this would be accurate or not
Based on what you've concluded or based on your research
So I was to say like what we consider to be Judaism today is actually just kind of an evolution of ideas
Starting back in the, you know, obviously going back as far as we know
But progressing through the Persian period and then even more so in the Hellenistic period when you start getting viable
Is that safe to say? It's not like the exact traditional account more of an evolution of ideas progressing
Well every, yeah, every cultic system, every religion is progression, constant progression
Yeah, and what's really important to understand is the Jews were never different from other systems
And I mean they were, I had this article, I don't know if you saw about this priestess in Elephantine
That was also published, I mean National Geographic did the thing about it as well
Where I actually found evidence, clear evidence of a priestess serving in the Yahweh temple at Elephantine
And a fascinating little ostracon that I had to hunt down
Anyway, so this, I mean normally you would think that there was no priestesses, there were no priestesses in Judaism
It's only male priests, that's the image that you get from the biblical, most of the biblical texts
I mean if you dig enough you can see echoes
There were Jewish priestesses, not only in Elephantine but also in Egypt, in the second century, first century BCE
And then in Rome, in Bicera, I mean there are Jewish priestesses and many actual priestesses in Judaism as well
But you never hear of that in the Bible
Or directly in the Talmud, I mean there are echoes that you might be able to interpret also there
But many scholars say, well what was unique about Judaism is that they did not have priestesses
You read that, many scholars say that, they say everyone did, but the Jews didn't have female, didn't have priestesses
But they did
You see what I'm saying? If we only look at the biblical image, it gives us a completely distorted image of reality on the ground
Because these are, I mean again, the Bible I'm not, I want to make sure that people understand
I'm not against the Bible, I'm not coming, it's not, I'm not trying to do it
But we need to understand the Bible, going back to the point I was making earlier on about Herodotus versus the Bible as a historical source
Certainly very skeptical of a lot of what Herodotus says, but the big difference between Herodotus and the Bible
Is that no one had his or her identity defined by Herodotus ever
No one say, I'm a Herodotian
No one had to, no, it was not a defining text
The Bible is, the Bible is defines your identity
And so we have different sects, different schools of thought
Each one inserting their own ideology into what eventually became the biblical text
The Bible is this huge battleground of ideas, okay
And it is, it's not concerned primarily or even secondarily with history
It's concerned with expressing those ideas, with expressing theological and mythological ideas on how the, you know, going back to the Exodus that we talked about at the beginning
The idea of a nation, of a group of people of her ethnos coming from the east
Was central to Greco-Roman thought, Hellenistic and Greco-Roman thought
If you wanted to represent your people, your ethnic background
As something ancient, something, you know, respectable, something that is, that is, you know, that has a lot of long history behind it
You would, in the ancient world, you would explain, you would provide some kind of mythology on how it came from the east
This is true of the Greeks in some, some of the Greek poly nation states
They represented themselves as being founded by definitions coming from the east and founding them there
But also Rome, at one of the heights of its power, Auguste commissioned, exactly
He commissioned Virgil to create the mythology of how Rome was founded by Aeneas from Troy, who traveled from the east to...
And this is exactly the same idea with the story of the patriarchs coming from Abraham
And then having each one of his children go back to the eastern to bring a bride from the eastern and re-establish them
So coming from the east, this origin, this origin from the east is so Hellenistic
You get the Heraklidae, coming from the Lydians, they claim descent from Heracles
That's right
Edgibaston Thebes, they're from Cadmus, who's a Phoenician
Cadmus, exactly Phoenician
Yeah, they're all this, they're all claiming descent from some sort of demigod
Yeah, I mean, even the name Cadmus just means east, right? Cadmus
Right, right, yeah
I mean...
Alphabet too
Yeah, exactly
But also, this ties to the Exodus, this ties to the Exodus, because the Exodus is taking this idea of going from Egypt
And then entering the land from the east, which makes no sense
I mean, they enter, they go all around from Moab and, you know, in Edom and they have to go and enter from the east
Again, the same kind of meeting the same place around Shechem, where Abraham entered the land as well
So you see that there are two narratives of how the people came from the east
One from the patriarch, one from the root of the Exodus
All of this is perfectly aligned with Greco-Roman, certainly, mystic, you know, ideals
And so, yeah, and we see that, I mean, it is, when you know the context, it's so clear as well
I mean, you know, a lot of people ask themselves, why did they have to go all the way around?
It doesn't make any sense to go all the way around
And, yeah, well, you want to establish this eastern providence
Providence, right
And that's...
It's actually fascinating, the truth sometimes is more fascinating than the tradition
Always, yeah, that's what gets me up in the morning
For me, researching this, it's always about lifting the hood and looking what is the reality on the ground
Now, again, as I started saying, I'm not anti-bible or anything like that
But the beauty of the Bible, what makes it so beautiful in many parts of it, in all terrible parts as well
But in many parts of it, what gives it its power is simply a question of geography
Because, you know, the provinces of Judea and Samaria, the Bible was kind of written between the two
Or composed between these two
That's where every military power, every empire had to go past through that region and leave its imprints in that region
And so the Bible is basically a story of humanity, of how humans left their imprint in this one bridge between Africa, Asia and Europe
And that's what gives this text its power, really
That all of ancient humanities, at least in these continents in Africa, Asia and in Europe, left an imprint that is discernible in this corpus
Yeah, and it's almost like you're getting this tapestry of different layers of different time periods
You've got the archaic layer that's in there somewhere
And then you have, as you mentioned, the Persian, Zoroastrian influences start to trickle into the text
And then you get this later Hellenistic layer of influences and, you know, the Presocratics with their monism and dyads and all that stuff
It starts to get pushed into the text
And so you have a tapestry of different centuries of time periods, different influences, and it's being sewn together
This could only happen to this extent in that region just for reasons of pure geographic reasons
But all of these different sort, you know, you have the Persian Empire that brought ideas and influences from India as well
And of course from Iran, I mean the Iranic peoples, and you have the Greeks and you have the Egyptians
So you have everything converging in that local area, this tiny little area that absorbed from all of them
And that is what eventually produced this corpus
I mean what's beautiful about it is the humanity of it
And just all of these different cultures coming together leaving an imprint and moving on
And this was absorbed
Now, again, it was absorbed somehow, but it was completely unknown to most Yawists, or practically almost all Yawists
In the up until the Hellenistic period
I mean imprints were left, but they were not widely known
And in that change, this is another book that I'm also working on
That changed with the Museum in Alexandria
I mean, what people need to understand, I mean, Ptolemy I and Alexander III
They grew up together, they were childhood friends
They both were students of Aristotle
Exactly
When they founded Alexandria, the idea was to implement Aristotle's ideals
And so the city was well planned with the grid of streets
I mean a very modern city
The temple had, you know, the doors were automatic
Because of hydraulic, you know, when you walked on the platform leading to the temple
The hydraulic pressure would cause the doors to open up
And so people, this was like Silicon Valley of the ancient world
I mean this is where you want, if you want to go to the cutting edge technology of the time
You want to go to where things are done
You go to Alexandria
Now, Ptolemy I first created his palace in Alexandria
And surrounded it with the temple and the museum
The museum was just a place of the muses
And within the museum you had the famous library of Alexandria
And it was the first library, real library in the world
People often say, well, do our libraries before the Library of Alexandria
Like Ashurbanipal and others
But these were archives, these were not libraries
This is where you would put different texts, administrative texts, but also literary texts
You would put them in an archive to conserve them
Or to teach scribes how to learn their profession
But these were archives, these were not libraries
The difference between an archive and a library
Is that an archive is to conserve or to use as material to teach scribes and things like that
But it is not a place to study texts critically
Which is really kind of what Aristotle wanted his followers wanted to do
And to find where different manuscripts of the text don't disagree with themselves
Or where the same manuscript has all kinds of disagreements within its own text
And so starting to critically study texts, that is what happened in Alexandria
And we see that also the same methodology also applied in the Bible
Addition, redaction, etc, etc, following the same idea
Now historically it is so clear and so conspicuous
That up until the library was established late really till the tail end of the 4th century
Beginning of the 3rd century BCE in Alexandria
Up until that moment we see no, as I said several times already today
Zero evidence of any type of knowledge of the Bible anywhere in any of the Jewish diaspora
Whether in Egypt, Babylonia, Judea, Samaria, etc
No one knows anything, there are no names that are related to the Bible
There are no, nothing, no one, it's simply not inexistent
This changes at the beginning of the 3rd century so clearly
We start seeing those names appearing in the list of names in the Onomasticon
We start seeing, you know, people like Cateus of Abdera or whatever text that we have there
We start seeing people at that time, around the time of the Museum
People start knowing something about the Bible, referring to the Bible
I mean it is so clear that there was a shift around that time
And as a historian I look for triggers
What causes, something causes change in history and you need to find the trigger
And the trigger, I mean this library in Alexandria is such a clear trigger, such a major trigger
And you see it in the archeological records so clearly there is nothing before and it starts after
That I think it's, I mean it's really hard to argue with that
This is what I've been saying for, as long as I started to discover some of this information
And then obviously we get the Septuagint translation coming a little bit later
But it doesn't seem like the construction or the creation of the Genesis for example, let's just take Genesis by itself
It doesn't seem to have been constructed that much earlier, maybe less than a century before at some point
Even decades
Yeah, decades, that's what I was going to say, maybe decades
We talked about Virgil
It took him 10 years to write the Aeneas
It took him 10 years, one person
And the Aeneas in terms of their length, I mean it's about the same size as the Pentateuch
So it's one person, 10 years to write the equivalent of the Pentateuch
Now Virgil also used earlier sources, he did not come up with the idea of Aeneas coming from the east
It was already very popular in Rome before him
There were earlier sources and one person did that in 10 years
There's the Sean Am, which is much later of course
But Ferdowsi who wrote the Sean Am, which is like the great Iranian epic
Beautiful, I highly recommend the viewers to check that out
The Sean Am is 150, I mean it's like 1.5 times greater than the entire Bible
Including the New Testament, I mean the Old Testament and New Testament
Times, you know, 1.5
One man wrote that in 30 years
So 30 years of one man is the equivalent of 1.5, the entire Biblical Corpus
And also he used earlier material as well
But this was, so people can write this
If there is a, if the right trigger exists and there is the right motivation
People can write this corpus very, very quickly
I mean it's not, it's not, it happened in
And when we look at, and I look at Genesis for example
It seems to be similar in its construction to other theogonies
Slash, Genesis stories, creation myths of the time period
Where you have a God who's a Demiurgic creator and he takes it, makes Heaven and Earth, Aurenos and Gaia
Which is what you see in like theogonies
And it's sort of, Ferricides has a different version of this
Appellodorus has a different version, they're all, they're all contemporary
Plato, Plato with the Timaeus
That's what I was just going to say
What we get in Genesis seems to be more platonic, maybe not
I think it's influenced by platonic, what would you say?
Well it's hard to know, I mean it's not exact, of course it's not one to one
It's not exactly the same, there are some certain elements
I think it's influenced, it's heavily influenced as is Plato himself by Persian
He admits this, he says that Pythagoras was taught by Zoroaster
That's right
So they're all, they're all borrowing from each other
But it seems to be in this particular period where you start to see all these ideas of a single perfected, not perfect
But like, you know, some sort of eternal Demiurgic power who's above all the Daemons
Well I mean you have that in the Egyptian worldview for millennia before that
So I mean it's not exactly necessarily new, the question is not, so again as a historian you look for triggers
You don't see a historical trigger for that necessarily
Then if you don't see a trigger what you need to do is start looking at individual data points within the text to see
Are they closer to the Egyptian model or to the Persian model or to whatever
So you need to start analyzing because there is no trigger, you need to start analyzing the data as per se and seeing what it relates to more
It's really interesting because a lot of the ancient ideas like that have a very, very lengthy shelf life
They were therefore, you know, some ideas are, you know, you find them in Sumerian texts and they appear also in Hellenistic Babylonia
And so a lot of these texts, very often scholars in my field, unfortunately, they say, well, this looks like something from, you know, that we find in the Neo-Assyrian text
And therefore I will date it to the Neo-Assyrian, that is extremely simplistic
When I do that with Amos, I mentioned that earlier, when I do that with Amos, I show how just the level of detail where he uses idiomatic expressions that would be lost on people in later centuries
So that's why I can date the text really quickly, but I only, really precisely, but I only date, I'm trying to be really, really cautious and really scientific about this
When I can see clear parallels that are indisputable between these different corpora where you can actually make that connection
But otherwise, you know, it's really hard to date these texts in any, you know, in any really precise form
And we should be extremely cautious with that, it's overly simplistic to say, for example, they mentioned Cyrus, so clearly it was written during the lifetime of Cyrus, for example
Or that is simply not mental
I had an even worse argument thrown at me about Genesis predating, or this is what I'm not going to name names, I don't want to, this is my friend of mine, he's a good scholar too
But in this particular thing, he really threw me, I was like, what? Well, I'll tell you what he said
I go, can you find anyone that's citing Genesis in the prophets, for example, or any, because I'm trying to find out when was Genesis written?
I think it's Hellenistic, but I asked him, I said, can you find anyone citing Genesis or quoting from Genesis, and I just asked him this question
And he said, yes, Isaiah does, and then he gives me a passage from Isaiah that has one word in common with one word from a sentence in Genesis
They're not even talking about the same thing, one of them was about creation, the other one was about destruction, they're opposites
And I go, wait, so you're saying that this one word in common with this sentence makes him, I go, that's not a citation
You know what, even if...
You said to me, this is not up for debate and left
Okay, so that person is clearly not thinking scientifically
But you know what, even for the sake of discussion, let's say we find in Isaiah or wherever, in Jeremiah, it doesn't matter where
An actual reference to the Garden of Eden, whatever, with actual verbatim quotes, what does that mean?
Nothing, strictly nothing, because it could be edited
Well, I was going to say, then you have to wonder, is this one coming after the other one now?
Well, not even that, but even that is meaningless, I mean the point is that we know that the Biblical text underwent so many hands editing and redacting it
We know from Qumran that sometimes they change just one word
If your unit is just a single word and you don't know when that word was written and added to the text, the text of Jeremiah
The text of Joshua was still in flux in the first century CE
Josephus had a different version of Joshua than what we are familiar with
Yeah, and so we have, that's first century CE, you know, and the text of Joshua is still in flux
So, I mean, knowing how the Bible was constantly, I mean it was a living text that people still edited and adapted to their own ideologies
Throughout the first centuries BCE and into the first century CE, you know, it was still a highly debated and very much still a battleground at that time
So knowing this, it is very easy to add references like we mentioned earlier to the Exodus in Hosea
By the way, the people in Alexandria, the Greeks or the Macedonians in Alexandria did the same thing to Homer and Hesiod and others
They edited the text and when they saw contrasts and contradictions between the texts
They made sure that they, to correct those texts and add and change a word here, change a paragraph there
They did that with the Greek texts and of course also the Jewish redactors, editors of the Bible did the same there as well
It was obvious, it was natural to do
You know, people in Qumran, for example, had no problem writing texts with the same, believing that they had the same authority as the authors of the biblical texts
You know, it's not, or not in Qumran, but at least the writings that were preserved in Qumran
And so, yeah, and so the biblical texts, it was alive, it was something that is a living document that people are still writing
It was not yet fossilized, it was not yet canonized
It was a living document with different sects fighting for their narrative to be more widely accepted than the others
Yeah, and this scholar, I had to look up what was said, it was Jeremiah, so I asked him, I go, is there any instances of one of the prophets citing from Genesis or quoting and saying, as Moses says
He says, yes, Jeremiah 423, okay, look it up, Jeremiah 423 says, I looked at the earth and it was formless and empty, and at the heavens their light was gone
And I'm like, so where's the citation? And then he was like, this is what he says, he says, it's clearly dependent on Genesis
And I was like, what do you mean clearly? And he's like, are you being serious right now? He got like mad at me
And I was like, I'm just asking, how do you just assume this is borrowing from Genesis? And it's because that word formless is in there
And I'm like, and I just don't think strong connection at all, I just think that's
Well, I mean, again, even if the quote was verbatim, verbatim
By the way, which it isn't
It isn't, I know it's not, but I'm saying even if to give your benefit of a doubt to your friend, even if this was verbatim, it's very easy for a redactor in the Hellenistic period to add this quote into the text of Jeremiah
You know what I'm saying? It's not, it means nothing because we see that these texts were constantly, I mean, the form, you know, the Jeremiah between the Septuagint version of Jeremiah and the Masoretic text of Jeremiah are very, very different
Very different. Also, the length is very different, not just, I mean, the location of the chapters is very different and the length of the text is different
But also, if you compare that to the Qumran version that we found in Qumran of Jeremiah, it is even different than these two
Okay, Jeremiah was still being, the text of Jeremiah was still being worked on in the second century, first century BCE
And they changed, they moved around verses, they moved around, they moved around, chapters, they moved, you know, they added stuff, they, you know, they removed stuff, they were, it was still undergoing in the second century BCE and the first century BCE
Still undergoing edition with action, etc. So it's very easy, if I wanted to make it as, make people believe that Genesis was a very ancient text or a very fundamental text to my, to my, to the people
Very easy to add quotes into the text of Jeremiah or into the text of Hosea or Joel or whatever, and, and should, I mean, you can do it in Amos, you can add a something that seems to be, to be a citation from Genesis or Exodus, and then people would say, well, look, Amos knew about this
Now, first of all, if you're approaching this from a scientific perspective, saying that there was a person like Amos is not scientific. Okay, might, there might have been, I don't, I don't really know, but I can't assert that there was
I, I, in my article, I, on Amos, and I normally don't, my most of my articles are not on, on real kind of biblical issues like that. But, but in this particular article on Amos, the, I refer to the Amosian school, not, not talking about a specific person.
Again, tried to be, when I say scientific, I mean, I do, I do not take, I need, I need to have evidence before, before, before making a claim. I can't just say, okay, well, the Bible says so, therefore, it's historical.
And, and you know what, the Bible never claims to be a book of history. I mean, the concept was, was not even developed yet. So, that was not one of its concerns, it was involved in an ideological battle between sects on the, I mean, again, just like the Annihads in Rome are not, they don't, they don't claim to be actual history.
Everyone knew that this is a form of mythology, but they accepted mythology. They had no problem with mythology. Mythology was a form of history. They, I mean, they, you know, and so it's not like today when we equate mythology with lie, it's not a lie.
Okay, it is a tradition.
You know, your mythology is your tradition. It is the stories that your ancestors told. It's not a lie. It is, it is a tradition is something that's part of your ethnic heritage, right, your, your, your ethnic DNA or your kind of cultural DNA.
And mythology was, was, was viewed with high regard. Today we see mythology as something that is a lie or almost, you know, people telling you something in order to, almost a marketing ploy. But, but that simply was not the case in the ancient world.
Yeah, and it normally represents some truths within it.
There is a grain of truth in every mythology, right? Absolutely.
Yeah, not, not, not to, you know, I just thought that was interesting how when I asked that question, it was like, there was, it was like, I was being rude to them for even questioning that Genesis could be, it was very strange the way it went down, but
people are very emotional about this, of course, and I see it all the time, of course, and I get accused, you know, all kinds of accusations because of this but, you know, I, I am committed and work on this very closely with my students to have to being committed to the science the scientific method of
of historical research and I do not, again, for example, showing that there was a unified, yeah, we stick identity already in the sixth century, late seventh, as I said earlier today, in our, in our discussion.
Some people see that as being conservative, right, to see, wow, there was already a unified kind of quote unquote Jewish identity already that early on.
Some people see that as a, as a concern because it's in, in scholarship, it's, it's, you usually talk, you see Jews as Judean, rather than, than cultic.
There was, I mean, the common opinion in scholarship is that there was no cultic unity among Yahwists until when they became started to be, to be identified as Jews, which is only in the Asmonean period.
And, and, and so usually in what's, what's normal in, in scholarship is to say, to use the word Jews only from the second century BC.
And here I say, well, there was, I still don't use the word Jews, but I, but I'm saying there was a common Yahwistic identity that goes way beyond the borders of Judea, already in the seventh and into the sixth century BC, and was very clear from the, from, from the,
quote unquote, exile on.
And that's another thing you start seeing synagogues in the Hellenistic era, not before that though.
That's right. That's right. And so in Jonathan, you know, my friend Jonathan Adler, who's an excellent scholar.
I don't know if you've had him already on your show, or if you, if not, you should, but his book, The Origins of Judaism is, is, is, is fat is just a great work that, that, that describes this very, very clearly from the archeological starting is an archeologist.
So from the archeological data on how, on how that developed.
But yeah, history, actual reality is much more interesting than the stories that they told you about, you know, about the Bible. And again, not.
It makes me like the Bible more. It does.
Exactly. I mean, exactly. Look, I mean, there, there are a lot of scriptures out there, like the Avesta, the Rig Veda, and the Vedas in general, that are rich, beautiful works.
They also have, they also interact with historical events. They have beautiful hymns, beautiful, beautiful, beautiful work, not less than the Bible.
The difference with the Bible is simply its geography, where all of these came together and left their imprint in some way, shape or form in this region, just because of where it's located.
You had to cross, if you want to go from Egypt to the, to Mesopotamia, you had to cross this, this area.
Or if you wanted to go from Mesopotamia to Egypt or from Europe to Egypt, as Alexander did, for example, you had to go through this region and leave an imprint.
And that's what gives the Bible. It's, it's, it's unique flavor.
But there are a lot of beautiful, you know, scriptural works other than the Bible that exists there. I don't, I don't think they are less beautiful and less authoritative.
And, but certainly the Bible is up there, certainly up there. And its uniqueness is just how, how eclectic it is.
Right. Conserving elements from all of these empires, from the Assyrian Empire, the Babylonian Empire, the Persian Empire, the Hellenistic Empire's plural into the Roman.
And, and all of this, all of these left a mark that is conserved and you can still hear these echoes in the Bible today.
And that's what I think makes it really unique and powerful.
Simply its humanity.
Well said. I mean, we call her a lot of ground in this discussion. And I just want to, I don't know if that was perfectly well said, we can end on that.
And I just want to give you the time to, you know, talk about anything that's coming up that you want to promote.
Obviously, you got the book coming out. Anything else besides that?
Well, I have this book coming out. I have a number of books as well, kind of on that I'm finishing now, I mean, finishing it.
I'm writing, I was commissioned to write a book about Elephantine, the history of the Elephantine, with the community there.
So they asked me to write that. And that's, I'm already working on that, of course. That's good. That's a big project, of course, to actually write the history of this absolutely amazing community.
The good thing is, of course, I have several articles on this that I can use in this work on this book.
And I have, yeah, I have these, these other books that I mentioned throughout our talk today also about the Alexandria, the museum on Alexandria and its impact on biblical, on the biblical evolution of the biblical text and on the composition of the biblical text, putting them together.
And, yeah, but, but really, I think what's, I'm extremely excited about this book that is coming out.
Yawism under the Achaemenid Empire, because of course it's not just me, it's colleagues that are fantastic that have contributed to this, that were in our, in the conference in 2022.
Really the great scholars, just so if you read that book, you have, you get, and by the way, not all of them agree with me, even within the book.
And, and, and so you can get a, you get, you can get a glimpse into the discussions.
Some of them, you know, disagree with one another, but that's exactly what you wanted to have.
We wanted to have a, a, all of the different points of view, or, or, you know, major points of view, discussing different things together and really get, so when you read the different chapters or different contributions in that book, you get a very, very good picture of Yawism at that, under the Achaemenid Empire.
And of course you can agree or disagree with me, or with my colleagues, or with other, other people there on there, but at least all of us try to make our, the most scientific arguments we can to, to support our, our audience, support our positions.
Yeah, I can't wait to see, do you think, and you think this book is going to bring some, some game changers out, like some stuff that no one's ever, like this is going to shake things up a little bit, right?
Absolutely. There are a number of articles there that are going to be to shape, really shake things up and, and, and open up. I think this book is going to be a reference book for decades.
You know, into the future that all scholars in our field will have to have on their, on their, on their desk.
Yes, I agree.
This is going to be a reference book for, for, for decades to come.
Is there a way to pre-order it? Can people pre-order it now or no?
I think, I think so. There's already, there's already a, a, a, it's already, it's already on the Decorator website.
Oh, okay. So I'll put the link in the description right now.
So people watching this now pre-order that thing. This is going to be the book that it's going to change the biblical scholarship as we know it.
And I'm, I'm, I'm, I'm promoting it as much as I can. I think it's, I just promote and promote good stuff. So definitely I'll put the link in the description, check that out.
And you have just attained true gnosis.
