where Jesus is saying to the Jewish leaders, you are from your father, the
devil. When you look at the Greek, ektupatras, tu tiavalu, you are from the
father of the devil. The fact that Yahweh is trying to get his own particular
people out of Egypt, he's trying to get them into the desert, into a mountain,
where there will be a big storm on top of the mountain, and then Moses will
stumble down with two stone blocks, saying that he is the words of Yahweh.
When the Egyptians imagined all this happening, they thought that this was
really a description of sat. The Septuagint of the Exodus, that is the
Exodus in Greek, they recognized that God of plagues, and of deserts, and of
mountains, and of blood, and of war, as sat, interpreted in their own way, to the
effect that Jews worshiped sat, who is the God of evil. Yah-o, this sounded to
Egyptians like A-o, and A-o is the equivalent of the donkey prey, because
when you learn about this God, it looks very different than the Platonic good,
right? The Platonic good doesn't change, and is unambiguously good, and only does
benefits for people.
And welcome back to the Gnostic Informant, and you are about to attain
true gnosis, and the great sage is back once again with another one, Dr. M.
David Litwa. Links are in the description for the YouTube channel, that's free, you
might as well hit that subscribe button, your news is nothing, but also if you want
to support a great scholar as I do, there's also the link for the Patreon as
well in the description. Go check those out, you've got different tiers, you might be
some tiers that suit you better, and if I'm not mistaken, you do offer your Patreon
members additional options of learning languages, I'm not sure if that's, are you
still open for that, or are you filled up? Oh, definitely, yep, open for that, so yeah,
there's all sorts of tiers, you can come on and learn a bit of Greek and Coptic
from me, I've got a tier for answering questions, I've got a tier for getting all
my scholarly articles and scholarly work, and yeah, I've got a tier where I can send
you a book in the mail, or even, you know, have dinner at some point, so yeah, check
it out. There you go, that's right down in the description, hit that link and check
those out, and the topic for today is something that really fascinates me for
the last couple of years since I've been, you know, reading into this stuff, and
it's the topic of early Christianity, and how they viewed the Old Testament God.
Some of you might not realize this, but the earliest Christians that we know
about, didn't all agree on who the Old Testament God was, what his role was, and
so there's a couple of groups that come to mind, we might, we might talk, talk
about more groups as well, but Marcian is this early Christian writer who, if I'm
not mistaken, please correct me if I'm wrong, but I'm just gonna tell you what I
think, it seems that he thought the Old Testament God was evil to some of these
Christian groups that had similar views.
Well, I think before we get to Marcian, let's just take a step back and draw a
bit of the context for this, because the context for this is really setting the
stage for all the figures that we'll talk about. So first of all, Christianity
takes on, it wants to appear intellectual, it takes on all the intellectual
repertoire of its time, and in its time, the dominant philosophy was Platonism.
And so Christians, you know, they didn't want to portray themselves as believing
fables and in conflicted and morally problematic depictions of God. They wanted
God to be unchangeable, to be everlasting, to be full of wisdom, to be
unknown, to be transcended, to be hypercosmic, that is transcending the world,
and to, most importantly, be good, and to have no question about the fundamental
goodness of God ever at any time. And so these are the fundamental traits of
Platonism. Platonism and Christianity joined forces, and they really never stopped
joining forces, because even today, all Christians will insist that their God is
good and only good, and is somehow transcending this world. Those are not
inherently biblical ideas. There's no point in where you'd be flipping through,
you know, the Bible and say, you know, the Hebrew Bible, and you'll find, you
know, God is transcendent, you know, I mean, you'll never find that as a as a
doctor. Okay, that's Platonism that has been worked into Christianity, like
Levin, okay, and has inflated the dough.
I wanted to add to what you say real quick, and then I want to continue with
what your thought was. But I noticed this recently, I was looking at Wikipedia
page for some of these high level bishops in Rome in the Roman Catholic
Church. And it says, I'm showing them on the screen as I say this, Roman
Catholic. And then it says philosophy, Neoplatonists. So some of these
Roman Catholics are like self professed Neoplatonists in 2023 right now. Just
to add just wanted to throw that out there to add what you're saying.
Yeah, I mean, you've you've had with Pope Benedict the 16th, he made an
official statement on this that that Christianity and Platonism have joined
hands and have always been the two constituent elements in what became
Christian theology. And in the second century, it's no different. So when
you're a Platonist, the very first thing you do in the most widely read and the
most popular text ever in antiquity, it wasn't the Apology of Socrates, it
wasn't the phasorist with its wonderful image of the soul as a chariot. It
wasn't the symposium, where you have the drinking party and speeches about love.
It was the time s, which is Plato's creation story. And in that creation
story, he distinguishes God as the good from the creator, who is a lower
being, who is also good, because the creator is a perfect manifestation of
the good. And the creator, also known as the Demiurge, but it's the same word.
Demiurge just translates as creator. This creator creates the best of all
possible worlds, which is our world, and does his best to conform our world to
the good and to the eternal thoughts of God, eternal forms, as Plato thought of
them. So already, Christians are dealing with a scenario in which there is not a
split in the Godhead, but a distinction that is a distinction between the
ultimate and transcendent God and God's manager. Okay. And God's manager is the
creator. And in Platonism, there's no hint that the, that the creator is, is bad.
In fact, that, that would be quite wrong headed. But there are, or there were, in
the universe, you know, it wasn't just Christians, it was all people who
acknowledged that the middle management class of deity, which is called the
the demonace, okay, are the diamonds. These could be good or evil. And the
demonace took control of the nations. So each nation had its own
diamond, its own sponsor, as it were, sort of much more like a, I was going to say
a mascot, but much more than that, that the diamond is the leading force and
protector of that nation. And we see this idea back in Deuteronomy, where, you know,
that all the 70 nations of the world are given 70 different angels to be their
manager. But the angel given to Israel is Yahweh himself. And later, the angel
given to Israel is depicted as Michael. That's in the book of Daniel. But anyway,
this idea of angelic rulers of the nations, or demonic rulers of the
nations, this is a fundamental idea. And they observed this because, you know,
when you went to different regions of the world, different cities or city
states would worship different deities. So Athens obviously has Athena as their
demonic protectorous. And other other city states will have different gods in
charge. Obviously in Egypt, there's Isis and Osiris. And in Rome, there is the
Olympian Zeus, or the Capitoline Zeus. And, you know, you could go anywhere. And the
way that Christians kind of thought of this is that the gods of the nations,
they are real. But they represent these middle management level of deity. And not
all of them are good. In fact, as Christians later concluded, none of them are
good. Now, with this basic idea, some Christians who, you know, were not
Jewish by lineage or by practice, that is, they didn't practice circumcision or
cash route or any of the other purity laws. They viewed the god of Judea, that is
the nation of Judea, the nation of the Jews, in much the same way as they would
have viewed the gods of Athens, or of Rome, or of Alexandria, or what have you.
That is, as a middle management being. And in this particular middle management
being, by the name of Yahweh, or as the Greeks said it, YAHO, this god had that
same ambiguity. Because when you learn about this god, it looks very different
than the playtown of good, right? The playtown of good doesn't change and is
unambiguously good, and only does benefits for people. And Plato says he can't be
jealous. He cannot be jealous. The specific thing in the Old Testament that he says,
I am the jealous god. Are we from there? Yeah. So the famous line in Plato and from
the Phaedrus is there is no jealousy in the divine choir. That is, no god, if it is a god,
can be jealous. Because the idea of a jealous god simply does not make logical and philosophical
sense. It is God needs nothing. Therefore, has no desire for anything else. If jealousy, then,
is the desire for someone else's property or characteristic, then, you know, QED,
God cannot be jealous. Otherwise, if you say that God is jealous, you implicitly say that
he needs something. But then that isn't God. That would be a lower middle management level
of being, who is jealous of the other nations, of the gods leading the other nations, you know.
Because when you think about it, Judea is a very small nation.
It always has been. In Israel today, I mean, it's not quite the size of New Jersey. I mean,
it's a very small place. So you can imagine a situation where the angels are competing with
each other. And we see that again in the Book of Daniel, where the archangel, Michael, who's
prince of Israel is fighting with the prince of Persia. Well, who's the prince of Persia? Well,
it's the angel in charge of Persia. They're jealous, and they have wars and fights. And when
there's wars and fights today, like between Ukraine and Russia, the ancients would think of
this as the angel of Russia versus the angel of Ukraine. And one angel is quite bigger and more
arrogant than the other, and wants to pick on the other, the other nations to gain more power.
So these issues are sort of your, your, your bread and butter kind of philosophical interpretation
of, of how to, how to envision the world from a philosophical perspective. You view the gods as
true beings, but on a middle management level. And the true God, who is the singular God, is
outside of this world, above the gods, above the middle, middle management level of the other
being beings called gods. And that God is perfectly good, unchanging, unjealous, unharmed by evil,
not needing anything, et cetera, et cetera. So this is the intellectual presentation of there,
this is how an intellectual in the, in the ancient world, say in the second century, would,
would voice things. And so Marcian, who's one of these intellectuals, and, you know, we can,
we can include with, with Marcian, the so-called Sethians or the seat of Seth, and we can include
the paratics, we can include several other, other groups. They have this Platonic idea of God, and
then they read the, the Old Testament and, or what Christians today call the Old Testament,
we'll just call it the Septuagint. When they read that document, they realize that the God in that
document, it doesn't match the description of the, the good. Because even this God, it gets jealous
of Adam and Eve in the garden, kicks them out, tries to prevent them from getting knowledge,
creates a situation where it's almost impossible for them to win. So in that respect, has,
introduces a large number of design flaws, is arbitrary in his rules. And when people don't
obey his rules, he attempts to annihilate them in the flood. And, you know, when the city of
Sodom and Gomorrah gets a little bit dirty, he'll fire a bombant, send a nuclear bomb by the hand
of an angel, blasted into smithereens, along with five other cities, or as the story goes, that,
you know, the smoke still rises in the Dead Sea region. These cities have, were wiped off the
map simply because Yahweh couldn't find anyone who worshiped him in those cities. And this image
of God, you know, it's the God who sends wild she-bears against young children to eat them up,
because they make fun of Elisha, because Elisha is bald. This is the kind of God that we're
dealing with. It's the God who kind of plays with Israel a bit, like, a bit like a yo-yo, you know,
is pulling them back and pushing them, you know, sending them in exile, promising to bring them
back if they're good. But, of course, they have to obey his regime of rules. And then, you know,
if they don't obey, he keeps threatening them and threatening them and threatening them. And
basically then, yeah, that's all hell. Run loose and sends the Assyrians and the Babylonians. And
it's like a game of cat and mouse. It's a very intolerant God, a very arbitrary God,
somewhat unpredictable, emotional. And, yeah, you can, you can see this. I mean, even, even,
you know, Jack Miles has a book called, you know, the God of Biography. And you can see this,
that, you know, people without the kind of faith commitments are still willing to say that,
yeah, this is a highly arbitrary and dangerous individual that we call Yahweh. And so that's
falls far short of any description of any kind of universal, universal and, and absolutely good
God. So they must not be the same character. And that's the fundamental deduction, right?
And it's also, for a Platonist, it's not a surprising thing because in the Platonism,
you're expecting the structure of reality to be, you have God on top and God is one and, you know,
you can call yourself a believer in one God. But of course, then you believe in a creator who's the
middle manager. And that structure of belief was very common. It's less common today because,
obviously, in Orthodox theology, they've so insisted that those two beings are the same.
Right. But that wasn't the dominant model and antiquity. So that's really important to remember.
Wow, that's very fascinating. And then so, like you mentioned, these, these, these
different sects of Christianity who sort of share this, this Platonic belief in this
perfect creator, and then middle beings and Yahweh being one of them, that explains that very well.
So I guess we said, instead of getting into who Marcian was and what I think that's, I think we
understand that Marcian sort of promoted some of these similar ideas. But I really want to touch on
this idea of Yahweh possibly being tied to the Egyptian God set. Because the reason,
I know it sounds like I'm going on a whole other topic, but you've tied this together
very nicely in your book, The Evil Creator, by the way, I have a link for that in the description.
So I want, and I think there's a good connection to be made here because we have some sources,
if I'm not mistaken.
Yeah, definitely. Well, as in with, with every other nation, you have,
you have gods who are in charge. And in Egypt, the situation is usually the gods in charge are
the beneficent gods, Isis and Osiris. But the Egyptians also recognize that there was a god of
foreigners in their midst and a god of evil associated with, with red and blood and the
dryness of the desert, the desert mountains and storms. And that's the god they called Seth,
which the Greeks identified with Typhon. So sometimes you'll see this hyphenated name Seth Typhon.
That's just the Greeks trying to understand who this god is. So I mean, for thousands of years
before Christianity, Seth was viewed as this particular type of, of, of God. And when the Jews
got around to promoting the Septuagint version of Exodus, they said that, yeah, Yahweh was at one
time, at one time attacked Egypt in a series of 10, you know, we call them plagues, but they're 10
separate attacks on the Egyptian people. And they look a lot like the things that Seth would do,
that is turning water into blood. There you get that red color, the idea of death and dryness.
Well, that's something that you get also darkness. And the fact that Yahweh is trying to get his own
particular people out of Egypt, his people, foreigners and Yahweh is the foreign god in Egypt.
He's trying to get them into the desert, into a mountain, where there will be a big storm on top
of the mountain. And then Moses will stumble down with two stone blocks, saying that he is the words
of Yahweh. When you, when the Egyptians thought of, or imagined all this happening, they thought that
this was really a description of Seth, right? And if I'm not mistaken, not to cut you off, because
this is amazing, brilliant stuff. If I'm not mistaken, the Hicksos, who Josephus, and Menatho,
or Borosus, one of the two, connect with the Israelites, and you can even get scholars today
on the apologetic side, connecting the Hicksos with the Israelites. Whether that's true or not,
regardless of the fact is, the Hicksos, if I'm not mistaken, if I'm wrong, their god was Seth.
Well, so that's in the later Greek retellings. Yeah, I wouldn't call that a Native Egyptian
tradition. I mean, the irony about Seth is that he's, he's, everyone recognizes him as an Egyptian
god, and the Egyptians recognize him as that, but he is also the god of foreigners. So he's
sort of, I mean, he, that's why he's, he's a threat. That's why he's the enemy of Osiris, right?
Yeah, so I mean, the, the, the long and short of it is, you know, when the Septuagint of the Exodus,
that is the Exodus in Greek, what became widely known in Egypt, they recognize that god of plagues
and of deserts and of mountains and of blood and of war as Seth. And that, so it was natural for them
to see Yahweh as Seth or as a form of Seth. And they, they sort of, they, they agreed with the
Jewish mythology and then sort of, you know, interpreted in their own way to the effect that
Jews worshiped Seth, who is the god of evil and a god associated with, with donkeys,
which is why they took special interest in, you know, Moses and donkeys. And there are episodes
where, yeah, Moses deals with, with donkeys. And so that they, they made that connection as well.
And they also made the connection because Yahweh's name in ancient Greek was, was pronounced
YAH-O, this sounded to Egyptians like A-O. And A-O is the equivalent of the donkey prey.
So we in English, we say hi-haw, but the Egyptians said A-O. And when they heard the sound of
Yahweh in Greek, YAH-O. It almost sounds like a Bakke cry too. Well, that's Evie or, uh, yeah,
it's a bit different. Yeah. Wasn't, isn't there a Yake, Yake, Yake? Isn't that another one too? Or is it?
Yake, Yake, yep, yep. Well, okay, it's still a different word though, it's still a different word.
Got you. Yeah, it's like the hard K sound. Yeah. Basically, there were a number of reasons for
native Egyptians to make the connection between the Jewish deity and Yahweh. And so before Christianity,
the Jews were already under attack from native Egyptian revisionary mythology. And so as you
can imagine, when Christianity came to maturity in Egypt, which I believe was the early second
century with intellectuals like Veselides and Carpocrates and Valentine's, they had no love
or loyalty to Judaism and they more or less, you know, not Valentine's or Carpocrates,
but other figures like Sethians, perhaps, if they made it to Egypt or if they were in Egypt,
they were attracted to this idea of Seth as a form of Yahweh or Yahweh as a form of Seth.
And this explained for them a lot of things, you know, it explained why Yahweh was so violent.
I mean, this is the God who kills the firstborn. Yeah. I mean, it's a child killing murderer.
And I just, just to look into, I was looking at tasks, because I knew he said something on this,
I just couldn't remember what it was. And I was able to pull it up. And he does say that there's
rumors that there, that when the Israelites were in the desert, they were starving. And on the seventh
day, donkeys led them to salvation. And now because of that, they worship the image of the donkey.
So this is a test of this in the second century, right around the time when all these different
groups are popping up that we're talking about. So you got to wonder if this was kind of a thing
in the air of the time. Exactly. So I reconstruct this whole story in the
stem of the traditions in my book, The Evil Creator, which I know it's, it's pricey.
That's due to Oxford University Press. But yeah, you can hop on Patreon and I can try to get you
a deal there. And hopefully we'll, the Kindle version is not too bad. And hopefully we'll get
a paperback soon. But yeah, don't hesitate to hop on Patreon. I give a deal to Patreon members for
books. And especially if you join the certain tier, I'll send it to you for free signed in the mail.
So at any rate, yeah, get the word out, The Evil Creator, you know, newsflash, he's, he's been here
the whole time. He's been here for long, even before Christianity even appeared.
So the final question on this topic, because this is fascinating, you got these groups,
for example, one of them being the Canites. Canites. Isn't Kane one of the bad guys? Well,
Kane was a tiller of the ground. And some of these Pythagorean Platonists were vegetarians.
And you add that to what we just mentioned with all these rumors floating around about Yahweh
being set or him possibly not being perfect. You have to wonder, Canites, Marcianites,
Sethianites, these are people who are looking at this from a Platonic worldview. And yeah,
what else? And so last time I asked you, the Sethians, is that, is their name tied to this?
Or is this just a coincidence? Yeah, well, Sethians are named for the third son of Adam,
who emerges after the death of Abel. And this sunset is said to be in the, in
to continue the image of his father, Adam, which is that which is the image of God,
and to be called the Sperma Heteron, which is the distinct or different seed.
And many, yeah, apparently think that this was a sort of pre-incarnation version of
Jesus or of the being who was later incarnate in Jesus. But anyway, Seth is this savior figure
who emerges early and carries on the secret mystical traditions that were known even before
Judaism but lost. And so Judaism is a sort of, it comes in and is the, it is, it is the
religion of the God Yahweh. But actually, Seth, long before Abraham, had the true traditions.
And then these true traditions reemerged later when Seth became incarnate in Jesus.
I see what they're doing there. That's very fascinating how they take the tradition and
sort of just say, oh, wait, what about this brother? Well, we're from him. So we got the real,
the real line of succession going. And it's kind of interesting.
Exactly. Yeah. So I mean, it's certainly, it's certainly anti-Jewish, but in a sense,
not any more anti-Jewish than other forms of Christianity were. So again, if you look at the
Barnabas, you know, it's, it's, this is a, this is a letter that, that's still, it looks
orthodox, basically. But it says that it was an evil angel, Angelos Ponoros in the Greek,
that tricked, the Greek is a Sophism, tricked the Israelites, literally tricked them
into using physical circumcision. The physical circumcision, you know, the cutting of the
penis was never intended to be God. It's a silly, silly ritual. And they were actually tricked by
an evil angel. And then the whole question is, well, who's that evil angel? And there's, you know,
among Orthodox interpreters, this is overwhelming sense that, well, that just must be another name
for Satan, right? I mean, but the, when you look back in Genesis 17, the only being who demand
circumcision is Yahweh. That's the evil angel. Wait, you just, and now I have an, an additional
question that just pops in my head now, because you have in the Gospel of Mark, Jesus telling the
Pharisees and Sadducees that their father is the devil. Now we've talked about this in my channel,
but for the rest of the people watching you, Gospel of John, I'm sorry, but people are someone
watching who have no, who don't know this yet. So can you reiterate this, this phrase and what you
think this means and maybe what you think that early Christians like Marcion, like the Sathians,
what have interpreted this as? Well, Marcion, I mean, he might have liked and enjoyed John,
but he didn't view it as scripture. Where, where John appears is in, in other kinds of literature,
among the paratics and among the archontics. And the first thing question here is, is,
if my memory serves, is John 48. And it's in English, translated, or I think mistranslated as,
as you, where Jesus is saying to the Jewish leaders, you are from your father, comma, the devil,
which is a horrible thing to say. But when you look at the, the Greek, it's,
whomes ectupatras tutiavalu, which is better translated, you are from the father of the devil.
And, you know, who's, who's, who's the devil's father?
Well, I mean, we all ultimately have one origin. And even the devil is a fallen angel. You know,
he didn't come out of nothing. His, his father, his generator is still
God, in this case, the Jewish creator. And it just so happened that the Jewish creator
made a mistake. He fathered a bunch of these angels. And, you know, a lot of them
rebelled against their father because they couldn't stand him and became
devils. And this is a, has ever since become a core Christian myth, you know, the origin of
Satan. Satan is originally an offspring of the creator, but turns against the creator
for whatever reason. There's, there's lots of reasons, but he turns against the creator.
And so even the devil's father, still Yahweh. So when, when Jesus says you were from the father
of the devil, he's saying something which is actually not controversial at all. He's saying
that the Jews are from Yahweh. And then when you go read the verse, it gets, it gets horrifying,
because it's not only you are from the father of the devil, it's you do the deeds that he did,
and he's a liar and a murderer from the very beginning. Wow. And so to end this, do you think
that Paul's epistles reflect that attitude of there being some sort of different, or do you
think Paul is more or less saying that God is the father is perfect and Jesus is the son?
What is your thoughts on that?
Well, I mean, so Paul has been domesticated for nearly 2000 years, and the attempt to make him
sound good. It continues today. But yeah, there are passages in Paul which make you wonder.
He has in Galatians 319, it says the law was given through angels. So the law is not a direct
product of God. And it's angels who are administering that. And so not that that means that not every
law is good, and not every law is permanent either. So you can throw it out. And that allows
him to make that move. Yeah, that's one thing you can say for certain about Paul is he has
this idea that the law is bondage, and freedom is in Christ, and you don't need the law anymore
because you're saved, because you're circumcised in the heart, not in the flesh.
Yes, that's the Paul. After, you know, 20 years of reflection on why he became a follower of Jesus
the Messiah. Paul the Jew, you know, presumably, you know, before 20 years before he wrote that
letter, would never say anything like that about Judaism. I mean, Jews even today view the law as
a gift. It's not a burden at all. And it's something good, something to have to have joy in. So that's
the Simcha Torah. They have festivals just that have joy for God giving the law. But of course,
Christians have it all the opposite way. They want to say, Oh, my God, the law is such a burden,
you know, it's the most awful thing that could ever happen to you. Excuse me, but you know,
this has to do with, you know, prevarication after you've already converted to a particular
view and framework. It's our meta narratives that determine, you know, how we view things.
But getting back to Paul, yes, he also says in two Corinthians four, that the God of this world,
hathayas tu ayonas, etiflosin, that is blinded people from seeing the light of the glory of Christ.
And, you know, I don't know of, I don't know of the Father of Jesus Christ ever really trying to
blind people from seeing the light of his Son. So whoever that God is, doesn't seem to be
the Father. That would have to be someone different. And then, you know, again, you pull the Orthodox
trump card and say, Well, that has to be Satan. Well, the same thing that we saw on Barnabas,
we see in Paul, this Paul never calls Satan a God. And it would be presumptuous to say that
Satan is the God of the whole world. No, that's a perfect description of the Creator. And in fact,
we find that very term, God of the world, describe describing Yahweh in books of the
substitution. So to my mind, that's a reference to the Creator, and that documentively is how
Marcian took it. Yeah, and I'm not mistaken. If it's one Corinthians eight, where he actually
acknowledges that there are other gods, or is that also translated, translation debated type of thing?
Well, he says there are many gods and many lords. Yeah.
Now, is that something you can people debate on? Is he actually saying there's other gods,
or do people say, No, he's not saying that these gods are real. He's just saying people worship them.
What do you think? Well, of course, in Orthodox theology, it's not permitted for Paul to say that
there really are literally other gods, right? Because then you'd have to give up on the idea
that he was a monotheist. But of course, that is a rather plain reading of the text.
I agree. I mean, of course, Paul himself would want to say that these other beings called gods
are really demonized. Right. It would fit with the times, with the middle plainness of the time period.
Yeah. And that's exactly how an intellectual would think that they are very real beings.
But they're the middle management level.
Wow, that brought it right back to the full circle. That was perfect.
Yeah. Anything else you want to touch on with this subject before we close out?
No. Just, yeah, check out the books. I've got an Amazon page as well. So, yeah,
don't hesitate to contact me over Patreon. Unfortunately, I can't take the emails just
because I get floods and floods of emails a day, and it just becomes overwhelming. So,
catch me over Patreon and I will see you there. And I have links for your YouTube,
your Patreon, and the book Evil Creator, because we talk about that a lot. So,
that featured book is in the description as well. And you have just attained true gnosis.
You have just attained true gnosis.
The Demiurge has no power over you.
