Welcome back to the Gnostic Informant and you are about to attain true gnosis.
And today we're going to go deep again.
As you know, I have Dr. Amon with me.
And if you haven't yet subscribed, go to Lady Babylon, hit that subscribe button.
This is, this is one, there's only one place in the world where you're going to find content
like this.
And I'm not joking.
This is a perfect, this is a real classical philologist who is trained in the ancient
classical Greek languages, who also studies the, the, the drugs.
What do I mean by that?
Well, I'll just pull, I'll just give you an example.
He wrote kind of a commuse.
This is a big hit.
As you can see, you know, the times UK said, this is the last wild frontier of classical
studies.
And you can get it right here on Amazon, links in the description.
The ancient world is not what you think.
I mean, just imagine if we had the like, I don't know, Lord of the Rings, but it was
rated R and there's prostitutes and drugs everywhere.
That's the ancient world that we don't, that we lost through a thousand years of the church.
But the ancient world before the church was a different place and we lose a lot of the
context of that.
When this, and that's what Dr. Amon brings to the table.
He reminds, he's reminding the world of what the ancients were doing.
And he brings a lot of context that is needed in my opinion when I'm looking into stuff
that I do.
Also, he offers his services.
And as you can see, he's a PhD in classics, he's got five stars, a perfect rating out
of 378 ratings.
You can hit the link in the description if you want to learn classical Greek or Latin.
He does both.
Let's just go down real quick just to see some of these reviews.
Learning is easy to Professor David.
He makes it fun and interesting.
Learning is quick and very smooth.
That was me, by the way.
Four lessons I've done so far.
Knowledgeable is an understatement.
Amon is able to take me through ancient Greek in a way that other teacher could.
I am comfortable learning with Amon and look forward to continuing.
There is countless, countless people who have left five stars and who are continuing to
get learning languages from Dr. Amon.
So with that being said, make sure you hit those subscribes, check out those links.
And we are going to have an amazing, amazing show tonight.
We're going to go deep into the stuff that they do not tell you in church.
Let me repeat that.
You will not hear this in church.
Hit the intro.
All right, here's without further ado, Dr. Amon, what is going on?
Neil, the great informant of the gnosis.
Yes, it's good to see you.
And thank you for having me on.
It's always, I'm always jumping at the chance to come on and address your audience.
So thank you for having me.
Absolutely.
I can't wait to get into this topic because as you guys know in the thumbnail, gangster
Jesus, some of you might be like, come on, that's a cheap shot.
But wait, this is something to this thing.
He is a boaster.
He is not playing around.
The Jesus you get in church is, you know, love your neighbor as you love yourself.
And the greatest thing you can do is love.
But that's, that's part of his schizophrenic, if you will, message that flips on a dime and
he'll just randomly snap and then brag about going after Jezebel and throwing her on a
table to rape her and then killing your children and then saying, I am the morning star, bitch.
And like, we're going to get into these texts right now.
You're probably running, what, what are you talking about?
What text is this?
And that's what we're about to bring you right now.
So let's get into it.
This is the Bible thug life, man.
This is the thug life of the Bible.
When I started dipping into the drugs and antiquity and the prostitution and these cult rights
and stuff.
Yeah, you see a lot of thuggery.
Yeah.
So this is a great topic.
Let's bring it all out.
All out.
Good.
Absolutely.
Good.
I want to, can, can I throw up first and I more want to present this to you and then
you have, you give me meal, your thing, because people like this love between us.
Yeah.
I'm going to pump up your energy.
We're going to bounce you back and forth.
All right.
Let's go.
That first email that Peter kills Ananias, right?
Yeah.
Right.
So there was a certain guy, you know, named Ananias and he's, his wife was Sapphira, right?
Anyway, he sold some land, some of his own goods he sold, right?
This is usually like a building upon a piece of land or something.
He's got some, some cash there going and he, like everybody else, he sells it, right?
And he only gave a part, you know, he gave a part of it to Peter, right?
And so Peter says, Hey, what are you filled with Satan, you know, that you got this thing
in your heart that you've lined in the spirit of God that you, you kept some of this stuff
back, bro.
And yeah.
And that's where it gets weird because he falls down right away.
He falls down and dies while you're in this ex-ep-suk-sin ex-ep-suk-sin.
And it uses a weird word there.
It uses a very weird word there, neo for to die.
It's used by the doctors on the side of, of the medical texts for losing a heart rate,
a stable heart rate, because they were all, they were all into the pulse and whatnot.
And so it has to do with some kind of cardiac event, right?
And so there he is.
That makes sense why he hits the ground, right?
And then the text says that this, this message went out, man.
People stood in fear.
People were afraid because of this.
Yeah.
And then he brings in his wife, same thing happens to his wife.
She hits the ground.
And he tells her, he's so good.
He can tell her.
He says, we just took your husband out and buried him just like we're going to bury you.
And boom, she hits the ground.
Now, what's funny that people don't point out is there are some Neoniscoy, right?
There's some Neoteroi there.
These are the new initiates.
These are the people who've just started into the cult, right?
Who were just in the family, calling them people brother.
And they sit there and they do what Peter tells them to do.
So somehow Peter had this interaction and in both cases, in both cases, he was able to
get them to die on cue, right?
When you sin against that pluma, that is a sin that is performed within the right.
That's the only thing that can't be pardoned is a sin within the right.
And if you took that poison without taking the antidote, you were dead.
And if Peter didn't give it to you, that's it.
Yeah.
And I want to throw something out here, too, because this is coming from the chapter where
these new initiates, they sold their property and they gave away most of the funds to the
church or the assembly and kept a little bit for themselves and that was not cool.
They were not playing around.
You're supposed to give all of it and not supposed to keep any of it for yourself.
That is it.
Where's all these conservative Republican Christians at today that are owning businesses
and you think they would ever, that's not the way, like what happened to that?
The idea that you can't have any private property, that's gone now.
Those aren't the Christians today.
This is a whole different world back then.
Yeah.
According to our modern evangelical fairy tale, it's our blessing by God who has given
us manifest destiny to be able to make as much capital as we possibly can.
But in antiquity, those Christians were instructed, you have to get rid of everything.
And what they said was you got to lay it at the feet of the rock.
You got to lay everything at the feet of the rock.
And so that's what they did.
And then it says they redistributed out what they needed for food and whatnot like that.
So yeah.
Right.
Remember, these people are dropping out though.
They're dropping out of society.
Right.
They're disappearing.
They're leaving families.
They're doing all this.
So we got a kind of a radical group.
So when we see gangster Peter, right, making these hits and setting the stage.
Rock Petros.
Yeah.
Mm-hmm.
Mm-hmm.
That's his gang name, you know, he's got some friends.
They call them the sons of thunder.
Don't don't mess with these people.
We know that they're armed.
Remember, Peter's the one who jumps out and starts swinging the sword, right, cuts his
ear off.
Yeah.
He's not supposed to be carrying a sword by the way.
That's a no-no.
Right.
And there's no in our rain antiquity.
They have laws against things.
Right.
So yeah.
He's armed and he's there and he's there with the trafficking Jesus with the boy and
the naked boy.
But let's go to the, let's go to the next one.
Yeah.
And all curses, right.
There won't be any curses anymore.
This is from apocalypse.
Yeah.
And the throne of God and the lamb was in them.
Right.
We'll be in them.
The slaves.
Right.
They'll serve them.
Right.
And they will look upon his face and their, their, their foreheads met upon right on their
foreheads.
They're going to have to own them out to, they're going to have his name.
This thug leader has slaves and those slaves bear a brand as do any slaves.
Right.
This is, you know, we're not living in a slave culture.
So this doesn't strike us.
But these are the word Latreo is that word of service.
Jesus has slaves whom he imprints with his own name on their heads.
Right.
And remember, we looked at Jesus as the lay stakes.
He calls himself, when he gets arrested, he comes out yelling, he's like, would you come
out against me armed like I'm a pirate?
Right.
This is the accoutrement of the pirate.
Right.
This is, he's got a brand that he carries.
Right.
And he brands you, you're his.
Right.
And he's going to trade you off that brand will follow you.
He'll always be in service, bro.
So this is a part of the machinery of antiquity.
If people don't realize it's baked into the language, you know what I mean?
That's crazy.
That is wild actually.
That is just absolutely, I mean, he's, this is like, you're, you're getting branded.
You're getting basically getting tatted basically for your gang.
And now you better die, you better be a martyr for this gang.
It's, it's radical.
This is not like some club that everybody was holding hands and doing hymns like your,
like your Sunday church.
This is like, you're going to get a brand on you and then you better go and die for
this faith.
Because if you don't, you're not real.
Yeah.
You better be, this is like the real, I don't know, I'm just going to say the word jihadi,
but like, kind of, did you notice, did you notice the apocalypse?
He's constantly threatening, I'll, I'll wipe your name out of the book of life.
If you do this, I'll wipe your name out of the book of life.
They're not playing around.
This is not a light at all.
This is serious.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And why is he coming back?
People are like, Jesus, come back and resurrect me and the evangelicals are like, Oh, I'm a
dominionist, pre tribulations, right?
Just BS that has no meaning to it.
I'm from the 1600s that they just made up.
It's not, it's not biblical, like, like, like Bart Ehrman pointed out in one of Derek's
videos that Jesus is coming back.
He's going to look for people when he says Jezebel, he's talking about people, specific
type of people who are profaners of the mysteries, people who are part, he's going to take them,
throw her out of bed, rape her, go look for her children and kill them.
That's the return of Jesus.
There's no rapture.
There's no come to take my people who believe me.
No, it's come to kill the people who don't believe me.
It's the negative.
It's the opposite of that.
That's a thug hit right there, baby.
Kill that.
Not only that, kill that, kill that BI, you know what?
And her children too.
Yeah.
Knock them all off.
Knock them all off.
It's a hit.
But that's, that's, that's, that's your true.
That's your basic messiah, messianic, all messiahs.
Doesn't matter what sect or religion, that's the, the idea of the messiah.
That's what the messiah is supposed to do.
Yeah.
That's not, that's not nothing new that Christianity is bringing to the table.
That's just, that's the messiah.
That's the real messiah.
There is nothing new that Christianity brought to the table.
There is nothing new, right?
If you took a pen and marked out, like you were redacting something for a lawyer or something.
If you went, took a pen, black pen and marked out everything that had precedent, the whole
thing would be dark, you know, except for Jesus went down to Bethany.
That's the only thing that, you know, just be his directions.
Right.
Right.
Right.
Love it.
Love it.
It's everything is, but you can't, you and I can't do anything original, right?
You don't seem, you see anybody else coming up with a religion that's new thing like that?
No.
Everything is language.
When you talk, when you're using a certain language, you cannot come out of, you can't
separate yourself from the linguistics that you're operating within.
No, it's like an amber and it traps you.
That language traps the meaning.
Yeah.
For forever preserves it.
Yeah.
He's going to come back.
He's not, people think he's coming back and it's all going to be half resurrection.
I'm going to heaven.
You all can.
No, no, no.
He's going to come back to kill all of us.
The mission is to kill everyone.
Think about this.
Think about, let's look at some more sources.
What's that next one?
Yeah.
Don't do that.
Oh, I just wanted to bring this up because this is a quote, you know, revelation 22.
I am a fellow servant with you, right?
That word servant is the same word for slave, right?
Right.
Yeah.
No, no, no.
He's talking about bowing.
This is an angel responding to John who's bowing in front of him.
He says, don't do that.
He's like, you know, I'm a, I'm a, I'm also a slave.
Right.
And he's, then he says worship God.
The only one that you're that slave to is the living God.
We are do Lloyd.
We are slaves, brah.
Yeah.
Okay.
Next one that.
Oh, look at this one.
Oh.
And by the way, isn't that, isn't there, isn't, isn't he basically calling him like the equivalent
of the B word, right?
Uh, he's, well, uh, that's an interesting question.
That's an interesting question.
I don't, uh, it's so cult tied up this word, that you even have dogs who are official priests.
So the, because the next one is father McCoy, right?
Those are people who are specific.
That's a technical term.
Yeah.
Those are people within the cult or within the community who are experts in drugs, right?
And, and so all of these are the pornoi.
Who do you think the pornoi are?
Those are the people that's the lady Babylon way.
And, and why do you think they're called phonase?
They're called murderers because they're performing their sacrifice.
And what was the last one, the Adola Latriai, those who were in service of the image, the
image, the image of the image, right?
These, these people are the people on the outside.
What's going to happen to them?
Right?
Let's see what the next one is.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And she'll take away the words of the book of the prophets.
He's got to take away his part out of the book of life and out of the holy city and from
the things which are written in this book.
Yeah.
This is intense, man.
This is not the love your neighbor type of Jesus right here.
This is, he's going to wipe you off the face of the planet like you never existed throw
you in the lake of fire.
That's what this is.
And when you say wipe off, you're right.
That's exactly Ophelia is exactly that, right?
He's going to take out your portion right from the tree of life.
You're not going to have any sort of access to this.
Right?
That's it, bro.
I'm going to kill you.
Dead.
Is this a threat, Neil?
When you said gangster Jesus and I was like, this is perfect.
This was Neil's idea by the way.
I said, this is perfect gangster all over the place.
This is an example.
He's got a book and if you're not in it, right, you don't get anywhere.
You don't get anywhere without me in my book.
That's a gangster.
Yeah.
That's gorgeous.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And it's like, there's no, this isn't about like doing anything or feeding the poor or
doing.
It's just about getting in line and do what I say.
That's the only thing that makes you or breaks you in the eyes of this God.
Do get in line period.
I don't care what's, there's no objective morality like you hear these Christians talk
about today and no, no, no, no, no, no, let's get in line.
Do as you're told or die.
It's very when you think about it, it's really simple and it's kind of it's really dark because
that's what this whole faith is kind of based on is just following it.
You know what I mean?
It's not like, like I hate to say like paganism is like this like huge umbrella term, but
like these other rights, then they don't operate that way.
There is no like, you better do this or else it's only within this biblical religion that
you get that.
And it's so opposite of classical civilization, the drive towards investigation and study
and argumentation.
You know, it's so contrary to that there isn't, there is an implied reason in pagan religion.
It's like when somebody tells you, don't believe what you're seeing, right?
Don't, don't, it's just bad press that's giving you this impression.
That's what Christianity does.
It says, don't use your reason.
Well, you know, you don't, I noticed about that too.
Polytheism, right?
Multiple gods, you give your devotion to the God that you align with, the God that you
look at and you look up to and you need help from.
But in monotheism, it's sort of, monotheism sort of aligns the world in a way that makes
it so that you have one king or one Caesar or one emperor.
And underneath that one emperor is the footstool, the world, the Roman empire, and everyone
is a servant to this one emperor.
That's why all of a sudden, when you get this Christian Byzantine empire, it's really
just like, all of it's privately owned by the Caesar, by the emperor, by the Constantine
or whoever.
Like, you know, all these different Constantine VI and Constantine VII and just keeps going
until another, and like, you can come get it from me.
Come get it from me.
If you can assert this throne, you can have this world, but until then, it's mine, and
these legions are mine, they're going to do what I say, and my will is be done.
And it follows the monotheistic religion that it's operating within.
So the religion sort of sets the tone of how the society operates.
Like, and like, you know, I sound like people, people always say, but you act like the pagan
world is so perfect, there were still problems, of course there was, but like, at least within
this world where you have all these different deities and different temples and, you know,
the temple of Ephesus was Artemis, the temple of Athena, the Acropolis, at least in this
world, it seems to be, there is more, like you said, there's more debates, more discussion,
more diverse, like more metropolitan feeling going on.
You know, what is your thoughts on that?
And I could be wrong.
I think what you're describing is not the gang, right?
The gang, we have to have a certain code, and we have to have a certain color, and we have
to have a certain ethnicity, and we take orders up, and we don't question, we just
kill, right?
That's the gang mentality, and I think Christianity is very much, that's because when you, when
you said it, gangster Jesus, I thought, wow, Neo, you've captured it, it is.
When you have paganism, on the other hand, there is no overriding authority.
There's no one central person who can tell you what's what, I mean, think about it.
Paganism expressed itself in the chorus.
The chorus is a group of people who come together and sing and dance.
I mean, what is more, you know, what is more democratic than that?
The Christians did not.
And even Zeus, even Zeus doesn't have all the power.
Like Zeus might, might get, Eros might have power over Zeus, or Athena might have power.
There's different situations where sometimes Zeus doesn't have the authority just to do
whatever he wants.
So there is that, there's that, I feel like that, that aspect kind of dictates the culture,
in a really effective way.
When you have that one authority on top, everyone follows suit, better do what that one authority
says, or else, you know, and it's funny because when the, when the Ottomans come and take
Constance and Opal, Mehmed II, what does he do?
He says, I'm Caesar now.
He just wants, he wants to continue playing the same game.
He's not changing anything up.
He just, we're Muslim now, but, but I'm going to be Caesar, even, even ask the Pope, call
me Caesar Pope.
The Pope's like, no, bro, but like, but you still, he's, they're, they're playing the
same game.
Yeah.
And it's kind of, it's kind of crazy to think about the world, like that's how the world
was for a long time.
What's the difference between a crusade and a gang war?
You know, it's always over, it's always over capital and some support, some, you know,
some kind of rights to be able to run this black market in this area.
You know what I mean?
It's always just like that.
Look at the, look at the history of the crusades.
It's the same thing.
It's the flow.
There is no ideal.
People that think crusaders were ideal, idealistic, you know, I'm going to go fight for Jesus.
And there are people who have that soldier of Christ mentality today.
Let me tell you something.
There's no such thing as a crusade.
Crusades are just wars over turf and cash.
Right.
That's, that's all they are.
So I don't, I don't, I don't understand why people can't see the thuggery that's behind
Christianity.
That's why Neil, I'm still really impressed that you made, you know, the Godfather.
What do you think a Pope is?
He's the, he's the Godfather.
Yeah.
I mean, it's like literally the same thing.
Yeah.
You know, what's the difference?
You know, it's my ring, man.
Yeah.
Get on your knee.
Kiss my ring.
Do what you told me.
Lovely.
Let's go to the next source.
Let me see if I got any more cool gang.
All right.
So we have angels are slaves.
We got that.
We did that one, right?
Yeah.
Here we go.
Yeah.
Yeah.
So that's the next one.
Let's go to the next one.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Okay.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Okay.
So for all of these people, look, it gives off a list, right, of people.
And notice right at the top, it's apistos.
These are people who don't subscribe to your notion of faith, right?
These are the people who don't just subscribe to your notion of faith.
So that's anybody.
We're not just talking about, people think this is a list of bad things to do, like
murder, right?
Murder and lying.
These are bad things.
So Jesus is the good guy.
He doesn't follow it.
No, no, no.
He's saying anybody that doesn't follow us is abominable.
Yeah.
They're murderers, right?
They're pharmacists.
They're drug experts.
They're drug users.
They are wizards, sorcerers.
He's calling everybody that, right?
And saying they're idolaters.
They're those image casters, right?
And by the way, he says, the liars got no part.
Yeah.
The liars got no part.
Yeah.
Yeah.
They're going to be putting that.
Think of that imagery though, the lake with your furnace with fire and brimstone.
Yeah.
Now, that sounds like, that sounds like the pit of Tartarus, doesn't it?
Yeah.
Well, this is the purging, right?
That thayoi, that brimstone that you're talking about.
Yeah.
That's a powerful purgative.
Yeah.
And they're going to burn with it.
They're going to be purified in hell, right?
And that's the second death.
That's what you call the second death.
This is what Jesus brings.
This promise that if he comes back and you're not one of the faithful, right?
This is what you get.
So right away, you got, look, there's no loving here.
Where'd the loving go, right?
And evangelicals have such a good way of pulling, of excusing this, right?
Of pulling this out of the hat.
They say, oh, well, just the age of grace is over.
I'm a dominionist and the age of grace is over.
And that's why all of a sudden, no, no, no, let's just tell me what you've got here.
You've got a picture of Jesus slaughtering all of humanity, all of humanity.
You know, I thought about this.
I thought about this.
And then even if Christianity turned out to be true, which it's not, but let's just,
let's play along with this.
Even if this, this scenario actually comes about, I'm going, I'm saying sending in that
lake of fire.
I don't, this, this, this, this, this reality that you created, you're evil.
I'm not going to spend eternity at your feet worshiping you for this.
Yeah.
Kill me now.
And I'm done.
I, I'm out of this game because this is just, and it's like, you created me this way.
So I don't know what your deal is.
You're the one that needs, this is, this is a you problem.
Get rid of me.
I'm done.
I don't care.
I don't care.
Like that to me is just evil.
I'm hoping, I'm hoping Neil that it's real as it can be.
So I can stand right in front of him.
And when it comes my moment of judgment, prima, and they talk about the great white throne
and his judgment, I'm looking forward to standing right there in front of the great white throne
and saying, you were arrested with a naked boy.
I'm not following you.
I wish I was behind you to watch it too.
I hope I don't do it in front of you so I don't get to what I'm missing.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Let's see what else is going to happen to us because the next quote, fire from uranos.
Yeah.
And she'll go out to see the nations, which are in the, oh, in the four quarters of the
year, Gog and Magog to gather them together to battle.
The number of whom is as the sand to see, and they went up on the breadth of the earth
and compass the camp of the saints about these are the bad guys, right?
That's, that's us.
It's everybody who's not faithful and the beloved city and they came from, uh, and
fire from came down from God out of heaven.
This is that poor uranos and notice it's got the Gog and Magog reference in it, which
all the evangelicals are going to be standing up saying, oh my God, he's talking about
Gog and Magog, right?
Gog, if you go back to Ezekiel, which I've gotten the bottom, and you're going to say,
wait a minute, you're not reading the Hebrew.
Yeah, you're right.
I'm reading the oldest version we have.
And you, son of man, son of man, now you know where he stole the title from, right?
Right.
That's from Ezekiel.
Yep.
Yeah.
Prophecy against Gog and say the Lord says these things.
He do look, I am Episay.
I am against you.
Gog, the ruler of Ross, Ross.
And what is Ross Ross is later, uh, Ruth's on the Latin side.
These are the people who live, um, where we now talk about Russians.
Oh yeah.
So, so when the Christian evangelicals get all, especially the, the dominionists,
and those guys, and it's mostly guys because they hate women.
They're misogynists.
Um, it's built in, it's built into the DNA of the gang of Christianity.
Um, and they just happen to bring it out.
Those guys just happen to bring this before Doug Wilson is in that group.
Anyway, anyway, um, they bring out this, uh, hatred.
It's a, it's a living hatred, but they say also, oh, this, the Russians, right?
Do you notice the Christians are all excited about the Russians and they're
like, Hey, don't help Ukraine, right?
You know, I know, I know Christians on Twitter, Catholics and Baptist, both of
them, and they, and those people hate each other, but they, they're coming
together and backing up Russia because Putin, cause they all, they all understand
something, they all understand something that's really real.
That the Orthodox church of Russia has a better claim to the, to the, to the
Greek Orthodox church than, than the Catholic church does.
They have a better claim to Peter and Paul than, than Rome does right now.
That's the Orthodox church of Russia right now.
That's the original church that fled Constantinople in 1453 and a century
later, Ivan the terrible, his grandmother was the niece of the last Roman emperor.
Who fled, who died during the siege of Constantinople.
So you have direct lineage.
That's why he called himself the Tsar.
He's the first Tsar of Russia.
Yeah.
The Kaiser is making us up.
He was, he was saying, I'm the, I'm legitimately tracing myself back to the
Constantine dynasty.
Oh man, that's so arouses me.
That's so arouses me.
Uh, so tell me a little, tell me a little bit more about these people.
So they tell you, they're like, Hey, in support of the ruse.
Did, um, did you know what side you're on?
That's why I like this.
That's why I, I didn't understand why these Christians, these Twitter Catholics
are like, Putin did nothing wrong.
I get why they're like that.
You're, you're right.
You're damn right.
You're on that side.
You should be on that side.
Let's get real.
You're, that's the side you're supposed to be on.
Yeah.
I'm supposed to be on the other side, the side of democracy, the side of Athena.
Yeah.
My own family wants everybody to die.
Right.
I mean, we all have family like this who are evangelicals or steeped in the
conservative fundamentalist Christianity or somehow influenced by it.
They want Vlad to sweep down and surround Israel because that's when Jesus is coming
back and according to them, right?
According to their bull, their BS, um, can't read the original text approach.
Right.
And, and they, that's why, you know, the Christians actually say now, people
should know this, this is a public service I'm doing.
Right.
People, people should know that the Christians are saying that there is no
America in the book of revelation.
Right.
There's no America.
So America must really fall before Vlad can sweep down and surround Israel.
Cause when he does that, the bear, when the bear does that, the text calls him,
then Jesus can crack, come in the world and boom, murder and mayhem can take,
take off like a, so they're going to push to get those things done so that
they can legitimately say, it's my religion.
I got to follow it.
I got to do as it's my religion.
And so, and that's why you get this push against degeneracy.
So they call it putans, putan cleaning up the degenerates, those degenerates,
you know, all those, all those, uh, those degenerate, uh, atheists and, and all
those, uh, you know, all those gays and all those LGBTQ degenerate.
That's what that, that, this is what this is, this is their, this is the
way they see the world.
Yeah.
And so putan as out to them is on the, on the side of, of God in there to them.
Well, we know, we know it's, it's that he's, he's evil.
We know that.
You got to know by the fact that he blows people up randomly with rockets,
you know, like mothers and children.
I mean, this is what I don't get.
You know, Jesus says directly, I'm going to take all those liars and I'm
going to feed him to the birds.
He's such a good gangster leader.
You know what I mean?
He's such a good mob boss.
He's like, Peter, Peter, take those people and feed them to the birds.
Right.
We, I mean, there's, there's nothing better than this.
What, you know, yeah.
Yeah.
And I saw an angel, right?
Standing in the sun and he shouted in a great voice saying, um, to all the birds
and flying around in midair.
He says, come now, soon.
A symbol at the banquet, the great banquet of God.
And it goes on, the text goes on to talk about feeding us to these birds.
Yeah.
Feeding us to these birds.
That's where we're going.
So it doesn't, it, it only makes sense that modern evangelicals can say, um,
what Putin is doing is good.
We can excuse lies.
Have you noticed Christianity that yells?
I heard the guy debating you talking about moral authority.
Right.
They think, oh, I'm for family values and moral authority.
You've got none.
You got zero because you will take a liar and exalt, bring up that liar to a
position and you will bow to a liar.
And we all know, we all know that those liars get fed to those birds, right?
That's the life, right?
That's not about this.
I thought about this hard is that I actually have this weird respect.
And I hate to say this, but like, at least the fundamentalists are consistent in
following what the text tells them, where you have these people on the
sidelines who I don't respect, who cherry pick and it's like a buffet of the
Bible's a buffet where they can just, I like this part.
I don't, I don't like that part.
So I'm going to somehow pretend it's not there or, or even just rationalize it
away by explaining it how I want to explain it.
And then you, and then what you're doing is you want, you are making it so that
the fundamentalists can stay legitimate.
Cause if you, if you just, if the people on the sidelines who, who are the
moderates who are, you know, using the Bible, like a, like a, like a salad bar,
if they actually just said, you know what, this, this text is, this text is
just evil.
I'm out of here.
Then there were, then the fundamentals would be looking, like looking naked
in the middle of the street.
They would just be target.
Like they would be wide open.
There'd be no one to cover for them.
They'd have nothing.
That was, they're the reason why that the fundamentalists are still around.
Because people, you get the moderates.
Neil, do people push you, um, like to say, Oh, don't be so hard on the Christians.
You ever get any comment?
Like, don't be so hard on them all the time.
Yeah.
You know what?
But I was, I was, I went, I, I was at a church for a years that really has an
impact that really is like pushing, pushing ideas into the world that are
really negative impact, climate change, El Pro, uh, accepting people of who they
are, all that stuff goes out the window.
And this is, these are churches at every corner that you can think of.
Like this is every city, every town has that it's not, it's not a small thing.
It's a big thing.
It's a big, it's a big pop.
It's a big population of people that are pushing these ideas.
I'm sorry.
I'm just going to, that's, that's where I'm at right now.
If you could convince me otherwise, but I've seen it, seen it first hand.
I know what I was, I was one of the people who on the email list for January
6th say, Hey, everybody, we, if you need to bust, if you need to ride there,
we'll send you out there.
We need to support Trump.
I was one of those people who were on that email list.
I'm just saying, so I'm coming out of that world.
So that's why I do what I do.
You don't have to do it, but I do it, you know?
Yeah.
And it was a Christian flag that was first, you know, every listen to what
Neil said, right?
It was a Christian flag that went first into that, into that capital.
Those people, Neil, that tell you you're, you're being too harsh on the
Christians, right?
Um, those are the people who in the first century AD, as Christianity was
becoming more and more radicalized and people were saying, we have to burn
down this place, right?
In order to get him to come back.
Um, that's the kind of, that's the kind of the person who stood back at the
time and said, oh, don't be hard on the Christians.
That was the person who, uh, helped facilitate the fall, um, of Rome.
They, an order.
And when I say Rome, I mean, order.
That's a good point.
That was such a good point.
Yeah.
Exactly.
It's what I'm saying.
It's, it's the people who are the moderates that kind of cover for the
fundamentalist types that, that do the most damage, right?
Cause without, it's like that you, you're the gateway to that path.
You're the reason why that, that thing exists.
Yeah.
Yeah.
You know, you know, when the Taliban was, was gaining strength in Afghanistan,
you know, that there were a certain percentage of a population that said,
oh, this is, this can't be that bad.
Right.
Whereas, uh, so it's, if we can, if, if we can, uh, show those people the
future, um, before it happens, they can correct, but that's unfortunate.
You know, unless you've got, unless you've got oracles and different sources,
you were talking earlier about polytheism.
Remember, people don't think this way, but there's, uh, uh, there are oracles spread
all over the place that give you the voice of God, whether it's she or he, right?
It doesn't matter.
Um, and you can go obtain that voice in one place that's different from another.
That inherent flexibility of the system, of a system that is, uh, integrates the
populace, that thrives on diversity, right?
That's what I'm saying, that the, the layout of that system sort of produces,
uh, a zeitgeist that's, that's not top bottom.
It's not patriarchal.
It's not, here's the one, one king on top and then the servants.
It's more like spread out.
You have these different, different institutions with their own certain types
of power that there's a balance happening.
You know what I mean?
More of a balance, balance.
That's a, that's a Greek idea, right?
Not, not today invented it, but that was big in their minds.
You have to achieve balance and become in thug life where you're selling everything
that you own and putting it at the feet of some thug who is going to murder you.
If you don't give it all up, by the way, by the way, how did people, how did Peter
know that he didn't give it all up unless he either had spies where he had access
to the sale itself, which since Jesus was so hooked into the, to the tax collectors,
it's probably likely that Peter knew exactly cause that all of that has to be registered.
But not only that, it's a message to the next person coming.
So you remember what happened to Ann and I is, right?
You better not, you better give me all that money.
You better not keep a penny for yourself.
Ann and I, he dropped dead right away.
It's like a, it's when a mafia leaves the horse head in the bed, it's a message.
That's what it is.
It's just, it's just strike fear in the people.
Yeah.
If you come here and you join us, you get initiated.
Yeah.
You got to give us all your riches, sell all your property and don't keep anything
for yourself.
Don't dare do that.
Are you dead?
But that's, that's intense, man.
If you are a modern Christian and you own property and you have, I don't know,
stocks, um, and you have a real Christian, you know, no, no, no, no, no, no, no.
You are an aberration that developed over 2000 years, right?
Yeah.
Does it, does it make sense to me, man?
But okay, let's, let me get through one more.
We got, we got Ponto Crattor, right?
What's this about?
Yeah.
Here's the Ponto Crattor.
Remember I said the Ponto Crattor is the title that's used by, um, uh, Hermes,
the Angulos, the messenger of Zeus, right?
Jesus in Revelation, not only calls himself that messenger, but even the text
itself, John says another angel, Jesus comes out at one point, um, with a
sickle in his hand, we're going to look at it in a minute.
And then another, it says another angel steps out with a sickle.
So Jesus is very much putting himself into this specific role, right?
What's he got a sickle for?
You know what he's got a sickle for?
To cut your guts out.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And what are they all yelling?
You know, Jesus is Lord, et cetera, et cetera.
Okay.
Next one.
Okay.
Yeah.
And I saw the heaven, the heaven open.
Yeah.
Okay.
Here's the description of gangster Jesus.
Are you ready?
And I looked, I saw the heaven open, open, yeah.
And look, there was a white horse and there was one seated on the horse called
faithful and, and true and in his right hand, he holds a, um,
um, sorry, with his right hand, Oh, hang on.
The car was in a clinic.
Kai polemic.
He, um, rules with righteousness and he polemic and he makes war.
He makes war.
Nobody talks about Jesus make war.
We don't have any murals of Jesus, the war maker, right?
But this is what characterizes the thug leader.
Yes.
Right.
Right.
He's literally calling himself the war monger.
Yeah.
And he's also injected in his eyes.
He's got the flocks.
He's got that purple, that burning purple in his eyes and it's the flocks.
Poor us.
That expression is used in Orphic, uh, mystery.
It's like El Pacino with this, with the cocaine on his nose.
Yeah.
Exactly.
He's, he's lit up.
He's lit up.
This is gangster Jesus right here.
And he's got lots of gold.
He's got bling.
He's got bling.
He's got crowns.
Right.
He's got a ton of bling and he has a name.
Right.
Jesus has a tat.
Right.
He has a name.
Oh, yeah.
Yeah.
The next one, the next one, Jesus has a tattoo.
And it's on his thigh.
A name, king of kings and lord of, think about that.
You know, you got the old English tattoos.
Yeah.
He's got that old Aramaic tattoo going on.
King of kings and lord of lords.
You know, that, that, uh, what that's, what is it?
That siriac, that siriac font.
You know what I mean?
He's got that tattoo, that siriac tattoo.
Why do you think he, why do you think he tattooed his thigh with it?
Cause he's a G.
He's, he's Jesus, the G.
He's G man.
Yeah.
This is so, this is so, honestly, when you look at it this way,
though, it almost makes sense.
It makes better sense.
It's the fairy tale, better sense.
Yeah.
That they come up with.
Can you imagine him flashing it?
Like he lifts up his, he lifts up his gown and he's like, Hey,
take a look at this.
You know, in my fur and it's funny because their rider die, their martyrs,
they're going to ride or die for their click, for their gang.
Not going to, you're not letting them, you're not going to get over on them.
They're going to die for that shit.
Like that's a mentality that you see in the mafia and the,
the Italian and the Spanish and like that's a, that's real.
Like that's, it's no joke.
And imagine though, you've got this drug using gang whose, whose, uh,
whose principal leaders are, are immune to venoms, right?
And Jesus is like, I'll make you so that you can drink this stuff and it won't
hurt you at all.
Right.
So, you know, the drugs are there from the beginning.
You know, the drugs are there with them when he gets arrested.
So it's a part of the culture.
Your comparison, the gang is, I think it's straight on man.
Jesus.
Look at how the popes dictated their lives.
Like the, they had the Pope Alexander in the 16, 15th century.
He had a, an enemy that wanted to be the Pope and this guy does become
Pope, it's Pope Julius.
He's two popes later, but this pope didn't want, didn't want to wait around.
He wanted to end this pope's life so he can become the next pope.
Well, he, he ended up apparently, according to the sources, he, uh,
he had an altar boy child and he was giving him poison every day enough
that it wouldn't kill him, but he would become immune to it.
And then he got him hired as the Pope's wine checker.
So he would be able to drink the wine poison in it and he wouldn't die.
Well, the whole operation failed.
The kid died.
But like that, but that tells you the mindset of this church, man.
This is like, these are like mafia bosses fighting over the throne.
Yeah.
And they're, when this is, this is the highest, highest that Christianity has
to offer the papacy and they're, they're operating like my bosses.
Why do you think that is?
You think it's just a reality.
You know, it's just like, that's the way the things go when you got lots
of money involved and lots of power and sex, you know, you just, it's going
to lean toward this hierarchy of there's going to be one thug and he's going
to run everything, right?
So yeah, I didn't think, you know, I didn't think they were sitting around.
Ha, ha, ha, ha, right?
I, I didn't think that was the reason everybody was there, right?
We all know it's, you can take those altar boys into the basement.
You know what I mean?
And you can do things with that's power.
That's what that's real power, man.
Jesus has that.
Let me see that, that long, that long one that I had with him on the white
horse, just go back one.
No, maybe it's one more.
No, that's okay.
That's okay.
Let's just, I'm sorry.
This one.
Yeah.
There we go.
Yeah.
And he's going to, he's going to destroy the nations, man.
He's going to rule them says below.
He's going to rule them.
And there's a little phrase in Rob doi sideroi, siderei.
It's with a rod of iron, but that Rob don't people don't recognize that Rob
don is a religious instrument.
It's used also by the Bacchus, right?
And his is made of iron.
You know why?
So he can bang bust your head open with it.
That's gangster.
This Jesus seated on a white horse.
He's gangster brought.
And by the way we see in the beginning, he's got his bow and he's got that
poison with him.
So, and here again, he's called the Pantocrontor.
Oh, but one last thing from this, look at one, two, three, four, five lines
from the bottom.
This is in verse 19.
Yeah.
It says, pate te lanon.
He is treading the wine press.
That lanon is the wine press.
And you should have one Neil that is the him to Linnaean Dionysus.
Yeah.
Look at this.
Look at this.
They call him Lyceus, right?
The releaser, the freer, right?
The, that lane route is the press for the wine.
And for those of you who think, for those of you who think that they were,
you know, God is comparing himself.
He's constantly saying, I'm this wine presser.
They didn't have wine except in Canaan.
The Egyptians got it from the Canaanites, right?
Because in Canaan, which is not a Semitic word, it's a Hurrian word.
It's a Hurrian word.
And they were not Indo-European.
And it means, guess what it means?
It means purple.
Yeah.
I've seen this before.
That's mind blowing.
Yeah.
Yeah.
At the bottom, at the bottom, I just want you to notice the last nine here.
Rhexikhthon and Linnae.
Linnae is that God who treads out the grapes, right?
That's from Revelation.
And this is talking about Dionysus.
This isn't a him to Dionysus.
Is that word being megastennis?
And the second last word, megastennis?
Having incredible strength.
Oh, OK.
Linnae is having incredible strength.
He's Rhexikhthon.
He is literally busting the earth or jamming something into the earth.
And guess what we have in one of these texts that I sent you, Neil?
It talks about Jesus with the Saturnian scythe or sickle jamming it down
into the earth.
Yeah.
Oh, yeah.
Here it is.
I see.
I behold a white cloud and upon the cloud sat one unto the Son of Man, having
on his head a golden crown, a croosone, and the Stefanon, croosone,
Stefanon, and in his hand a sharp sickle.
Drepanon.
Yeah.
Yeah.
He's got that sickle and he's about to jam it into the earth as
his judgment, right?
This is the exact same thing that Dionysus does.
I'm not kidding you.
The, for hundreds of years, the workers of Bacchus, they would hear this
and they'd be like, oh, yeah, he's Bacchus.
Yeah.
That's, that's, that's what I'm trying to know.
So that's what I learned from you.
And this is what I'm trying to relate to people is that the language
in Greek in any, doesn't matter what it is.
When you're speaking Celtic language in, in Greek, it's going to ring bells
in people's ears in the Greek world, especially people living in Phrygia or
people living in Corinth or the church at Thessalonica.
These people are growing up in the Orphic mysteries.
They're all around them.
This is, this is stuff that's, this is familiar language to them.
And we lose this context when we, because we're in an English-speaking
world, that's a thousand years removed from this.
We have no idea the context anymore.
It's gone.
But that's what, this is the work you've been doing that I'm trying to,
trying to give to the people.
Like there's some context in this, there's a reason why they're using this language.
Sure.
That's Saturnian.
Yeah.
This is, Chronos has the sickle.
He's the one who comes in, you know, they have the Thanatos, the God of death.
This, this is all in Revelation.
It's not like, this is not like I'm pulling out of the airs.
He even says Thanatos, death and Hades gave up their dead and then they're throwing in
the lake of fire.
Right.
And even in the Christian, even in the Christian manuscript, or in the, the editions of the
New Testament, you'll see Hades capitalized, right?
Because he, he's a person.
He's the king of the underworld, right?
And even Steve, where it says the sea gave up its dead, I, I, I'm not, I'm not
kidding when I used to, when I first read that, I remember thinking like, well, you
have Hades and you have, you have death and Hades, the sea.
And I didn't know until recently when I started reading the Orphic hymns, there was a hymn
to Thosola.
Yeah.
So hymn to the sea.
The sea is also a deity.
Yeah.
No, they got, they, it's all in Revelation.
It's all there and it's all Saturnian too.
And that's, that's why when you read these hymns, you're shocked.
You're like, wait a minute, they're using the exact same symbols.
That they're using in Christianity, which only makes sense.
I mean, come on.
They didn't sit around and Jesus didn't say, oh, let me make up something.
Hey, let me just pull out of this, pull this out of the, out of the void of some black hole.
Like these are ideas that come passed down from other ideas, the evolution, all ideas
come from something.
Yeah.
Yeah.
All right.
Let's finish these quotes because I'm kidding.
Yeah, these are great.
We're on fire right now.
So this is one Jesus kills and feeds into the birds.
We did this one, right?
Yeah, we did that one.
Oh, no.
Here's the one we got to read.
Here's the one we got to read.
Okay.
This is like, this is admitting that you're on some G shit right here.
This is, there's no hiding.
These shall hate the whore and shall make her desolate naked.
She'll ease her flesh and burn her with fire.
For God had put in their hearts to fulfill his will.
Yeah.
That's what I like to start with.
The ending of that one, right?
Which is at the bottom in Greek.
It literally just says Theos Edokin.
God gave into their hearts the idea, right, to follow his nome, right?
His desire.
And what is his, what is God's desire then?
What does he have in his mind to do?
They're going to miscesus and porne.
They're going to hater.
And they're going to stripper naked.
And they're going to consume her flesh.
And this word for flesh sarks.
There's a reason that Paul associates it with sexuality.
He says, don't follow this, the flesh, follow the spirit.
This sarks is the fleshy pulp of a fruit.
When you bite into it and you get all that juice out of it.
That's what, that's what they are consuming of her after she has been thrown into this bed,
right?
She's going to be thrown into this bed and they're going to catechaosus and they're
going to burn her up in the fire.
Now this is what's weird is that catechao is used in religious context and it's used to burn
that piece of incense that you get, that smirna that comes from between the legs of aphrodite.
You burn that and it creates an odor, right?
So what the heck is going on?
God is sitting there watching this, this orgy, this rape orgy, right?
That ends up in her getting totally consumed and it's what's in his mind.
And don't forget, don't forget this, but right before this or not right before this,
a few 15 chapters before this, he's coming out and saying, nevertheless,
talking to the church of Pergamon, saying that woman Jezebel, I will cast her on a bed
and send my minions to rape her.
Yeah.
That's the mistranslation in the English.
Bart Ehrman pointed this out and I asked you about it and you were like,
he's not lying, Bart's spot on, that's what the Greek says.
And then it says, I will strike her children dead.
We're murdering children now?
And then he says on the bottom, I'm the morning star.
He say, right after he says, those are the people who will learn of the deep things of Satan,
I'm the morning star.
Yeah.
That's like, what?
He's saying, you know the Satanists?
Nah, they had nothing on me.
I'm Lucifer.
Bitch.
That's how I'm reading you right now.
That's what it sounds like.
He moves in on the territory.
He takes it over.
He's the new leader, man.
He's the new, you think you know about this stuff?
Yeah.
Watch this.
Yeah.
Now I'm going to kill you all.
Yeah.
Look at this.
And look at this.
And look, and low, a lamb stood on the Mount Sion and with him 144,000 having his father's
name written in their foreheads.
Now here's some more gang stuff right here.
And I heard a voice from heaven as the voice of many waters, as the voice of the great thunder.
And I heard the voice of harpers harping with their harps.
There's that Orphic imagery right there.
And they sung as it went a new song before the throne and before the four beasts and the elders
and no man could learn that song.
But the 144,000 which were redeemed, these which were not defiled with the woman,
for they are virgins.
What's Jesus doing with 144,000 virgins?
And I'll bet you-
They're branded with a tattoo on their foreheads.
Yeah.
Of course they are because they're sex slaves.
Exactly.
That's the whole point of that verse.
Yeah.
That's crazy.
Yeah.
And by the way, when it says they are virgins, that's not like physically.
That's like a cultically.
Like it means like they're mine.
They only belong to me, right?
Am I right about that?
They're Parthenoi, it calls them.
I checked this one out.
They're Parthenoi.
So it's, you know, we talk about Athena Parthenos, right?
I'm saying in the context that he's saying, he's saying that these only,
they only belong to me.
Nobody else has access to them.
They're my slaves.
Right, right, right, right.
No, exactly.
Yeah.
Exactly.
That's dark.
Yeah.
That's why it troubles me when he's arrested in the Garden of Gethsemane at 4 a.m.
with a naked boy.
Mark says that that boy was assigned to him, right?
That he was, it uses a verb that you only use with slaves and military, right?
You can talk about somebody in the military being assigned, right?
So it's like, what's going on here that Jesus is attracting to himself, these, you know,
slaves who are, you know, in this case, they're virgins and, you know, is it, and he's yelling,
I'm not a pirate.
I'm not a kid trafficker.
You didn't have to come out with the big weapons.
I'm not a kid trafficker.
Right.
Yeah.
Peter though, what do you think gang wise when Peter took off, right?
Jesus is there.
The boy takes off.
Peter starts swinging with a sword, knocks off that guy's ear and then takes off.
Uh, do you think it's just like, um, gang lord got taken down, right?
So, uh, we're going to step off and then does Peter just decide along the way?
He's like, Hey, I've got the apparatus going here.
I've got enough followers that we can liquidate all of their cash and we can drive, drive this,
this gang forward.
I don't know.
What do you think?
He's the Petros.
He's the rock.
He's the under boss.
He's like under the Godfather.
There's that, that, that, that, that, you know, the main boss that's right underneath
the guy.
He's the one doing that, making sure everything gets done right.
And so I'm not surprised that he's pulling out a weapon.
Make sure things get done the way it needs to be done.
Like you can't, you know, and then, and then what happens?
Jesus, no, no, no, no, no, no, put it away.
Okay.
Okay.
Boss, you got it.
It's like a scene out of a scene out of a Godfather scene right there.
You know what I mean?
Like put the gun down, Tony.
That's Petra.
But you know, he's the one who ends up starting the church, right?
He was the one who goes to the Rome.
And so that's, that's, that's the original Godfather, the first Pope right there,
according to the tradition.
Are you muted?
You muted.
Peter ends up in and out of jail too.
So they're catching on to what he's doing.
I mean, he, he obviously is making a presence and he's able to get out of jail.
It, it makes you wonder, look, Judas was there, right?
We all know Judas was an informant, right?
No problem.
He's an informant.
How much to what extent could those three guys that were with Jesus when he got arrested
with that naked kid, what were they, how much could they have been in it?
Do you think Peter could possibly have known that things were going down with Judas?
Do you think that was, he just tried to make a show?
Like, you know, if he can kill Ann and Ice on the spot, he could have killed that guy
that he swung at.
Was he just, was he just trying to, you know, make a show or something?
No, I think, I think he was ready.
I think he was ready for something to pop off.
I think there was something.
Yeah.
I think you're, I think you're on.
And, and you know, Dr. Tabor talks about this is that people want to make it seem like Jesus
and Peter were a bunch of poor fishermen and that had no, no, no, no, no.
This is, you know, people don't, people don't remember or talk about or write about or fixate
on people who are just randomly homeless.
Like this is probably some wealthy, like, you know, some sort of movement happening.
There's something going on here.
There's some, this is a movement.
This is not just some little group of people that magically blew up and became the world,
the state religion of the Roman Empire.
This is a systematic movement that's going on.
You got to think if they, if they become so popular, they spread all the way over to Rome.
Right.
And if you're thinking that Peter is taking people's goods and redistributing.
Yeah.
And he's, and he's taken everybody.
I mean, how many people, I mean, and it can be anybody, wealthy people, I'm sure, also got involved.
Absolutely.
How much, if the movement is so big that it spreads to Rome and throughout Asia Minor,
how much did people bring to Peter's feet?
I'll bet he had the most gold on the planet.
Yeah.
Oh, if you have, I'm going to Toronto in two weeks to talk to Professor Clappenborg at
Toronto University.
He wrote a book about this that's called Christ Associations, where he documented,
he's looking at all like the stellies and stones and, and like, in like imprints in,
in catacombs, and he's putting together the pieces of the puzzle.
And these are like early Christian labor or labor unions, basically, they're organized.
They're all like the city of Corinth, the stone masons had had a church and they were organized.
The city of Alexandria, the wood carpenters, they had a church, they were organized.
This is an organized network of assemblies.
And he even the first thing, the first thing he does in the first chapter is he redefines
that word ecclesia.
We say church, but it really means assembly.
And this is a broader term than just church.
These are groups of people, networks of people that are organized.
That's the reason why they were so successful.
They were organized.
And they say he says that up until, I guess, in like maybe the second or third century,
if you, if you had a loved one died, you had to go through the assemblies and they're most
likely Christians.
That's how they got their power.
They took, they infiltrated the, the, the, what do you call it?
When someone dies funeral home places, they were, they were the ones that infiltrated and
took those over.
You know what I mean?
But it kind of reminds me of like today where you see these funeral homes and they got Italian names
and it's like, maybe it's a mafia in front of it.
Like it's just like a front.
You know what I mean?
Who knows, just throwing ideas out there.
No, it makes you wonder.
That's what makes me, I'm seriously thinking that though.
I'm not, I'm not getting around.
It makes you wonder how much cash was flowing back to those original apostles and particularly
Peter because he's named as the keeper of the keys, right?
Like that's another thing.
Why is this gangster magus involved with children and prostitutes and tax collectors?
Why does he walk around in that, in that state saying, Hey, Peter Rock,
I'll give you the keys.
What, what is that?
What the, what does that mean?
Right?
We, we look through the, through the fairy tale and we think,
Oh, give you the keys, right?
What the, no, no, what's he, what did he mean when he's going to give them the keys?
Somehow he did because Peter ends up making a ton of money off the deal.
He got, it got to the point where the church of Rome is claiming that they came from,
like this is Peter's thing, right?
Like that's, it's the point that he don't, he's put up as like the successor almost,
if you will, like the book of acts starts off before you even get to Paul.
Peter's the one reviving dead people.
He's the one, Peter resurrects a dead person in the book.
Forget about that.
It's not just Jesus resurrecting dead.
It's also Peter and then Paul does it too.
Yeah.
And he's battling, he's battling that Simon magus who wants the piece of the action.
He wants any action and Peter's like, no, cut him out, cut him out, right?
He was a good, he was a good thug, man.
The Simonians were like another rival gang, if you will.
And so the, the, the history gets written by the victors.
The Simonians end up getting written in this, the text where Peter and Simon, Simon magus,
they have a show off.
They have a showdown.
It's like a, like a, like a Western gun, like a, you know, bit Billy Bart and, uh, and,
and, uh, what's his name and badass Billy Joe and they're having their little,
they got their guns pointed at each other and Peter wins.
Peter shoots him down, dead, done.
That's what happens.
It says in the text that Simon magus, this is not an act.
This is an apocryphal text, but it says in the apocryphal text that Simon magus goes,
let's see what you got, bro.
And he starts flying in the air and he's just flying.
Like, look how powerful I am.
Look how much power I got.
And Peter goes, really dog, really dog and makes them fall down dead.
And then Peter wins, dude.
Like Peter is more powerful than Simon magus.
And it's like, that's the message that you get.
But you almost, it almost makes you wonder what's behind this message or was there,
was there a warring factions of Christians in Rome?
I think so.
The archaeology sure is how it shows us this.
The, the evidence shows us this, that there was more than one Christian group going on in Rome.
Simonians read Irenaeus and, and Hippolytus.
They're talking about the Simonians being all over Rome.
Worshiping Simon magus as a Christ.
Simon magus was the Christ.
Yeah.
He was offering, and he was offering that female avenue as well,
that you get through the, through the Ophites.
You remember in selling his wife, Helen, and entering her into this,
all the stuff that the Nicolations were doing with their, brought with their wives.
Now, if this ecclesia, if this thing that, you know, we say church and we think fairy tale,
and no, no, no.
If this assembly that starts out is able to, you're able to have others crop up,
other unions crop up in other places that are, have the same hierarchy and Paul,
notice Paul, it's the same gangster stuff.
He's writing the church at Rome saying, Hey, thank you for the donations.
Right.
Thank you for, I understand that you're trying to help me.
This is what we're doing, right?
It's the,
We will repay that gesture.
Don't worry about the message where everything's good over here.
Yeah.
Yeah.
That's what it is.
And he's so hyped up on drugs for those of you like Paul, and I'm talking all the,
all the people who just drool all over Paul, the apostle was, no, what an intellect.
What a great guy.
He's doing his thing.
He's so drugged that he gets bitten by an ass, but it doesn't hurt him.
It doesn't hurt him at all.
He shakes it off.
Like, because he knows what that venom is like, right?
He knows it because he's been shoving it.
If he's, I've recently come to the conclusion that that part of the text is trying to say
something to the certain people who are initiated into these serpent,
serpent sex of Christianity, the Nazis, the old fights, that that's like a, a nod to them
and that passage of acts where it's like Paul got bit by the serpent.
Nothing happened.
And the people, those old fights are reading this text like, oh, shit.
Yeah.
He, yeah, he's one of us.
That's why Jesus says, I'm shocked that Jesus says, you know, you can expose yourself to this
stuff and it's not going to hurt you, right?
He can show these things, right?
And people are never understand.
They think fairy tale.
They think, well, um, Charlton Heston playing Moses and Easter, right?
They don't, they don't think, uh, what's the reality going on, man?
Paul was juiced.
Paul was juiced and there was money involved.
And there's a woman, a Lydian woman.
I think her name is Lydia involved in the purple trade, right?
That stuff keeps coming up and keeps coming up and keeps coming up.
So these early Christians were not only gangsters, but they were into the drugs, man.
I'm going to throw this one up.
This is one of the last ones we have, but I got a real quick cause I drank so much tea
that I got to take a piss for a second.
I'm going to throw this up so you can read it and I'll be right back.
Okay.
I will read it.
And the angel thrust in his sickle into the earth.
Again, this is just like Dionysus does and gathered the vine of the earth and cast it in
the great wine press of the wrath of God.
And for those of you who think that they were, um, the Jews were on grapes,
they weren't, it was a Canaanite industry.
And the wine press was trodden without the city and blood came out of the wine press,
even unto the horses bridles, but a space of 1,600 furlocked.
Oh my God, this blood is the blood that he's bringing out of you and me.
Bra, when he comes back, this is the blood that he's going to produce.
He's going to put us in that press and he's going to squeeze out blood.
That is not, that is not the savior that you and I see in church, right?
If they had a giant painting of a dude that was forcing your head into a wine press and
squeezing out your guts and blood and one giant mess that was as high as,
that was as high as a horse's bridle, how high as a horse's bridle comes up,
can come up to your chest, you know, if you ever stand next to a horse, right?
So, and it says in, in Apocalypse, it says there, his garments are stained with blood,
stained with blood bra.
That is a dude that you and I can get behind and say, this, this guy is going to take us
all the way. This is what gang members look for. They look for that strong leader to take us all
the way. You know, unfortunately, Peter, God is ending. They caught up with him, which they always
do. Gang leaders always get screwed in the end because they inevitably run afoul because they're
organized crime. They inevitably run afoul of the civic authorities. Jesus did it with the Romans,
got himself crucified. Peter did it, got himself crucified, right? It's, it's almost like
that hope of Roman civilization was to preserve that ethos, that, that understanding of that the
law governs. And when you have a group that organized crime, when you have a group that's
functioning based on that black market, you can't, you can't look at Jesus's image when he's sitting
there with Mary and she brings out this stuff that is so expensive, you could have given it to the
poor and fed a whole bunch of people. Instead, she uses it on him. My question is, what is their gang
doing with those resources, right? These are black market resources and they're using them.
They're using them. Jesus is in it deep. So when he's arrested with that kid in the public park at
four in the morning, maybe it's not so strange. Is that part of the bling? Is that part of the thing?
You're with that kid, you're in the right, getting hyped up, you're entering that mode. And he thinks
he's genuine thinking he's the Son of God, right? He's very genuine in that, right?
Yeah. So good for him for Dionysus and Thug life. I love it.
He's the, he's the Cronian son, the Son of Chronos. Like he's trying to, that's what he's going for.
He's going, he's trying to set up a mystery right out of the culture that he's in. Like, you know,
that's what it very much seems like. That was the last slide. But before I even get to,
there's some questions people want to ask about the Greek. Before I even ask that, I just want
to one more time. I just want to, while there's 120 people watching, go and hit the subscribe
button right now. I want to get him over past 1000 subscribers tonight. Let's do it. So hit the
subscribe, go hit Lady Babylon. It's right. It's not even in the description. It's in the title.
You just hit that app button and click it and subscribe, do that. And then, by the way, if you
wondering, what do you mean? What are you talking about all these drugs in black market? Well,
the perfect book to explain this to you is the coming news. I'm telling you,
if you read this book, you'll have the context. You'll understand what we're saying. And if you
want to learn Greek, hit up the next link that's in there. And that's, you're going to five star
378 ratings, background check past, legit teacher, PhD in the classics, ready to teach,
if he's got a schedule. So the time, it'll fill up quickly. So you better get in there quickly
before someone else does. And yeah, so that's what I want to do.
I just like people helping. I like helping people pass their college exams. That's what I like to
do to help them do that. Yeah, it feels really good. And then to inspire them to say, oh man,
maybe this field is actually interesting. Yeah, professors out there do everything they can to
kill interest in the field by doing the most boring stuff. But yeah, yeah, I've got to stick to my,
I've got to stick to my oath to the devil. So yeah, if you got to go, you got to go. I understand.
I'm going to do that. I'm going to do that. I think Neil, it's an honor to have you on.
It's been an extreme honor, an extreme honor. And for those of you who are out there who are
following Neil and following, you know, the program, I've got a lot of, I cannot express to you
how Neil has changed me. Yeah, for the better. I can't, I can't describe that. I like to say
you learn somebody when you fight against them. And I learned honor through fighting with Neil.
I want you guys to know that. And this man loves the muse and he's, he's honorable servant. So
thank you, Neil. Thank you. Thank you. And like I said, everybody, go hit the subscribe and
follow you over there. You'll see me on the channel every once in a while, popping up on there. And
all right, take it easy. I'll see you soon. Okay, talk to you. So yeah, so, you know, he had to go
and I apologize if you sent a super chat towards him. I'll do my best to accommodate whatever I
can. Stop scamming, man. Thank you for the super chat. Can you provide any insight into the meaning
of the Greek word in the New Testament, which translates English to demon? Also do any, that's
a good question. Because you got the word daemon, which kind of just translates to God. But in the
Christian sense, it kind of becomes demon, where it's like a bad God or like some sort of demonic
spirit. That's as best as I could do. I'm answering that question. But I apologize that I'm
won't had to leave. But I really, you know, you know, some I get people on they only have
a certain amount of time to be here. So I apologize for that. Morris and prophecy. Thank you for the
super chat. I finally caught one of these lives. I love your channel. I was raised evangelical
and agree with everything you said this morning. Cheers. Awesome. It's good to see you, Morrison.
Thank you for that. Stop scamming, man. Hello again. Can you provide any insights on the Greek
words for heaven and paradise the New Testament uses and do not and any Christian right? Our
nose is heaven. Paradise. It's an um, let me see what uh, Perseus stuffs has for paradise.
Paradise. I don't even know. Paradise. Paradise in Greek.
Paradisos. Paradisos. So, uh, let me see if I can share my screen.
Yeah, so you have our nose, which is heaven. The same one for the God our nose. And then
and then Paradisos. Parad, Paradiso, Paradiso, Paradiso. Yeah, that's the best I can do. Sorry
about that. Thank you for the super chat. I appreciate that. I wish I could uh, you know,
I wish I was an expert in Greek and can help you out with that. Thank you for that though.
Cthonious. My boy, Cthonious. Who was Jesus' father? God. To me, it's the Old Testament
God. The Jews rejected him. Did his God have a secret name? Yeah, I think you're right.
He claimed to be the son of Yahweh. You know, he claimed to be the son of the Old Testament,
the biblical God. You know, so that's a definite, that's definitely, that's definitely the thing.
Thank you, Justina. Carry on for the super sticker.
Let's see what else we got.
Melody Joy. Thank you for the support and you had the, uh, the, um, membership. I
appreciate that. Always good to see you here. Melody's been here watching my channel.
Well, through Derek, but since the beginning,
I'm like under a thousand subscribers. Melody was watching and so I really,
it's always good to see Melody in the chat. Thank you. Appreciate that.
One of the, the OGs of the, of the channel for sure. Let's see. I think that might be it,
but, um,
I appreciate everybody. This is, I like having Amon on. Thank you for the super sticker.
By the way, go and subscribe to Drawing Down The Stars. Mind as well, uh, while you're,
let me pull it up. Let me pull up the channel. Let me pull up the channel.
Drawing Down The Stars.
There's another good channel. If you like the, if you like the,
the deep mystery religion stuff, then you will like this channel right here,
which is Drawing Down The Stars. Hit that bell. Hit that bell. You're making a lot of
content too. And we're going to be doing some collabs together too. So definitely,
definitely go and subscribe to Drawing Down The Stars. Absolutely. That's a must.
Go and do that right now, everybody. And, um, with that being said, I'm out for the night
and I will be back tomorrow night with another one. Wait, is it tomorrow night that I'm going?
Oh, tomorrow I'm going live with MythVision on Derek's channel, MythVision,
and we're going to have Dr. McDonald present the memesis theory to none other than Professor
Gregory Crane, who is the founder of Perseus Tuft's website. So the found, this is going to
be huge. This is big. This is gigantic. The founder of Perseus Tufts, what we call Alice,
is going to sit in attendance and listen to Dennis McDonald explain the memesis theory
of the New Testament, how the New Testament bowers from the Greek Homer's Odyssey and Homer's
Iliad. This is going to be crazy. I'm telling you, this is tomorrow and MythVision around one
o'clock Eastern, be there. With that being said, you have just attained true gnosis.
You have just attained true gnosis.
The demiurge has no power over you.
