The
first century of Christianity is shrouded in mystery.
What we know for sure, compared to what we are told by traditional accounts, is wide
ranging and extremely problematic.
The earliest Christian documents we have are letters from Paul dating from the 40s and
50s and early 60s.
Only seven of them are considered to be authentic and written by one author, although it is
entirely possible that others are written by someone Paul was close to or even a secretary.
These letters from Paul contain the most important details about Jesus being crucified.
We have letters from John and Peter, which may not be authentic, but are nevertheless
late 1st century, early 2nd century texts written by Christians.
And there is also an epistle from Jude, James, and an unknown author writing to an assembly
of Greek-speaking Hebrews.
Outside of these letters, the only surviving 1st century letter, which was not included
in the biblical canon, is the epistle of Clement, dated to 96 AD, which we will discuss.
The book of Revelation is also dated to this year and is considered to be in close proximity
to the Joe Hennine Collection and possibly the same author who wrote John's letters.
The scholars date the three synoptic Gospels to the late 1st, early 2nd century, starting
with Mark around 70, then Matthew between 85 and 95, and Luke X in the early to the
middle 2nd century.
The Gospel of John is also dated by most scholars to be between the 90s and 140s.
All four of these Gospels did not have the names of authors attached to them until the
end of the 2nd century, so we don't even know if they really were written by Mark,
Matthew, Luke, or John.
These titles were given by later Church Fathers.
The earliest physical fragments of these texts that we have are from the late 2nd and 3rd
century.
And the oldest full copy of the Bible in existence is the Codex Sinaiticus from 325 AD.
The Gospel of Thomas, which was once an important early Christian text, is dated between the
1st and early 2nd century, some even arguing that it could be the oldest, but was not selected
among the biblical canon by the Church Fathers in the 4th century.
Though its impact on early Christianity was massive, outside of that, there is a plethora
of Gospels and texts produced by the early Christians in the 2nd century that will be
discussed later in the video.
Please hit that like button and subscribe.
In the 4th century, Eusebius provides a detailed list of the early Church bishops in Antioch,
Rome, Alexandria, Athens, Corinth, Smyrna, and others.
These lists show a direct continuation from the Apostles like Andrew, consecrating the
father of the heretic Marcian, Philologus, the 1st Bishop of Synope, as well as Andrew
consecrating the 1st Bishop of Corinth named Apollos, who is mentioned in Paul's letters,
and Mark being the 1st Bishop of Alexandria, consecrated by Peter, with Peter being the
1st Bishop of both Antioch and Rome, consecrating both Linus and Ivarius, and of course they
list James as the leader and 1st Bishop of the Church of Jerusalem.
And from them are the 70 apostles listed in Acts and names that look familiar to people
mentioned in Paul's letters.
These elaborate lists of succession show what appears to be a united Church that has a direct
line of orthodoxy from Jesus down to Constantine.
However, the primary sources show this not only to be problematic, but impossible in
some cases.
Many of the sources have conflicting lists with each other.
People considered to be alive in certain times are somehow alive in times when they
should be dead, and the surviving texts that we do have are so few and far between that
it becomes a nightmare to try to piece it all together.
The truth is, early Christianity was far from united.
It was so diverse that I would argue Christians in the first two centuries were farther apart
than a Mormon is today with a Catholic.
On one side of the spectrum you have Ebianites, Jewish law-observing Christians who revere
James the Just, but reject Paul as a liar.
They follow strict dietary laws from the Torah, keep the Sabbath and the commandments, and
think Jesus is the Messiah, but not God.
You also have Alka-sites from Parthia, who are also Torah-observant, but also think that
Jesus was a giant 96-mile tall and 14-mile wide angel who was the Son of God, and his
sister the Holy Spirit was also the same size.
And no, I'm not making this up.
On the other side of the spectrum you have quite the opposite, Canites, who think the
Old Testament God is actually the devil, and Judas was the hero, and all the way to pagan
Christians like the Perate who believed that Greek gods such as Zeus and Aphrodite were
actually the Archons who created the world, and Christ came to save the world from them.
There are many sex and denominations in between, such as the School of Callistus, who gave
way to the Noetians.
People who were called Heretics at first for saying Jesus Christ and God the Father were
actually the same being, as well as dosetists who think Christ was so divine that he could
not have a flesh body and that he was just a phantom that just appeared to be human.
Dosetists were the first main heresy of Christianity on record.
And then there are some sex that are so radical that you don't even know where to put them
on the spectrum.
The Borba Rites, who are rumored to be one and the same as the Nicolations mentioned in
Revelation, are a group of Eastern Roman Christians of Syria and Egypt who apparently put semen
and menstrual fluids in their Eucharist and engaged in orgiastic baptismal rites, took
psychedelics, spoke in tongues.
Those guys definitely had the Holy Spirit.
There is no such thing as proto-Orthodox.
This is a term used in hindsight of what ideas won the battle for what would fit best for
the Roman Church in the 4th century.
Who we are told are the heretics and who we are told are orthodoxy is not so clear when
we examine the sources and compare them to the central teachings of Jesus and even Paul
too.
I will be demonstrating this in this video.
As most people know, Jesus lived in the first half of the first century, had a following
of young Jewish teens consisting of both male and female, and he was crucified under Pontus
Pilate in Jerusalem around 30 AD.
Most of his life is shrouded in mystery.
He wrote nothing down, and we have zero contemporary primary sources or any archaeological evidence
about him or his movement that exists from the period in which he was alive.
Everything we know about him is taken from Paul's letters and what the Gospel authors
say about him.
All we know about his family is that his mother's name was Mary and that James may or may not
have been his brother.
Paul tells us nothing about his father, and the earliest Gospel, Mark, doesn't even mention
who his father's name is.
It is not until Matthew's Gospel, written between 85 and 95, in which we get any mention
of Joseph being the father of Jesus.
Kelsus, a Greek who was hostile to Christianity, claims that Jesus' biological father was
a Roman soldier named Pantera.
Kelsus cites Jewish sources who he says he got this information from, and the Talmudic
fragments from rabbinic sources also agree with this.
According to Origen, Kelsus lived during the reign of Hadrian between 117 and 138.
Even if Kelsus wrote later, this would mean that Pantera and Joseph, as possible fathers
of Jesus, are nearly contemporary ideas to each other in the sources.
If Joseph was really Jesus' father's name, you would think Paul's letters in Mark's
early Gospel would easily relate this.
And what reason would Jews have for deceptively telling Kelsus in the early 2nd century that
his father was actually Pantera, a Gentile Roman, born out of wedlock?
It seems that there would be much more incentive for Paul to hide this than there would be
for Kelsus to lie about this.
Whether Joseph or Pantera is his father is impossible to know.
I will leave that up to you to decide.
This is a topic for another video.
The main question I want to explore in this video is what did the earliest Christians
believe and who were they?
Kelsus gives us a list of the sex and denominations of the Church that were relevant in his day
in the early 2nd century.
He says,
Those of the Great Church receive as true the accounts of the creation in six days,
and God resting on the seventh.
They agree in regard to this first man and deduce their genealogies from him.
They accept the narratives about going of the children of Israel into Egypt and their
flight from it.
I know some hold the Creator, the God of the Jews, to be different from and opposed to
the God which Jesus came from.
In truth, their divisions are endless.
They have carnal and spiritual men.
They call themselves Christians who wish to live in all things as the Jews.
There are among them, Sybilists, Simonians, Marcellians, Carpocratians, disciples of
Mary and Martha, and Marcionites.
But notwithstanding all their divisions and abusive controversies, you may hear them all
saying,
The world is crucified unto me and I unto the world.
What I find so interesting about this passage is how he shows no knowledge of any gnostic
heresy at this time.
Although he does show knowledge of divisions, which is understandable, he considers the
Simonians, Marcellians, Carpocratians, and Marcionites to be among the sects of the
great church.
All of them are considered Gnostics and Heretics by later Christian writers.
You would think Kelsus would have said something about this if he knew this was the case, and
he mentions them as being Sybilist.
I think this is very telling of how the early church was divided, but yet all were within
the church, wide-ranging doctrines that oppose each other, yet all believed in the crucifixion.
I will address every single sect listed by Kelsus, plus others, and I think there is
a good reason why Kelsus lists the Sybilist first.
The Sybillian oracles, texts written in Greek hexameter prose, are a wide-ranging phenomena
that is said to stretch back to the oracle of Delphi and spread throughout the Hellenistic
world into Asia Minor, Mesopotamia, Judea, North Africa, and Italy.
The Sybil was at first depicted as an aged woman with the gift of prophecy, and that
there were 12 of them.
The Persian Sybil, the Libyan Sybil, Delphic Sybil, Khmerian, Erythrian, Sammian, Khumaian,
Hellespontine, Phrygian, Turbotine, Egyptian, and Chaldean Sybil.
Some lists replaced the Persian Sybil with the Hebrew Sybil.
Legend had it that the Khumaian Sybil, close to Rome, was a thousand years old and had
given her books to the 5th king of Rome, in a Truscan king named Tarquinius Priscus, grandson
of Numa Populus, who succeeded Romulus.
These oracles were entrusted to the priesthood of Jupiter to be guarded by the Vestal Virgins
and only consulted in times of crisis.
Regardless of the truth of their origins, these books became central to the religion
of Rome during the Republic era.
Like the prophets of the Old Testament, these Sybils predicted future catastrophic events
and the demise of major cities by God.
These texts were most likely used as a form of political propaganda to sway public opinion
during times of war.
From the 3rd century BC to the 1st century, we see a mixture of Greek and Jewish themes
present in these texts, specifically in Alexandria, Egypt, where a large Jewish and Greek population
coexist.
It is here in Alexandria, where the collection of all 12 Sybils are gathered and put into
one collection.
They show both Jewish and pagan influence, everything from Hesiod themes of the golden
age of Saturn, Homeric epics like the Iliad, predictions of Romulus, Cyrus the Great, Alexandria
the Great, Caesar Augustus, as well as references to gods like Ares, Cronos, Aphrodite, Zeus,
and the Titans vs. the Olympians.
All the way to stories about Noah's Ark, the Tower of Bebel, Moses getting the tablets
on Mount Sinai, the Latin poet Virgil is mentioned by name in the Sybillian oracles as a great
teacher sent by God to teach the world.
And Virgil himself cites the Sybillian books in his Aeneid and mentions Dephobe as the
Kumayan Sybil, to show some passages of the 3rd Sybillian oracle to give you an idea of
what it's like.
But he, eternal Lord, proclaims himself as one who is, and was, and shall be.
To hear the only name of Heaven's great God, the ruler of the world.
He by his logos created all things, even Oranos and Thassala and tireless Helios and full
Selene and bright Astreus and mighty Mother Tethys, springs and rivers, imperishable fire
and Amera and Nyx.
This is the God who formed four letter Adam.
The first one formed and filling with his name Anatoly, Hesperides, Notos and Boreus.
The same as he who fixed the pattern of the human form and made wild beasts and creeping
things and fowls.
Sybillian oracles 3.
Notice the blend between pagan and Jewish elements and how the Creator includes the
many gods within his creation of the world.
This type of genre can also be seen along the book of Revelation.
For example,
Then I saw a great white throne and him who is seated on it.
Gaia and Oranos fled from his presence, and there was no place for them.
And I saw the dead great and small, standing before the throne, and books were opened.
Another book was opened, which is the Book of Life.
The dead were judged according to what they have done as recorded in the books.
Thassala gave up the dead that were in it, and Thanatos and Hades gave up the dead that
were in them, and each person was judged according to what they had done.
Then Thanatos and Hades were thrown into the lake of fire.
The lake of fire is the second death.
Anyone whose name was not found written in the Book of Life was thrown into the lake
of fire.
Revelation.
If you read the English translation, you might not know this, but most English translations
are like playing a game of telephone.
Being filtered through Latin and different versions of English, the nouns are translated
into places when they are written as names.
Not only that, Gaia, Oranos, Thassala, Thanatos, and Hades are all gods that have hymns dedicated
to them in the Orphic hymns.
The latter three, Thassala, Thanatos, and Hades, are gods who rule over the dead, while Gaia
and Oranos rule over creation.
Their functions in this book Revelation, Chapter 20, are exactly this.
Seeing Gaia and Oranos fleeing from God, and Thanatos, Hades, and Thassala giving up their
dead.
Here, Thanatos and Hades are being judged and casted into the lake of fire, for being
insubordinate to the divine plan of God.
Revelation was the last book to be accepted into the Christian biblical canon, and even
at present day, some Nestorian churches reject it.
It was tainted because the heretical sect of the Montanist relied on it, and doubts
were raised over its Jewishness and authorship, and it was not until 419 that it was included
into the canon.
The Montanists were led by Montanis, a heretic who was also called Anostic, and he was a
Sybilist.
He was assisted by two women, Prisca and Maximilla, who led a Christian Sybilist group called
the Illuminati, Enlightened Ones.
Yeah, Illuminati.
And these women were considered prophetesses, and the voices of the Sybil.
They entered into states of ecstatic frenzies, spoke in tongues, and prophesied the future.
Montanis, despite being deemed a heretic, is credited with baptizing Trotellian, who
was also known as the father of Latin Christianity.
Already we're starting to see that the lines between heretics and orthodoxy are getting
blurred.
If you think that's a lot, just keep watching.
The Sybil continues.
But when Rome shall or Egypt also rule, governing always, then shall there appear the greatest
kingdom of the immortal king over men, and a holy lord shall come to hold the scepter
over every land, unto all ages of fast-hastening time.
From the Sebastianis line of Augustus, Belair Nero shall come, hereafter the height of hills
shall he establish, and shall make the sea stand still, and the great fiery sun and bright
moon, and he shall raise the dead and many signs work before men, but nothing shall be
brought by him unto completion but deceit, and many mortals shall be led astray, Hebrews
both true and choice, and lawless men, Sybilene oracles three.
Here we see another theme that both the Sybil and the Revelation have in common, prophecy
of the birth of Christ under the reign of Augustus, and the coming of the Antichrist,
who is Nero.
Here is how it is told in Revelation.
Then I saw a second beast coming out of the earth.
It had two horns like a lamb, but it spoke like a dragon.
It exercised all the authority of the first beast on its behalf, and made the earth and
its inhabitants worship the first beast, whose fatal wound had been healed.
And it performed great signs, even causing fire to come down from heaven to the earth
in full view of the people.
Because of the signs it was given power to perform on behalf of the first beast, it deceived
the inhabitants of the earth.
It ordered them to set up an image in honor of the beast, who was wounded by the sword
and yet lived.
This calls for wisdom.
Let the person who has insight calculate the number of the beast, for it is the number
of a man.
That number is 660 and 6 Revelation.
We know that the beast is Nero, because the Latin version gives the Dramatria of 616.
The only name in both Greek and Latin that have a Dramatria of 666 and 616, who also
fits this role, is Nero, the Antichrist who caused the Seven Year War between Rome and
Judea to break out, that results in the destruction of the Temple of Jerusalem.
The civil continues.
And then the generation 10th appeared of mortal men, from the time when the flood came upon
earlier men, and Kronos reigned and Titan and Iapetus, and men called them best, offspring
of Gaia and of Uranus, giving them names both of earth and heaven, since they were very
first of mortal men.
So there were three divisions of the earth, according to the allotment of each man, and
each one having his own portion reigned and fought not, for father's oath were there,
and equal were their portions, but the time, complete of old age, on the father came and
he died.
And the sons, infringing oaths, stirred up against each other bitter strife, which one
should have the royal rank and rule over all mortals, and against each other, Kronos and
Titan fought, but Rea and Gaia, and Aphrodite, fond of crowns, Demeter and Hestia and Dione,
of fair locks, brought them to friendship, and together called, all who were kings, both
brothers and near kin, and others of the same ancestral blood.
But when the Titans heard that there were sons kept secretly, whom Kronos and his wife
Rea begat, then Titan sixty youths, and this is the beginning of dire war, the Egyptian
kingdom, then that of the Persians, and of the Medes, and Ethiopians, and of Assyria and
Babylon, and then that of the Macedonians, Egyptian yet again, then that of Rome, God
imparted first, how many kingdoms have been together, gathered of mankind.
For first of all, the House of Solomon shall include horsemen of Venetian and Syria, and
of the islands too, sibling oracles three.
Once again we see themes from Hessead of the Golden Age, and the war breaking out in heaven,
between Titans and Olympians, but it quickly evolves into themes found in Daniel, with
the succession of kingdoms of the Assyrians, Persians, Greeks, and Romans.
These things I show thee, the long walls of Assyrian Babylon, for Greece to proclaim
to all the wrath of God fire sent, and that I might to mortals prophesy of mysteries divine,
and men shall say in Greece that I am a foreign land of Ethre, born shameless, others say
that I am a civil born of mother Cersei and father Nostos, sibling oracles three.
Cersei is the sister of Medea, and the daughter of Hecate, goddess of magic, who is in Homer's
Odyssey, and other Greek and Roman myths, and she says her father is Nostos, an obvious
Gnostic reference to the father of knowing.
This is just one tiny section of hundreds of pages and dozens of oracles written by
pagans, Jews, and Christians living in Alexandria from 300 BC all the way until the 15th century,
when they are strictly written by only Orthodox Christians.
They end up being used as political propaganda by the Byzantines against the Muslims, when
they repurpose the Antichrist to be Mohammed, but the origins of these very Orthodox Christian
Sibylene oracles go back before Christianity even existed, during a time when the Orphics,
Platonists, Pythagoreans, and Jews clashed in Alexandria, especially during the 2nd century
BCE.
It is during this time in Alexandria where Daniel and Enoch are written.
Myths that show close proximity to the Sibylene tradition, about dreamlike oracles of future
events and messianic promises, Orpheus was credited by both Jews and Greeks in Alexandria
as being a great theologian who fathered Moses and was a son of the Sibyl.
They also claim that Noah's daughter was the Erythrian Sibyl, called Thea Sibyl, the
goddess Sibyl, and Heraclitus in the 6th century BCE, said that her voice reaches through
thousands of years.
It is in this mixed cultural environment of Alexandria where we get people like Aristobulus
and Thilo, and the soil for Christianity to thrive in is laid down.
It is not a mistake that Kelsus calls Christians Sibylist, he is right on the money with this.
These oracles, which started off as Greek, then Roman, then Jewish, and then towards
the end of the 1st century and 2nd century were Christian, and only written by Christians.
These Sibylene oracles are cited by Josephus, Justin Martyr, Clement, and Origen, and play
a crucial role in the early church.
Not long before Kelsus wrote, we have the three earliest mentions of Christians by
Roman authors.
The earliest mention by Roman writers and most detailed of the three would come from
Pliny the Younger in his letter to the Emperor Trajan in 112 AD, he says.
There have been some of this mad sect Christians, whom I took notice of in particular as Roman
citizens, that they might be sent to that city.
After some time, as is usual in such examinations, the crime spread itself and many more cases
came before me.
A libel was sent to me, though without an author containing many names of persons accused.
These denied that they were Christians now, or have ever been.
They called upon the gods and supplicated to your image, which I caused to be brought
to me for that purpose, with frankincense and wine.
They also cursed Christ, none of which things it is said can any of those that are ready
Christians be compelled to do, so I thought fit to let them go.
Others of them that were named in the libel said they were Christians, but presently denied
it again, that indeed they had been Christians, but had ceased to be so, some three years
ago.
However, they assured me that the main of their fault, or the mistake was this, that
they were to on a stated day meet together at dawn and sing a hymn to Christ as to a
God, alternately, and to oblige themselves by a sacrament or oath.
Here we are told that these Christians will easily lie and reject Christ in order to save
their lives.
Ironically, this goes against every Christian apologist claim about the so-called martyrs
who would die for something they know is true, yet these Christians, when pressed, will worship
the image of Emperor Trajan and curse Christ in order to save their lives.
I do find one particular part of this useful for examining Christian practice, the passage
about them waking up at dawn and singing hymns to Christ is a rite commonly found among
Orphics who also sing hymns to Lucifer or Iosphorus at morning at dawn and also oblige
themselves to oaths of piety.
The next Roman source from this period comes from Tacitus, Nero fastened the guilt and
inflicted the most exquisite tortures on a class hated for their abominations called Christians
by the populace.
Christus, from whom the name had its origin, suffered the extreme penalty during the reign
of Tiberius at the hands of one of our procurators, Pontius Pilate, and a most mischievous superstition,
thus checked for the moment, again, broke out, not only in Judea, the first source of
the evil, but even in Rome, where all things hideous and shameful from every part of the
world find their center and become popular.
A few years later, Suetonius would write something very similar, punishment was inflicted on
the Christians, a class of men given to a new and mischievous superstition, from these
two sources we can't really gather much about them, other than there seems to be a rumor
that they were blamed for the fire at Rome, and that they held strange superstitions.
The only non-Christian source in the first century that mentions Jesus is Josephus, but
this text is considered by scholars to be extremely problematic, to the point that it
is considered to be either heavily edited or even not authentic at all.
Origin who makes use of Josephus in his writings never once mentions the passage that talks
about Jesus, which you would think you would.
Even if there was a passage about Jesus in Josephus, the text was so heavily edited that
we can no longer tell what was actually said.
Josephus does, however, talk quite a lot about another biblical character, John the Baptist.
John the Baptist was considered a great prophet in his time, and he was executed by Herod,
sometime in the early first century.
There are movements from Palestine, known as Mandeism, or Nazorianism, who venerate
John as the Messiah, or greatest prophet that ever lived, and they even place him above
Jesus himself, who they consider to be somewhat of an imposter, and they do not consider Jesus
to be the Son of God, let alone one with God.
The name of the Mandeans comes from the Aramaic Manda, meaning knowledge, which literally
means these people were called Gnostics in the Aramaic Tum.
The core tenets of their religion shows heavy influences from Zoroastrianism and the Syrian
Magi.
The central belief system of this particular religion goes by the name Nasrta, which translates
to Nessorian, which translates to Nessorian Gnosis, or a form of divine insight.
Followers of this faith refer to themselves as Nessoriai, meaning Nazorians.
The community of Nazorians is split into two main groups, the Tarmiduta, which pertains
to the clergy, and the Mandeuta, referring to general congregation.
The term for the latter is derived from the word Manda, meaning knowledge or Gnosis.
Mandeans revered Adam, Abel, Seth, Enos, Noah, Shem, Aram, and especially John the Baptist.
And much like Zoroastrians, they worship one God who they call the King of Light, the ruler
of heaven that oversees an army of angels in opposition to a king of the underworld called
Krun, who rules the demons.
They believe in baptism as a way of salvation from sins and initiation into heaven.
The term Baptist comes from the Greek baptai.
Surprisingly, there are a group of ancient Greek Pythagoreans and Orphics living in Corinth,
ironically one of the main early Christian cities in which Paul writes to, and in Corinth,
these Orphics actually call themselves Baptists.
A text from an author named Eupolus, who lived in Athens between 446 and 411 BC, writes about
these Baptists and claims that Elcibiades and Socrates were among the initiated and
that they adopted foreign religious practices from the Persians and Egyptians and engaged
in nocturnal rites.
It is entirely possible that this group could have looked a lot like the Mandaeans, with
the difference being that these were devotees of the goddess Kodas and Dionysus and not
the king of light.
Elcibiades, who was a fellow student with Plato under Socrates, was an Athenian politician.
Eupolus wrote hostile polemics against both Socrates and Elcibiades and especially was
not fond of the Corinthian Baptist cult.
During the wars between Athens and Sparta, Eupolus found himself, as fate would have
it, serving under a fleet led by Elcibiades in the Sicilian expedition.
And Elcibiades had Eupolus drowned in retaliation to his plays about him.
According to the sources from Xenophon and Plato, Socrates and Elcibiades saved each
other multiple times from death during these wars.
Elcibiades was defeated by Lysander and he fled to the Persian court of Archiserses II.
But was killed along the way.
Socrates, on the other hand, was condemned by the Elosinian hero-vents and Athenian religious
authorities for leading the youth astray and importing foreign gods.
His martyrdom is very comparable to Jesus' death and condemnation.
His successor Plato wrote an entire dialogue about Elcibiades and massive dialogues about
Socrates.
Plato, in his Republic, expressed his discontent with the religious order of his day.
He states in Book 3 of the Republic that he wanted to replace Homer and Hesiod with more
righteous ideas and better examples for the youth to live by.
Even going as far as desiring a heaven for the righteous and a hell for the sinners.
Plato and Aristotle after him claimed that Zooraster was a teacher of Pythagoras and how
the pre-Socratic masters got their wisdom from the Egyptians, Phoenicians, and Babylonians.
It is certainly possible that these Baptists in Corinth who were charged with worshipping
foreign gods may have already been on their way to something close to a protonosticism
with influences from the Magi.
Aristotle tells us that several Magi even attended the funeral of Plato himself.
Aristotle was also charged by the religious leaders of Athens with blasphemy and was forced
to flee Athens and take his own life.
Then Aristotle's successor Theophrastus also was charged with blasphemy as well.
Even Theophrastus's successor after that, Demetrius, Vilarium, was forced out of Athens,
fled to Alexandria, Egypt, and according to Josephus, was present during the creation of the Greek Pentateuch.
The reason why I bring all this up is to set you all up with what I think is the most
important question regarding early Christianity, something I have never yet hear anyone ask,
the question being, who was Paul writing to?
If you haven't really thought deeply about this question, you might just say,
Paul is writing to the churches in Corinth and Rome and Ephesus.
But wait a second, if Paul is writing these letters in the 40s and 50s and Jesus just recently
died in 33, then how is it possible that Jesus' disciples have already successfully went across
the entire Roman Empire in one decade, converted thousands of Greeks and Roman pagans, set up
assemblies and churches in major cities throughout Anatolia, Greece, and Italy, and gained support
from rich patrons? Weren't these just teenage fishermen? To me, this is not only impossible,
but would be a far greater miracle than Jesus healing the sick and making wine from water.
This would be the greatest miracle of all, and yet it's not explained in any of the text,
other than a few vague verses in Luke Acts, about 70 disciples,
magically dispersing far and wide. Let's put the fairy tale aside and get real for a moment.
There must have been an existing order of religious culture in these areas before Jesus
and Paul. For starters, we know from the sources that there was a thriving, Hellenized Jewish
community living throughout the urban cities of Greece, Egypt, and Turkey between 200 BC
through the Common Era, era stimulus of Alexandria, a Greek middle Platonist Jew
living in the 2nd century BC, wrote about Orpheus and Muceus as Jewish prophets among the Greeks,
as well as Plato and Pythagoras as God-fearing Greeks worthy of reverence.
And Philo of Alexandria, his successor, wrote extensively on concepts like the logos
and God having an heir to inherit the kingdom of heaven. Philo also wrote on how the laws
of Moses and the Torah were not to be taken literally and were spiritual laws that could
be interpreted depending on the situation. They leaned heavily on the laws and philosophy of Plato,
which dominated the time period. These mixing of Platonic and Jewish ideas would set the stage
for Christian theology and would be heavily borrowed from by the Gospel authors and Paul.
It is quite possible that these Jewish communities who spoke Greek and adopted Greek
customs followed Judaism to a moderate degree and were likely to be less interested in following
Mosaic law in a fundamental sense, and these would be the most likely to convert to Christianity.
And it sure makes sense that these very people would be more inclined to accept Paul's teachings,
but I still don't think this would be enough to explain the massive network of Christian churches
existing so early on during Paul's time.
Professor John Kloppenborg's late academic sensation, known as Christ's associations,
does a thorough analysis and comparison between ancient Greco-Roman cults and associations
of deities in Athens, Corinth, Macedonia, Ephesus, and other cities throughout the Greco-Roman world
of the Hellenistic period through antiquity. He posits that the early Christ assemblies
throughout the Roman Empire would most likely operate in a similar manner to the assemblies of
devotees of other deities. He compares inscriptions on templates and stones from archaeological digs
of temples and dining halls. One of these groups that is described is known as the Cult of Theos
Hipsistos, or God Most High in Greek. This cult flourished in Corinth, Athens, Macedonia,
Phrygia, and Cappadocia from the 3rd century BC until the time of the Christian takeover
of Roman religion in the 4th century. These people, called Hipsisterians, were shipped one God,
either in the form of Theos Hipsistos, God Most High, or Zeus Hipsistos, Zeus Most High,
and sometimes Zeus Sabaesias Hipsistos. Their theology seems to possess a platonic cosmology
of one perfect, nameless, unbegotten creator who creates the world with his lesser daemons and
angels. His temples usually possess no images of God, or just a symbol of an eagle with a wreath,
and very rarely in the form of a statue of Zeus. But most of these cults worship God with no images,
similar to the Temple of Jerusalem and how the Jews forbid the images of God.
These very Hipsisterians were in close proximity to the thriving Jewish communities
living in Greece and Turkey. It should also be noted that Hipsistos is the Greek title for the
God of the Old Testament as Elian is the same word in the Hebrew Bible. It is highly likely
that these very people are among the earliest converts to Christianity. These are the people
who the author of Acts refers to as God-fearers. At Caesarea there was a man named Cornelius,
a centurion in what was known as the Italian Regiment. He and all his family were devout
and God-fearing. He gave generously to those in need and prayed to God regularly.
Acts 10
These God-fearers are Gentiles who worship the God Most High, aka Theos Hipsistos. Gregory
of Naziansus, one of the 4th century Church Fathers, claims that his parents were once
Hipsisterians before converting to Christianity, showing the close proximity of these groups.
He describes them as syncretic Jewish pagan groups that does not worship idols,
reveres lamps and fires, worships the almighty Pontocrator, and they keep the Sabbath
and adhere to dietary restrictions. But they do not circumcise and says that this cult formed
from the native Cappadocian cult of Zeus Sebasius, a Dionysian cult, and integrated
with the cult of Yahweh Saboeth during a time when many Jews were moving to that region.
What early Christian assemblies had in common with the devotees of Theos Hipsistos and the
Dionysian Baptist groups in Corinth was that they all seemed to run in a similar fashion,
similar to modern-day unions. These members would often be given titles,
similar to titles found among Dionysiac groups, such as Torchbearer, Thesmophorii,
Templebearer, Neophorii, and Christbearer, Christophorii. Oftentimes, inscriptions found
bearing at these ancient sites would be the names of members of these cultic associations.
Stone masons, silversmiths, goldsmiths, leather tanners, boat builders, fishermen,
tax collectors, etc. Depending on the location, these cultic associations looked a lot like
modern trade unions, who got together on Sundays for mass, shared communal meals together,
held Eucharistic rituals, and buried their dead and shared catacombs.
They had systems of healthcare, they had egalitarian social networks, and rotated jobs
in a democratic way, similar to the ancient Athenian Democratic associations.
Women, plebeians, freed slaves, people of lowly rank in the Roman Empire, were treated equally
with patrician and equestrian rank members. These progressive egalitarian aspects
of the cult was not only apparent in Dionysian associations in times past,
but Christians also had a biblical reason for this. Jesus has quoted saying,
Many who are first will be last, and many who are last will be first. And again, I tell you,
it is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than for someone who is rich
to enter the kingdom of God. Jesus has also said to have given a parable about workers in the field,
not working the same hours, but getting the same pay, which he says in Matthew 20,
for the kingdom of heaven is like a landowner who went out early in the morning to hire workers for
his vineyard. He agreed to pay them a denarius for the day and sent them into his vineyard.
About nine o'clock, he went out and saw the others standing in the marketplace,
doing nothing. He told them, You also go and work in my vineyard, and I will pay you whatever is
right. So they went. He went out again at noon, and about three in the afternoon and did the same
thing. About five in the afternoon, he went out and found still others standing around. He asked them,
Why have you been standing here all day, doing nothing? Because no one has hired us, they said.
He said to them, You also go and work in my vineyard. When evening came, the owner of the vineyard
said to his foreman, Call the workers and pay them their wages, beginning with the last hired,
and the going on to the first. The workers who were hired at about five in the afternoon came
and each received a denarius. So when those who came were hired first, they have expected to be
received more. But each of them also received a denarius when they received that they began
to grumble against the landowner. Those who were hired last worked only one hour. They said,
And you have made them equal to us who have borne the burden of the work and the heat of the day.
But he answered one of them, I am not being unfair to you friend. Didn't you agree to work
for a denarius? Take your pay and go. I want to give the one who was hired last the same as I gave
you. So the last will be first and the first will be last. Not only that, but the author of Acts
relates that the new initiates would be required to sell their homes and all their private property
and give all their money to the feet of the apostles as Acts two states, they devoted themselves
to the apostles teaching and to fellowship, to the breaking of bread and to prayer. Everyone was
filled with all at the many wonders and signs performed by the apostles. All the believers
were together and had everything in common. They sold property and possessions to give to anyone
who had need. Every day they continued to meet together in the temple courts. They broke bread
in their homes and ate together with glad and sincere hearts, praising God and enjoying the
favor of all people. And the Lord added to their number daily, those who are being saved, Acts two.
This egalitarian approach is what we find in these early Christian groups. One of the earliest
Christians on record mentioned in Kelsus is the Carpocrations. The group was started by a man
named Carpocrates who lived in the first century in Alexandria within the Church of Mark. He was a
student of Menander who was in turn a student of none other than Simon Magus who was baptized by
Philip and given the Holy Spirit by Peter according to Acts. This Menander according to Irenaeus
was rumored to have performed miracles with his baptism in which his disciples did not grow old
in appearance and that he gave them eternal youth. Other first century Christian leaders who were
initiated by Simon Magus were Cerdo, Basilides and Ceternius who started churches in Antioch,
Syria and Rome. Carpocrates along with his wife Marcellina started their own Christian church
in Cephalonia, Greece called the Agape. He ran his assembly according to Acts that we just read
where everyone was required to sell their property and take a position among the assembly. Everyone
lived equally in this group. Food and water was evenly distributed among them and they dropped out
of Roman society to live reclusively, devoted to worshiping God, singing hymns, baptisms,
Eucharists and reading the sayings of Jesus. These Carpocration Christians are among the
earliest in the sources to show anything close to a Trinitarian theology. However,
this Trinity was slightly different, God, the Logos and Zoe. At first this might sound heretical
and strange but if you read the Gospel of John in Greek it states that the Logos and Zoe were
with God in the beginning. Zoe is translated into English as life and since the English authors
translate Logos into word with a capital W it can appear that life or Zoe is not important.
They translate this noun without a capital letter making word look like it stands out and life not
even looking important. However, the oldest Greek fragments of John do not have any
distinctions between capital letters and lowercase letters unless it's the start of a new passage.
So translating Zoe and Logos both as nouns is a valid way to translate the text.
The correct translation of the Gospel of John is as follows.
They were not alone in this Trinitarian doctrine
of the Logos and Zoe. Other Christian sects such as the Valentinians, Sathians, Nascines,
as well as the Simonians and others had this doctrine. I will talk more about these groups
later in the video. Marcellina, the wife of Carpocrates, was so influential in her time
that she was invited to Rome during the papacy of Anacetus in the 150s. This shows that the so-called
Gnostics were still a big part of the church late into the second century. She attracted
large numbers of followers and founded a sect known as the Marcellians mentioned by Celsus.
During her time, many women held high positions in the church just as Mary and Martha held high
positions during Jesus' ministry. Marcellina and her followers believed in Antonomianism,
also known as libertinism, the idea that obedience to laws and regulations is unnecessary
in order to attain salvation, something that Jesus also preached. But this is considered
heretical later, even though it lines up with the Pauline teachings in Galatians 4,
the allegory on Christian freedom about not being bound to the law.
Tell me, you who want to be under the law, are you not aware of what the law says? For it is
written that Abraham had two sons, one by the slave woman and the other by the free woman.
His son, by the slave woman, was born according to the flesh, but his son, by the free woman,
was born as a result of a divine promise. These things are to be taken figuratively.
The woman represents two covenants, one covenant from Mount Sinai and bears children who are to
be slaves. This is Hagar. Now Hagar stands for Mount Sinai in Arabia and corresponds to the
present city of Jerusalem because she is in slavery with her children. But the Jerusalem
that is above is free and she is our mother. Marcellina taught that Jesus was only a man,
but saw him as a model to be emulated, albeit one which a believer was capable of surpassing.
Marcellina's community appears to have sought to literally implement the foundational
carpocration teaching of social egalitarianism. The Marcellians in particular are reported to
have branded their disciples on the insides of their right earlobes with a tattoo and venerated
images of Jesus as well as the Greek philosophers such as Pythagoras, Plato and Aristotle.
Marcellina taught that Mary Magdalene and Mary of Bethany were female followers of Jesus
who are mentioned in the gospels and who were believed to know the mysteries of the kingdom of
God that the other disciples did not know. In the formative years of Christianity,
women held significant positions within various sects serving as prophetesses, educators,
healers, evangelists and leaders of congregations. Figures such as Mary Magdalene and Mary of Bethany
were notable female disciples of Jesus, referenced in the biblical narratives,
reputed to have understood the teachings of Jesus, the secrets of God's realm.
Women like Mary and her sister Martha set the example for the individuals such as Marcellina
and other women who took on preaching roles. The apostle Paul cites a doctrine in Galatians 3
likely recited during baptismal rites asserting the equality of Christ in all regardless of
ethnic background, social status or gender. There is neither Jew nor Greek, there's neither
bond nor free, there's neither male nor female, for ye are all one in Christ Jesus. Galatians 3 28.
By the end of the first century, figures like Marcyon of Synope were known to ordain women
as church elders on par with men. In the 100s, the Valentinians acknowledged the parity between
women and men. The Montanist movement identified two female prophets, Maximilla and Prisca,
as pivotal to their foundation. However, such spiritual leaders, including Marcellina, faced
heavy criticism from mainstream theologians who castigated them with accusations of insanity,
immorality and demonic influence. Tertullian, an early Christian author, voiced his objection
to the active participation of women in religious matters.
Condemning their assertiveness and readiness to teach, debate, perform exorcisms, heal,
and possibly even administer baptisms. He particularly targeted a North African woman,
referring to her derisively as that viper. What I find ironic is that both Jesus and Paul
kept women in high standing in their ministries, like Paul traveling the Roman Empire with Thutus
and writing to Priscus and Achilla, Rufus' mother as well, yet these heretics are condemned by the
later church for putting women in high places. This is also why many scholars, including myself,
don't think Timothy is an authentic Pauline letter, with its call to keep women away from
teaching and for them to cover their heads in church seems completely antithetical to the
early libertine Christians in anti-law egalitarian message of Christianity.
First Timothy seems way too concerned with bishop laws and regulations to be considered an early
Christian letter from the time of Paul. In fact, Marcian, an early bishop who I will speak at great
length about in this video, held in his possession the oldest known New Testament Bible, including
Luke X and the Pauline epistles, but not First Timothy or Second Timothy or Titus,
which I think proves that those texts are not authentic. The text is only used among the
proto-Orthodox types, like Irenaeus, who also taught that only bishops can have authority
and that the bishops are the representatives of God on earth. First Timothy just happens to contain
a message that looks a lot like anti-nostic propaganda. Oh Timothy, guard what was committed
to your trust, avoiding the profane and idle babblings and contradictions of what is falsely
called gnosis. By professing it, some have strayed concerning the faith. First Timothy.
If this text truly was authentic and from Paul, Marcellina and the Carpocrations would never
have made it past the first century in the church, let alone would Marcellina be invited to Rome
by Anacetus in the 150s. These Carpocrations also were the first Christians to make images of Jesus
and Mary to venerate and worship. Among their doctrines was the process of apotheosis or deification
through attaining gnosis. This was considered the highest form of salvation that a baptized
Christian can attain. They believed that Jesus was one who attained the highest level of gnosis
and was begotten by God through his apotheosis. They also believed that Pythagoras and Plato
also attained gnosis and were also not only deified, but the Carpocrations also made statues of
Plato and Pythagoras and venerated them along the statue of Jesus. The idea of being begotten by God
would be completely foreign among Jews, but to the Greco-Roman world, this was nothing new.
Caesar Augustus, Alexander the Great, Seleucus Nicanor, Demetrius Polyocritus,
just to name a few are people who were considered to attain apotheosis while being alive.
When Demetrius Polyocritus entered the city of Athens, they had images of him in the city
next to Demetrius and Dionysus so that he can be worshiped as a God. The same can be said
about Caesar Augustus and Alexander the Great.
All of these Carpocrations who attained apotheosis was the son of Carpocrates and Marcellina
who were married and their child was named Epiphanes. Epiphanes died when he was just 17 years
old, but he was deified on the island of Cephalonia around 120 AD. In his short life, he wrote a
masterpiece called On Justice. Here are some passages from this text to give you an idea of
their doctrines. The righteousness of God is a kind of sharing along with equality. There is
equality in the heaven which is stretched out in all directions and contains the entire earth in
its circle. The night reveals all the stars equally, the light of the sun which is the cause of the
daytime and the father of light. God pours out from above upon the earth an equal measure to all have
power to see for all see alike since here is no distinction between rich and poor. People and
governor, stupid and clever, female and male, free men and slaves, even the irrational animals
are not accorded any different treatment, but in just the same way God pours out from above the
sunlight equally upon all the animals. He establishes his justice to both good and bad by seeing that
none is able to get more than his share and deprive his neighbor so that he has twice the light
his neighbor has. The sun causes food to grow for all living beings alike. The universal justice
is given to all equally. In this respect there is no difference between the species of oxen and
particular oxen, between the species of pigs and particular pigs, between the species of sheep
and particular sheep and so with all the rest. In them universality manifests injustice. Furthermore
all plants after their kind are sown equally in the earth. Common nourishment grows for all beasts
which feed on the earth's produce. To all it is alike. It is regulated by no law but rather is
harmoniously available to all through the gift of him who gave it and commanded it to grow.
The apparent themes of this text show heavy influences from both Jesus and Plato. The stressing
on equality coming from God is apparent throughout the text and can be seen as the force behind the
culture of early Christianity and communal life. He goes on to say as the laws could not punish men
who were ignorant of them they taught man to transgress for a particularity of the laws
cut up and destroyed the universal equality of the divine law. The idea that the law is given
for the lawless and the righteous have no need for the law is arguably the most central doctrine of
Christianity itself. Jesus and Paul taught that the law was only given for the lawless. Luke 11
states after Jesus had spoken a Pharisee invited him to dine at his home. He entered and reclined
at the table to eat. The Pharisee was amazed to see that he did not observe the prescribed washing
before meal. Jesus said to him oh you Pharisees although you cleanse the outside of the cup and
dish inside you are filled with plunder and evil. Luke 11 37 what goes into someone's mouth does not
defile them but what comes out of their mouth that is what defiles them. Now we know that whatever the
law says it says to those who are under the law so that every mouth may be silenced and the whole
world held accountable to God therefore no one will be declared righteous in God's sight by the
works of the law rather through the law we become conscious of our sin. Paul. In him you were also
circumcised with his circumcision not performed by human hands. Your whole self ruled by the flesh
was put off when you were circumcised by Christ. You who have heard that it was said
an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth but I tell you do not resist an evil person if anyone
slaps you on the right cheek turn to them the other cheek also give to the one who asks you
and do not turn away from the one who wants to borrow from you. You have heard that it was said
love your neighbor and hate your enemy but I tell you love your enemies and pray for those
who persecute you that you may be children of your father in heaven he causes his son to rise on the
evil and the good and sends rain on the righteous and the unrighteous Jesus. And there you have it
Jesus like carpocrates like epiphanies like Marcellina using the sun as an example
of God's equality of righteousness for all under him. The carpocration ideas are biblically
accurate and are aligned with Jesus and Paul. The core doctrine of Jesus was that authority
can only come from God and rejected the scribes Pharisees and Sadducees who obsessed over the law
and the scriptures which are external rather than focusing on being righteous within.
I also think it should be noted that Jesus in the same passage says that you may be children of your
father in heaven implying that anyone can be be gotten by God something that the carpocratians
taught epiphanies was not the first christian to attain this level of salvation and became deified
besides Jesus of course his father carpocrates was said to have attained perfection through gnosis
carpocrates teacher Menander also declared to be a divine messiah and had the power of God
in his quoted saying the primary power continues unknown to all but that he himself is the person
who has been sent forth from the presence of the invisible beings as a savior for the deliverance
of men also Menander's teacher Simon Magus was a Samaritan and was also deified by his followers
Simon Magus was deified in Rome along with his wife Helena and they were depicted in images in
the guise of Jupiter and Minerva the opponents of Simon used this as a way to condemn them for
heresy however Simon told his followers if anyone on seeing the images of either Simon or Helen
shall call them by the names Jupiter or Minerva he is cast out as showing ignorance of the mysteries
a statue of an old atruscan god Simo Senkis that was still erected in Rome on Tiber island at that
time was apparently also used to represent Simon some accounts say that he was so popular in Rome
that it was Emperor Claudius himself that erected this statue this statue was designed
with the archetype of Apollo and had the club of Hercules possibly denoting that Simon was the son
of god it is also said that Simon was identified with Heracles Melchart and was called Shemesh
or son while Helen was identified with Selena Astarte and called Luna according to Clement
this idea of initiates having nicknames or titles of gods is something practiced throughout
many Greco-Roman assemblies we see this with Mark Antony and Cleopatra being Dionysus Osiris and
Aphrodite Isis I would even go as far as say that the gospel writers themselves linked Jesus
to certain divinities by writing stories of him doing similar miracles and wonders as the heroes
and gods before him such as Jesus casting a legion into swine like Cersei does in Homer's Odyssey
also casting a legion into swine or Jesus being called the true vine a title that Dionysus also
has and the light of the world a title that Apollo also has Simon Magus was said to have met Helen
in Samaria and that Helen was originally one of the disciples of John the Baptist who considered
her as his favorite and most beloved of the 30 disciples Simon Magus was opposed by a Christian
named Ossetius who was considered the standing one and leader of the sect of Baptists but was
eventually taken over by the Holy Spirit and kneeled down to worship Simon Magus ordering his
entire rank of 30 disciples to follow Simon instead after this Simon took Helen as his wife
and left Samaria and traveled to Rome and was met by Peter during the reign of Emperor Claudius
Simon Magus wrote a lengthy text called The Great Declaration which was central to the
Valentinians and Scythians both early Christian sects who I will discuss later in this text are
found heavy influences of Zoroastrianism, Platonism, Peripatetic, Stoic, and Epicurean concepts
with a wide mixture of Hellenic and Hebraic ideas on top of Pythagorean numerology the text begins
with Moses' proclamation that God is a consuming fire from Deuteronomy 4 Simon willed together
this concept with Heraclitus philosophy which posited fire as the fundamental element of all
existence Simon referred to this foundational element as an endless power, dunmus apparentos and
proposed that it resides within human beings who are created of flesh and blood however Simon argued
that fire was not as simple as commonly perceived in a matter akin to the Stoics and Zoroastrians
he imagined it as an entity with intelligence from this eternal entity emanated the created
universe that we are familiar with structured with six foundational elements or roots each
having an internal and external aspect paired as such mind and intention noose and epinoa equating
to heaven and earth voice and name phoene anoma the sun and moon reasoning and reflection logismas
and enthumasis to air and water these six roots were also termed as six powers interwoven with
all was the supreme endless power which is ascribed as that which is was and will be this power
held the potential within every human being could unfold to its vast extent the insignificant
could become significant and the minute could expand endlessly Simon taught that this minute
essence within the body not only to the spiritual attuned was akin to the kingdom of heaven and
comparable to the mustard seeds potential for growth it is within our capacity to cultivate this
essence and it is this very potential that the phrase that we may not be condemned with the world
first Corinthians 11 alludes to for if one does not actualize this divine likeness within oneself
it perishes with the physical demise Simon warned echoing the biblical sentiment that the
unproductive tree is destined to be honed down and cast into the flames the entire text presents
an unusual amalgamation between Greek and Jewish traditions employing allegorical interpretations
for both classical Greek epics and the writings of Moses it includes a symbolic reading of the
Garden of Eden story and equates the Pentateuch to the five human senses there's also an esoteric
discourse on the oneness of all existence that mirrors the verses sung by a Brahmin in their
hymns its prose sheds light on the narrative involving Helen articulating a vision of singular
power that is split between the celestial and the terrestrial self-curating and self-sustaining
and is simultaneously its own kin and consort embodying a singular indivisible origin of all
things the simonians put a big emphasis on baptism and levels of initiation they claim that baptism
following by attaining the Holy Spirit were separate citing John that we were to be baptized
with the Holy Ghost and with fire the simonians maintain that the normal water baptism was a
mere form and that they had the real baptism for as soon as their neophytes went down into the water
a fire appeared on it this is also mentioned in the book of Acts that after Simon Magus and the
Samaritan village was baptized by Philip Peter came to the city to lay hands on the initiates
so that they can have also the Holy Spirit this gives credibility to the Gnostic idea that there
are levels of salvation beyond just having faith in being a Christian Simon Magus would later be
heavily opposed by the orthodoxy that began to emerge in the latter half of the second century
writers like Irenaeus, Hippolytus, Justin Martyr claiming that Simon met his demise in a horrible
way however these stories about his demise in the church are conflicting and don't make a lot of
sense for instance a text known as Acts of Peter which was written around the third century depicts
Peter as the main protagonist leading the church of Rome and being opposed by Simon Magus who is
depicted as the main antagonist this text seems to be more reflective of a deeper layer that consists
of the early Christian schism between the Gnostics and orthodoxy of that time period in this text
taking place during the reign of Nero Simon Magus and Simon Peter have a magic duel in which Simon
Magus shows he is capable of levitation and flies high into the sky Peter responds with his own cast
of magic as he strikes down Simon Magus down from the sky and instantly kills him in another source
by Hippolytus Simon Magus was in Rome with both Paul and Peter and was very successful in swaying
people over by his magical arts Peter and Paul both reject him and then he leaves Rome and goes
back to Samaria where he tried to prove to the Samaritans that he is the Christ by having himself
buried with the promise that he would be raised up on the third day according to Hippolytus
Simon Magus never gets raised up and thus meets his end a third century text called pseudo
Clementines similar to the Acts of Peter gives a legend about Clement of Rome and Peter as the
main protagonist against Simon Magus in this text is during the reign of Claudius not Nero
but Simon Magus was opposed by Peter after losing many magical duels he jumps off a tall building
to his own death not by the magic of Peter this time this story can't even be true because
Clement would have been less than 10 years old during the reign of Claudius all three of these
legends about Simon Magus's demise in Rome conflict with one another and Justin Marder relates that
Simon Magus was rejected by Peter and Paul in Samaria before he ever went to Rome at all if that
was the case why would Simon Magus be welcomed into Rome by the church let alone Peter in the
first place the book of Acts gives no such account of Simon's demise the book of Acts leaves
Simon Magus on a positive note as one of the earliest disciples to be baptized by Philip
and attain the Holy Spirit by Peter himself that would be such a high degree of salvation
that rendering him a heretic would make the Holy Spirit and baptism useless some Christians today
might point to Simon's sorcery and his attempt to buy the Holy Spirit with money as a clear sign
that he was always a heretic and should be rejected as such however this happens before
Peter prays for him and lays hands on him to give him the Holy Spirit and if this makes
Simon Magus evil then what should we say about Paul who not only hunted down Christians before he
was saved by the Holy Spirit but also talks about how he opposed both Peter and James to their faces
Simon Magus was saved before Paul and the author of Acts ends the narrative about Simon on a positive
note with Peter Simon and Philip preaching the good news to the people of Samaria if Simon was
rejected at that time there would be no time for Simon to start his own sect of Christianity
and travel to Rome and be accepted by the church there so many of his doctrines were
central to the Valentinians and Sethians and none of that would be possible had his story ended there
also Acts was written in the early second to mid-second century and the author would have
known how evil Simon was by that time if this was the case
what I think is more likely is that a political divide between the Christians took place sometime
between 140 and 150 AD causing a schism between the followers of Marcian, Valentinus and the so-called
Gnostics with the followers of Justin Martyr, Taysin and Aranaus the latter group seems to have
won the schism but I will speak more on this later in the video but due to this schism it is likely
that Simon Magus became the main target of criticism due to his vast influences on the
members of the church like Valentinus and Marcus Magus who used Simonian doctrines due to Simon
being so early on and so many learning from him it would be strategic to cut out the branch from
the root which is Simon Magus the Simonian influence on the early Gentile church was so vast can be
easily compared to the vast influence of Paul from this line of Simon Magus we get Menander,
Cerdo, Saturnius and the Carpocrasians who have already mentioned Cerdo, Valentinus, Marcian,
Marcus Magus were all in Rome during the papacy of hygienists decades after the papacy
of Clement which shows that this schism comes much later than reported by the heresiologists
all of these early church figures show dependence on Simon's doctrines but are equally influenced
by Pauline tradition as well these are Christians who reject the Old Testament mosaic law dependence
in favor for a more spiritual approach to salvation
another student of Simon Magus was facilities this facilities became a famous Christian mystic
and teacher in Alexandra Egypt during the first half of the second century
facilities is arguably the face of Christian Gnosticism he takes Gnosis to another level
the logo of this channel which is the symbol of a Braxis comes from none other than facilities
himself he taught that the great Archon Magus Archon known as a Braxis or Yaho was the unbegotten
father and the Demiurge who had the highest emanation of light in the universe and produced
ions descended from his being resulting in multiple heavenly realms and angelic powers
with the Jewish god Yelda Boeth identified as one of these angels a Braxis had the head of a hawk
torso of a man and legs of serpents signifying the three elements air water and earth his name
in Greek Abbasax equals seven letters for seven planets and days of the week consists of three
vowels and four consonants which multiplies gives the twelve lunar months of a solar calendar the
dramatria of the name a Braxis equals 365 he designates a Braxis more distinctly as the power
above all in the first principle or RK the cause and first archetype of all things and mentions
that the bacilladines refer to 365 as the number of parts and the human body as well as the days
in the year he says that a Braxis the RK which is the monad gives birth to the mind noose which is
the duod or dyad along with Sophia the female principle of noose this dyad produces the logos
which is Christ the world as well as 365 heavens was curated in honor of a Braxis
and that Christ was sent not by the maker of the world but by a Braxis his true father theos
hipsistos who I mentioned earlier as a god worshiped by monotheistic Greeks was also a title
given to a Braxis as well as God Almighty Pantocrator Pantocrator is used once by Paul
and second Corinthians and nine times in the book of Revelation and I saw no temple therein
for the Lord God Almighty Pantocrator and the lamb are the temple of it I will be a father to you
and you will be to my sons and daughters says the Lord Almighty Pantocrator
it is quite possible that this doctrine of a brexit is rooted in deep ancient mystery rights
Eusebius the church historian under Constantine writes about a bronze age priest named Sankel
from 1200 BCE in Phoenicia cited by Philo in Biblos in the first century who says the Phoenicians
call it good Daemon in like manner the Egyptians also surname Kenev and they add that the head of
a hawk because of the hawks activity Ipice also who was called among from the chief hero font
and sacred scribe whose work was translated into Greek by Arius of Heraclipus speaks in an
allegory word for word as follows the first and most divine being is a serpent with the form of a
hawk extremely graceful which whenever he opens his eyes filled with light in his original birth
place but if he shuts his eyes darkness came on Ipice here intimates that he is also of a fiery
substance saying he shone through for to shine through is a peculiar delight from the Phoenician
Pharisees also took the first ideas of his theology concerning the god called by him Ophion
concerning the Ophianade moreover the Egyptians describe the world from the same idea engraved
the circumference of a circle of the color of the sky and fire and a hawk shaped serpent
stretched across the middle of it and the whole shape is like our theta representing the circle
as a world and signifying by the serpent which connects it to the middle of the good Daemon
Zoraster also the magian in his sacred collection of Persian records says in express words and god
has the head of a hawk he is the first incorruptible eternal uncreated without parts
most unlike all else the controller of all good and he is also the father of good laws and justice
self-taught natural and perfect and wise and the sole author of the sacred power of nature
Eusebius inserts his passage just after explaining the mystical sacrifice of the Phoenicians
in which El the god of the Hebrew Bible known to the Greeks as the Kronos sacrifices has only
be gotten son as a ransom to the avenging daemons Eusebius argues that this was a portent of Jesus
Christ being crucified as a ransom for the sins of mankind
facilities asserted that it was knowledge or noses not faith that led to salvation
this special knowledge or noses was an esoteric truth revealed to humanity by the divine figure
of Jesus Christ two facilities faith had no role in achieving salvation he regarded faith
as simply the soul's approval of concepts that don't arouse the sense due to their absence
furthermore he saw faith as an innate attribute not a deliberate choice suggesting that individuals
inherently recognize truths intellectually without the need for proof facilities also seem to link
various levels of honor with one's natural faith facilities own scriptural collection
featured a unique gospel in addition to the gospel of john which explicitly excluded the
epistle of Titus as a forgery and incorporating only selected letters from the paulian corpus
which he thought were authentic his canon also included a specific text believed to have been
authored by facilities or his immediate disciples such as the interpretations of the gospels and
the exegetica in contrast the established christian canon it omitted the synoptic gospels marc
matthew and luke deeming them incompatible with perfection of john's gospel which incorporates
christ as the logos and sophia as zoe ascending from the father who is a braxis like simon
megas paul and the carpocratians facilities influence on the church of roam as well as the
church of alexandria was massive in particular the sephians and valentineans who shared common
ideas about god and curation and also use pathography and math and platonic philosophy
to construct their christian theology a central text among the sephians and valentineans
was the apocryphon of john an early christian text revealed to the apostle john that gives the secret
account of creation the narrative opens with john immersed in sorrow and confusion following the
death of christ however christ manifests before john transforming an appearance and soothing his
distress with the cosmic vision the highest divine principle is the monad an ultimate divine entity
described as a singular sovereignty with no higher power he embodies the absolute the everlasting
the boundless the flawless the sacred and the self-sufficient his existence surpasses all
understanding and is beyond any definitive measurement or description existing in a state
of unimaginable perfection the monad brings forth a dyad a female divine aspect known as barbello
from his contemplation she is known as the initial thought and the monads reflection
while barbello is feminine she is also referred to in both maternal and paternal terms embodying
the concept of the original parent and is characterized by a blending of masculine and
feminine traits as the foremost and hierarchy of divine beings called the ions barbello's
interaction with the monad results in the emergence of additional ions as well as the
aspects of light and mind light synonymous with christ and referred to as christ the auto genies
works alongside mind or noose in a creative capacity honoring barbello and the monad by
generating more ions and forces the narrative's harmony is disturbed by an ion named sophia
of the eponoia who unilaterally embarks on a creative venture without the monad spirit or a
consort collaboration her thought gives rise to yelda boeth an imperfect and mavalent being
with the lion in head and a serpent body sophia recognizing the flawed nature of her creation
attempts to hide yelda boeth keeping him oblivious to the higher realms of the ions despite his
solitary origin and lacking the monad spirit endorsement yelda boeth possesses sufficient
power to emulate the creative acts of the superior ions spawning a legion of archons
with the similar deficiencies and crafting a lesser world for them made from darkness yet
infused with light pilfered from sophia wisdom incarnate this realm neither fully dark nor
light is a murky creation in his ignorance yelda boeth proclaims himself the exclusive
and envious deity of this domain upon realizing her mistake sophia expresses remorse the spirit
of the monad and other divine powers in ions seek to redeem sophia and her aberrant creation
in this attempt yelda boeth and his archons are startled by the monad spirit and an image of this
spirit is inadvertently imprinted on their domain surface eager to capture this essence they fashion
a human adam in its likeness sophia and entities from the higher order perceive a chance to recover
the trapped light within yelda boeth's dominion and adam they deceive yelda boeth into instilling
his spiritual essence into adam and limiting him and simultaneously depleting yelda boeth
of the light derived from sophia yelda boeth and the archons observing adam's radiant intellect
and superiority attempt to restrain him they place him in eden a deceitful paradise filled with
sin and death hiding the true knowledge that can liberate the light within christ confides to john
that he prompted adam to taste the fruit of knowledge and reveals eve as a helper dispatched by the
higher order to free the light imprisoned in adam and yelda boeth's creation as the story unfolds
yelda boeth strives to recapture the essence of light encouraging procreation to craft new bodies
filled with the false spirit which deludes humanity keeping them in darkness and servitude john and
the savior engage in a dialogue where christ elaborates on who will attain salvation those
touched by the true spirit will be saved while those ensnared by the false spirit will face
condemnation christ as an emissary for the higher realm reveals his mission to awaken and save those
trapped in yelda boeth's shadow marking the enlightened the special seal that protects them
from death the savior concludes with a warning profiting from these divine secrets would incur
a curse the sethians who produced this work were a group of christians that have their roots and
pre-christian times before jesus among groups known as the canines and ophites who existed in syria
palestine and armenia before coming to alexandra egypt they were said to have became christians
after meeting peter and mark their predecessors the canites were a group of jewish nostics who
believed that the old testament god was evil and that eve was the savior and that cane was the hero
because he tilled the land was a vegetarian and did not believe in blood sacrifice of animals
to appease a demonic god along with the ophites they believe the serpent in the garden was sophia
wisdom incarnate who came to save the world with nosus they along with the sethians taught
that christ on the cross was analogous to the serpent on the cross that moses placed in the
desert to avert from harm the serpent on the rod was a serpent coiled on the tree in the garden
and christ on the cross was the fulfillment of this prophecy and as i stated before the gospel
of john was a favorite among these groups which also states just as moses lifted up the snake in
the wilderness so the son of man must be lifted up john 3 14 they also believe that judas was a hero
who was given the most important task by jesus to turn him in so he could become the sacrifice of
the world they produced the gospel of judas which explains how jesus met secretly with judas to tell
him that he was the greatest among the disciples that he would be remembered by the world who has
no nosus and that he would be called the worst and that they would remove him from the 12
the sethians employed a range of middle platonic zoroastrian metaphysics in their writings they
also had a text attributed to the grandfather of zoroaster whose name is zoestrianos that explains
the five levels of attaining salvation through five types of people which was revealed to him by the
angel of nosus the first type of person is materialistic with a dead soul mind and body
and they suffer and are consumed by demons the second type is materialistic but has an immortal
soul and they forget their eternal god and associate with daemons third type the sojourners
are far from wicked deeds if they possess an inward discovery of truth the fourth type is the one
that repents renounces dead things and desires immortal mind and soul and they can receive
another conception in every attainment the fifth and most powerful type is the saved person who
has grasped the image that changes in every situation and can become divine zoestrianos
offers up praise to god and asked the angel of nosus for wisdom by the dispersion of the
saved type of person who is mixed with and divided from them the angel of nosus tells him
some souls need help to escape reincarnation and if not they will keep descending into generation
and become speechless due to the clutches of the body to avoid this fate there are specific powers
appointed for salvation these powers are perfect living concepts that will save whoever receives
them passing through the world in every ion additionally the text describes the self-generated
ions as eternal lights that possess a variety of beauty trees plants human beings alive
with every species immortal souls every shape and species of intellect gods of truth angels
dwelling in great glory with an indissoluble body and in generate offspring with unchangeable
perception these ions are perfect and individually complete and at each ion there is a living earth
a living water luminous air an unconsuming fire zoestrianos explains that being baptized
five times by the powers of the self-born feignies caused him to become divine zoestrianos urges the
holy seed of seth to awaken their divine aspect seek salvation by choosing the light over darkness
the sethians produced dozens of lengthy texts that were found among the nog hamadi codices
in the sands of egypt that were thought to have been lost for 15 centuries it would take me an
entire video to go through them all the sethians would go on to influence the nasines and valentinians
and marcionites one of the main criticisms laid against them by iran eus and hippolytus
is that they were docitus which means they believed that christ did not come in the flesh
but was just a phantom this is however not true one of the central sethian texts called melchizedek
contains an antidocetic message that advocate for a christology wherein the incarnation of jesus
was a flesh and blood human who was born ate drank and suffered and died the text also shows
close proximity to the author of hebrus highlighting that these christian heretics
were more biblically based than what they're made out to be this is not to say that docicists did
not exist and many of them certainly were on the gnostic side but this is not true for the leading
theologians described in this video even origen was thought to hold some quasi docetic views
on christ divinity these christian heretics were well connected in their time and well respected
by the masses marcion of synope who was deemed a heretic in the late second century by iran eus
was so influential and popular that he needs to be addressed before we discuss the valentinians
and nasines marcion claimed to have been taught by two teachers thudas who traveled with paul
and serdo who was a student of simon magus it is thought that he met both of them through his
father philologus who is one of the 70 disciples who actually met jesus while was alive yes you
heard that right marcion's father philologus is counted among the 70 disciples from luke who
physically met jesus and he was also the first bishop of synope consecrated by st andrew himself
marcion's father being one of the oldest saints to pass away makes marcion the most
interesting heretic of all marcion was also a close companion of valentinas and was welcomed to
roam under the papacy of hygienists in 138 his teacher serdo taught that the god of the old testament
was not the father of jesus but a different god and that the father of jesus was the good god of
justice who freed humanity from the bondage of the law marcion seems to have adopted a similar
view to this marcion posited that the deity depicted in the hebrew scriptures who he labeled
the demiurge and identified as the architect of the physical cosmos was a provincial god of the
jewish people characterized by a strict authoritarian legal system that inflicted suffering and death
as a punishment for human transgressions on the other hand the deity that jesus manifested
was a holy separate entity a universal divinity defined by kindness and love offering humanity
forgiveness and grace marcion is known to have composed a work known as the antithesis which
has been lost to time where he drew distinctions between the old testament's demiurge and the
new testament's heavenly father he showed how the book of kings depicts elisha being called baldi
by some young children and then the god sends she bears to devour the children for revenge
he argued that this is not the god of goodness and justice but a vengeful deity who admits time
and time again that he is a jealous god thirsty for blood sacrifice and burnt offerings god is
not in need of anything and can never be jealous according to marcion the gospel of john chapter
eight contains passages that can be seen as marcionite for example you judge by human standards
i pass judgment on no one but if i do judge my decisions are true because i am not alone
i stand with the father who sent me in your law it is written that the testimony of two witnesses
is true i am the one who testifies for myself my other witness is the father who sent me you are
from below i am from above you are of this world i am not of this world you are doing the works of
your own father i know that you are abraham's descendants yet you are looking for a way to
kill me because you have no room for my word i am telling you what i have seen in the father's
presence and you are doing what you have heard from your father distinction there between his
father and their father if god were your father you would love me for i have come here from god
i have not come on my own god sent me why is my language not clear to you because you are unable
to hear what i say you belong to your father the devil and you want to carry out your father's
desires he was a murderer from the beginning not holding to the truth for there is no truth in him
when he lies he speaks his native language for he is a liar and the father of lies
jesus you belong to your father the devil can be interpreted is that the Pharisees and Sadducees
are of a different father than the one that jesus was sent by which is in line with marcy and i
valentinean thinking marcy on is credited with being the first to establish a collection of
christian scriptures his compilation included just 11 texts partitioned in two categories the
evangelical icon a condensed form of the gospel according to luke and the apostle icon a suite of
10 letters from paul the apostle each slightly abbreviated in comparison to the versions that
would later become canon prominent early christians like iranias tortolian and epiphanius mentioned
that marcy on deliberately modified luke's gospel and paul's letters to align with his own
doctrinal stance a view that christian scholars used to support however a number of modern scholars
suggest that marcy on's renditions might actually predate the versions that ultimately became part
of the biblical canon and that it was the other church fathers that altered these letters marcy on
having the original correct version marcy on thrived in asia minor the location of the seven
churches of asia mentioned in revelation pergamon one of the churches mentioned was known in the
first century to have a large jewish community that strongly opposed christianity it is likely
that satan's throne and the synagogue of satan is a referencing to the jews living in pergamon
in asia minor i know your tribulation and your poverty but you are rich and the slander of those
who say that they are jews and are not but are a synagogue of satan this throne of satan is
mentioned three times in revelation and twice regarding people claiming to be jews this aligns
with marcy on's attitude that the church is for the gentiles and jews who reject judaism revelation
ends with the marriage between the bride of christ represented by the church who accepts jesus
in condemnation for israel who lost the temple marcy on's preference for the pauline letters
is indicative of his belief that paul alone was the true conveyor of jesus message as opposed to the
twelve apostles and the early christian community based in jerusalem who marcy on believed were under
the influence of the demiurge marcy on's possession of paul's epistles shows how close and proximity
he was to paul and how connected he was remember this wasn't a time when people can just fax an
email content to have a copy of a letter so early on could only come from someone being in close
connection to that person and the fact that he had all of the authentic epistles of paul so early on
shows that marcy on was extremely connected when marcy on traveled to roam in the 130s he joined
the roman church and made a large donation of 200 000 cestresses to the congregation there
a modern equivalent to 2 million 175 000 today conflicts with the church of roam arose he was
eventually excommunicated in 144 when he was opposed by pious and anesthetists but he was
still popular in the eastern churches long past his death into the third century
the lintinous his companion in roam also a follower of thudas and paul
was up for pontiffus maximus the highest bishop in roam against pious and he lost by a small narrow
vote had he won that election he would be on the list of popes inside your catholic bible
and marcyon would have never been excommunicated and it is entirely possible that christianity as
we know it would be completely different today the bishop he lost to was the first to oppose marcyon
and considering how close he was to losing to valentinas it is entirely possible that this
created a division between them he remained in roam until the papacy of anesthetists but his
movement declined after marcyon was excommunicated trutilian writes valentinas had expected to be
a bishop because he was an able man both ingenious and eloquence being indignant however that another
obtained the dignity by reason of claim which confesorship had given him he broke with the church
of the true faith just like those restless spirits which when roused by ambition are usually inflamed
with the desire of revenge he applied himself with all his might to exterminate the truth
and finding the clue of a certain old opinion he marked out a path for himself with the subtlety
of the serpent valentinas said that thudas imparted to him the secret wisdom that paul had taught
privately to his inner circle which paul publicly referred to in connection with his visionary
encounter with the risen christ when he received the secret teaching from him such esoteric
teachings were downplayed in roam after the middle of the second century but these teachings of secret
wisdom and gnosis is something that comes up quite a bit in paul's letters now to him who is able to
establish you in accordance with my gospel the message i proclaim about jesus christ
in keeping with the revelation of the mystery hidden for long ages past we declare god's wisdom
a mystery that has been hidden and the god destined for our glory before time began
first carinthians i know a man in christ who 14 years ago was caught up in the third heaven
whether it was in the body or out of the body i do not know god knows and i know that this man
whether in the body or apart from the body i do not know but god knows was caught up to paradise
and i heard inexpressible things that no one is permitted to tell one can argue that paul himself
attained apotheosis by reaching the third heaven elaine pagels in her book the gnostic paul
shows how the heretical teachings of the so-called gnostics are just as aligned with paul's letters
as the so-called proto orthodox teachings are in fact one can even make the case that the gnostics
are even more aligned with paul especially the seven authentic pauline epistles more on this later
valentinas was a neopathagorean christian numerology and mysticism was at the core of his
teachings hippolytus went as far as to charge him with plagiarism of pathagoras's teachings
in which he says of some such nature as i who have accurately examined their systems have attempted
to state compenduously is the opinion of pathagoras and plato and from this system not from the
gospels valentinas as we have proved has collected the materials of heresy i mean his own heresy and
may therefore justly be reckoned a pathagorean and plateness not a christian valentinas therefore
and heraclion and tallimaeus and the entire school of these heretics as disciples of pathagoras
and plato following these guides have laid down as a fundamental principle of their doctrine the
arithmetic system the valentinian system like the sethion taught that the godhead was a triad god
the father logos and zoe again drawn from the gospel of john as shown earlier for the sethion
triad this triad system is arguably the origin itself of trinitarian theology which does not
get accepted as doctrine until the fourth century the valentinians already had this doctrine and
they held the conviction that the existence initiated within an entity they termed the pluroma
akin to the universe at its core was the original progenitor bithos or the primal father who epitomized
the inception of all entities after ions of solitude and introspection bithos gave rise to 30
ions celestial ideals manifested as 15 duos of counterparts among these was the ion sophia
you might be wondering where this sophia comes from and isn't biblically accurate it is biblically
accurate and it can be found in any orthodox or catholic bible in the book of wisdom of salomon
chapter seven and eighth says the following i learned both what is secret and what is manifest
for sophia the fashioner of all things a spirit that is intelligent holy unique manifold subtle
agile clear unpolluted distinct and vulnerable loving the good keen irresistible beneficial
humane steadfast sure free from anxiety all powerful overseeing all and penetrating through
all spirits that are intelligent pure and altogether subtle for sophia is more mobile
than any motion because of her pureness she pervades and penetrates all things for she
is a breath of the power of god and a pure emanation of the glory of the almighty therefore
nothing defiled gains entrance into her she is a reflection of the eternal light a spotless mirror
of the working of god and an image of his goodness although she is but one she can do all things and
while remaining in herself she renews all things in every generation she passes into holy souls
and makes them friends of god and prophets for god loves nothing so much as the person who loves
sophia the wisdom of salomon also depicts sophia as being in the beginning with creation
forming adam himself sophia's flaws her curiosity and fervor precipitated her descent
from the pluroma culminating in the emergence of earthly realm and humanity both intrinsically
imperfect the deity of the hebrew scriptures was equated by the valentineans with the demiurge
an inferior artisan responsible for crafting the physical cosmos humanity esteemed as the
pinnacle of creation in this corporal world as an amalgamation of spirit and matter redemption's
objective is to extricate the spiritual essence from its maternal entanglements it was imperative
according to valentinean thought to acknowledge the primal father as the fountainhead of divine
essence in the quest for gnosis or profound spiritual enlightenment they believe that an
individual's acquisition of this deep-seated knowledge or gnosis bore beneficial repercussions
for the cosmos at large aiding in the restoration of cosmic harmony
the valentineans posited that salvation was rooted in gnosis not mere faith
clement noted that valentineans considered orthodox christians to be naively faithful whereas
they themselves were the bearers of gnosis they viewed themselves as intrinsically redeemed by
a virtue of innate superior seed within them positioning their spiritual gnosis as distinct
from the faith from the ordinary believer as the ethereal is from the tangible valentine's system
stresses the idea of not being a scholar of the law but of being spiritually rich within
one might be reminded of jesus in the gospel of luke here
woe to you scholars of the law who have taken away the key of gnosis you yourselves did not enter
and you stopped those trying to enter the valentinean idea of putting gnosis over faith
and the spirit over the law is something that jesus himself preached in his time according to the
gospels jesus is portrayed in the gospels with an attitude that shows stoic and cynic leadings
and his parables align with middle plateness and path agrarian values these valentineans
like the orphic and path agrarians before them held to the doctrines of transmigration of the
soul which is a lot like vatic reincarnation one might easily dismiss this as heresy however
the gospel of matthew declares that john the baptist is the second coming of elisha which
could very easily be interpreted as transmigration just as jesus is the last atom if john the baptist
is not literally elisha then the prophecy is failed and the messiah never came i don't think
christians would say that right so you kind of have to say transmigration doctrine is valid under
christianity valentineus had a student named marcus magus who started his own sect known as the
marcosians although heretics now they are credited greatly for helping spread christianity into
france and europe his system was completely path agrarian his system tells of 30 ions divided into
an agduad a decad and a dotacad of the fall and recovery of sophia of the future union of the
spirits of the chosen seed with angels as their heavenly bridegrooms something that we just
looked at from the salomon wisdom text which is also canon according to both catholic and
orthodoxy what marcus added to the teaching of his predecessors was a system of isopathy
similar to that of the later path agrarians about mysteries and numbers and names marcus found in
scripture and in nature repeated examples of the occurrence of his mystical numbers four six eight
ten twelve thirty marcus magus points out that the gematria of the name jesus or isus in greek
totals eight eight eight a perfect number that shows god's divine providence as the logos
due to the greek alphabet having exactly eight monads eight decades and eight hector nods that
is that jesus consists of all numbers in the alphabet and is thus the logos eight eight eight
it is said by hypothesis that marcus magus was delivering eucharist with purple fluids in the
wine that contained a hallucinogenic drug that would cause his initiates to experience intense
visions that he would call the holy spirit he even said that marcus would have two cups ready
one for the people to check beforehand and one with a sleight of hand would swap it out with the
drugged one and at the last second people would think that the holy spirit was taking them over
and giving them visions when he really drugs them if this true or not we can never know
but marcus magus's trinity has a father a mother and a son similar to the concepts in
wisdoms of salomon sophia god messiah and the marcosians would thrive in france
all the way to the fourth century until they mostly were swallowed up by the arians and cathars
before i bring in this so-called proto orthodox fathers like clement and papias and ignatius
polycarb i want to talk about my favorite heretic of all he is called the nasin preacher
the nasin preacher who led the nasin's a group of charismatic fringian christians
who venerated the great mother they are the first group that apolitus discusses in his against
heresies these nasin's have doctrines that align closely to that which is found within the sibling
oracles and greek magical papyri a wide-ranging mixture of pagan jewish greek mystery cults
platonic philosophy and dianesean revelry they represent adam as adamus an androgynous dyad
of both male and female and equate him with the adamus from the semithracian mysteries
as well as adis from the frigian mysteries the name nasin which means people of the snake
is attributed to both the rod of asclepius and the staff of moses they believe like the ophites
and canites that christ on the cross was the fulfillment of the serpent on the rod in the
wilderness of zion and this of course is presented by the gospel of john and like planning the
youngest christians they also sing hymns to christ at dawn who they call lucifer just as christ
is called lucifer or morning star in the book of revelation i jesus have sent my angel to testify
to you about these things for the churches i am the root and the descendant of david
the bright morning star revelation 22 furthermore the gospel of the egyptians is central to them
they affirm that venus and proserpina both in love with adonis represent the natural world
of production and regeneration but when diana selena passes over to eclips then adonis becomes
adis castrated this represents the threefold nature of christ who is neither male nor female
connected by his death resurrection and apotheosis christ they say and all that have been generated
is portrayed son of man from the unportraitable logos which is the meaning of the great and
unspeakable elusinian mysteries of dianisus and demeter they say that christ is mercury the logos
of zeus waving his wand which guides souls out of hades and into heaven the nasi preacher says to
the adepts and as when in the magic caves recess bats humming fly and when one drops from ridge of
rock and each to other things clings i place a rock at the foundations of zion this rock he affirms
is adam the nasi him was an ancient orfic him to adis repurposed for jesus christ by the
nasi preacher and it goes like this whether you are a child of chronos or their happy son of zeus
or rea welcome o great one who is the sad song of christ the assyrians call you thrice desired adonis
and all egypt calls you osiris greek wisdom calls you the heavenly horn of the crescent moon the
semitrations call you veneral adamus the ammonians call you choribos and the phrygians sometimes call
you papa and at times they call you the dead one or the god or the barren one or the goat herd
or the harvested unripe ear of corn or their fruitful one who the almond tree begot the man who plays
the pipe the hymn continues in another verse i will him adis son of rea not with buzzing sound of
trumpets or idean pipers with the accord of the voices of the curates but i will mingle my song
with the palo's music of harps evo hallelujah in so much as thou art pan as thou art bacchus as
thou art the shepherd of brilliant stars but jesus said father behold a strife of ills across the
earth wanders from the breath of wrath but bitter chaos seeks to shun and knows not how to pass it
through on this account oh father send me bearing seals i shall descend through ions whole i'll
sweep all mysteries i'll unravel and forms of gods i'll show and secrets of the saintly path
style noses i'll impart
most of this sounds like a completely different religion than orthodox christianity of today
but what do the earliest christians who the orthodox and catholics venerate as saints say
the oldest text that we have outside of paul's epistles in biblical letters is the epistle of
clement the only surviving text in the first century that exists outside of the biblical canon is
clements epistle to the carithians clement lived from 35 to 99 ad and he is so important
he is considered one of the first popes consecrated by peter himself and one of the first saints
he is considered to be the first apostolic father of the church one of the three chief ones together
with polycarp and ignatius and a co-laborer of paul his epistle to the carinthians shows no signs
of any concern with the gnostic heresy he is mostly concerned with the belief in the resurrection
and spiritual principles such as humility hospitality and piety he reminds the carinthians
that christ belongs to the lowly of heart and not to anyone who would exalt themselves above the flock
for clement there are no grounds for doubting the resurrection and says that faith must be
accompanied by works he shows much more concern for unity than for division and calling out heresy
clement however tells his story that is nowhere to be found in any orthodox doctrines in verse 25
clement talks about a portent that occurs in the east in arabia where there is a bird known as a
phoenix which has a lifespan of a thousand years 500 years alive which upon death makes a nest out
of frankincense and myrrh and dies and its decaying flesh becomes a small grub for 500 years and after
reaching full growth takes up the nest containing the bones of its predecessor and carries them all
the way from arabia to heliopolis rising into the sky resurrected it flies to the altar of helios
in egypt deposits them to the priest of heliopolis and when the priests consult their records they
see that it arrived on the 500th year fulfilling the 1000 year cycle of death and resurrection of
the phoenix clement argues that this miracle was given by god as a symbol of death and resurrection
of christ he does not ever say that this is a myth or legend but describes this as a real
natural event that happens this is also found in greek mythology before christianity and it turns
out that among the naghamadi scriptures within the texts known as the on the origin of the world
once again a text central to valentineans and sephians and in this text we find the same legend
of an arabian phoenix who has a lifespan of a thousand years and travels to heliopolis this
shows that clement has a lot more in common with these so-called heretics and nostics than people
think ignatius of antheok is sketch records can't even get his birth or death when he died
within 40 years usibius claims he died in 108 but the sources suggest that he lived much later
and died around 140 most of the stories about him and his margherdom seem to be fabricated
legends of his epistles many seem to be later forgeries but some might be authentic there are some
scholars who even doubt the so-called authentic ones as well but to be charitable he seems to be
concerned with the nature of christ's divinity there is one physician who has possessed both
flesh and spirit both made and not made god existing in flesh true life and death both
marry and of god first passable and then impassable even jesus christ our lord ignatius
letters of the aphesians there are some christian scholars who claim that ignatius was an early
opponent in narcissism however the way they argue this is flawed ignatius only seems to be concerned
with dosetists and christian scholars as well as some of the heresiologists tend to lump the
dosetists in with the nostics so then they can claim that any opposition to dosetism is also
somehow an opposition to narcissism but ignatius aligns with marcion and valentinas in the sense
that they all agree that judaism and the mosaic law is not important for salvation
polycarp lived from 69 to 155 and was a disciple of john and the first bishop of smirna his
epistle to the philippians is dated to 108 during the reign of trajan most of what is contained in
his epistle regards to conduct of members of the church stand fast therefore in these things
and follow the example of the lord being firm and unchangeable in faith loving the brotherhood
and being attached to one another joined together in the truth exhibiting the meekness of the lord
in your intercourse with one another and despising no one polycarp he also stresses the importance
for women in the church both wives and widows who he says knowing that they are an altar of god
this inclusion of women in the church is something that aligns once again with the valentines and
marcionites and less with the orthodoxy of the fourth century church which became strictly
patriarchal in its structure lastly papius of heropilus who lived from 60 to 130 ad most of
what papius writes about is concerning the reliability of the gospel accounts and does
not ever say anything about a gnostic heresy he tells us that peter told mark about the sayings
of jesus mark put them into a narrative and then matthew came along and rewrote mark in the correct
order but he says that matthew wrote hebru which is clearly false even usibius criticizes the
reliability of papius and calls him dumb for taking things that are allegorical too literal
justin martyre who lived from 100 to 160 is the beginning of the schism between the
gnastics and the so-called proto orthodoxy justin martyre opposes marcion in the year 144
and thus begins the first great schism of the church however even in justin's writings
he writes things that align heavily with the carpacration and simonian thought
justin declared that socrates and heraclitus were christians his aim was to emphasize that
absolute significance of christ so that all that ever existed of virtue and truth may be
referred to him this is something that the heretics mentioned in this video and also believed in
the old philosophers and law givers had only a part of the logos while the whole appears in christ
christ marks the end of regulations of circumcision animal sacrifices the sabbath and the laws as
to food though christ the abiding law of god has been fully proclaimed in his character as the
teacher of the new doctrine and promulgator of new law lies the essential nature of his redeeming
work justin martyre admits in his own writing that he went to athens academy to be educated as a
pathagorean but was not able to learn music math and geometry he then attended a peripatetic
philosopher but was put off but the philosopher was too eager for his fee when he tried to become
a stoic he was not satisfied with their ideas about god so he adopted the platonism and the
perception of immaterial things quite overpowered me and the contemplation of ideas furnished
my mind with wings so that in a little while i suppose that i had become wise and such was my
stupidity i expected forthwith to look upon god for this is the end of plato's philosophy sometime
later justin met a syrian christian ascetic living in poverty and said that he debated him
about god and was converted due to being moved by the man's arguments
so what can we conclude from all this i ranaeus claims that the secret nosis passed down by the
few who have the holy spirit is heretical but says that only bishops can have true authority
in our thus human representatives of god on earth the faith preached to men which comes down to our
time by means of the successions of the bishops for it is a matter of necessity that every church
should agree with this church on account of its preeminent authority this view in my opinion
is completely elitist and it is an odds to the central teachings of christ who says
whoever has ears to hear let them hear for all those who exalt themselves will be humbled
and those who humble themselves will be exalted matthew 20 so the last will be first and the first
will be last mark four if anyone has ears to hear let them hear matthew 22 when he was alone
the 12 and the others around him asked him about the parables he told them the secret of the kingdom
of god has been given to you but to those on the outside everything is said in parables so that
they may be ever seen but never perceiving and ever hearing but never understanding otherwise
they might turn and be forgiven luke 14 for many are called but few are chosen all throughout the
gospels jesus is preaching about secret wisdom and rejecting authority figures the system of
bishops getting authority from other bishops is exactly the system of the Pharisees and Sadducees
that jesus rejected even paul in his epistle to the Corinthian says if i speak in the tongues of men
or of angels but do not have love i am only a resounding gong or a clinging symbol if i have
the gift of prophecy and can fathom all mysteries and gnosis and if i have a faith that can move
mountains but do not have love i am nothing if i give all i possess to the poor and give over my
body at a hardship that i may boast but do not have love i gain nothing 1 Corinthians 13 one might
think paul is talking negatively about speaking in tongues and having gnosis however if you read
this carefully he places tongues and mysteries and gnosis above faith and then he says that all three
of those levels of salvation are nothing without love gnosis faith and the holy spirit all being
nothing without love paul is relating that those three are the gifts of the holy spirit talking
about them in a positive light later in the epistle paul drives this home follow the way of love
and eagerly desire gifts of the spirit especially prophecy for anyone who speaks in a tongue does
not speak to people but to god indeed no one understands them they utter mysteries by the spirit
but the one who prophecies speaks to people further strengthening encouraging and comfort
anyone who speaks in a tongue edifies themselves but the one who prophecies edifies the church
i would like every one of you to speak in tongues but i would rather you prophecy
the one who prophecies is greater than the one who speaks in tongues
unless someone interprets so that the church may be edified now brothers and sisters if i come to
you and speak in tongues what good will i be to you unless i bring you some revelation or gnosis
or prophecy or word of instruction paul is speaking the language of the mystic gnostic
one who interprets prophecy is the one with the gnosis and the gnostics and heretics all had
this in common they all entered into ecstatic states and spoken tongues without gnosis however
how can one interpret prophecy justin martyre opposed marcian in 144 and led to the schism
between the gnostics and orthodoxy in the middle of the second century
the church would go on to be led by the likes of origen tertolian iranaius apolitus julius africanis
syral augustine and clementive alexandria and those names are usually listed as the first
generation of christians even though they're kind of like the third generation of christians
the gnostics did not go extinct however a charismatic gnostic named peter would start a
sect of christians known as the eukites and they spread throughout mesopotamia and asia minor
they would influence the bogamills and cathars who would survive in europe during the middle ages
and be heavily persecuted by the orthodox catholic church they believe that they were returning to
the true spiritual wisdom of christ and rejected bishop authority as in modern day Pharisees
they were accused by usibius of engaging into orgiastic rituals a prophet would rise up named
mani in the third century who declared himself to be an apostle of jesus christ and would be revered
from europe all the way to china and he would start a new religion known as manicheism which would
incorporate the teachings of buddha zoaraster jesus and christina all considered to be prophets
alongside mani this religion would thrive in india and china as well as arabia and persia
this religion mixes ideas from the magi the bramans and judaeo christian prophets even augustine
temporarily was a convert this religion would even influence early islam when theodosias
became the emperor in the late fourth century he issued a decree of the death for all manichean
monks living in the roman empire and declared orthodox christianity the only legitimate and
legal religion for the roman empire the fact that the christian persecution by orthodox christians
against gnastics and manicheans is rich in iran the real martyrs for jesus turned out to be the
heretics just as jesus was considered a heretic and the scribal authority class having dominance
over the aesthetic spiritual christians living in poverty just as the scribes and Pharisees in
the time of jesus is completely antithetical to the message of jesus who opposed the scribes and
Pharisees for their ever obsession with the law and searching the scriptures for authority you
search the scriptures for in them you think you have eternal life and these are they which testify
of me but you are not willing to come to me that you may have life john five
and so with all that being said i want to conclude with this do i think the gnastics
and those who are deemed heretics are right and the heresiologists or so-called orthodoxy
like iranias and hapolis are wrong not necessarily i don't think the answer to this question is so
black and white but i do think that if there's anything i demonstrated in this video is that
there is much more nuance here regarding whichever these doctrines should be considered correct or
heretical are we basing this off jesus teachings paul or what your pastor or priest told you last
sunday let me know what you guys think in the comments and you have ascertained true noses
you
