This robot hand has a lot of impressive features, pneumatic pressure-sensing fingertips, 19
bio-inspired tendons, plus a full range of finger motion. But the really impressive thing
is how it was made. The whole thing was 3D printed, in one go, by a single machine.
The hand is one of several demos made to show off a new type of printer,
one which combines various techniques to print objects with more materials,
more detail and in less time than previous technology. The team behind it call it vision-controlled
jetting, or VCJ. It's an inkjet printer, a bit like a paper printer you might have at home.
Inkjet printers spray materials in liquid form and can do so faster than those 3D printers which
extrude building materials from a nozzle. But inkjet printing can be imprecise, often layers
need an extra smoothing step where they are mechanically rolled or scraped to get rid of the
imperfections. That limits the materials you can print with to ones which won't stick to the scraper
or be smeared out of shape. So this printer uses a 3D vision system to scan each layer that goes
down and create a depth map of the object being printed. This allows for the next pass under
the inkjets to compensate for any accidental bumps or lumps, meaning no messy mechanical smoothing is
required. And that means all sorts of different materials can be used, and you can print things
like the tendons of this hand with a rigid inner core and a soft shell. Currently the new machine
can print with three different building materials at the same time with a fourth print head depositing
a wax support material that gets washed off at the end. This combination of contactless
machine vision error correction and multi-material printing allows for far more complicated designs
than have been previously possible, like for example the robot hand. Being able to print
multiple materials in one go is particularly useful for biologically inspired devices like this pump
based on a mammalian heart with one-way valves, internal sensors and pumping membranes.
Soft Robotics is another potential avenue. This robot walker can move around and grip objects.
There are still limitations. The machine can only use low viscosity material. Inks have to be runny
enough to be sprayed from the printer's inkjets. And that wax support material has to be washed
off and removed from any cavities, so designs with air pockets need to include drainage holes.
But there's also even more potential than shown so far. The current design can print with any
combination of materials that can be sprayed through its inkjets, not just the soft and rigid
plastics demonstrated here. This means that with the right resins, vision-controlled jet ink
can be used to print anything from multi-material robots to cellular scaffolds for tissue engineering.
The researchers anticipate that VCJ will open new possibilities to create complex objects
that were previously impossible to produce.
