Welcome to Deep Transformation, Self-Society Spirit.
I'm Roger Walsh and our co-host is Joan DePuis.
And with us today is a guest that I'm just delighted to be in dialogue with.
This is Daniel Schmacktenberger, one of the most incisive, integrative,
and brilliant thinkers about the great issues of our time.
Daniel is a polymath who has ranged across a wide variety of disciplines
and has a prodigious amount of information about multiple areas, topics, issues, concerns,
and intellectual disciplines, but not only a wide array of information,
but also a remarkable degree of information and integration,
pulling topics together, synthesizing them in novel ways,
and coming up with creative innovations and ideas and synthesis.
He is able to and has been giving us a wide array of insights into the great issues of our time.
On the internet, you have probably run across Daniel and the many dialogues he's had about the metacrisis,
the term that's currently used for some total of our social and global issues.
But what you haven't seen or heard of Daniel is his spiritual dimensions
and the ways in which those have touched his understanding of life and current temporary concerns.
We were really delighted given that deep transformation is about transformation,
not only of self and society, but also of spirit.
When Daniel suggested that in our discussion of the metacrisis,
we focused specifically on the spiritual dimensions,
which he said he doesn't often get a chance to talk about.
And so we are just very happy to have this opportunity.
So many people know you as someone as a brilliant intellectual who has thought deep and hard
and synthetically and novelly about these great issues.
But you also have a deep commitment to self-exploration, self-actualization, spiritual practice.
What would you like to share about that side of yourself?
First, thanks for having me here.
It's good to be with you both and all the people engaging in the podcast.
When it comes to the spiritual dimensions,
and we'll probably want to unpack what we even mean by spiritual sense,
it is a pretty un-precise term often.
But the psychological, interior, sacred, whatever dimensions of the state of our world,
I would love to be in that conversation together.
I don't have a preset set of things to talk about on it,
because as you mentioned, it's not the thing I talk about all the time,
but obviously very interesting.
I was fortunate in my growing up to get to study a lot of the people that might be called great polymaths throughout history.
So I have a heap of respect for them and I've tried to learn what I can.
I would not describe myself that way.
I think the connection is I would describe myself as being deeply interested in lots of things.
And I find that what people are interested in and what they find meaningful,
and at the heart of that what they find sacred are usually connected,
though they might not be explicitly aware.
And the things that people are interested in and enough, they often develop some capacity at.
And if someone has some sense of the wholeness of reality,
as opposed to like, when we think in different disciplines,
here's where biology starts and chemistry stops or physics or whatever.
Those are ways we take the complexity of the world and try to divide it to make subjects and make it easier to study,
but those divisions don't exist in reality in that way.
We have some sense of just the integrated wholeness of reality and we're kind of interested in it.
There's some sense that reality itself is sacred.
Then there would be nothing that isn't interesting.
Right, it's like, if you're really in love with your partner,
what aspect of their being is uninteresting to you?
Like it's a weird proposition to say, oh, I don't give a shit what she thinks about or like her talk books on fashion or whatever it is.
And it's such a superficial place to be because even if you didn't think you cared about that topic on your own,
if you really care about this being and this being cares about it,
work to understand why they care about it because there's some part of their being you're missing,
if the fascination they have, if the care, if the love doesn't translate to you.
And so if you get that, you're like, well, whatever, every aspect of them I'm interested in because part of love is the desire to know.
Because what does it mean that I love somebody if I don't really know who they are.
And if I have some love for reality, then wanting to know it more is one of the things, right, wanting to appreciate it more wanting to be in more service to it and those are all just kind of natural byproducts and so
relatively young.
I had the insight that everything was interesting.
That the things that I thought weren't interesting because at first I didn't think that but the things I thought weren't interesting was just because I didn't get them.
I don't understand why anyone else found it interesting and if I tuned in empathetically enough to them and I could see it I'm like oh there's a whole dimension of meaningfulness and beauty and parts of the nature of reality that I'm just missing.
When Gibran said, it's in, it was in meditation upon the dew drop that I discovered the mysteries of the ocean. I had the kind of poetic way to speak to the fractal nature or the as without so within
there is some understanding of the integratedness of reality, a deep insight about anything also gives you some insight about everything else.
And one of the places that I gain most insight was taking some principle and thermodynamics and applying it to gardening, or some principle and evolutionary theory and applying it to relationships or whatever, getting that like those theories were
understanding the universe, but all of them gave different insights looking at the world through thermodynamics lens versus an evolutionary cycle ends versus a complexity theory lens gave different insights on the same reality.
So if I could take those insights and apply them to lots of things and apply lots of different ones just got to see more multi dimensionally.
In physics we launched called the conciliance project and that's what the word conciliance means is the more perspectives one can take on the thing, the more depth and richness of information, they can get about it.
So, and I think, you know the the metacrisis this area of study of like, what are all the problems of the world is really like came from a childhood inquiry of
what it was worth doing. And there were so many things that were worth doing and I became became kind of clear that when you focus on one, one I just couldn't leave some of the areas out.
Right, like, it was just, I don't know how many people have this experience, some for sure.
I think about really focusing on factory farms are really focusing on the issue of how many dogs and cats are getting put this league every year or clear cutting or whatever it was.
The idea that I was not focusing on the other things just wrecked me.
I've been getting to see that there were so many groups focusing on those things and yet so many of those things collectively we're getting worse, not better and I was wondering do we just need more effort in these areas or is there something about the nature of the effort that is, that is off.
Both, but there was definitely something about, and people have heard me talk other places that way we solve problems causes other problems almost all the time because we define the problem to narrowly we create a first order solution that the technology or a law or business or whatever to solve it.
And that's connected to a complex set of things and it produces second and third order effects somewhere else so the dam to bring electricity to poor people to solve the poverty issue might extinct a bunch of species down river from the dam that just got flooded or whatever, and there's a million examples of this.
It actually became clear that the study of the issues in the world and the siloing of the issues in the world was a part of the problem itself why we weren't solving them in a way that bone talked about very well, David bone.
And so the, like what is worth caring about everything, you know, how if it's together what is worth studying is kind of everything.
The study is for itself it's pure knowledge of just the intimacy with universes intrinsically interesting, and it's also has utility, it can increase the capacity to be in service to.
Those are some initial thoughts.
You know, did you, was there a point as a young man or a teenager, you began as you were kind of chewing on all this and seeing it was that starting to emerge as a calling for you that maybe that was your path to start connecting the dots and seeing how these things mattered.
I think
most people when they're young are enculturated in a particular way about who they are and what life is about and what they should pursue.
And then some of them continue on that path some of them recognize that's their parents idea of what they're calling should be or their cultures idea is not their own and then they have kind of this path change.
I've had lots of path refinements I have had times of deep study and esoteric metaphysics and hardcore reductionist atheism you know like, like any young person who's trying to be intellectually congruent and make sense of stuff and not miss stuff and, but, but they had the same spirit to them which is funny right
which was like, and you can't even put words to it because you can say it's what is true but it's also kind of what is good what is meaningful what is beautiful and you know something like that.
But I think I was pretty fortunate in a way that some other but not lots of other people were in terms of early childhood exposure to the topic of what is my path is that that's a, I had parents that were putting that question as the forefront of my
education since I was born.
And so that's a pretty fortunate thing.
And I went to school a few times mostly to my parents were interested in me getting some socialization but I was mostly home school.
And they were interested in running a kind of educational experiment, and they weren't they were not educational philosophers and any formally trained sense they hadn't read Dewey and Montessori and Steiner they just had their own kind of intuitions about it, but some really good intuitions.
But the sense was rather than have a curriculum based thing have some sense of trust that the kids innate curiosities, if facilitated will orient them in the right direction. So it's kind of constructivist.
And so we had a homeschool that had no curriculum at all.
And there are a few places where this was significantly disadvantageous because like it wasn't till I was an adult and paying attention to spell checker that I learned how to spell.
I was fortunate. I didn't do enough of the like writing letters penmanship to actually have refined the fine motor skills enough to have legible handwriting.
I didn't get it and then let it devolve because of busyness like some doctors I just never even got decent penmanship. It was a good thing I can type.
There were whole areas of like American history and things that were actually important that I just didn't know were important I just had none of them.
There is that I got to study way more deeply than people normally would have at those times but because I was studying things I was interested in.
I double down on interest right and I think one of the things that happens for a kid is when you don't facilitate their interests because you don't know how, which so often the kids are asking questions and the parents just don't know the answers.
I give these examples a lot because they come up all the time when a kid asks why is the sky blue or why is fire hot. You have to understand many layers of physics, but then also neuroscience and then also the philosophy of mind to be able to translate the subjective
sense of hotness from sensations that happen on the skin and what is communicated between cells and in the nervous system to what is the thermodynamics of fire or the nature of the molecules in the upper atmosphere that create blueness in the visual optical
spectrum and those questions if every kid asks stuff like that, and if you know how to facilitate the interest they end up learning everything from theory of mind to philosophy of science to, you know,
psychospherex and neurobiology, but if you don't facilitate the things they're interested in, and you force them to do shit that they're not interested in, it can break their interest and then they become a little bit more focused on quick hits of
dopamine orgic interest rather than deep learning.
So I had that fortune, but the other fortune other than just kind of designing my own curriculum is because a kid will largely be interested in things based on what they're exposed to and how they're exposed.
I don't find that there are any kids who aren't interested in math who had amazing math teachers, or who weren't interested in art who had amazing art teachers or history.
So how they're exposed, what they're exposed to and so what my parents were interested in had a lot to do with what I was interested in, of course right this is one of the limits of constructivism is you know what the reality of what the kid is exposed to.
But again I feel like I lucked out in terms of their interest being things were a pretty good set of things so my, my parents were reading Buckminster Fuller and kind of design science and they were reading.
David Baum and Krishnamurti they were reading kind of Vedanta and Eastern philosophy for Choff Capra and the kind of emerging systems theory in the early 80s and.
And they also the thought that there's no reason bedtime kids bedtime stories for kids when their infants need to be Dr Seuss as opposed to synergetics by bucky Fuller because kids learning language no matter what.
And so those were like my primitive concepts and included in those were the core existential questions of what are we, what are we here for what is this all about, and then the people using kind of the most advanced frameworks of the time like systems theory and design
about how do we go about making a better world and like that, so I never really had to find my way to that. That was kind of the default setting.
I had to find and upon further inquiry of like was that a wrong default setting should I just
just make money or make art or something else like no that in that in the continuing to be roughly right direction.
I had to more competently answer how to understand the issues the world and how to be of service to them. It's a lot of content refinement.
Daniel so you had a usually broad self directed education, but there's also something else that's quite distinctive about your thinking and that is a rare degree of integration.
How did how did you develop that.
I have friends who are developmental theorists who Zach Stein I work with closely and many others.
Let's talk about how there is an increase in the type of complexity of what someone can process the way they notice changes in context for processing the same content the way they can seek and shift perspectives and then integrate them and I think there's a lot true and
I have other friends who are critics of developmental theory because they say there's a lot of societal normative assumptions based on how people are kind of ubiquitously trained that in a different society with different childhood development would go differently.
So for instance, if kids are being taught in school. This is math this is social studies this is history this is biology and they're being taught a compartmentalized universe where they're never asked how the social science is being influenced by the biology or vice versa
and the principles co apply. They're getting a non integrated fragmented world, given to them and actually behaviorally trained up on thinking that way.
They're not being given any kind of integrated framework so then we get excited when someone becomes an integrative thinker later because it was trained out of everybody.
I don't think it is actually necessary that people learn that way. I think it's not even the case in same pre industrialized education. It was just wasn't even the case in the same way.
So, because my education was self directed it also didn't have clear delineations of topics I was never doing math or social studies I was doing an inquiry about something that was interesting that might have involved some math and some, you know, quite a few things.
If you're trying to understand integrative things like how does a body self organize, how does a fetus actually develop how does that, then you're having to intrinsically be radically interdisciplinary.
What is worth doing in the world and how do we know and so I think the most interesting questions are at a high enough level abstraction that to address them well there's the taxonomy of questions beneath them is very interdisciplinary and you actually have to bridge across them.
So I do think a totally different educational paradigm could have analysis and synthesis or integration on a knowledge that happening simultaneously at each level of complexity.
And under pulling together some of the things you've said, you've spoken to your education you've spoken to the, to the natural integrative thinking that emerges from a problem solving approach to education as opposed to compartmentalized scholastic disciplinary approach.
Also underlying that this was sounds like a real desire for an appreciation of the whole and desire to optimize service.
It seems like what I'm hearing is that those two things led you to this in big picture integrative approach to understanding and responding to the great issues about time.
Yeah, I'll share a few other things that I think were significant influences that I'm grateful for and that I think are interesting for everybody to look at is.
There's a good bit of evidence that the people that many of us find to be some of the most great the greatest exemplars of human potential were the result of developmental paths that are more accessible to everyone than lots of people are think,
not just some weird genetic or situational anomaly.
And I'm not saying that genetics plays no role in aptitude of course it does. The height is a real thing that's going to affect aptitude size whatever and maybe doesn't do that for neural connectivity sure.
But
I believe his name is Eric whole who was an academic who started a very interesting blog recently published this article that then it's gotten a lot of traction and debate around where of all the super genius is gone.
And it's a resource I think is really interesting and worth people paying attention to of course their problems with what we think of as super genius because might a Aboriginal tracker who doesn't solve Rubik's cubes particularly well or do the normal IQ things be a super genius and a totally
set of dimensions on things we can't even perceive with our normal cognitive cognitive science kind of models short. But if we just take what he was meaning here was saying, it seems that the Isaac Newton's and Einstein's
you know the the people that contributed
novel insights to many fields that specialists in those fields appreciated and hadn't done that we are seeing less of that recently than we have in a long time and there's this whole fascinating debate I know I'm a bit off topic but I find this an interesting topic and maybe relevant.
Some people think the idea that there is less super genius now is just wrong and some kind of romantic romanticizing the past but there's pretty meaningful data in here in terms of how quickly do new scientific insights happen, or philosophic insights, or legal insights
happen that are paradigm shifting that would change the Cooney and paradigm or something like that.
Some people think it's that there's just so much more fucking knowledge now than there was you just can't be a polymath that you could have been a polymath before and all the stuff and nobody can now that it takes all of your life to be a specialist in a tiny discipline, and that the only thing that can make breakthroughs now is huge teams of specialist
scientists with big data processing ai's.
There's a lot of different ideas about it.
Feynman famously said that he thought he would be in the last generation of great physicists for some time based on what he saw happening in the direction of physics and the direction of education.
And there have certainly been some developments in physics sense but maybe not of the type from modern physics to him.
There's a lot of truth in this that has that we are actually developing people of that type less globally independent of the increasing complexity of the world is also a factor.
I think there's a few reasons for it but one of them that seems to be pretty compelling. And so this this article about where the super genius is gone puts forth that there is a lot of data that points to the idea that most of the great polymaths the
scientists, if you want to call it were have one thing really clearly in common, obviously not 100% correlation but a higher correlation than anything else, which was that they were the result of aristocratic tutoring, high quality aristocratic
tutoring, and that post the kind of modernity and democratic reformation of the world. There was no aristocratic tutoring of the same kind.
And did it really makes a difference. So if you think about it.
This little boy in Tibet, identify certain bowls and pain so we say he's the Dalai Lama of Marie incarnation perspective, but then how does he get educated, right.
The top llamas in Tibet, who are the top meditators and oracles and philosophers and historians and scholars and mathematicians are all privately training this boy with the investment of their entire culture.
The Dalai Lama the result of an educational paradigm that doesn't really scale because how could you have the best teachers of the whole peoples, you know for everybody.
And is the Dalai Lama's type of consciousness and capacity actually something that could be trained if people had access to that it's a fair question.
I can read meditations by Marcus Aurelius, which is also a great philosophic text. The first chapter he dedicates just to his tutors, right the intact like he writes the book of stoic philosophy as the Emperor of Rome and the first
chapter is just a dedication to his tutors because when you're being raised to be the Emperor of Rome during Rome's high period.
Mathematician in all of Rome is your math teacher and the best historian and there was another study I had seen I find this theory of education stuff so deeply fascinating.
There's a study I'd seen that was looking at world class or what were considered first rate mathematicians and they had some way of defining what a first rate mathematician was.
And of course the field's metal is something, some set of things.
But the highest statistical correlator they could find across everyone who became a first rate mathematician to see like is there some trait that where we can predict this is that when they were young, they started to study with a first rate mathematician.
And of course someone could do a correlation causation question and say was it only because they had such exceptional ability that a first rate mathematician paid attention to them and they were young.
But it does not appear that that is the direction of causation that they got exposed to a first rate mathematician was teaching at their particular school for a while the time whatever.
Because there are certain classes where a whole bunch of them came out of that class with that teacher was. And it makes sense, because your average first grade or 12th grade math teacher at a high school is not a first rate mathematician.
They're not even a second or third rate mathematician be the brilliance of mathematical thinking the love of it the insight the passion they don't have it they have something else right they studied to be an educator they studied in a country that couldn't pay you all that much to be an educator so they aren't
even a first rate educator. So, can you learn how to think like a first rate mathematician from a normal math teacher who is themselves someone who has never even had thought like that, probably not.
And the same would be true for spiritual insight or for anything else. And so when you look at Marcus Aurelius you're like, it was who he was actually just a result of a good educational model and
the modern democracies were forming the idea of feudalism was so disgusting and repugnant for many reasons and had to be shut away that anything that was a remnant of feudalism had to be put away.
But in democratizing education to raise higher education for so many people you also lowered the highest version of education to where the wealthy people whose kids are getting tutoring today is to keep up with the normal scholastics of a curriculum based thing
or personalized tutoring system, for the most part. And so I do partly why I was bringing this up is that, you know, I didn't have a whole field of tutors but I had parents that were doing that with me.
And then because I saw how valuable it was to have invested people be in that level of dialogue I started seeking out tutors before I even knew this. And this is like maybe the highest thing I can recommend to young people or for parents what to do with their kids.
I, I somehow knew because I also had stuff like think and grow rich and the kind of like tenacity of a Carnegie to be self directed as part of the thing but hopefully along a different set of goals than just monetary accumulation.
But if you have the tenacity of a Carnegie associated with other developmental goals, which would be a really good thing.
So I found a teacher that seemed like they knew something I really wanted to learn I figured out what I could possibly do to be useful to them. And that looked like cleaning their house and changing babies diapers and learning skills I didn't have they needed
electrical done I would learn electrical to is like whatever the fuck it is this is what I want to study from so I'm going to figure out how to be around them and be useful to them.
So much of my learning was not what I studied in university that was cool, or even just in books on my own, it was people who were really, really fucking brilliant spending time with me directly because I figured out how to partly I was a gift and partly I figured out how to make that happen.
And Daniel is part of what you're saying as far as the tutor also a mentor relationship, having older people that can not only just download information but somehow impact your soul and your being.
And, you know, it's all together see in a mentoring relationship.
They're not just topical artists, right there, who have, because they're teaching to a whole class have to teach a curriculum.
You're the kid is asking them questions that they're interested in the range beyond their subject matter and the, and the teacher in that relationship actually cares about them and loves them and gets invested in their education so they ended getting the benefit of something like good
that's multiplied by a lot more people a lot more capacities that error correct each other.
And so the cognitive education shouldn't be limited to one domain separate from others it should go across the domains but it shouldn't be limited to just cognitive education it should be that the, you know, and so first, the various domains of ontology need integrated, you need to be able to think
about the psychology and chemistry and physics and etc together.
Next is you have to integrate across ontology and epistemology whenever the kid is learning something it's not just here is how it works it's why does it work that way how is that discovered that this is one of the next key insights is, I never wanted to know
the formula in math I wanted to know how long people knew that that problem was interesting and didn't have the formula who discovered at first what novel thing about their life gave them that insight, what other new things they discovered afterwards because of that.
You know, like I wanted to know the epistemology.
And I find that when you get that, and you start to get what is the generator function of novel insight, what is across all the domains, the, the people who discovered the most important thing what was happening in them that made them discover the most important thing you can start to develop that
in yourself, rather than just a huge knowledge set in which case we're just shooting computers.
And so you want to integrate all the ontologies you want to integrate ontology and epistemology and then all of that in the cognitive domain you want to integrate to why do you care at all.
Why do you care to want to learn so the ethics the aesthetics the pragmatics also come in and the identity of the person in relationship to it comes in.
And is there a developmental sense of responsibility that's transmitted is like I don't want to let my dad down my mom down these people that taught me I want to live up to the quality of the love and the gifts and the knowledge that they're imparting to me.
You know,
people being motivated to care about people and animals and life forms that they will never meet and will never give them credit.
I could take some work. It takes some developmental work to get there enough that you'll make real sacrifices to care where you don't get any obvious credit for that.
It takes having some sense of your identity expanded beyond your own individual self, where you're looking through their eyes right and you're, and you get that they actually matter to reality.
But at first.
If somebody believes in a sky god that is all knowing all seeing and internal punishment, if you fuck up, and they know your thoughts so you can't just virtue signal because you can't virtue signal the God that knows it and eternal reward if you get it right.
So even if you're really just a shithead who just doesn't want to get punished and wants to get a reward you still have to be good all the way down to the level of your thoughts.
That's kind of awesome. Right, like from the point of view of just how do you get a lot of people who might still be narcissists in a low degree of truly ethical development to do the right thing that kind of like sky god judicial system is kind of awesome.
And another.
Now it's also terrible because then of course everybody's terrified of burning in hell forever and has to think that someone else who's not getting it right is and they have to terrify their kids of burning in hell.
But in the same way, the idea that many, many traditions had that when I die I'm going to be with the ancestors, and I'm going to like and there's some glory of my of the great teachers.
And will, and they're still watching me right and, and when I go to be with my forefathers with the teachers in eternity and afterlife do I actually deserve to be with them.
There's something in noble that that can do right there's something powerfully ennobling that that old tradition can do.
Of course we also find out that our great teachers are people that have their failings and weaknesses and we have to wrestle with that and we're going to have our own feelings and weaknesses and we might get intellectually congruent enough to have some doubts on the metaphysics of that thing.
But there is, there is definitely something even if you don't go to the metaphysics the afterlife version there is something about
feeling that you received something that you don't get to take credit for that you're fortunate someone else was born into a situation that if you were born into you'd be doing less well, and that you were fortunate to get to have these experiences, and that you owe something to them and to the future
world because of that fortune.
I think that's really important.
Anyway, I've got to bring this up preparing for this I went to your websites and I came across a blog article you've written things that I learned from my dad.
I was deeply moved by this. I halfway through.
When we got to the part how to treat women, I think I started weeping and immediately.
I like your father but I like you because this is what you remembered from your father and it was so incredibly powerful and basic.
Such a need for young men to be initiated into some sort of positive manhood.
And what your father laid out I got a lot from my father but obviously was not as articulate as your dad that he lived a lot of these principles you were talking about.
And can I read one of them.
The highest value for men is serving women, nature and children, future generations, the highest value for men.
You should shout it from the rooftops. That's incredibly profound.
Say things all the time like you're either serving your family or the family of mankind or your off path. Those are the only two things you can be doing that are not off path.
And the family of mankind was the term use but inclusive of life, not just human life.
I mean, I wrote that because my dad's health was very delicate at the time and it wasn't clear if he was going to be around much longer or not. And so often, people write a eulogy of all the things that they appreciated from their parent after they're dead and they don't get to experience it
directly and I thought that that would be a loss.
And so I wanted to write it for that reason.
I also want to write it.
That particular one is definitely not a full expression of what I learned from my dad it was called things I learned about being a man from my dad.
And so it was, it was definitely oriented to the principles that have to do with transfer of masculinity, as opposed to just would be equally true for all people some of them are of course that.
And part of the reason that I wrote it at that time was, I think I had had in conversations arise in the week or two before of men, young men so boy into man phase, who had just clearly never been fathered in important
ways, and we're causing pain to women they were in relationships with two people around them were being or leaders and, and it was just,
I was like they're so many people that didn't have so many men that are in their masculine role not having the fortune of having had a good role model of teaching in that way.
I wonder if some tiny little bit of vicarious element of it can come through by writing about it. So that's why I wrote that one in that way.
I think it came through for me brother. Thank you for that.
And he said is like, on your time off. What you do is you get in your pickup truck. This was before cell phones and all, and you drive around and find people are having trouble with their cars getting started, you fix their cars and send them on their way and said,
that's a good time that's the way to spend your day off. And it's all orientation noble, disinterested service, and it's just anyway.
It's funny because yeah this was before cell phones and so when someone broke down on the side of the road pulling over to pick them up was an important thing. And, you know, my, I think part of teaching someone about how the world works in general,
and also part of the ideas and I understand this is
a normative like by gender normative thinking on the thing that is I was given to me.
Was that for a boy growing into a man knowing how to solve problems and fix things was a particularly important thing so anytime there was construction to do.
And it always involved me and it even where involving me and it took a lot more time than doing it without me, because he was not just trying to fix the thing he was also trying to raise a child, who would someday not just be an adult but would
themselves be a parent and a teacher and how to do that thing properly and whenever there was something to fix on the car it took 10 times longer to show me how to do it, and you know then, then not.
And so, but then it was also while we're fixing the car.
There were so many things like if a job is worth doing it's worth doing well, and well begun as half done and see the job do the job stay out of the misery, these kind of idioms and the, if the job is worth doing it's worth doing well meant
just know half assing the thing like we, and so like I'll give you an example that was so beautiful.
The first time we're building a building from the ground up, we laid the studs, and then we drilled to the studs to run the wire for the outlets, and it was very important to my dad that the way the wiring was in the wall before the drywall went on was
beautiful.
That the holes were at the same height that the Romex was not twisted, and that it was beautiful and no one would ever fucking see it we're about to cover it and drywall, and you're like, Why, and he's like you know,
it's an incredible teaching that's, and there's something where it's like the, if you can do it any of the ways do it the way that is the most integrist the most awful the most beautiful.
And you will feel better about it and you'll feel better about who you are and then your unconscious default and the moments where it matters and other things will be to do the thing in the highest way you possibly can as opposed to asking the corner cutting questions and
the if it's worth doing it's worth doing well, see the job do the job stay out of the misery meant.
Don't even ask if it's possible and definitely don't bitch about it, just if it needs done, figure out how to do it and do it with the best attitude because you have choice over your attitude and why would you do it any other way.
And well begun as half done meant, have you cleaned the space first have you set out the tools do you know what the workflow is going to be because the problems that are going to come up when you've opened everything up it's up on the jacks and you realize you're missing
something you have to go to the store like that's where the danger happened that's where someone gets hurt that's where the inefficiency happens that's so think through the process pretty well first.
I anticipate where the mistakes and the problems and the challenges are going to happen there's so much of my work in the meta crisis that is anticipate where the unanticipated externalities going to happen.
And then internalize those future externalities into the choice making process better and yeah.
You can see now how you are basically self taught and coached and mentored into into the ideals which would lead you into a life of service into a way of thinking, which would bring you into a big picture approach, and into a planning mode that would allow you to
participate second third order of complications and to think through those to you were honed for the work you're doing.
Now wait, there's something that I was starting to say it's important please remember your thought because I don't want you to forget it but I don't want to forget this.
You had mentioned john the that a fun time was to load up the tools and go looking for people who are broken down and fix up their car because triple I wouldn't say come all the time, especially if it was snowing outside they could actually be in danger.
Obviously that meant, you know, there.
I had to know some how to fix a car type skills. So, I was mentioning that my dad would take a lot more time to do the thing then pay someone else to do it and to do it with me then do it on his own because he was wanting me to learn.
Learning these other deeper psychological spiritual integrity lessons along with it like well begun as half done and if the jobs were doing this worth doing well, but then also learning the mechanical engineering of why was the screw threaded this way rather than the
other way and why was the sting built this way and then the history of internal combustion engines and when the transmission came out and the, you know, like, and then the physics of how the explosion happens inside of the piston and so there's a very integrated set of knowledge that
was happening.
And that takes just a lot of investment right takes a lot of care and a lot of investment.
And, but then, when we would do that it was like Sunday, Father son let's have fun.
He wasn't into sports so we didn't throw ball.
That's my, my hand I coordination at the level of ball throwing didn't develop all that much, but we would load the load the truck up with tools and go look for people broken down fix it up.
The interesting thing was it didn't feel like some dreadful sacrifice of service that we had to do the way that a lot of people feel when they're doing some church activity as kids they don't like it felt like the most fun thing we could possibly do like it was just
really really enjoyable because one I'm getting this high quality time with my dad right he's not trying to get me to go do the thing on my own.
Who we're getting to be learning in the process and then helping people where there's this immediate, you know, expression of these people being delighted and surprised and so there was absolutely.
It wasn't just like an ethic of service it was like a, like a way to condition that as that the what I want for myself personally and who I want to be for the world there wasn't even a distinction.
Beautiful.
Yeah.
Another thing your dad said and I'll stop parking on your dad I could go on and on this but he said, and this is so simple but so profound he said, forgive, just as a given, you got to forgive, and the second part is help them do better.
So you just don't forgive okay I'm okay I'm clear, you know I didn't bother anymore because I forgive him but the other part is help them do better. I just think that's one of my now as a kid and there's a period where my parents were in the team community and built this beautiful
community called Lakeview estates out in Fairfield and we're working on on kind of enlightened theme park and development business.
And there was someone that was an extremely close friend of the family and kind of employee and partner who had for whatever reasons.
So we decided that he was going to come into our house and steal a bunch of the artwork.
And because he, you know had the key to the house and all like that.
And, you know, but the trail like that oftentimes very easy to be like want to be vindictive or at least totally cut ties.
And I remember my dad intercepting him, not letting him do that and then taking him out and having this conversation like dude what the fuck, like, what happened inside your head is this who you want to be and, and there was still to like help him do better.
And one of the ones that really stood out to me.
You know, I, there's something where I feel torn about this first, just as a caveat I must say.
The reason I didn't write one about my mom at the time was because I don't think there is as gruesome a deficit of mothering in the world as there is fathering currently.
And so I didn't have as many women sharing with me just like kind of abject failures of fundamental things as I had guys so I was a little bit more motivated for that reason also her health is better.
And mother is also everybody's important in in my life and childhood and who I became and was the one that got me into activism and had me going door to door with and had all the protests with Peter and Greenpeace and all those things as a kid and got me studying
art and introduced me to Dolly and Picasso and Gibran and Blake and, you know, brought me to all the world religions churches and
coming back to my dad here.
My dad had a strong patriarchal line that taught him some of these things his dad was first generation green beret and so that you know that way, but he also had a really fucked up childhood with a humongous amount of trauma.
His dad commit suicide his sister commit suicide is many of his family members were in and out of incarceration and mental institutions and
the violence of the childhood he was in he's covered in physical scars from weapons, you know, like you had a rough go of it.
And so, some of what he got he got directly but a lot of it was his way to not kill himself was to say maybe he's not crazy the entire world is crazy because the whole world he was exposed to seem completely crazy to him.
And he'd rethink everything from scratch. And so when you do that you come up with a lot of good and interesting things and also are going to make a lot of mistakes and they're painful parts in the process and I didn't emphasize those in that letter because
it wasn't the purpose of the letter, the article, but you know my path benefited from all the extreme gifts, and it had some like quite, quite interesting hardships as a result of the complexity of who he was from transcending his life.
All those other things is what got me in the therapy young and which I'm also very grateful for because then I ended up getting a huge amount of, you know, basically parenting from the therapeutic traditions.
The reason I say that is so that people don't think oh well.
I can't do well because I had trauma because I didn't have some of these gifts. I, everybody's life has some gifts and has some fucked up stuff and the difficult stuff the healing of it is what catalyzes their gifts.
And I just want to say that.
And some of the gifts that he had were really fairly rare and unusual.
I'm very grateful for that some of the issues he had were somewhat unusual, but when it comes to one of the things on the forgive, he definitely had the gift of being physically heroic.
And there are military men who are trained in that a lot of people are not in this age physically heroic and previous ages that was much more common.
Here in and Senitas, and I was like, when T
where, which is usually not a violent area. My dad was in the
parking lot on thoroughfare here El Camino Real gunshots rang out handful of gunshots from a blind store.
And everybody who was in the parking lot ran the other way or dropped my dad ran straight at the blind store.
He figured the shooter was still live and in there turned out the shooter after killing the other person killed himself. So by the time my dad got in there, the shooter was dead.
It was a husband who was going in there to suicide homicide his wife.
And the, but he shot himself.
He stabbed her and when he thought he had finished killing her than he shot himself. When my dad got there she was bleeding out but not dead.
And so he started to put compression and turn the kits and whatever on, you know, all the areas where the ambulance and police came.
But then he went to the hospital to be with her and then followed up with her afterwards.
And in addition to like, she would have bled out if he was not there saving her life was him wanting to make sure that she could forgive her husband for that.
Because of knowing how fucked up he was and that he's no longer, you know, in pain himself or a risk to anybody else. But that was like, it was just default mode and I mean, almost too fast that it can be a bypass, but in that moment it was both.
And, you know, just a very interesting thing about him is like thinking the shooter was still alive he thought, I can keep my body moving long enough if I take shots that I can take him out and more civilians won't get killed which means he was willing to risk his life for people he'd
never met. Didn't even couldn't even see to know what color they were a race or whatever. This is very noble, very beautiful. And then the moment the harm of the dying was out of the way the harm of her holding on to that grudge and resentment was the next one is focused on
what a gift to be exposed to and live with someone like that. And, and not only an education but a transmission of moral values and really is and to take up a theme a question I began with a little while ago.
As you've described this it's getting more and more clear how your life has been self developed and honed and gifted by multiple people to bring you to your life's work which has been the metacrisis and how we as a species as a species and a civilization can continue because clearly
we're in danger right now and presumably will be forever after because the technology is probably only going to get more developed and greater capacities etc. So you've been, you've been, you've had these ideals of service transmitted to you've had
attitudes of, of handling them skillfully looking for complications thinking ahead etc. You've also had the multi disciplinary education. So, how does the
how does the to these depths, the spiritual depths that and self inquiry you've gone through not only in spiritual out even in psychotherapy and philosophic inquiry out of these, how do these depths inform you about our contemporary crises and what do you see lacking that these, these depths, when these depths are depreciated what do we miss.
Thank you.
And recently, who does conservation work, and she's a brilliant conservationist who has kept huge important areas of high biodiversity intact, and has done so at a significant devotion including expense of her own personal life and other areas.
We were talking and she had just been in conversation with some of the world's wealthiest people. And she asked me, when someone asks, why should we protect nature, how to answer it.
Because that was obviously their question. And I said,
Well, there's a lot of answers that we can give that from a, from the utility perspective of helping them get why they should care we look at what they currently care about and we show a rationalized argument between why the harm that would come to nature would harm
what we would care about, maybe draw those connections. But before getting there, the fact that someone has to ask that question in earnest speaks to something broken in them.
At a minimum something pathologically underdeveloped.
And if they had had a life where they grew up in any real contact with their own embodiment, their own kind of biology and experience of being an embodied being and in any real contact with nature and other sentient beings.
That question just wouldn't even arise.
It would be, it would be obvious and the question would simply be how do we do better job with it.
And I saw one of the, in the brief look one of the questions you sometimes explore with guests of like,
the ones that orient their relationship to the sacred. And I think at the, at the heart of it is not even a question.
Right, it's a something more like a perception.
I think if someone is perceiving somewhat clearly than the sacredness of life is prima facie just is.
And I don't remember the exact quote but it was a Joseph Campbell quote that was something to the effect of that we think what we want is to know what the meaning of life is when what we're actually seeking is the experience of being fully alive.
And I don't think that is the whole because someone can experience being fully alive and fairly self centered ways just doing, you know, extreme sports and whatever.
But it is also true that in the moments where someone is experiencing feeling fully alive they're not an existential angst about what is the meaning of life.
And I think that oftentimes the actual intrinsic sacredness and meaningful of meaningfulness of life that happens through a deep enough bandwidth of connection and sensing.
The longing for that. It's filtered to the mind as a desire to understand what is the purpose of all of this what is the meaning with a whole bunch of bad assumptions about like what thing is it building to that seems like a terminal value that then I can't.
Then that will be a satisfying answer where if we say well the purpose is love then I say well what is the purpose of that or the purpose is learning well what is the purpose of it.
So we can the first the concept of purpose and the concept of meaningfulness are not identical.
But the reality of them and the concept of them are not the same either.
And so, how to develop a deeper connection to the till a deeper connection to life and deeper ability to perceive the innate uniqueness of everything and the interconnectedness of everything at the same time at the interconnectedness of it all but not.
It's not a homogenous oneness where because if it's a homogenous oneness doesn't matter how many of these ones die doesn't matter if the species goes the oneness is the oneness.
If it is just uniqueness but not interconnectedness well then in the service of this one I can damage these ones.
It's every part unique and every part radically interconnected.
In this case, it is all an expression of the whole so I, whatever I care about I also have to care about all that it's connected, and also each part is irreplaceable and that's totally precious.
Right. And it's not that is the thought is that is the perception from there.
From that base state of perception. I think the right other questions and analytics more naturally arise.
So the, to the extent we can open ourselves to the totality of experience to to life, the world, and to ourselves.
And to that extent, in some ways.
In one sense one could say the questions fall away because the questions are conceptual and we're now speaking to an experiential openness and directness that give birth to understandings or intuitions which can flower into concepts.
I'm obviously, I'm obviously into concepts, right. I'm obviously into work.
Good company.
I wrote a blog piece a while ago called the dance of the Dow and the 10,000 things. And maybe that one can be linked and I'm specifically talking about that because, you know, there's this concept and Taoism.
Every day in the practice of knowledge something is added every day in the practice of the Dow something is dropped. And, but I think they are both meaningful.
And I think that not only there's a way in which learning more about the 10,000 things the field of conceptuality and interfere with one's connection to the Dow, there's a way that it can also enhance it.
You don't know how they can dance together if you don't know how it can enhance it, then you have to just avoid intellect mind past future.
Mostly the things that are uniquely sapient uniquely adult sapient and say, look at the lilies of the field look at the little children you're like yes the things that don't have the prefrontal cortex is yes the prefrontal adult brain can cause problem but it also has unique evolutionary purposes we just have to
And two things there Daniel one, one is the intention. What's the intention of using the intellect is it to get lost in the abstractions or is in the service of the solution.
And the other is the skill and capacity to integrate into a kind of vision logic.
I think those are both part of it. I had a friend that I think you know Samantha Sweetwater.
She hasn't been on this podcast she'd be great to be on. She just left me a message this morning with a thought. She was saying the way she phrased it was that sapience is in service of sentience.
If it is to be rightly guided.
Oh, I thought that was a nice way of phrasing it.
I am in terms of the Greek through the good and the beautiful triad. I remember writing to an artist friend of mine on her birthday once.
You and the good only matter because the beautiful is.
Or no I think I said truth and goodness only matter to beauty is that the beauty was actually the fundamental thing if reality did not have intrinsic beauty I wouldn't actually care to be good do it or to know it or whatever there's something that is intrinsic that is deeper than the why.
Daniel.
Yeah, I have a follow up question to all this. And I know they threw it at Carl Young so I'm gonna throw it at you.
Do you believe in God.
I remember many, many years ago and I wouldn't phrase it this way, any what more and there's maybe 15 years ago I wrote a poem called the atheist who writes love poems to God.
And it was saying, do I believe in God, not in any God that is believable, meaning that I don't remember where it went but the idea that what the word belief means is.
The idea that a proposition about reality actually maps to reality.
And so belief is a thing that can happen inside of propositional logic.
And propositions have to be formed in semiotics right in in semantics and syntax.
Do I believe that there is some sentences that I can say that define what God is where I would say, yes, that is a description that I think is both true and comprehensive and you know adequate and no I don't I think that's why the first verse of the
I think that's why the first verse of the Tao Te Ching is the Tao that is speakable is not the eternal now so if you believe in the Tao you missed the whole fucking thing.
If you, you can have a outside of semiotics outside of propositional experience outside of propositional knowledge experience of a kind of wordless knowing in a connection to wholeness.
If you don't then try to reduce that to propositions about the world.
So I think there's a lot of people that will have real experiences that are numinous and transcendent, and then try to make a belief based on that. And I think that's usually misguided.
If I wanted to speak to beliefs. Do I think that consciousness is an emergent property of brains, probably not.
Do I think that there are things that don't have brains, including other types of biology and whatever that might have some quality or there's something that it is like to be them.
Probably yes, but I'm holding all this. I say probably even though I think there's some pretty strong arguments.
Because I think too much certainty about any of these things is really problematic.
I think that it might not just be biology, but that anything that self organizes has some type of interiority or selfness in some kind of pan psychic type way.
Do I think that
even though each cell in our brain or body is its own self organizing thing they come together to make something that is synergistically more than the sum of them taken separately.
Yes, do I think that might be true for say universe as a whole, or very large things within universe, like galaxies or whatever. Yeah, I think that's interesting.
So do I think that
there are types of sentience and types of intelligence
that are more deep and vast by far than our imagination can think about.
Do I think that there is the possibility to in some meaningful ways connect there and have results come from that connection. Yes.
Do I think that there is an inherent sacredness and all that is physically and metaphysically.
Yes.
I wouldn't reduce all that to saying I believe in God.
I'd rather think of it as something
more respectful
than the reduction to a proposition. I get that. Yeah.
But I was actually just talking with a very close friend the other day about
an aspect of learning theory there are certain things
that when I learn them, I have to work to implement them as effectively as I can, because I can't not.
And there are many people who don't have that.
They forget that like they learn things and they forget and they're like, oh yeah, that was a bummer. I forgot. Let me get back on path.
There's some different depth of the care about the thing that is of course the result of all the exposure and whatever.
And I'm like, yeah, there is something where it is like, actually, like the difference is actually believing there's a God, right?
And that was the term that I used to just kind of make it simple in which if one actually believes there's a God, then they can go,
they can work to perfect themselves, go to happily die in a holy war, whatever it is, because there is some superordinent thing that is so fucking important that everything else falls in line to that.
So there is something for me and belief in karma can do that, right? There is something that is like believing in a God.
That is the coordinating basis of everything for me.
But it isn't believing in a God and I can't do better with words.
No, that. Yes.
I think that's a very sacred holy answer. I think you handled it really well and thank you for even, even doing that means a lot.
Beautiful that certain that some of the some of the intimations in your response were about to the unknowable mystery of reality, bottomless, fathomless, inconceivable.
And so the transconceptual nature of that mystery and actually of life that the idea of the Tao that can be named is not the eternal Tao.
And even more than that, we can't any statement we make is is that it can be valuable, but it's never fully adequate to the reality of anything.
And to the extent that you think that you even unconsciously even fuzzily think of it as adequate. Now it's actually harming you.
Yes.
Because now it deadens your perceptions now it creates less.
You don't see the reality you see the frame of the reality that you expect to see it in and you stop seeing where that model is inadequate which means you stop learning because you're now filtering reality through that model because it's convenient.
So in that thing the dance of the down the 10,000 things. There's one part where I say, do atoms exist. I'm like kind of kind of because
and I'm, and I didn't play with it from the point of view of is there physicality at all or is that all just an epiphenomen of consciousness or is this a simulation.
I wasn't even playing with it in that direction I was just saying, do atoms exist well.
It works pretty well. We can actually do atomic level engineering and chemistry pretty well right this is it's about as good a science as we've got there's a lot of good empirical things regarding atoms.
So if you define an atom, the formal definitions will, we can do it in terms of the Schrodinger equation or information theory or particle physics or whatever, but we'll say okay you got nucleons and you have electrons and you have orbitals and whatever.
You can say where in the periodic table row and column it is and deny honor.
But does that atom exist without the strong force.
Exist without electromagnetism does it exist without the Higgs field does it exist without the gauge bosons that mediate the connections the glue on the Higgs boson it doesn't exist without any of those things, and yet none of them are included in the definition when we say Adam we take them all for granted.
So, if I removed those that are not part of the definition do atoms exist.
So, if I want to define an atom adequately that it actually exists can I do that. Nope.
And so I have to take for granted a trans finite amount of reality to define this thing in a way that is useful, but is it real.
You've walked your way into the British shunyata and into the wire British wire and philosophy of the concealed and the revealed that any perspective unveils or conceals the universe and simultaneously conceals another one.
This is absolutely fascinating we could go anywhere with this but I want to, I want to ask you.
On this, this perspective, these multiple perspectives you're bringing to bear on your own your understanding of, of everything.
What you see as some of the deeper unrecognized usually unacknowledged causes of the meta crisis and I'll just give a little context and I think one of the beautiful things about the way of the way you appreciate the
crisis is you're very aware of the traps of reductionism, or what I would call the single focus fallacy, which there are three, a single, single issue fallacy, the we're facing global warming that's it, a single cause fallacy
is all due to capitalism and the single solution fallacy. So I love the way you're thinking transcends those limitations and and recognize the traps of reductionism so in asking you what you see as some of the deeper causes I certainly acknowledge that you don't
these aren't it, but they are important elements and they're ones that don't often get don't as often get spoken to.
Yeah.
Okay, so the question is I understood this are,
are there drivers or causes of the issues we face in the world, and of the thing that I sometimes call the meta crisis that we haven't defined here but define enough other places of someone is not already familiar they can check it out.
That are not the ones that we usually talk about that are somehow deeper, and I'm going to translate that to, are there things in the inner landscape of people's experience and psyche.
Specifically, which is when we were saying are there spiritual dimensions or interior dimensions.
And I want to make the distinction is because I don't know that the term deeper makes sense.
Just for quick point of reference, I would not say that I am a physicalist or an idealist in the classic philosophical sense of physicalist meaning that physics comes first matter and force fields and third person stuff and that
physics emerges from that somewhere.
Nor am I an idealist in that consciousness comes first and all of the physics is an emergent property of consciousness structures of mind or something.
I would say that the, the subjective stuff and the objective stuff. Have you want to think of that all the words have problems we can talk about first person third person can talk about
the quality of the physics, but that they are equally fundamental and co informing co arising facets of an integrated reality, and the relationship between them is part of that fundamentality.
So, I wouldn't say consciousness is deeper than physics to the nature of reality.
I think that's a weird kind of dualism.
I think information theory affecting physics has already started to get a lot of people, at least in this realm.
If you say, okay, well consciousness stuff is deeper than physics stuff, like, but what is physics stuff? Well, it's like atoms.
Atoms are subatomic particles and subatomic particles or some weird Heisenberg and Schrodinger thing, which seems a lot like some type of pattern of information.
It doesn't sound like physics anymore. Right. And it doesn't necessarily sound as different. It's not like just some dead inert matter doesn't sound as different from the consciousness stuff, especially as you start to do a similar dive on what the
consciousness stuff is because you say well is that information processing on some information processing substrate. What does that mean. So, in the same way that I wouldn't say consciousness is deeper than physics or the other way around.
I wouldn't say that the psychological drivers of the metacrisis are deeper than the technological or the economic ones.
I would say that they are co informing co influencing and that to really address it, there are necessary things that have to happen across each of those areas, and that sufficiency only happens across all of them.
And I won't belabor the point because we've written and talked about it. We wrote a paper in the conciliants project called why technology is not values neutral.
And it's worth people looking at.
Beautiful paper.
And it shows just a brief overview of the work of Marvin Harris and
and Marshall McLuhan and so many people in theory of technology of how technologies change the nature of mind and psychology individually and collectively the nature of culture in ways that are really subtle and not not obvious.
So I, you know, there's always this question of
is the, what technologies the world develops and what social systems it develops are those the result of the consciousness and values of the people, or the consciousness and the values of the people who are born as babies being conditioned by the world that they're in and the dominant systems and what
can be successful and if the worldview and the technology creates don't win a war just gets wiped out.
And so I'm framing it this way because I think the deeper thing is actually really problematic. It's, you mentioned Roger the reductionism.
The other type of reductionism is to say there's only one thing the other type is say there's a handful of things but my favorite thing is the most important one.
And so being able to understand the co arising and non reduced process is actually really important.
And if I can introduce if I can introduce a concept here Daniel I find I have a neologism which is omni determinism, everything determines everything. And I think that's what you're speaking to.
Yeah.
Yeah, I might more usually talk about omni influence that everything is influenced everything but not in a way that is absolutely deterministic because
there are things that are outside of hard determinism still the influence the net result of what happens. Also, when we say omni we mean in the direction of all inclusive but we can never actually know we're being all inclusive.
So, in fact, we can know for sure that we aren't being that's actually important.
We can know for sure that I'm not being all inclusive because computationally it would be impossible.
So, the framing of the metacrisis, we often talk about involves like a frame I'll use often is from Marvin Harris's work that to understand a civilization, you can think of it in terms of these three areas it's
structure, its social structures and its superstructure infrastructures all the technologies the whole tech stack and all the modes of material development and like that.
The social structures are all the collective agreement fields everything from the system of governance the law, the institutions that mediate it, and the superstructure is the religion, the cultural ideology the values the definition of the good life.
But the superstructure is kind of the spirituality psychology interiority of the people at the collective level.
And so of course we're always talking about that. So, I think seeing the top level frame of how all those fit together is worthwhile so if people haven't.
I'll just reference talked about a bunch of places. Good friend Nate Higgins who's very good thinker on specifically the relationship between the environment and energy and financial system.
I just did a five part series on his podcast and then the fourth part we do kind of an overview of the metacrisis that covers this. The third part unintentionally, just because it came up, we ended up covering how does one like emotionally
psychologically and spiritually deal with the reality of the metacrisis given that there's so much to care about beyond what we feel like we have a sense of agency about those are ones that people might find interesting.
And the fifth one we talk about frameworks to think through solutions, competently. So with all that prefacing.
I'll say some things here that I think, maybe have not said as much other places that are relevant to what in the interiority of human psyches and experiences and cultures is a key, or key drivers of the problems of the world.
How many things there are that we probably have no fucking clue about that are really critical, just, just to give a tiny couple examples.
We know that there are a lot of species that have gone extinct that somewhere between 100 and 1000 times the background rate of extinction that since the Industrial Revolution as a result of human activity.
The species are not just in the world externally.
There is a similar biodiversity loss and species extinction in the microbiome of the human being.
And the microbiome of the human being produces some of the necessary chemicals for us to work our genome doesn't actually produce all the things some aspects of the macrophage binding protein and various things like that are not adequately coated in the genome without microbiome and
And so, extinction of some of those is pretty humongous like deleting chunks of our genome right. And but if you start having ubiquitous antibiotics and pouring in the water and pesticide exposure and all those types of things.
So how much, when you realize that somewhere between 50 and 80% of the major mono and amine neurotransmitters like dopamine serotonin and gob are produced by the microbiome in the gut.
And that how you think how you perceive what you believe how happy you are what you, your orientation towards violence will largely be or result of that.
And what seems like a spiritual crisis in the world is the result of effects of the unintended consequences of our kind of war on bacteria and biology and actually destroying part of the, the code set that makes us able to be us.
I think that people often would think of when they're thinking of the spiritual drivers of the thing, but that is really important. And if we, you know, if we look at the Anthropocene that the human built world there's so many aspects of the human built world that built a world we did not genetically
evolve in we're not genetically adapted to that makes us misfit to our own being and important ways.
200,000 or 300,000 years of homo sapien history and the couple million years of hominin history.
We always lived in tribes.
There was no such thing as not living in tribes until extremely recently, but we've been this way long enough that it seems like the nuclear family household was the most obvious thing and the only thing that could ever be and we can't really imagine anything else and yet it evolutionarily we evolved to fit in
tribes. So we, so all the shit about attachment theory.
We evolved to have attachment to like 150 people, like strong attachments, and where our life literally dependent upon them, we couldn't get our, the person who knows medicine is the only person who knows medicine I'm not going to interact with other people so
we just have a market opportunity to go to anybody so I actually need people and they need me so I can't be a should head to them so I, and everybody's going to see what everybody does so I can't lie and get away with it so like everything about psychology attachment theory.
Bonding the ideas of codependence and independence were totally different and we evolved in that setting. Right. So then we get birth control.
And we're like oh sex doesn't have to equal reproduction anymore even though forever sex always equals possibility of reproduction we evolved to have our neurochemistry mean sex equals the possibility of reproduction.
We put in birth control our neurochemistry and our evolutionary didn't just change overnight.
But now we're acting in a way where it's like as if it doesn't mean that thing but a huge part of our whole be responding that way so reason I bring this up is if we were to try to comprehensively list.
All of the things that are conditioning our psyches in ways that they did not evolve to process and that are not optimal for us at an individual thriving a community thriving or global thriving would be who this podcast would take days.
And so that is a big topic is what I do.
Yes.
If, and I say that because if I say anything else first, I'm concerned that people over norm on that as the thing.
And then again lose observation to all the things and complexity of all things.
If I wanted to speak to something as the thing, it would be the nature of mind that makes us lose orientation to the complexity and the interconnectivity of all the things.
So if I if I was going to try to say what is the psychological generator function of the Metacrisis.
One, I think as good a way of saying it as I could is kind of not exactly the way David Bohm said it but it's derived from the way I heard him.
When he said the problems of the world result from a fragmented consciousness that sees the world as a bunch of parts and doesn't see the wholeness of things.
So we talked about wholeness and the implicate order and can we perceive through that wholeness and obviously we know he was a student of Einstein's and Einstein said, it's an optical illusion of consciousness to believe there are separate things there is one thing that we call
universe, and we have to work to develop our perception.
Some of the problems in the world happen by be by intentionally advantaging some things at the expense of other things we know it'll cause an expense so we're advancing our country at the expense of another country in a war, which means our people or land or riches or
whatever at the expense of that for those people.
Those things were able to separate the world enough to be able to think about this trade off of good for these ones.
And even though we know it's bad for these ones okay because we separate the interconnectedness of everything.
Whether it's a country doing that to another country or in a relationship a person doing that to another person thinking they can possibly win a fight and someone they love actually not get their needs met and that equals a good life for them somehow which is fucking ridiculous idea.
It's not the level of corporations or anything else.
Or humans with regard to the biosphere other animals we can advantage ourselves at their expense which obviously a factory farm and oh, and industrial fishing fleet are not good for those animals are not good for the oceans are not good for the people working on them in poor conditions.
The other problems in the world is where we didn't know that we're causing the harm right so we can either benefit something at the expense of something else knowingly, or we can benefit something at the harm of something else not knowing.
So conflict theory and mistake theory.
And the real politic assessment of humans is the problems in the world are because we are dumb and nasty.
Right, like roughly if you want to make it very simple.
The dumb is we cause problems that we didn't anticipate and nasty is because problems that we knew.
We're going to happen. And so the how do we enlighten humans has to deal with both the dumb and nasty part. Right if we're talking if we're talking about how do we have the, not just how do you affect human behavior through different rewards and deterrence and social norms and systems of law but through
people wanting something different having an internal motivational basis would be, can we expand the circle of care where they care about more.
That's the nasty part, and can we expand the complexity of process where they can actually calculate their effects so that they are not unintentionally harming things more. That's the deal with the dumb part.
Similarly there if I'm thinking about CO2 and how critical it is to get it down, but I'm not thinking about ocean dead zones from nitrogen effluent using nitrogen fertilizer to grow more crops that will sequester more CO2.
It's like a good idea even though it's going to cause this other externalized issue. So again, my ability to separate the ocean dead zones and the CO2 is what's causing that unintentional heart, right or thinking about that Facebook will be some cool system for people being able to tag photos and get to know
each other not thinking about what its effect on democracy will be with a particular ad model.
I would say, all the problems look like people, all the problems come from harm happening somewhere as a result of human choice but the choice was motivated by someone trying to benefit something.
It's all based on trade offs. So it's either I'm trying to benefit myself now at my own future expense, addiction and compulsiveness.
I am.
So the parts conflict can even be within oneself. Right.
I'm trying to benefit my people, my religion, my nation, my political party, whatever at the expense of the other ones. So great, you get your political party elected, you polarize the population worse next time they'll swing back harder, and you're actually not progressing anything other than increasing polarization.
I am seeking to benefit things and the harm I'm causing elsewhere I just didn't know I didn't know that leachate was going to cause that pollution over there or whatever the other thing is.
So when bone was talking about the fragmented consciousness it was both at the level of aware of the connectedness and care about the connectedness.
And so really the key is seeing reality as parts.
Right seeing reality as a bunch of separated parts leads to being able to care about a part and seek to advantage it in a way that causes harm to other things and then cascade effects of other agents doing this similar stuff and so you get cumulative harm effects and you get escalating arms races.
And not being able to perceive stuff as a bunch of separated parts but perceiving everything in relationship to everything else perceiving everything as a part of an interconnected whole where your ability to benefit that thing had to mean both caring about everything that it's connected to and being able to think through everything that's connected to come up with a strategy that is omnibeneficial or as close to that as possible.
You know where you made a mistake in it you're also ongoingly aware and working to correct it. I would say from the psychological perspective that's probably as deep a thing as we can say.
And even stuff like but aren't people wouldn't wouldn't we say impulsiveness and selfishness and addiction or even deeper than that because obviously all of the environmental harm is happening because people are buying too much to get a keep up with the Joneses or get a hit of something
that's the same thing right like it's, it is still the thing of that their future self is being harmed for their momentary self because their momentary self feels fucked up enough that it thinks that it means to get ahead to.
The parts conflict, the, the theory of trade off starts within the self between the parts of itself the Jungian parts reconciliation then would be the basis for being able to also have a wholeness of self in relationship with the wholeness of world.
Yeah, let me let me couple of things.
Given that, and I've listened to you talk about these issues a lot and sometimes I'm just left with just, oh, we are so fucked, you know, but given that the solution of survivability as our current species on this, our home seems to be ignorance and just.
Being bad actors.
Do you feel that enough of us that there's any kind of hope or sense that enough of us can evolve to a level where we can recognize this fractured and recognize what we're doing enough to keep us together as a human family connected to the whole, so that we can survive this this choke point in our evolutionary history.
I don't think there is much of a human family to keep together that is anything other than an abstract idea at this point that some people hold and many people don't even hold.
That's an ideal.
Mm hmm.
I think.
The question of is it possible to make it through the issues that the world is facing today, the whole plurality of issues that are unprecedented historically because we haven't had centuries of industrial tech bringing us up to planetary boundaries and we
haven't had exponential tech or even small number of actors could fuck everything up so quickly and we didn't have a world that had so much fragility.
Given that we could have massive catastrophic harm from so many different vectors from synthetic bio created pandemics and from AI autonomous drone weapons and from climate change and from chemical planetary boundaries and from scaling war.
Is there to make it through we have to avoid all of those to fail we only have to have any of them happen.
And our crack record doesn't look good right if you look back at the history of empires at all.
The war and environmental destruction is a pretty big part of that story. We don't seem to be really noble stewards of power so as we're getting exponentially more power and we've usually used our power to do power games with each other, meaning destroy each
other and in ways that harm the environment. Is there any way that we can steward exponential power in a finite space.
I would say it takes a step function, like it will take something significant that is more than just the continuation of whatever good aspects the enlightenment created or something like that.
In the huge shift after World War two, it was a big shift we made a whole new world system, but the answer was still extract more from nature even faster make more money and make more tech like the bread and woods world system was a world system but
I think more increase for everybody was still a somewhat easier thing to do than when you're hitting planetary boundaries and you have to say no we actually have to reduce consumption across everybody where a lot of people are like no, I would rather not reduce my consumption
go to war and have less people.
And I think I can win like this, it's hard, the situation we're in right now is unprecedented at a global level in such deep ways right.
So do I think it is possible to make it through.
I think the question is it possible to make it through without great harm doesn't even make sense because we're in species extinction and war today.
Like great harm is happening today people are being killed in Ukraine people are being killed in Armenia and Azerbaijan people are being killed all over because of these issues, and species are going extinct today so we're already in the great harm phase.
Almost no adolescents don't have body dysmorphia in the Instagram, etc world like that's so we're already in that right now, do I think we can make it through without catastrophes where hundreds of millions of people by
is one question do I think we can make it through where there are any humans left.
We can make it through where there are humans and something that isn't just a totally scorched earth, these are all different questions.
The answer.
Can we make it through without the catastrophes intensifying.
No.
No, no chance.
So, so, so given all this.
The question comes up how then should we live, given the truth of.
This next part is critical can we make it through without the catastrophes intensifying no they're going to intensify because, no matter what we do today there is no enactable path to preventing the extreme weather events that climate change alone is going to
there's a lot of things like that, and then the human migration that's going to come from that we can, if we do the very best things, we can make it less bad but there is also no we.
There is no we that is a unified acting group.
Right.
The, what China's interests are and what the US is interest are what the individual with the left and right within the US is interests are what the individual US people versus the elites in it they're not the same.
The whole like, one of the biggest mistakes I made growing up was I always thought in this royal we did like humanity, thoughtfully was all reading bucky's operating manual for spaceship earth and we're all, you know, thinking about UN charters and looking at the earth and
the astronauts perspective and hearing Carl say it's pale blue dot and of course we want to do the right and smart and good thing for everybody.
The thing that some people think is really good to other people think is really horrible.
And when you realize that the enactment gets really hard, right, is is the legality of abortion protecting women's freedoms and rights, or is it murdering infants.
The most severe ideological differences on what is good, they create a basis for massive conflict, and you see that across so many things right.
So,
that's why I said that there isn't a human family to hang together, like that's, that's an aspirational thing.
I think that if there is already a trajectory of some people who care about not just their own political party or their own nation or their own race, or even their own species but care pretty considerably and are working in service of that that
there are increasing number of people who have both more care more capacity and more interconnectivity, and they cannot then also work with other people who maybe don't care about all of that but in increasingly good coordination for the things they do care about.
Because that's happening right there's a good thing in emergence that is happening.
Do I think that that could be sufficient to make it through without total extinction or scorched earth. Yes.
Totally. Do I think it can make it through without the catastrophes intensifying. No, they will intensify before even the best course.
Do I think that it's a given that we make it through. No.
Which means we are, no matter what in a phase of increasing intensity ahead, and with I think both what it takes to avoid all the catastrophes is deep enough change to the world systems that it's like that Bomean thing that we are neither harming each other on purpose or accident,
which means a kind of more universal on the consideration or things like a human family is actually a real thing.
I think in order to not have to get much worse changes have to happen at a deep enough level that it gets much better. So I do think there's something like a pretty hard fork.
And I think it can go either way. And I think it is not determined. And I think it isn't increasingly potent and hard over the next while on in figuring that out.
So with that then the question how do we live.
The frame is, I can't imagine a context in which one's choices could matter more.
Indeed, it gives a whole nother level and depth and dimension to the choices we make and the priorities we serve and how we live our lives and offer our lives.
And so what, what are some of the parameters for an effective contributing life that you see.
A few more resources that I'll offer here. Another short little blog I wrote on how to live a meaningful life, which was intentionally not answering the question what is the meaning of life which we discussed earlier.
But it said, had a meaningful life and is just, it's a way of talking about it there's lots of ways of talking about it this not particularly better than lots of other ways but I
there's something that is kind of comprehensive and kind of elegant about it. So, Alfred.
And it was looking at the mode of being the mode of doing and the mode of becoming all being relevant.
And all of them in terms of beauty. And that thing we said earlier that truth and goodness matter because beauty is.
So there it says the mode of being at its essence is about really deeply taking in the beauty of reality, and appreciating it, giving gratitude for it honoring and loving it, you know, all those things.
It's the essence of what the mode of being is really about.
The mode of doing is about being in service to the beauty of reality, protecting it adding to it.
And the mode of becoming is deepening the capacity for being in doing that I can appreciate ever more fully.
And that I can add to it.
And that a meaningful life is a recursive relationship between those three.
And what I'm doing isn't arising out of everything's fucked up so I have to fix everything but it's arising out of perceiving working on this hunger issue because we're perceiving the other meaningfulness and beauty of these kids, or these people in their life and the importance of it and
so then the doing the desire to serve and protect arises not from the perception of all the badness but actually arises from the perception of the beauty from which the good, which also means the bad is framed at all.
Right so the thing that really is terrible and pisses us off is because something that is beautiful and sacred is being harmed which then brings us back to there's something that we actually love and have devotion to.
So we trace it back to that and say how do I be in service there.
So the doing must arise from the being.
And the becoming is I don't just want to perceive the beauty I currently see I want to perceive ever deeper dimensions of things that I had missed.
You know I want to ask what aspects of the of reality are important and beautiful that I'm missing that other people are noticing that I'm not honoring as fully as I could.
And then similarly with our doing, where do I have frameworks for what I'm, where is what I'm doing coming from ego and trauma and wounding where have I been running a strategy so long if I stopped and thought about it from scratch and I come up with something better, you know, like, I want to be deepening the doing as well.
So I think if one relates to appreciating the beauty of life adding to it deepening the capacity for both that's a nice framework to start.
So there's another resource, but on there called Dharma inquiry, which is more personal because that's obviously true for everybody that arm inquiry. It's more into specific things one is bothered by and is inspired by and has aptitude and is called to to have a sense of what is your unique relationship to that is your own Dharma with it.
I realized that there's something but very beautiful about the kind of bodhisattva direction and something that is incomplete about a certain direction of it. I was, I was incredibly influenced by valve the bodhisattva and the may I become whatever is needed.
And when you look around and try to perceive what is needed and try to develop within yourself, what can offer something there.
The first time I actually read it was in Alex Gray's art book, the sacred mirrors and he had the heavy look page for the painting and then he had this poem next to it so beautiful.
And it said something like where there is
thirst may rain fall upon the people and man, may I myself become that rain where there is hunger may be transformed into food but near them where there is illness may become the medicine, wherever there is need of any kind may become what is needed.
I think
that helps one to recognize that what they love is deeper to who they are than who they think they are.
Because I think I like these things and I don't like these things I'm good at these things not these things but oh I can't help with that because I'm not a legal scholar or I'm not a construction worker I'm not a whatever it is.
And yes, like, but if that's the thing that is most needed and would help what you care about most.
Can you can you become something that you are not.
And I've had many times where there was something that I was not good at that I actually really identified as a thing I would never want to be good at.
And realize that it actually mattered what I cared about enough that if I held that limited identity I was not in maximum service to what I claimed to care about.
And I had to get like, like, I care about what I care about so long as it fits with my identity easily.
Or I've got to transcend the identity. So that's what I like about the value of the bodhisattva.
But where it's missing something is,
I really am not equally good at all the things that are needed, nor can I do all of the things even if I try there's a lot of people have to do all the things.
If medicine work is needed, and if economics changes needed and if care of the individual people and animals is needed as well as macro systemic thinking about systems to do that.
Not only what is most needed but what is most needed that my being as well developed to be able to be in service to is important.
And so the Dharma questions are trying to help hone that for people.
And, and you're pointing to the kinds of questions we need to ask ourselves in order to, in order to orient ourselves to be most effective instruments of service or for the war.
And in the Bodhisattva aspiration for the welfare and awakening of all.
I really think that probably that Bodhisattva aspiration, maybe one of the highest ideals minors, human mind is ever come up with such a beautiful thing.
And you're pointing now to the questions we asked was the first question that emerges is, well, what, what can I do.
But then you're pointing to the idea that there's questions deeper than that. What's the most effective thing I can do.
And along with that the question, or the colon actually, what am I called to do.
And deeper still in your implication is, is the question how can I live my life so as to be an optimal instrument of service.
And each of those is, I think better thought of as a, as a colon or a wisdom question.
And I would draw the distinction saying a conceptual question is, you know, is it raining outside take a look no end of question.
But wisdom questions are more like columns every time you ask me have the potential for taking you deeper into the question, deeper into life, deeper into yourself.
And so you're pointing us towards with the real the wisdom questions of our time.
I would also say that almost every value or principle
lives in a dialectical relationship with another value or principle that is complimentary but they might seem almost opposite.
And that without holding them together.
The full version of just that one thing the reducto at absurdum of it actually becomes even.
And so this is the everything can be a medicine or everything can be a poison topic.
So,
what is
what is my unique self calling what is that which I can offer the world based on the unique set of experiences and capacities I have that no one else could offer
I spend my life doing things other than that, that other people could do the most novel offering that I have doesn't occur.
That's a deep and important and beautiful question but taken to its extreme it'll make your total shithead, because I can do the dishes when you need to do the dishes no it's not your unique self.
The only thing that you can do like anybody can do the dishes or take out the trash but like, damn, though, a lot of life is just doing the dishes out the trash.
And maybe the unique self that you have is in is unexpressible infinitesimal qualities with which you show up to those things, you know.
So, the, what is uniquely mine to do that no one else can do, and what fucking needs done that nobody wants to do I'll just show up to you got to hold those together.
Right, because also on the other side if you always just say, what is nobody what is the shittiest job that nobody wants to do let me show up to that which is this incredibly a nobling question, incredibly beautiful question.
And also, in the failing at some unique self darmas and capacities you could have because of only orienting my life.
And so, every, every principle and every virtue needs held in a dialectical relationship, and not over normed as absolute.
Yeah, and this is the ancient concept of the interdependence of virtues that that they require, require each other and complement one one one another.
And I think you're also pointing to the contextual nature of our inquiries that we have to keep the context as well so, again, beautiful, beautiful reflections and deepening and expanding that I see you pointing us to.
Yeah, and I've just felt that we've been spending.
I don't know, X amount of time in the heart of philosophy and I feel a connection with fiduciary Athens and all of that stuff that started long ago and another land, and it's still, it's still churning and a universe that can produce.
A you, and to me, I can't be all that, and I feel deeply moved and deeply renewed in my commitment to do my little things, you know, whatever that calling might be and I think I pretty much found that but also to shampoo my dog and take out the trash and, you know, wipe the counters and
that sort of thing.
You know, you say can't be all bad it's funny because so I focus on the meta crisis which is like all the most fucked up stuff that could be all together.
It kind of seems like that, but it's not really what I focus on, I mean, it's
been appreciation and love of this world and life there's the desire to protect it.
And so paying attention to things that need protecting but where does the motivation come from motivation doesn't come things being fucked up motivation comes from the wonder of it right from the beauty of it like.
And I know you, you both talk about bringing the philosophic concepts into daily practice on this show a lot and you know I've had a lot of practices throughout my life in terms of types of meditation types of inquiry and whatever.
And the first thing I do pretty much every morning and I just look out the window at the trees, and I just watch the trees move in the wind for a little bit.
And I don't.
I don't have to try to care about them or try to find them beautiful they're just fucking beautiful. And there's a happiness that comes just watching that.
And then there's a gratitude to be alive and consciousness, you know, arising again, and there's happiness to be on this planet, and then there is a because of the happiness that comes from just the perception of the beauty of it.
I don't need that much for myself. Right there's not an unhappiness that needs me to do a bunch of stuff.
And then there's this gratitude that I like.
I was sleeping this content is Daniel consciousness wasn't here and then it boots again and now it's here.
And I think about when Daniel's dead.
The consciousness that will be perceiving the world and falling in love for the first time and climbing trees and reading Hafez and Rumi for the first time it's all the things.
And I can't not feel connected to those consciousnesses 100 and 1000 years from it like I can't not feel what it feels like to perceive through those eyes.
I'm actually not trying to get it to go anywhere. I just want that kids get to keep experiencing falling in love with trees for the first time and mothers get to keep falling in love with their kids and people get to fall in love and do poetry for the first time and
get heartbroken and all the things the pot like is intrinsically already meaningful without going anywhere.
And it's already beautiful. And, you know, one of the other things I know you'll have talked about is peak experiences and one of the things I always felt is,
once you have had one of them.
Like, for me, I remember, I remember discreetly I've talked about before.
There was this one time I was watching a sunset and writing poetry to nature and watching a sunset as a teenager.
And I remember the sunset was just so incredibly beautiful and I remember thinking,
I had the choice if there is a spirit before this life if I had the choice to come here and incarnate and go through whatever painful things that I've went through my whole life just to get to have this one experience of color and vision and the wind and the
insects in this moment would totally do it.
Like I would take every pain in my whole life have had this experience, as opposed to no experience.
And then I'm like, I've had that I've had so many of these experiences and one of them is worth incarnating for.
I've had so many of them.
And so it's like the fact that I will probably have more of them is gravy. And it's like a ridiculous beauty and abundance.
But that every that future life gets to keep having those and that other people get to have more of those is kind of more what I'm motivated by.
To make us better persons, when we experience those things that it shifts, you know, something happens.
Maybe just a little bit but something happens in a positive thing and shifts in our soul and our carriers and maybe we behave a little, a little better or a lot better.
I'm not sure.
I think the what's in it for me thing chills out.
And it's not that it doesn't reboot because we're complex people with lots of parts and there will be a pain body that reboots and so it's not like enlightenment is a static thing and you have a Satori and then you never have a pain body boot again it does.
But there's something about even just thinking about and just being like
there could have been no I no experience at all.
And there's experience, and there've been such amazing ones and
and I feel this pretty much with every difficulty or trauma to is like when you've done the healing work with it, you don't still feel messed up by the trauma or the pain, but you do feel on goingly benefited by the lessons.
And it's kind of like a lot of people don't have the resources or know how to do the healing so they never get the lessons and they're just always affected by the pain and that's a bummer.
But if one kind of has the resources knows how to work on it, then the pain is temporary and the gifts are lasting.
It's like this just beneficial asymmetry, like this beautiful asymmetry, where it's like, yeah, I just am a yes to the whole thing.
And there's, there's a beautiful couple of lines that came out of San Quentin prison.
There's a project group guiding rage into pain which people work very intensely with with people, many of them life as many of them have been murders and work on life transformation their ideals the Bodhisattva aspiration
the commitment is, even if I stay in my in the prison for the rest of my life I'm going to do what I can to help people.
And one of them after after the end is a very intensive exploration of their pain and the trauma they've both caused and received and these are very traumatized people.
And as a video of one of these sessions, and which one of the one of the prisoners some suddenly lights out lights up and says, Oh, I get it hurt people hurt people and healed people heal people.
Oh, it's so beautiful.
They're both self propagating.
I would love to explore that with you Daniel.
We've gone long and far and deeper maybe that's the wrong word to explore the darkness and the addiction and the way out of that and just what you said.
Hurt people hurt people and heal people heal people and that's maybe that's a good place to wrap it for this evening.
I really enjoyed the conversation with both of you I think that the this podcast or you're exploring these topics and sharing it with people is a really beautiful service and I'm honored to be here with you.
It's such a delight Daniel and it's such a such a gift to be able to investigate at this depth and co explore so.
Thank you so much for this gift to to everyone who listens to the podcast and thank you so much for your life's work it's truly a gift crisis.
We get to share this with thousands and thousands of God knows how many people. That's tremendous. That's just tremendous.
This is the second time we come back to and explore that hurt people hurt people that there is some auto auto poetic trauma force almost, and there's also some kind of auto poetic healing or integrated force.
But if you wanted to think of the light and dark sides of the force that's actually kind of a good way of thinking of it is the auto propagation of those things.
And to explore that sometime, maybe also if the listeners have thoughts or questions or topics coming from this that can inform it we can get to those next time too.
Right well will we here by extended invitation to listeners to let us know the questions you have for Daniel and I think you're implicitly suggesting you're open to coming back and we of course would love that and I know how listeners would too so that's beautiful and
regards to your father and mom if they're still on this plane and if not regards to me.
Okay, tell them they, they deeply touch one old guy in Louisiana made a difference for him.
I'll send this podcast to them when it publishes.
Daniel, thank you so much.
Take care.
.
