Hey everybody, let's build a Dyson Sphere.
We know we want to, humanity leans for the cosmic climb, so where do we start?
Welcome to Science, Technology and the Future.
Today we have Canadian futurist, science writer and ethicist George Svorsky with us.
He wrote an interesting piece on how to build a Dyson Sphere in five easy steps.
So we are here to discuss the hows, what's, wins and where's of doing so.
George Svorsky has appeared many times in our show since 2012 discussing journalism,
human enhancement, singularity, the Turing test and the AlphaGo phenomenon.
He's a contributing editor at Gizmodo and IO9, the chairman of the board at the Institute for Ethics and Emerging Technologies,
and he's one of the directors for the Rights of Non-Human Persons program.
Thank you so much.
Sad that we're here to discuss the passing of an iconic figure,
but it certainly gives us an opportunity to delve into some of the issues that he raised over the course of his illustrious career
and at times a controversial career, and we'll dive in and explore some of these pretty exciting concepts.
So the way that I was really introduced to the idea of Freeman Dyson was actually through Dyson Spheres,
my interest in large galactic, mega-scale structures.
First of all, I mean, what is the Dyson sphere and why would we want to build one?
Yeah, I mean, the whole thing got started for Dyson back in the late 50s.
I think he penned this two-page essay where he just kind of got thinking that eventually,
like a super sophisticated, super powerful technological civilization,
they're going to need a lot more energy than what could possibly be provided on their home planet.
So he conjectured about these hypothetical megastructures, which are basically a massive array of solar panels that will completely envelop the sun
and extract virtually all the energy that's output from the star.
And yeah, I think he had originally envisioned it as a whole fleet of satellites, like a spacecraft in orbit around the sun,
but out of tremendous like a dent, like I would think like hundreds of kilometers of density,
so they would not intersect and smash into each other.
But effectively, it would kind of, from a distant observer, there'd be so many working in concert that it effectively would be this swarm of
spacecraft or really what are solar panels in orbit, like I said, around the sun extracting that energy.
They would therefore be used to power that civilization and continue to advance and develop as an advanced civilization.
And he also got thinking, well, this is a possibility for extraterrestrials.
Well, two things come from that.
One, he said, well, it therefore represents a way for us to potentially detect the signs of extraterrestrial civilization.
So that becomes a kind of techno signature.
This obviously this giant shield that kind of envelops the sun is going to be absorbing a tremendous amount of heat,
and will then be giving off a certain amount of heat radiation.
So he said that, and others have since speculated that we should be able to detect this infrared signature at specific bands from Earth,
but that'll depend on the materials that are used and the amount of heat that still is able to be dissipated from the structure.
And yeah, I mean, and then the other the second issue that this raises is that, well, hey, that means that something that we might do in the future as well.
So this is not something exclusive for extraterrestrials.
It's something that future humans might want to build as well.
And yeah, I mean, it's pretty exciting as an idea.
I think it's a no brainer as funny because I'm such a huge advocate of solar power as a renewable guy.
I like wind, of course, and other renewables, but oh my God, like for me, like a solar is a no brainer.
I have this envision like from transformers like Cybertron.
Instead of kind of Cybertron, whether we just convert Earth into this gigantic solar, you know, like basically a gigantic orb that's plastered in solar arrays, right?
Yeah, I exaggerate, but the point is that we are absolutely squandering so much real estate on this planet that should be extracting solar energy that's otherwise going to waste.
Of course, you know, we don't want to destroy forests and things like that.
Obviously, plant life and other life need this.
Well, there's a lot of deserts, isn't there?
Yeah, there's a lot of rooftops.
Those two things right there, I mean, we could just exploit those resources in terms of real estate.
We go a long way, I think, to providing some of the much needed power.
So what Dyson was thinking about back in 1959, again, he was thinking that eventually though, you know, this will be unsatisfactory even if we can't harness as much energy as we can on the planet.
And what would be, what would, what was since we would be referred to as like a Kardashian one civilization, but perhaps I'm jumping ahead of ourselves as we will get to Kardashian stuff in just a minute.
But it's nice that these ideas intersect with each other, that a Kardashian one scale civilization would harness the entire energy available to us on this host planet, where it would therefore need to graduate to a Kardashian to scale civilization where it can actually harness all of the
output from its host star. And that's where Dyson sphere provided the Dyson provided a mechanism, a potential megastructure with which this could conceivably actually happen.
So it's kind of obviously futurists get excited by this idea because it really does present a plausible solution for our energy needs moving forward, whatever those energy for whatever we want to convert that energy into in future, whether it be running supercomputers or, you know, the like so.
So yeah, that's, that's, that's kind of maybe that's the answer your question. Yeah, that's kind of like what this one we haven't even got into all the different kinds of Dyson structures that can exist.
But that basically is, you know, how I'd answer your question as to why and how we're not how and why we want to build such a thing.
Indeed, yes. Yeah, so, so two luminaries to amazing minds recently passed away Freeman Dyson and Nikolai Kardashev note I'm not talking about the Kardashians folks.
You haven't heard of like, the Nikolai Kardashev, he's a guy who came up with civilizations, the scales of civilization and what sort of resources they'd be using and how large they'd be.
And so yeah, there's a there's three Kardashev scales, do you want to give us a brief. Yeah, yeah, sure. And again, very much.
Not the Kardashian scale. Yeah, the Kardashian scale is going to be completely different.
We'll save that for another podcast.
So Freeman Dyson and Nikolai Kardashev, obviously contemporaries. So whereas Freeman Dyson was running with Dyson Spears in 1959, I believe it was Kardashev in 1966 conceived of the Kardashev scale.
And again, it was a very simple scale.
One to three. And, you know, he was to him like this.
He was a Soviet astrophysicist and to him, you know, energy availability was a massive metric like it meant everything in terms of how you would, you know, really define a stage of civilization.
And he got this idea, well, eventually, you know, a civilization should be able to harness all the, you know, all the energy that it can possibly extract just on its home planet.
And that can be, you know, obviously just we're just talking about solar so that can be incoming solar but can be anything else it could be wind it can be currents and all that, but eventually that's there's only so much you can extract.
Once you've kind of hit that cap, you're what he would call a Kardashev one scale civilization.
And the next was a civilization that can harness the entire energy output of its son, that's a Kardashev two scale.
And perhaps more radically, I don't want to say more speculative because all of this is speculative, but more radically, he also conjectured about a type three Kardashev scale civilization which can harness the entire energy output of the host galaxy,
which when you think about how many millions, billions of stars are in the Milky Way, that's a lot of energy. That's a, you know, mix of wonder, you know, at that point, you know, that that that point is beyond human comprehension to understand what that civilization would be like and wouldn't get
possibly use that much energy for it gets in it is kind of maybe like God like the state of being that and it's difficult to imagine.
So some of these numbers, and look, it's hard to make intuitive sense.
Oh, I know, I got so ridiculous.
Yeah, the exponentials are massive. And yeah, like the orders of magnitude beyond orders of magnitude beyond orders of magnitude is because the point where it doesn't the numbers that you suggest that they just don't mean it just doesn't make any more sense to us.
I think even like to think about a Kardashev one scale civilization still enough to kind of make my to make me real in terms of what that would actually represent let alone, you know, a Dyson sphere capable civilization.
I mean, that's a great scale and it got a lot of conversation going on the late great Carl Sagan, love the idea and he thought hey why don't we actually kind of dive into this little bit break down a little bit kind of came up with the schema for you know, creating incremental
versions of Kardashev skills. So, according to his measure so for example today, Earth and Earth today human civilization would be about a zero point seven like a zero point seven five on the scale.
So we're going to like, we're like three quarters of the way there to be a full K one civilization. And similarly they get out of one point two one point five or whatever, you know, obviously if you're working from a Kardashev two to three you can be a Kardashev, you know 2.0000006 and probably that's
you know, because you maybe at that point in part is let's say 10% of the Milky Way so these kind of make sense and but even others to take an inspiration from Kardashev and come up with other ideas we know for example, the amount of space let's say that as civilization has
as occupied so let's say if it's if it's now kind of dominates its entire solar, its entire star system well that's could be a certain level or the amount of infer this is not one that I'm particularly partial to
and I believe, yeah Carl Sagan also promoted this idea was that it was the amount of information available to a civilization and I believe you kind of did this across the scale of A to Z.
So you could have, whereas A is like hardly any, you know, level of information and said is like, I forget the way what it was, the actual metric that he used but it was, that was like the end of the scale.
So I believe he said that we were like at an H level so we were like a Kardashev so we were like at a 0.75 H type civilization right now, in terms of like not the energy that we have available to ourselves, and the amount of information processing that we're capable of engaging in.
And I think that those two things there are I think a very potent measures you know where you're at. Of course it doesn't measure things like you know, gross domestic product that doesn't measure things like you know social well being and health factors.
And I mean there's so many different ways I think you could still drill down and come up with different ways of describing like the technological or social or political or whatever aspect is important to you in terms of the development of
a civilization whether it be ourselves whether it be an extraterrestrial level civilization and I think we'll always be biased but what we think is a good metric of progress.
You know so you know who knows maybe in 100 years from now we'll have a completely different sense as to what the direction and the developmental trajectory that we would be desirable for an advancing civilization such as our own.
You know you can't speak to what that what that might actually be and maybe if you look at for example, maybe it could be the amount of you know renewable energy available to a civilization outside of non renewables that'd be good one I'd be fascinated to see that you know that scale put
aside to that, or if you were partial to things like you know the heathenistic imperative, or, you know, engineering, you know, maybe how far are we to toward that goal, like how many, and how many individuals both human and non human animal on the planet are in a kind of
entering into a state of, of heathenism as opposed to the kind of modality that we find ourselves in today so different there's different ways on all this then you know that's Kardashian but that kind of got us thinking about, you know,
the ways in which we can, you know, conceive about, you know how we describe the state of a civilization.
Yeah, indeed. Yeah, I should preface that I am partial to the heathenistic imperative. I've done a lot of interviews with David, although I don't think to me I just, I'm not quite ready to commit to pleasure being the only metric that's important.
I think sensitivity to novelty is also very important and, yeah, and the ability to make progress intelligence and, yeah.
So, yeah, wow, it's, it's, it's amazing how large theoretically civilizations could get, but it's been conjectured and I'm also a little bit worried that we can't see any evidence of other civilizations doing this.
Yeah, this ties into the Fermi paradox, right? The Drake equation. Absolutely. I mean, first and foremost, we can almost write off Kardashian III as a possibility because, you know, our astronomical observations seem to be in violation of that, that idea.
You know, we look up into the sky and we see no evidence of, you know, galaxies that have been completely re-engineered or in or away somehow obscured by, you know, this massive use of, like, Dysonian type megastructures.
And there have been actually, this is actually not something I just, you know, I'm not just idly saying this to you. There have actually been specific astronomical observations looking for these sorts of signatures coming from other galaxies.
And obviously, these studies aren't to be all an end all, you know, maybe other ways of searching for these cloaked galaxies that are out there, but we have yet to kind of see such a thing.
So right off the bat, it's like, oh, I don't know. I also think just, I mean, it's kind of like you suggested it does bring the Fermi paradox to mind because maybe we should be seeing these.
Like, even if we are looking potentially, you know, hundreds of millions or billions of light years away, because obviously we're looking deep, deep, deep back into time.
You know, like we have, for example, special lens that could show us the universe or the cosmos outside of the Hubble bubble that we're in. Maybe it would be a dark universe and maybe that we're at a special time in our universe's development where galaxies are, you know, starting to become
seen by the intelligences which they've given birth to. But more locally to the Milky Way, again, the searches have only begun. Like, we've only been talking about Dysonian SETI for, I'd say, but the last 10 or 15 years.
And again, the term Dysonian SETI, again, we can, that's a tip of the hat to Freeman Dyson. So again, thank you for that. And with that, the idea behind Dysonian SETI is, in addition to looking for
traces of Dyson spheres or shells or swarms or whatever, we should be looking for any kind of techno artifact and in particular, mega scale engineering, because there could be many different kinds of things that advanced extraterrestrial
civilizations would do that would leave some kind of a signature for us to be able to detect. It could be everything from pollution and heat waste.
You know, and back to pollution, like, for example, even planets that are an unnaturally high level of carbon dioxide or have been other kind of chemical compounds that are not consistent with what we know about the known laws of physics in terms of what can
autonomously be generated through natural processes. It could be traces of S, you know, engines or the rearranging of stars or again, or even just very straightforwardly, a, you know, a Dyson shell itself as we were alluding to earlier.
And even what's also fascinating is that there's constantly, you know, new thinking in terms of where we should be looking. So recent papers said, hey, you know what, like, never mind, like, plain old stars, like, we should be looking at pulsars for Dysonian structures.
And what they will do is that the big most sense to create was like a Dyson, like a Dyson ring is really what it would be. So just you can imagine a ring around a pulsar, and I'm sure your viewers and listeners can imagine that as a pulsar spewing those concentrated streams of energy, it would be, they would be
concentrated along the ring, the interior of the ring. And it would be such power, you know, that such efficiency that you don't need, you don't need to build such a massive structure.
You know, right now, like, for example, we wanted to build a Dyson shell that completely enveloped our sun here in our own solar system. I think Andrew Sandberg is probably the leading guy that's done this math.
Among others, and it's like, yeah, like, you got to take apart Mercury, probably take a huge chunk out of Venus, and let's go dive into the cores of the gas giants. And next, you know, like, we're kind of starting to run out of actual material in our own solar system to build such a thing.
So there is kind of like a prohibitive nature to that as well. So if you can be more economical in terms of the material that you need to build and why not, you know, exploit perhaps better sources of that energy such as pulsars.
And there's even talk of like, for example, creating similar structures around black hole. So what you do is let's say, you know, black holes, what they do is when they're, when they're pulling in material, they also spew stream of highly energetic jet of photons.
So what you can do is I'll likewise set up a massive, you know, a raise energy extracting a raise at the, at the exit point there were the jet is streaming out.
And, you know, that's your turbo your energy turbine to lack a better word that works there. Or we get like deliberately shove a star or several several stars into a black hole to even create facilitate this process and create more output for us.
So maybe it's not so much a passive thing in terms of just capturing our star is it is going out there and finding better places to exploit. But now at this point, really what we're talking about is we're now escalating down that Kardashian scale we're now definitely, I would say you got started to
want to, and then, you know, I don't think you go from K one to having a pulsar capable Dyson show I think you got to graduate to what you know to those means of K and as you're working your way toward that K
three status. So, um, so yeah, I forgot even with the initial question was that you have to remind me what
Well, you know what I'm just wondering like I guess we spoke about like what it means to to not see any evidence of galactic structures or expansion of civilizations out there and we started to speak about the Fermi paradox and and Drake equation I bought up and Robin Hansen brought up the great filter argument.
And he described the that we should be concerned if there aren't any galactic spanning civilizations out there, because it decreases the likelihood that we will be able to reach that sort of status ourselves that will likely go extinct.
Yeah, it's a very potent and upsetting idea. And yeah, I mean the search for Dyson instructors is only really just begun.
So that was just to be fair, but there have been searches and nothing has come up yet but more, more practically I suppose, considering the contributions of Enrico Fermi, it shouldn't even matter.
Whether or not we see these spheres or not what matters is that we we just seem to be completely out of touch with other extraterrestrial civilization we see no no signs of anything they've never, they don't appear to have traveled through the solar system.
And what that means is that and that for the casual listener that maybe the world, you know, maybe, you know, maybe there've been tons of you know, aliens have sit through our solar system and certainly while there's a I suppose a chance of that.
There is a general feeling in the futures community and those who are engaged in this kind of deep deep kind of speculation that look when a, and when we're talking with these advanced civilizations they're not just going out on field trips, you know, at holidays to visit star systems
and what we're talking about are expanding bubbles of the civilization itself, and that when it reaches another star system.
It doesn't just, you know, pass through it actually will make it its own it'll actually adopt it build its own probably extract all the resources and possibly can to continue to fuel its civilizations spread, including building a Dyson sphere around the star of that system, completely
even more speculative also everything and everything we're saying is so super spectacular but why not let's just keep going. If then you get some objectives like oh Star Trek Prime Directive they come here and they'd be like oh there's intelligent civilization on Earth we have to leave them alone because it's Prime Directive like no no no no
The very least what they would do is well destroy us but I doubt that that's the case I think more plausibly than uplift us. So within a snap of a finger, they would basically integrate us within their own civilization by whatever means is available to them.
That's become part of the organism become part of the board collective we'd be subsumed into their civilization hopefully it would be benign and enlightened uplift and not a like the board is obviously as a dystopian scenario as it gets.
You would hope that that's not the kind of assimilation that would happen and instead when I mean uplift I mean in the truest kind of like, you know, sense where we would be, you know, bioengineer and reconfigured to be this kind of post biological entity that they themselves are most
assuredly, they most assuredly have become. I'm not imagining green aliens visiting us I'm imagining, you know, machine minds, digital beings passing through here, transforming you know the galaxy as they expand out through the Milky Way.
So, yes, so I just stepped back a bit so yes it does not appear that we have been visited by extraterrestrial civilizations why because everything looks pretty peaceful natural, you know, in a, as that currently you know that we've nothing but we're not touched we're not touched solar system so
but as far as we can tell, you know, as we look out into the galaxy looks like all the other star systems in our galaxy are the same, the same way hello it's, and we still we have yet to see any sign of something that's you know undeniably inalienably artificial in nature
everything this doesn't appear to be out there we look out in space, it's very, these are all natural processes, everything fits in nice and closely, you know, within the laws of physics as we know it so there's no reason for us to believe that
we're looking into, you know, a highly technified galaxy so that's that's kind of essentially, I mean that's probably taking what Fermi said a little too far, all his observation was like oh my god like, you know, we, we should have definitely seen somebody by now.
Like, what he what what's what's potent about the Fermi paradox is he basically eliminated time as a factor, because that what would you a common argument is like oh there hasn't been enough time for civilizations to occupy the entire galaxy.
And that's fundamentally wrong. There has been more than enough time. Our galaxy is really really old, and has been able to host biological life for a very long time, long enough such that, you know, this galaxy should have been colonized, you know, not just once but multiple times, yet it's not hasn't happened.
And that's kind of alarming. And that's what, you know, Robin Hansen said, Well, maybe it's because it doesn't happen that there is this kind of great filter and effect where that you know no civilization can get a certain developmental stage that nobody can get past.
And it could, it might be self destruction of some sort. It, I mean it could be let's say a technological, a complete you know, technological hurdle.
Even he didn't go for example it can even go back in time to the, the, the rise of, you know, from single sub life to multi cellular life.
That's the case that's actually amazing new that's the best news I could possibly share with anybody today, because it means we've actually passed the great filter and that we're freaks we shouldn't actually be here.
And we might even be the only civilization in the entire universe, or certainly in the galaxy. That's somehow we leaked through this filter where, you know, no other planet that was even possible so that that's, we don't know if the filters behind us or but still ahead of us.
Personally, I'm inclined to think that it's ahead of us that we're heading toward our daily inevitable doom, and that there's something that will prevent us from building Dyson spheres and becoming Kardashian, you know, 2.4 civilizations and so on, which is kind of a depressing thought but unfortunately that's potentially where the evidence is leading us in terms of trying to understand, you know, our future.
There are other possibilities, of course, I mean, this is alarming, but it's also a great motivation to be extra careful and to do whatever we can to increase the likelihood of becoming aware of potential filter should be be stepping right into one and mitigate the likelihood that that'll wipe us out.
Like all filters, you know, something gets through like a great filter is considered like to be many, like, like Robert Hansen described it as a whole like range of things, but like steps going up a staircase.
Now, some, some life doesn't make it beyond the first step. Some life makes it beyond the second and third and fourth. Maybe we're on the 16th, and there's a 17th, 18th, 19th and 20th before we reach a technological mature civilization.
So hopefully they don't like squash us out of existence before we do that, right?
Yes, it's interesting thought and there's no shortage of threats in our future. I mean, we could go on and on about artificial superintelligence. We could talk about molecular nanotechnology.
We can talk about, you know, deliberately engineered viruses and on and on and on not to mention the nuclear threat, which remains an apocalyptic risk.
And so there's still that and like I said, things that we could probably invent that we don't even know are possible.
But there's also nothing to consider is that maybe there are modalities of existence that advanced life, you know, kind of escapes into that doesn't involve, you know, you know, this kind of colonization wave that we've been talking about.
Yet, you know, at the same time, these, these solutions have to do two things that has to satisfy the energy requirements needed to enter into that desirable modality of existence.
And it has to be a solution that applies to every other single advanced extraterrestrial civilization out there, not just the subset because it didn't apply to every advanced sieve.
And at least some would decide to embark upon colonization campaigns. And again, the solution has to take that into consideration has to come up with a solution that's like, well, what's to prevent everybody from venturing out and reworking the Milky Way in their own image.
Well, there's, yeah, exactly. There's a prisoner's dilemma, right? Where, if you're ever aware that you have galactic neighbors, or that you are suspicious that one, you have galactic neighbors, you're going to try and get all the resources that you can to preemptively protect yourself, or even use to attack this potential neighbor,
so that they don't do exactly the same thing. Everybody, like, would be thinking of the same thing. Let's reduce, let's grab the resources so that we can defend and attack, and perhaps even preemptively strike, because our neighbors might be also thinking of preemptively
striking, whether they're aggressive or not, they may decide that that's just the most rational self interested thing to do.
Yeah, that's a very depressing thought. I mean, it's, and I love that you invoke the prisoner's dilemma there, because it does seem that that's kind of the situation, like, you know, what do you do with partial information?
You know, what do you do, you know, when you're not entirely sure what, you know, a cohort is, what kind of decisions a cohort is going to make, and, yeah, just sort of the whole maximum concept, you're therefore unleash a whole fleet of berserker probes and sterilize the Milky Way before, you know, a berserker, you know, swarm, you know,
Again, that's another, I also find it fascinating, maybe more optimistically, that we also have no evidence of berserker probes. Again, a berserker probe is this idea that instead of, like, happy von Neumann probes that are self-replicating probes that go out there and do exploratory work or even colonization work, and then, again, like I said, they self-replicate and they continue to spread and spread and spread and spread in a very happy way.
Berserker probes just simply go out and just destroy. Basically, they're sterilization waves, and then it would be, it would be, well, one of several reasons as to why this can happen, well, one is just pure, like, malevolence, just to, like, create this kind of scorched earth policy or scorched galaxy,
Scorched galaxy policy, yes, scorched galaxy policy, just as a protective measure, so a defensive measure. It could be, again, a rogue AI has gone completely, you know, mad, and it's just, you know,
you know, or just, or just, again, I don't want to speculate on the reasons, but I mean, it's, the fact is, is that we've not actually seen such a wave maker and make its way through our galaxy, simply because we're here.
We're talking about Berserker probes, so if you're talking about Berserker probes, they're probably things that they don't actually exist, so that's how, like I said, it'd be a more optimistic way of looking at it.
Yeah, that's true. Now, you've done, like, you've recorded, like, a whole taxonomy of different types of, like, possible von Neumann probes, right?
Yeah, and you were in discussions with Eleazar, and what was it, Nick Boster, maybe, and is Sandberg, trying to sort of lay out at least some of these different...
Yeah, one of the ones that came out of a discussion at Chicago in 2008, I think, Transvision, and it's kind of like, Eleazar had the greatest term for it, you call it the whack-a-mole hypothesis, which is this idea that you have, kind of like, Berserker probes do exist,
but they're discriminant as opposed to indiscriminate. So, like, similar to, like, the Modeleth on the Moon in 2001, it's just hanging out, kind of waiting for us to reach a certain developmental stage, and then it's kind of, like, kicks into action, and it does what it does.
Again, what a wonderful idea by Arthur C. Clarke. But anyways, so the idea of the whack-a-mole discriminant probe is that it's waiting simply to see what becomes of us as a result of our own technological singularity.
That one of the big things that Yadkowski talks about is that there isn't necessarily just one kind of artificial superintelligence that can emerge, that there's a whole family of different types that can come out of the technological singularity.
We just don't know what kind we're going to produce, and nor do the aliens know what kind we're going to produce, whether it's a happy version or a sad version.
So let's say it's hanging out there, and we can't detect it. It sees it, oh, we've passed the technological singularity, and it's a, oh, it's a good AI.
We're going to let them live, and we're going to just let them be or integrate us or whatever, or if it's a potentially dangerous artificial superintelligence.
So that even threatens the aliens' ongoing survival, then it will extinguish us, and that's the end of that. So that's just one idea.
And even as another idea for these self-replicating, or not even self-replicating, but just this idea of probe technology, Andrew Sandberg has also speculated about kind of like policing probes.
It's kind of like, maybe more enlightened idea that we were suggesting earlier about, you know, going out and just, you know, terminating potential threats.
It's just basically exactly that, just kind of like policing and kind of just assessing and just making sure that any threats or anything that's coming in is what was desirable rather than potential threat.
So in other words, it may not have to be a prisoner's dilemma sort of situation. We can maybe have this kind of intermediary situation where we can kind of just get a sense of the intentions of an extraterrestrial civilization.
But yeah, there's the different ways of thinking about this problem.
Absolutely. And that's the whole whack-a-mole or whack-a-civilization idea brings up some absurd visuals in my head.
Yes.
Yeah, so, well, I guess you've also given us a very interesting step-by-step description of how we could bootstrap a galactic civilization starting with a Dyson sphere or a Dyson swarm.
Usually people mean Dyson swarms when they say Dyson spheres and not a thing that sort of shell with gravity problems.
Yeah, so do you want to just step us through?
Sure. And to be clear, this idea is not my own.
It was Stuart Armstrong from Oxford University who first articulated this particular model for, like you suggested, bootstrapping the Dyson sphere.
What I did was I kind of distilled his ideas and popularized it and been happy to talk about it ever since, but definitely he deserves full credit for this idea.
So what it is is, what he was saying is that really that within short order we will be able to start working on this.
And that's not something that we should think of as being so far away in the future, or something that only civilizations far and away in the future will be able to embark upon this.
He said that we should probably start thinking about building this structure relatively soon.
Dyson requires some new tech and new ingenuity and new capabilities, but we can get going because ultimately he said if we kind of get started on it, that the kind of like this very first stage of the sphere or swarm will become operational.
You don't need like the whole thing, you don't build the whole thing and then turn it on.
You know, we've kind of silly.
I'm imagining it like the scene when you're, you know, you put the lights on a Christmas tree, and you hit the start button, and it doesn't turn on because one of the lights is actually out, but that's kind of like, well, I guess it's old school technology.
Okay, let's start up the Dyson swarm and
that's not starting correctly.
So, no, what you do is you create a huge chunk that is going to be drawing power from the sun, transforming it into useful energy.
And what Stuart Armstrong was arguing is that you then use this to now newfound energy source to continue to fuel the construction of the Dyson swarm.
This becomes this kind of like, becomes this exponentially improving process and no manpower will be required because the way he envisioned it is you're going to have probes, robotic sort of revive devices, working in space to actually construct
these these these panels, these receivers, and they would also this have to work in tandem with mining expeditions to the inter planets and perhaps even the asteroid belt and the other planets.
Unfortunately, we have to say goodbye to Mercury and possibly parts of Venus and like I said, the asteroid belt and
other places in the solar system and that clearly will create a lot of upset. I mean already just when I get right about it, people right get I get very angry, angry letters like how dare you talk about the dismantling of the solar system.
Okay, well, I mean, my only concern about it is that it could disrupt the kind of orbital equilibrium that we do see in the solar system that there is this kind of like,
there is this prospect where if you suddenly remove a planet from its orbital plane, it can have this rippling gravitational effects down the line we perturb the trajectories of planets.
And what that does is over the course of many millions of years we can actually result in collisions between planets, which is not good last I checked so that's that's one one possibility but like let's let's be let's be honest like Mercury is useless right there's it's
it's just baked in radiation and there's nothing of value there. I mean, aside from just for the sake of it being there.
Venus I'm not even going to speak, speak to me it's interesting only from a scientific perspective in the sense that we, they could maybe help us understand our climate models a bit better and what you know potential risks are.
I want to put some like severe case situations are like for what an atmosphere can actually do.
Like, that's pretty scary when you look at you know what because Venus is a sister planet to our own like it's so close to us is basically the same size as ours yet it's a complete show.
And what's it what happened like what's the difference between us and that so yeah before we dismantle Venus I would like us to know how it came to be.
And actually what excitingly NASA is actually considering a couple of missions finally I think one of the most even those that are closest celestial neighbors one of the most neglected planets in the solar system yet it should be I think a high priority that we understand it a little better.
Obviously all the focus is on Mars because it has this this this this historical potential for habitability certainly doesn't have that anymore.
So that's why there's all this excitement with Mars we also think of it as you know that potentially you know planet B for us which again is a as I don't know if you were you caught this one out of but last year I wrote a piece called why will never colonize Mars generated a lot of excitement and a lot of upset.
And I basically argue that Mars is not what you think it is, and the whole these all these ideas of like how great it's going to be to live on Mars colonize it and terraform and all that is a bit of a pipe dream and it's complete.
You know, completely neglects you know the hardships and realities of doing so.
So, so yeah.
It's going to be really hard in our current biological form, but by the stage, we, you know, build a maybe a type two Kardashev civilization, we can have the ability to sort of adapt ourselves to sort of operate in a variety of environments probably a lot more harsh than Mars.
For sure.
That's long term.
I was a bit cheeky in my headline there when I said humans will never colonize Mars because it was my excuse to say, yeah, post humans can call it.
So, that was kind of like where I was coming at on that one so definitely, I definitely made it at that point that yeah, we had modified humans and that's a different story altogether.
So, um, yeah, so back to the building of the Dyson sphere.
Basically, once you've created this core panel, then it becomes this exponential thing and I mean, Armstrong's predictions were that you could do this and maybe four stages I think five stages and it would only take, you know, a few decades once you went to the ball once the ball is really rolling.
I mean, I mean, this idea has been attacked for not just because you require the dismantling of planets but also the time obviously the time scale I agree.
Maybe when I wrote this article about 10 or 12 years ago I maybe overstated our ability to get into space and work into space we're finding it to be much more difficult than we could have ever imagined.
You know, that's just the sheer cost alone of, you know, rockets, delivering rockets and we're seeing the private sector finally getting a bit of a handle on this but it's still the launch requirements, the technological requirements, the ability to actually have machines working on Mercury, for example, that would not, you know, succumb to the elements.
To be fair, we're still quite a ways off from being able to do this but like I said, one thing I will stand by is that it's not too early to think about it.
You know, let's talk about it, let's make up some plans and maybe make some timelines.
Let's maybe say, hey, what's the tech that we need to do this? What's the material that we need to do this?
What kind of, how would a robot actually work on Mercury to kind of dig down deep into, you know, to actually access them in usable materials?
What do we do with all the waste and all this stuff? These are questions we can ask right now and get some very smart people working on it, even if it's just, let's say, from a crowd source perspective.
Obviously, I think academics should be talking about this but maybe, you know, just as an active community.
If you get the Mars Society and people talking about that, it feels just so devoted to colonizing Mars.
So why don't we have, you know, a group of people devoted to getting the ball rolling on the creation of a dexon swarm.
So timelines, okay, maybe not, maybe what we thought but certainly, I don't discount the, what Armstrong suggested though, that once the ball is rolling though, that it does become this awesome feedback process where now you can really in earnest
build this thing rather quickly. Next thing, you know, you've got this, you've got a dexon swarm.
So one of the, again, one of the real points here in the article, what Armstrong was even arguing was that, again, this is something that is plausible.
You know, this is not, what Dyson was conjecturing about, was fascinatingly, intriguingly doable.
And, you know, it was, it was just kind of blew my mind to see a guy actually put pen to paper and say, here's how we can do it.
At least in a conceptual level.
It sends to me and I continue to think it's just a fascinating possibility.
Oh, indeed, yeah.
So, I mean, in terms of the timeline to actually bootstrap to get started in this process seriously and start at least using some of the energy that we can harvest from the sun with a few, I guess, panels in place.
It's the beginning of a Dyson swarm.
How long do you think that would take?
Armstrong said 40 years.
Which is crazy, but that that's what that's what that's what he said. So, 40 years to get started.
Oh, sorry, I thought you meant the complete completion of the swarm.
You're asking me like when we can actually get started on the project to start building the first one. Yeah, what's your opinion.
Oh boy.
Not for a few decades. I mean, we're still at the stage where kind of crazy because like, we're talking about like NASA's now in Congress was earnestly talking about a mission to Mars by 20 in the 2030s, for example.
And the fact is that we're embarking on a really small step still.
And we're still not working on the moon. We don't even have a moon, an orbital moon base. We haven't even been to Mars yet.
You know, and we don't know some of the, not only do we not know the technical hurdles that await, we don't know the socio economic hurdles that await as well.
And the situation here on earth concert to get so dire in terms of the environment that deep space exploration and and work out there will have to take a backseat to the problems that need to be addressed here at home.
And it's going to be increasingly difficult for governments to justify the spending taxpayer money, you know, for what could be deemed as these rather uplandish science fiction the prospect I'm not saying I agree with that perspective and saying that will be a prevailing
So, it's because of these kind of realities that you have to temper these kinds of expectations so to answer your question, maybe not sadly maybe not for eight 100 years.
And yeah, like I said, a lot of there are a lot of wildcards and blacks wants to consider it between them, both ones that can continue to set us back, but even like blacks ones that could perhaps be good.
And let's say an artificially, we kind of have this kind of like an artificial super intelligence that that we can kind of understand and control very dubious and we could do that but
let's say that we kind of like start to offload some of these design and engineering tasks to artificial intelligence.
And we find ways of let's say, you know, becoming more economically stable and having the means the resources with which to launch the source of expeditions.
So those things kind of came together then all that's are often terms of when we could start to mark upon his project so that's the case I would say, you know, after the 2050s, 2060s recently.
I will add though, I'm turning 50 this year. This is just an aside.
But turning 50 this year, and you start to do the math like when I was a kid, like, you'd see, you know, NASA is launching probes to this planet or this moon and it's going to take 15 years to get there or whatever it's going to be 25 year project.
And you kind of, it's easy for you to digest that it's your thing all out so far in the future which you can digest it.
And now, like, for example, there, that NASA is going to be sending a probe to to Titan. It's fascinating. It's going to be actually a drone will be able to fly through the atmosphere because it actually has an atmosphere.
And yeah, it's going to be, it'll be landing in the mid 2030s assuming they can get it going. And yeah, I'm going to be like, I'll be like 6465 years old when it happens and radical life extension.
Adam not withstanding when in terms of what, you know, what, you know, what, you know, what, how our health can be prolonged in the future, I tend to be a status quo type of type of a person I don't tend to assume that that's going to happen.
I take it, I assume they'll be aging normally and I'll die, you know, you know, a death, you know, as per the situation today, it'd be wonderful, you know, like a prolonged my life but it does seem that certain get to a point now in my life where
perhaps some of these longer scale prospects or something I'll never live to see. And eventually there's going to be some kind of a project where I do the math I'll be 115 but it actually gets rolling.
In other words, I probably won't be alive to see it. So I'm not sure why I'm bringing this up just aside from the fact that starting to it does affect perhaps the way you look at the future and understand that yeah, you know, and life will absolutely go on without you being there.
And of course, without you being there to observe it and appreciate it. But of course, that doesn't mean you should think it's still going to not going to happen. And most certainly you should never let that prevent, you know, this kind of multi generational thinking.
I, for example, I'm a firm, a staunch believer that we should start to not not just talking about Dyson swarms and construction.
We're not talking about interstellar expeditions. You know, we've got Voyager, the Voyager two probes, you know, they they're incredible but why we scale up something like that, you get a massive, you know, I think they're already been like Stephen Hawking talked about this, for example, creating these ships with solar
that my God, like these things once they get cooking and moving in space powered only by like the particles, I mean, out from the sun within a short matter of time, they'll be moving at 10% the speed of light.
You know, that suddenly these relative these relativistic speeds, the nearby star systems aren't so far away anymore. And now you're talking about missions that are like what 1040 years, you know, instead of like, prohibitively long like, like Voyager's not going to reach the first possible star system for
like tens of thousands, hundreds of thousands of years. Obviously that's super discouraging. But anyways, point being is I would love us to start taking the long new bold ideas. Yeah, we may not live to see it in our lifetime, but maybe, you know, generations four or five 1020 from now will absolutely yield the benefits of this.
It could even be potentially existentially worthwhile the sense that it could actually detect, you know, habitable systems to learn from the science of these expeditions. And so I think we should also start thinking along those lines as well.
Yeah, the idea of astronomical waste comes to mind and population axiology or population ethics where we should be considering the moral relevance of people who are not yet around, or like slots for life that are not yet available, can we say.
And if we were to go extinct or to, I guess, be damned to live only on this sort of film on top of this rock called earth in this tiny portion of our own galaxy, let alone all the others, then that would be a shame.
Because there's a whole lot of matter out there that doesn't isn't being sort of used to support lives worth living. And so yeah, it is a paper out there called something along the lines of astronomical waste.
Yeah, but it's quite interesting when you start thinking about the huge sheer amount of possible lives worth living that could be cut short or just never actually be realized if we go extinct or if we just never get off earth.
Yeah, and you know, bringing it back full circle to Freeman Dyson, if you were here talking to us right now he'd be absolutely on board with what we're talking about he was absolutely a big thinker in terms of the future human trajectory and he, you know, he what did he say
or his book and very famously said infinite in all directions now it's in such a beautiful, beautiful term and but he believed it you know like, even even thought that you know eventually we can find ways of, you know, prolonging the existence of a civilization.
You know, by slowing, I have to forgive me if I get this a little bit wrong but basically what he was suggesting is that we, we dramatically slow down like the clock speed of civilization to the to the point where it's so excruciatingly slow that the time ticks relative to the actual
time is elapsing around it that it might as well be, you know, quasi infinite in terms of how long the civilization could actually last, given the constraints of course of cosmology.
I think he came up with these ideas back in the 70s when we saw a different view of
cosmological evolution and development. We now know for example that the universe will eventually start to expand and expand quicker and quicker and quicker which will preclude I think some of these ideas of you know finding almost like infinite ways of prolonging human existence or post human existence
will be like 22 30 billion years from now but yeah he was definitely online with this thinking like they big bigger like that's I think that's one of the more fascinating aspects about Freeman Dyson was how he would kind of like just take things to level that perhaps you know no one
had before. You know when we talk about a guy who penned this thing in 1959. Okay, it's, it's hard for us perhaps to understand how radical an idea that would be.
Okay, this is 1959. Hey, extra trustee we're going to build what he didn't call in Dyson's spheres and people called it after that like they named it after yes, he actually didn't like the term that that was named after it, but I will say
he got the idea from Olaf Stapleton. And that very good point actually and thank you for bringing that up he it's not was not his idea yeah you got it from science fiction Olaf Stapleton and perhaps even others were already talking about ideas such as this.
Again, he just looked at it as a potential solution for you know the insatiable energy demands of a civilization.
But I thought it was pretty great like when I heard that he had died a couple of days ago. I thought, you know, I mean, I really hope that we build a Dyson swarm if not for the simple reason that we can call it a Dyson swarm or Dyson sphere that it would what a legacy that would be as a thinker to have a mega structure, you know, such magnitude be actually named after
and I think I just I would just love for that to happen even if you didn't like the term too bad for him and you came up with an awesome idea, or at least populated, populated, popularized and more fully articulated the idea, again, with all due respect to Olaf Stapleton maybe I take back what I said make sure you call them staples and swarms.
But, but still I think we pretty damn cool we actually do call it that we build something like that but it was point being that how radical must have been for him to not only just talk about mega structures, but to talk about it in the context of the search for extra
intelligence which I'm not sure there was even a term that existed in 1959. It wasn't until Drake in the, like in 1964 or so and project Osma and the first efforts at Radio City got underway so this could predate for even radio, like actual efforts for Radio City.
So, today we can talk about, amazingly, we can talk about mega structures and Dyson sphere, you know, without blinking an eye and batting an eye like, for example, a couple years ago, there was that variable star, which is called boy, a boy on star.
Tabby star, the same thing. Tabby star is the same star. It's the same thing. And that had this unexplainable and irregular dimming episodes, and a number of, you know, theories were posited to explain it from a natural perspective, but inevitably it got people thinking, well, maybe this is actually evidence of, and the first data point we have of an alien mega structure.
And what delighted me as a journalist covering this stuff, well, was that I can actually just, you know, matter of fact, we say, yeah, this could actually, this is actually being entertained as possible. And I didn't have to like, like, really beat people over the head to understand it, and I appreciate it.
And people are like, oh, I've heard of that. I don't know what the next shell is, you know, or whether it be through the science fiction or whether just through casual conversations becoming, whereas we have to fight for Dysonian city, you know, just 10 to 15 years ago.
It's now almost taken for granted that that's how we should look for extra trust with civilizations that, and now almost the radio city almost seems anachronistic, I still believe we should do it.
Don't get me wrong. I still think we should listen for radio signals. But now, yeah, let's look for, like I said, other technosignatures, even laser settings becoming a thing and all that. So, again, but again, I just find it interesting that
Freeman Dyson being the free thinker that he was, you know, just had it, you know, just thought this is what needs to be said and thought through and, you know, like I say, is what it is.
I've often thought about like what other like strong attractors could, I guess, motivate a civilization to expand in a way, which is indetectable.
And, you know, at least small and came up with the idea that like maybe black holes born universes and, and there's other sort of permutations and an idea and perhaps galactic civilizations engineer or optimize black holes to spur forth the types of idealized
universes for computation and, and, and life, right. And they think that, you know, they sort of ascend or transcend in some way to a better reality or a reality more conducive towards flourishing.
I kind of hope that that's possible and that's a good reason why we can't see other civilizations out there but what are your thoughts on, I guess, strategies for civilizations to continue without being detected.
So, again, I have to work under the data that we have right now, which does suggest that advanced civilizations, should they exist they don't become interstellar colonists.
That just, that's, that's the assumption that I'm working under. So I'm a bit, I guess I can call me a contact pessimist or even like a, you know, just, just doubt that that's kind of like within our, within our, within our future, future means so I keep asking the question,
you know, how the wide and what is this kind of modality that a civilization would enter into that's, that's, that's still deemed a value.
And it just, I mean, it just keeps coming back to this idea of, of, you know, this internal existence that living within ourselves, like locally, and not branching out like just finding, you know, means to, you know, perpetually have access to resources that might mean
something or parking near a perpetual energy source of some sort, but living more modestly in that sense and yet just running, you know, ancestor civilizations or hedonistic civilizations and living out, you know, the remaining duration of the cosmos in that manner.
And I think the best solution that we come up at this point that's still that, that I, in my opinion, does not violate the non exclusivity issue and at the same time, answers the question as to why we've not made contact with anybody else.
We're just inherently xenophobic, and we just keep to ourselves, we enter into this happy heaven like modality and that's, that's, and that's, and that post United the pathway ever after the end.
So, I'm not suggesting for a second that that's what will happen or that's the greatest solution to this but it's certainly one that occupies some of my thought, in terms of what's the solution here what's the what's actually going to happen.
What's a non exclusivity issue.
The point is that it has to be a solution that every single extraterrestrial civilization will independently enter into.
And that there can't be any outliers, because if there were outliers and we would have made contact with them by now they would have made their presence known.
That's working under those kinds of constraints I suppose in terms of what when used to kind of make these sorts of extrapolations.
Simon Dyson did have some controversial opinions and views. And one of them was that he was sort of critical of climate change models or that weather climate change would have a serious impact on global health and viability.
He kind of alienated a lot of people toward the end of his life, and yet he was not kind of on board the whole, you know, climate justice span wagon and quite the opposite.
And, you know, he said himself that, you know, to be a good scientist kind of like means you have to be subversive I don't think ever liked.
I think the more popular an idea, you know, became I think the less inclined it was to latch on to it kind of I was looking for ways to kind of chip away at it.
And climate change was certainly one of those targets and yeah he kind of thought that scientists were, I think it was a bit of a climate change skeptic first of all.
But even if he did buy into the models, he kind of thought well it's not so bad, you know, which from today's perspective like I don't have to tell you as someone who lives in Australia like, well it is kind of bad.
It's kind of like it's a show, you know, it's just awful. And he was saying oh it's great that carbon dioxide is great for plants and create these lush environments and all these kinds of like this, I think the hand wavy sort of, you know, proclamations and it got me thinking
well he's a big thinker but he was also maybe sometimes spoke outside of his immediate area of expertise and maybe didn't think through some of the repercussions of this.
Yeah, I will say at the same time, he's like the only climate skeptic or whatever you want to call it actually I kind of will ring in my ear every once in a while.
You know, like, you know, for example, you'll study a Jurassic environments and you understand that you know there was no polar caps at that time and dinosaurs live in a very unique time in our interplanets history and understand that yeah,
climate change is an indelible part of this planet's history like planet of, in fact, the history of this planet is simply the history of climate change.
And in this constant study of how the planet has changed and how animals have reacted to this to climate change over time and that includes all kinds of different hominins and of course dinosaurs and animals and all sorts of things.
So, you know, you do have to look at climate change that that lens yeah what's, I don't have to remind you or your listeners obviously this is characteristically different because we're the ones that are now responsible for it and we're kind of causing this change on time scales that are
unprecedented in the planet's history like it's a these spikes are just unreal in terms of how quickly we were able to now impact upon the environment.
You know, it also gets me thinking even about the Kardashian scale because Kardashian says talks about K one civilizations and you know harnessing of the entire energy output of the planet.
Kardashian would not have been concerned about well at what cost to the environment. What does that mean in terms of the heat expenditure.
You know, if the whole planet, you know, is working in that way like what does what is that doing environmentally, what is it doing to sustainability, is it viable and sustainable.
This is, you know, is actually creating a planet that's actually going to be able to continue to move forward in time.
And still sustain, you know, what what we would value in terms of wildlife and plant life and all that sort of stuff. So,
it's one thing to conjecture about is anything sometimes one of the most difficult things is to project outcomes and consequences. And I think maybe that's where Freeman Dyson was maybe a little lacking and
to Cavalier perhaps about what he thought were the ill effects of climate change and not to accuse him of this but maybe simply because it was at the sake of being contrary and being that guy who was that, you know, to be that kind of deviant when it came to scientific to scientific thinking.
So that sadly will probably be one one area in which he will not be fondly remembered as I think we can pretty much agree that climate change is something that needs to be mitigated rather than celebrated.
Right. But yes, so a lot of people have controversial opinions and it shouldn't really detract from the value they contribute in other areas.
And I think some people like to demonize thinkers because they come up with one controversial opinion. And that can kind of be like throwing the baby out with the bathwater, which is, I think, silly.
Yeah, no, for sure. I mean, you know, I have, you know, so many quote unquote heroes that that I admire, but I don't think there's a, I would never say reason why I had to put heroes and scare quotes because, you know, whether
Charles Sagan or Freeman Dyson or anyone is people that I hugely admire. They're not perfect. And there's always something about their personality or something they might have done or something that they believe in that does absolutely not conform to my own beliefs or values.
I would never say that I would, I will unabashedly feel and irreservedly follow someone and declare them, you know, to be the perfect hero for me. That does not exist for me personally. So I could admire the hell out of somebody that doesn't mean I have to buy in absolutely everything that they have to say.
So yeah, totally agree with you.
Yeah, yeah.
Is there any other points which you'd like to bring up at this stage, which we haven't yet covered?
You know, we, we, boy, we covered a lot there. I just want to just maybe back to Tabby star, just to say that it's not a, I don't know, we kind of came full circle on that it's not a mega structure.
Right now they're pretty sure it's still some kind of naturalistic phenomenon and it was a fascinating paper a few months ago suggested that what it might actually be is a disintegrating moon.
So what happens in some star systems is that a planet will at the end of its life gets subsumed by its host star, and it'll bring along its moon or moons with it.
And in this case, they're saying that that did not happen that the moon got ejected, and it's slowly disintegrating as it is also being a subsumed by the star and it's kind of creating this anomalous debris field that is, that is infrequent in terms of how it's happening.
And that's the explanation and I actually talked to Dr. Boyan about this and she thought it was an intriguing possibility. So I decided to mention that because I didn't want you listeners to think that it was still people are still very much thinking that it's a mega structure.
It's we're pretty sure it's not, but I think it's pretty exciting that we can talk about this possibility. Yet at the same time you never want to, you know, whenever we see something that you don't understand is put your hands and say, Oh my God, we don't understand it.
Aliens like that. I think that's I'm not suggesting we should by no means. In fact, we're talking about pulsars earlier. The first pulsars that were discovered were so odd to astronomers that no explanation for them.
Because these things are blinking with such extreme rapidity regularity like that was their first thought to I think they're actually the notes that like was like LG.
They called them or something like that which meant like little green man or something like that based on the hinting that oh my God, or maybe discovered, you know, some kind of alien signature here.
It turned out not to be the case, but there always is this tendency that when we do see something that's super weird, and it defies our expectations, there is this tendency to invoke extraterrestrial life.
I'm not saying that's the healthiest thing to do. It shouldn't be this kind of last resort, if you will, kind of like that, like the anecdote at the end of an anecdote to say after we've exhausted all these possibilities, you know, a through F.
Let's just maybe keep an open mind that it kind of maybe is consistent with what we think is technosignature could look like it's that. So that's all I want to say about tabby star at this point.
Awesome. Well, I guess if you'd like to conclude what if you were to meet somebody who was thinking about donating their large fortune towards some form of exploratory research.
What would it be and how would you convince them to do something that you value that maybe relates to our discussion today.
Wow, that's, that's, that's a heck of a question and I've really given not really given so much thought to that like I will say that it might be an answer that it's kind of like unsexy relative to discussion or even irrelevant to the discussion we just had but I admire for example the bill and
Linda Gates Foundation for what they've done in terms of being smart about where they spend their money and in particular as to what they deem to be areas that are most in need. And for example, a big thing for them is neglected tropical diseases.
And obviously, you know, with COVID-19 being what it is right now and it's not a neglect the tropical disease, obviously, but it just shows that we're still
victimized by microorganisms, like in a way like that's just unreal, you know, we, we like to think that we have a handle on on nature that we don't we're not preyed upon by lions anymore, you know, or wolves.
But we're most certainly preyed upon by other kinds of animals and they're microscopic in size, whether it be malaria, you know, Zika virus, you know, the common flu and the cold and now the COVID-19 disease.
It's, I think that we need, we need to continue to spend our money and resources on those kinds of threats because at the end of the day and at the end of the year when you look at the, you know, the actuarial tables, those are the things that are killing us.
You know, at a horrific scale, you know, that's what's killing us on mass and we need to get a handle on that. And similarly, the fact includes bacteria and bacterial infections in that, in that body of thinking.
And we're heading toward the so-called, you know, antibiotic apocalypse where there are antibiotics. Looks like they're not, they're increasingly becoming ineffective. And we're starting to talk about, you know, super viruses that are super immune to standard cocktails and antibiotics.
So these are the kinds of things that scare the crap out of me.
And it should scare your listeners as well. And so yeah, that's, if I can, you know, I think that people with horrendous amounts of money should probably spend it to alleviate those kinds of blights. So that's how I will answer that.
Well, George, it's been an amazing mind blowing discussion. I love talking about these topics and I really appreciate the time to talk to a few. So yeah, thanks Heaps. And I look forward to chatting with you again in the future.
Absolutely. Me too.
You
