So
Hey guys, welcome back to Everly's Build a House.
So in our last video, we had just finished pouring the walls of our basement.
And so we'll go over kind of what the guys did next to get ready for building the floor
in our house.
So if you remember in our last video, there were some deck ledgers that were just temporarily
held on the back of the house just with screws and they were just screwed into the ICF webbing.
Aaron and his dad had then drilled and wet set some bolts so that later after the concrete
had cured, they could go back and tighten those.
So they did that and then on the inside of the house, if you remember, there were all
those cutouts in the styrofoam and then they were covered with plywood.
Also that all the concrete would infill into those holes.
And so then Curtis and Aaron stripped off all the plywood and you could see all the
exposed concrete.
Then they went ahead and temporarily held up the floor ledgers just with screws again
into the ICF webbing.
And then they had to take a hammer drill and drill into all those concrete squares and
then set in all of the bolts and tighten them so that the floor ledgers could be hung.
So that was the next step.
Check it out.
Thank you.
Thank you.
I showed you these before we poured the concrete.
These are those bolts that we had sitting in the board ready to go for when the concrete
is poured and they were wet set in there.
So a little later on we're going to go and crank on all these nuts and tighten that up
and that will suck that to the wall and that's going to hold up our deck.
So here's all those nuts will get tightened up and that's actually what's the strong part.
We screwed those all into the webbing but that's not strong it's just there to hold
it until the concrete and the bolts do.
We're doing the same thing inside here we're just Dad and I we're just screwing this up
to the webbing and tomorrow when I get the right tools that I need like a right hammer
drill bit and I'll go and I'll drill those and we'll get those installed and that will
be right now it's just sitting up there with a couple of deck screws so it's not strong
if you put any weight on there it would just pull right off.
So we'll bolt it in tomorrow and that'll keep it strong.
So we poured our wall this week and here's what those cutouts look like filled up with
concrete.
Here we've got a lot of braces and stuff here's those dowels full of concrete too.
So that's what will hold our floor our basement floor this here will look like that eventually
but we need to bolt through this into those concrete cutouts and that's what will hold
this end of the floor up.
Now the other thing here is these beam pockets that we put in there so the steel beam will
sit right inside there right on top of the concrete wall and that will hold the whole
middle of the floor up basically all the way from here all the way over there.
So we've got these dowels all the way to the inside to hold the floor up that those cutouts
up there to hold the upstairs floor beam pockets here and that's how that works.
Our floor trusses have arrived here's our big steel beam it's going to go into those
beam pockets and then be held up by three teleposts.
I think you're going to hold the house up.
Cool this is going to be our view.
Okay here's the finished floor.
So those ledgers bolted on there we've got the trusses sitting on the ledgers.
The other end of the truss is on the steel beam which are on the teleposts these two
are I believe they're 12,000 pound rated posts and this one is 21,000 I think that's because
of this hole I'm not sure exactly how all the engineering works but there must be more
load there because of this hole here or something.
We went with 20 inch web trusses and this lets you get everything keep everything tucked
up top there all of our ducts are going to be up in the webbing up coming off the top
of the main duct which will be in the mechanical room on the other side of the beam there and
everything will come off the top and shoot up over top.
So over here we've got the ledgers over here the ledger these trusses they also as well
as supporting the floor this way they also support the walls these walls can't fall
in with these trusses built the way they are they would basically have to crush all of
these trusses from that wall to this wall is held up by those trusses now that doesn't
provide the same strength this way though so for that the engineer had a detail for
us and we've got these braces I guess they are so they we had to cut out the ICF so
that actually bears on the concrete not on the foam foam is obviously just going to squish
and then you do some blocking and you've got a gusset there and we glued and screwed the
heck out of everything and these are every oh and there's also the boards up on the plywood
there so between these braces and the plywood being or the decking being glued and screwed
on there that will provide that lateral support this way so the trusses do it north and south
and the braces oh and the strong backs here too also tie these all together I forgot to
mention these guys there's certain locations we had to put in they're called strong backs so
this will tie all the trusses together so when you're walking upstairs you know it's not
bouncing around or nothing nothing moves and it's six nails or screws per truss on every one
of those strong backs so I'm glad I've got that pass load nailer because holy cow that was a lot
of nails and that is basically our completed floor another thing I should maybe mention here
this hole is where the stairs are going to be so those trusses didn't come all the way to the
beam here obviously so we had to make our own beam this is a 2 ply 2 by 10 just with regular
joist hangers nail the joist hangers to the the trusses there and those trusses are doubled up
to carry the load and there's actually a there's a bracket for those two see that little bracket
it connects those trusses together so they can't pull apart and then this beam sits in between them
and those trusses bear on that beam and this is this will be the hole for our stairs won't be
quite this big we have to build out it's a little bit right up here not quite the fireplace but
kind of in the TV fireplace area there everything went pretty well learned a few things it was
kind of fun to do so that's how that works
