If we were to look at ourselves through the lens of an experiment like we would an animal experiment
We think that animal is sick if you saw an animal digging in the corner looking looking looking looking for a bone the dog
Is looking looking looking looking looking and you'd think that's really sad. That's us, right? That's us
I'm pointing it myself intentionally. That's us
Dr. Andrew Huberman welcome to the show great to be here. It's been a long time coming very long time coming
What do you mean when you say you cannot control the mind with the mind?
Yeah, that statement really emerges from the fact that if we are in a pretty relaxed state or
If we are happy
We generally feel like we can do what we want to do. We can maneuver through our environment
We can make choices that are reasonable
But
Oftentimes we're not in relaxed and happy states. That's just part of the human experience obviously and there's a
Fundamental feature to the nervous system
Which is this thing they call the autonomic nervous system
Which is just fancy nerd speak for the components of your nervous system that raise your levels of alertness or bring them
Way down sometimes we hear fight or flight rest and digest, but this system governs all that but a lot more and
Basically what happens is when we are at the extremes of
The autonomic what I call seesaw of very very alert to the point of being really stressed or panicked or concerned
Or if we are very close to sleep and we're drowsy and we're exhausted
at those
points along the
autonomic
Nervous system
Our thoughts become a bit like a runaway train, you know, if you're very upset
It's hard to talk yourself out of it if you're stressed
It's hard to think yourself out of it. In fact, you can start doing all sorts of third-personing and
Rationalization you can call someone you can text somebody. It's very hard to get yourself out of those states with thinking alone
but the beauty of the autonomic nervous system is that it
Traverses the brain and the body and it connects to essentially all the organs of the body and it's a two-way street
such that certain behaviors
Even certain patterns of breathing
Etc allow us to
shift where we are on the
autonomic continuum between very very alert and stressed and very calm and
thereby give our mind a
Shift also in terms of the kinds of thoughts that we can entertain the sorts of
Actions that we can engage in to make this concrete if you're very very stressed. We're very very upset
Two things happen one. It's very hard to take your focus off
Whatever it is that's upsetting you and if you don't know what's upsetting you new pure anxiety, but you don't know why
It's very hard to take your mind off of the feelings of anxiety
In those states of mind
There's another component which is that for whatever reason and no one really understands why this is
It feels as if the state that you're in will go on forever
Now when we're in happy relaxed states rarely do we think gosh?
This is going to go on forever and yet when we are in these unfortunate states of mind
We get the idea somehow it was sort of hijacks our perception of time and we feel like this is never going to stop
If we turn to the body and certain behaviors
Let me talk about what those are
We are able to move ourselves
Along the autonomic continuum and at that point when we've done that successfully and it's actually quite straightforward to do
We are able to think about things differently
We start to get a sense that the way we feel might not be the way we're going to feel forever
And it's in those shifts that we start to realize ah
My mind actually is not my best friend at these extremes, but there's a lot more to it
You're only getting the tip of the iceberg in those states
So that's why I say if you can't control the mind with the mind look to the body to control the mind
How would that be adaptive?
How would it be adaptive for us to focus all of our attention on to the anxiety?
Is that something that you could see a useful? Absolutely, so let's take stress as an example
And this could be stress panic anxiety
You know each one of those has a definition in medical terms psychological terms, but to be fair
No one really knows how to draw the line in the brain between fear and stress and anxiety
But we can save with certainty that all of those states
Involve high levels of alertness high levels of awareness sometimes for things in our environment and sometimes just for what's going on internally
When we are stressed anxious
Afraid waking up in the middle of the night doesn't matter what triggered it
There are a couple basic things that happen to all of us first of all our heart rate quickens. That's kind of an obvious one
Fuel from our muscles and our liver is shuttled to particular organs of the body and away from others
In particular fuel is shuttled towards the big muscles of the body to generate large movements
This is why we quake a bit when we're stressed the hands will shake. It's preparing us for we are prepared for movement
How does that prepare us for movement?
The shaking actually is the consequence of trying to not move when we are stressed
Basically, this is why taking a walk or a run you actually feel like you can kind of dispel the stress
You're not actually dispelling the stress. What's happened is it's like the ARP the RPM are getting cranked up. It's like idling it
Right, it's you know, you could sit there in a parked car and do that
But basically you take the thing out of park and it just wants to go and so a lot of the times when we're stressed
It's in conditions in which we're trying to remain still
Public speaking and a tough argument, you know at the doctor's office about to get an injection
You know, it depends on what stresses people obviously
But that readiness for action is a second component. So heart rate readiness for action by way of shuttling
glucose and other fuels to the muscles and then away from the reproductive organs from digestive organs, etc
Because that is just not the right time for that
Another very very powerful feature of this response is that our our pupils of our eyes
The dark parts of our eyes get big now
You might think that that expands your visual field
But actually the way the optics of the eye work that narrows the aperture of your visual field
So when you are stressed, you literally are seeing things through a small aperture
so to straw view of the world as they say and
Under those conditions, you cannot see things in your periphery as well as you could prior to being stressed
but you become
Exquisitely good at measuring small detailed changes in whatever it is that you happen to be looking at now
There's an internal process too, which is that the aperture on your thinking also becomes very very narrow
So that if for instance, well, I had this happen the other day. I I heard something very stressful
I couldn't think about anything else
Right and that might just seem logical like of course you can't think about anything else very stressful
You're concerned about this but my mind wasn't thinking about this particular incident
It was thinking if this then this then if that then that and that then that and so you start, you know dropping into the future
You start dropping into the past like, oh god, why did we do that?
Wow, you know, and you start doing all that kind of cycling through things
And of course there are so many things that can help relax us meditation
Exercise a nice healthy meal social connection
but the fifth column of the stress response is that
Your aperture of vision your aperture of thinking gets very narrow
And it becomes harder and harder to do the very things that would keep you out of stress
And so this is kind of the the double-edged sword that is stress
And so all the more reason why in those moments if the stress is not desired because there are moments when stress is desired
You know, you're navigating an emergency, etc
But if you don't want to be in that narrow aperture of thinking and vision, etc
Then you need to find some way to bring your level of autonomic arousal as it's called down
Slightly so that you can start thinking about other possibilities or you know, there are instances
I think everyone's been in this kind of situation where the thing that's stressing out is not going to get resolved today
And you need to sleep and of course, you know, you need to sleep and then you can't sleep
And then of course that creates a compounding stress and now you're stressed about not being able to sleep
And then over the course of the next few days, you you know dissolve into a puddle of tears
But fortunately there are ways out of that kind of self-destruction
You've done a lot of work on fear. That was one of the things that you mentioned before
Is there something that everybody is scared of because I've heard the
Story the wives tale babies are born with is it fears of heights and loud noises or something? Is there any truth in that?
There's there's something everyone's scared of there is I think the one that
Everybody who has a healthy nervous system will react quite robustly to is if you start increasing the amount of carbon dioxide
That they're breathing and reduce the amount of oxygen that they're taking in that's terrifying
am I right in thinking there's a
experiment you can do where it's a single breath and
That is pretty reliable at bringing on an anxiety attack
Yeah, if you have people, please don't do this because you need the right proper medical staff around but they're they're great
Experiments of having people breathe carbon dioxide directly and it you basically panic
It's terrifying one one big gulp of carbon dioxide will make make you very afraid
It turns out that there are a little group of neurons
Of course neurons are just nerve cells that little group of neurons in the brainstem that respond to levels of carbon
Dioxide in the blood turns out the reason we breathe is of course to bring in oxygen and then offload carbon dioxide
But we don't have neurons that stimulate breathing for oxygen
We have neurons that sense when carbon dioxide levels get too high
So if you hold your breath
Eventually carbon dioxide levels go up and then at the moment that they reach a certain threshold these neurons fire and trigger the gas
Reflex huh, so in that moment you bring in oxygen and then of course you offload some carbon dioxide
That's why it's so important to work on co2 tolerance right for breath work. Yeah, so
Freedivers a sport. I actually don't recommend
Because there's only one way out of that sport as they say
I have some friends who are freedivers and and obviously you can do it safely with the right guide and training etc
But it is a very dangerous sport because for most people when carbon dioxide levels increase in the bloodstream and brain
triggers this gas reflex what?
Free divers train is carbon dioxide tolerance
So they do that a couple of different ways and again, please don't do this because you actually people have died doing this
Which so one way is you can do what's called cyclic hyperventilation?
Right you do that 25 times or so and you think oh you're bringing a lot of oxygen you are but you're also offloading a lot of carbon dioxide
Especially if you use forceful exhales normally humans breathe through active inhales and passive exhales
You just cut they just sort of dump their air passively
But if you do this cyclic hyperventilation, you're dumping a lot of carbon dioxide and then if you were to oh
Hold your breath what you would find is you could hold your breath for a lot longer
Why because your carbon dioxide levels are reduced so you don't have the same impulse to breathe now on land
That's a more or less safe thing to do provided that you can get a good gulp of air once the gas reflex hits
If you do that before going underwater cyclic hyperventilation they call air packing and then you go underwater
You're going to be able to excuse me cyclic hyperventilation to air pack and then go underwater
but your
Carbon dioxide is then lower you're going to be able to stay under longer
But this is very dangerous because normally when that carbon dioxide threshold hits you would
Pop up to the surface you sort of panic and want to go to the top free divers learn to tolerate
High levels of carbon dioxide in their bloodstream and stay very very calm the way they die is very interesting
Because it speaks to the physiology the way they they die is they'll just be swimming
Feeling completely calm because they're very used to they've trained up the co2 tolerance carbon dioxide tolerance
And when they die they don't suddenly feel like oh my goodness. I'm running out of air. It's just lights go black
That's it. They're just black out and so they're alive and then they're gone
And so this is why they use spotters. They you know, they have a line etc
anytime you hear about somebody
Dying doing free diving. It's rarely because they weren't
Comfortable at a given depth or because it's not because they got their gas reflexes kicked in
It's because their gas reflex has been so desensitized that it's after the point of which they die
precisely and this you know, it's sort of like when you hear that
Skilled parachuters die why well because they're so comfortable with so many jumps. They actually forget to pull
there's sometimes there are many instances in which they're they're
Videoing the first time jumpers right and they're getting the video for them
And they themselves forget to pull because they're so comfortable jumping out of planes
And so as people get more and more advanced in something there's a there's a new risk that that surfaces because
Unless it's very reflexive and they've built all all the protocols in
Oftentimes they can overlook the very thing that allowed them to become expert in the first place
Why do my palms get sweaty when I watch videos of people climbing up cranes and stuff like that
You know the ones that I mean the guy's got a gopro is a dude called James Kingston from the uk. That's a psychopath
He goes up to the highest
Towers of dubai
illegally in the middle of the night and then I watch it on a screen. It's only this big and
I get this visceral response. Yeah, well two things first of all I I can relate
You know, I saw the free solo movie with alex honnold and you know, he lives
And it's still scary to watch right you actually know the outcome at the beginning
They sort of make it clear that he manages to do this and
You're it's still terrifying and I think it's for the same reason that the osu. YouTube videos are terrifying
Which is that we are so visual as animals
We are so visual. I mean rodents even a lot of carnivore predators are extremely olfactory smell driven
Humans are incredibly visual. I mean more than 40 percent of the human brain has something to do with vision visual navigation
eye movements
Visual perception color perception face perception. We have dedicated areas of the brain that are just for perceiving human faces
And the micro expressions of human faces. So it's so highly evolved for us
When we see depth of field that's not
Parallel to the ground
It is terrifying with good reason because
You know, what's the universal force that we all experience from the time we're born is gravity
The first thing you learn is that things fall down not up, right?
They, you know, it's it's like the the fundamental rule that we come into the world with it's like
Day one
Even though the baby's kind of flopping around like a potato but can't even hold its head up
Eyes are often, you know, the ocular muscles of the eyes are often not very good
So babies will kind of their eyes are rolling back in their head that generally corrects itself
over the next few weeks or so
But the feeling of gravity of them, you know, if they feel like they're being dropped even the tiniest bit
Right, they will go wide-eyed. So there's a built-in vestibulo ocular reflex
So when you see depth of field in the direction of the gravitational pull
You actually get a little bit of activity in your cerebellum, which literally means mini brain
A little area of the brain in the back that actually looks like a little mini brain
If you were looking at the brain and that area of the brain is responsible for all the reflexes associated with the falling reflex
It does a lot of other things too. So when you see that depth of field in the direction of gravity
You have a little micro activity in your brain that you might fall
And you've ever been to a tall bridge or a dam and you go to the edge and you know, people love to play with this
There's that also that tower in toronto. They have the big um, see his tower
Well, the big no the big um the big tower into I forget what it is. Maybe it's in calgary. Goodness. Canadians are going to hate me
Okay, I love Canadians, but for some reason I can't remember this
They have one of those glass floors there
Where you can walk and it's terrifying and you know, you're not going to fall through it
Right or they tell you and you're not going to fall through it, but it's terrifying
because your
Body and brain are preparing for this immense fall. So when you see this in video, it's the same thing
I always say a picture is worth a thousand words, but a video is worth 10 million pictures
I mean, this is the reason why we're so drawn to things like instagram scrolling. It's like text text video
You know, or the the enormous popularity of tiktok
It's video now the enormous popularity of twitter still escapes me because that's a different different sort of cultural gravitational pull
But video and in particular action that gets us in a kind of a primitive mode
That is an extremely alluring visual image. What about emotional fears like a fear of failure or social disapproval or something
Do they work in a in a similar way or is there a different part of the brain that's using that? Yeah, great question
So a few years ago a postdoc in my lab who's now a staff scientist malice yieldman
Excuse me malice doctor malice. Yelma's Balban. She has a long name
Excellent researcher studies fear
Did a very broad-scale survey of the general public thousands and thousands of of entries
Created this kind of
Cloud of bubbles the bigger the bubble the more the greater number of people that had that fear
You saw some we saw some interesting things
So heights certainly public speaking certainly doctor's office and syringes certainly
Public speaking fear is very common
Um, social isolation fear is very common, but we also saw some things like dogs
You know, there are a number of people who are afraid of dogs, which is inconceivable to me because I love dogs so much
Exactly the same. Yep, but people
You know people form these associations whether or not through experience or through indirect experience observing others
I think public speaking is one of the greatest fear of dying
Yeah, I swear. I don't it's not funny, but
Figure of speech. I
Never think about dying and being afraid of dying. I think about all the scary things that could happen while I'm living
but there are many people who are just
intrinsically afraid of dying
And so that's that's a big one
For people that uh, don't swim fear of drowning for people that swim less so
um
For people that have some sort of psychiatric disorder genuine psychiatric disorder
Like obsessive compulsive disorder, which is not just obsessive compulsive personality, but obsessive compulsive disorder
Fear of the of being discovered in the shame that they have around their obsessions and compulsions. These are
True ocd is very common. Do they all live in the same place?
All of these different fears that all exist in the same place. So yeah, so I was rattling off and I didn't answer your question
To the the more important point. So forgive me
The short answer is they have a final common pathway
Which is increased autonomic arousal and that is funneled through a couple what we call limbic structures
Among others. So there's certainly involvement of the of the now famous amygdala
This which means almond is his almond shape structure on the two sides of the brain
There's also area of the brain called the striatum analysis is also involved in fear
And then the hypothalamus this small collection of neurons just above the roof of your mouth
Which is really to me one of the more fascinating areas of the brain harbors neurons
That create a body wide and brain wide response
To something that the higher order areas of the brain like the forebrain
See and perceive as dangerous as threatening. So the short answer is yes
It all funnels through hypothalamus, amygdala, striatum analysis and autonomic nervous system. That's a final common pathway
But in terms of the variety of different things that can stimulate fear in the ways that they can do that
That is highly contextual. So the forebrain this real estate in the brain right behind behind the forehead is incredible because it's sort of
Free real estate for you to customize for your life according to what happens to you early on
So for instance, you might not be at all afraid of heights
And you say well, why is that so?
Well, maybe when you were a kid you were one of those maniacs that like you know doing within the states
We call them cherry drops the kids that could you know swing on their feet and then jump off the the bar and then other kids
Are timidly crawling to the top of the thing don't even want to go up the ladder to the slide
There's a ton of variation and that variation does not exist in the kind of deeper circuitry the final common path circuitry
It exists in the learning that we experienced early in life one bad fall
Can do it. I mean I was bitten very badly by a german shepherd when I was a kid
Head almost got my eye, but you know for whatever reason I've always liked dogs anyway
But there are other things that I've experienced that have left long term negative imprints
So I it's highly contextual and a lot of it has to do with what happens immediately after the bad experience
This is why nowadays there's a lot of legal use of the drug ketamine
After traumas, you know, this is all very dark stuff, unfortunately
But if you you know, you just imagine the family member that was just in a car crash and saw their
The driver their loved one impaled onto the steering column
I mean what could be more horrible than that nowadays if they come into the emergency room
They will often give them an injection of ketamine, which is a dissociative anesthetic to get them to dissociate from this extreme emotional state
So there are ways now to treat this
And ketamine is used clinically at later periods too. Didn't you you you did an experiment where you went
Diving with sharks and I think that there was a complication and you went back the next day to redo it
I'm going to guess that this is for the exact same reason to sort of conquer and
Integrate the experience. Yeah to make a long story short
We went two years in a row out to Guadalupe Island with a lot of great white sharks
Some of the more expert shark divers were cage eggs sitting. They were leaving the cage the first year. I did not the second year
I decided I would but the day before I did
I went down into the cage just get comfortable again down there and I had air failure
And the safety tanks were out also and obviously I experienced extreme carbon dioxide
Overload and panic. I didn't full-blown panic. I kept enough awareness that I was able to obviously I'm here
Um, I survived doing a share air protocol, etc. But it was a very bad situation
I don't like to say I nearly died because that's actually sort of letting the bug in my brain
I like to joke that the reaper came in and um, you know and offered me a fist bump and I offered him a different gesture instead
so I survived
But the next day I woke up very very distraught because I had this bug in this loop in my brain
You know this notion I came so close to to the end. And so I did go back down and I did cage exit and I don't say that to
Um, suggest that it was the smartest decision
Uh, um, obviously you're safer on the boat or on land
I don't say it to sound, you know, again tough or anything. I did it deliberately because I did not want to return
Home with this
Loop of fear and so I went back into the traumatic circumstance and obviously made it out
And if you look at all the successful treatments for trauma, they all involve
getting close to the
Trauma inducing mindset
Exposure therapy gradual and assisted by a clinician
But rarely if ever
Are people with serious trauma encouraged to get as far away from the feeling of at least not in the clinical setting
This has a lot of implications for things like trigger warnings
Colleagues of mine in psychiatry. I've asked them directly. What do you think of trigger warnings? And they said, you know
I mean, there's some logic to it on the on the surface, but if you really
Think about true trauma
And we can define trauma
Dr. Paul Conti was on my podcast his amazing trauma psychiatrist. He said trauma is an experience
Is not just a bad experience trauma is an experience that changes your nervous system
Such that it behaves differently in the future that in a way that's maladaptive for you
So if you look at all the trauma treatments, they're all about learning to talk about the trauma
Even experiencing some of the same feelings
So things like trigger warnings and all these things that buffer us against feeling our true feelings
Do nothing but prolong the trauma and prolong and exacerbate fear
You had David Goggins in the lab to study him for fear. What did you learn from looking at that guy?
David's David's great. I always chuckle with David because you know, the one thing about David is what you see on social
Media is actually what you get when you interact with David
We worked long hours one day and I was everyone was ready to tap out. This is a bunch of people in
Silicon Valley for a day, you know doing some workshop type thing and he just he was changing into his running shorts midway
He was going to run to the airport and he ran to the airport as far as I know to get his flight
I believe so, you know
But there was this moment of should we continue? Should we take a break and he was like, no, let's keep going keep going
Everything you see and read and hear about David is exactly how he shows up. It's really wonderful
He came to the lab and he did, you know, we have a virtual version of the shark thing
Which of course is not the same as the real experience, but for people who are afraid of sharks
It's quite scary for them and allows us to study fear
David was he's very afraid of sharks, which was sort of amusing to me given that as a seal
He had to spend a lot of time in water
But uh, he was first one in wanted to do the vr talked about how he didn't like it. But um, but that's why he did it
You know constant
Testing himself. In fact, I think even though david's quite successful
I think and has many many options of how to spend his time
I believe this is correct that I think right now. He's doing fire jumping
He's fighting fires in the wilderness by zip lining in or fast lining in or jumping out of planes
So he's constantly pushing that
that friction lever to create
Or build or
Further build this thing about leaning into friction and this is a term that isn't really scientific
But that I decided to coin because this idea of limbic friction
That when we're very tired and we need to be in action or when we're very stressed and we need to
Perform in a more calm and controlled way
There's friction on both sides getting out of bed when we're exhausted hard
Very hard often
Leaning into action in a calm and deliberate way when we're freaking out
Like going to give a public lecture if one has fear of public speaking
Also hard so this limbic friction and david just seems to seek
What I call limbic friction in every domain of life. Is that like exposure therapy for limbic friction then?
Essentially, yeah
I mean what you're training and improving when you're getting better at dealing with stress
Is this ability to tolerate high amounts of adrenaline in your body and to think clearly and function
Well, I mean adrenaline is epinephrine and just a little bit of physiology
It's released from the adrenals obviously above the kidneys that gets your body organs
Amped up and energized
It can't cross the so-called blood brain barrier. You have a high restriction fence that we call the blood brain barrier around the brain
Keep bad molecules out
Adrenaline therefore is released also within the brain from a little cluster of neurons called locus ceruleus
The name doesn't matter. So when you are stressed
Your brain and your body both wake up and that adrenaline
Hijack certain systems narrows your visual focus, etc. Etc. If you look at almost all stress inoculation
protocols
cold water ice bath cold shower sick like hyperventilation
Those all do the same thing
They generate a lot of adrenaline release in the brain and a lot of adrenaline release in the body
But it's different if though
If the adrenaline in the brain and body is evoked by you that you did it
Because under conditions under which you did the ice bath deliberately and now you're wide awake and really really alert
There's this feeling that you have options. It wasn't done to you, but you can train up an ability to for instance think
clearly and calmly
Maybe even do some simple math problems in your head or maybe try and relax while there's all this adrenaline in your system
And that carries over so that when you you know, we've all done it
You're driving along the person in front of you stop short
And you're almost in the accident, right? There's that moment where you could panic or that moment where you could
You know road rage or that moment where you could freak out
But if you are familiar with the feeling of adrenaline in your brain and body
You navigate that in a in a calmer way. How well because adrenaline is generic
There's no adrenaline for the car crash adrenaline for the heights adrenaline for the
The uh the relationship situation
It's all the same so we can get better
We can raise our stress threshold as I like to refer to it and that can be done through cold water
Or cyclic hyperventilation
Ideally not at the same time, but cold water, you know is a universal stimulus for creating adrenaline release
And there's a big range of cold not infinite, but a big range of cold
In which you can generate adrenaline without harming your tissue
Whereas with heat you get into a very hot environment or very low oxygen environment
You'll also get a lot of adrenaline, but you can also suffocate and burn yourself
So this is why cold is used in navy seal screening and training
And this is why I think so many people really like the ice bath and cold showers
It has a bunch of other positive effects, but it is a great trigger for adrenaline
speaking about relationships one of the most
Uh common traumas probably that people are going to go through is heartbreak, right? You're going to
Be in a relationship that you imagine is going to continue forever. Maybe when you're 18 or sometimes when you're 48
And then it's going to stop. Have you thought about the neuroscience of what's happening during heartbreak?
No, we did so I've done episodes of our podcast on
love attachment and relationships
Which is a fascinating literature mostly from psychology, but also by biological literature
Um, and that's mostly about people's orientation toward attachment. So they're just very quickly
There's the so-called secure attached style. This typically emerges in childhood when there's a very predictable care
Um caregiver carry a relationship between child and most often mother
But it can be father to or other caregiver
Just so happens that the classic experiments were done on mothers because this was in the 1970s and there weren't as many
Reverse role really, you know homes, etc. There were some but not as many as there are now. So
That's one style of attachment. The parent leaves the child gets a little distraught
But then can distract itself doing other things or just simply do other things because they have a high degree of intrinsic knowledge
Not the thought but intrinsic
Calm the autonomic nervous system doesn't feel any need to ramp up because the mom returns
Then there's the so-called insecure attachment styles and there are a bunch of different ones
But those are the ones where
It's really stressful when the parent leaves. It's not clear. They're going to come back and when they come back
It's not clear that there's they're going to reestablish the bond that the child will feel
support, etc
Here's what's fascinating. Those same neural circuits
Are repurposed for romantic attachment in adult life the same circuits, which shouldn't surprise us
I mean, why would the brain throw away valuable circuitry?
But this whole Freudian notion that you know childhood attachment styles map onto adult attachment styles
That's real. That's physiological
Now one important point
It's not one for one in the sense that let's say you had a secure attachment to your father
Let's say it's a young a young girl and as a baby and a young child
She had a secure attachment to her father and an insecure attachment to her mother
In adulthood and let's say she's heterosexual. So in adulthood she prefers men as romantic partners
This girl grows up and you might say well, she had a good relationship to her dad
So she's going to have a good secure attachment style in her adult heterosexual relationships
Often it's not the case
They will transplant or superimpose the insecure attachment style to the to the mother onto male relationships
But have great relationships to female friends, for instance
So we have to be a little careful to not map one for one. That's important
So all of that is in us
And then you were talking about breakups and we did an episode on grief and the way that grief works in the brain and nervous system
Is that there are three sort of factors that are mapped in our consciousness and our subconscious and these are space
Time and this notion of closeness, which is attachment space and time is very simple
It's where is the person that I love and when will I see them next?
Right. I mean if you have a relative that lives overseas and you know, they're alive
You're not going to grieve them. You might really miss them
But you're not going to grieve them the same way you would if suddenly you get the note
Unfortunately that they passed away
And then attachment is how close you are to them like how critically you rely on them for
Internal control and support and that doesn't mean they have to be an immediate caregiver
It could just be like a really good friend. You'd call them mates over in the uk right like a really good friend
That just your knowledge of him just makes you feel good. You feel better in the world
You know as a guy who mostly grew up with you know, kind of a big pack of male friends
I mean, I feel strongest and happiest and most secure in life when I see something about one of my friends doing well in life
It just makes me feel good if one of them dies and unfortunately I'm getting to the age where a number of them have died
then
You feel like all of a sudden like goodness like there's a loss internally, right?
Okay, that's all sort of obvious
But what's interesting is that the grief process itself
Is about restructuring this map this map think of it like a tripod
It's got three pieces space time and closeness when someone dies
It's very confusing for the brain because where are they in space? Well, the body is put someplace. Maybe it's cremated
Maybe it's not
We have notions of a spirit and that depends on one's orientation a soul or a spirit
Okay, or if you don't then you don't then then where do they go right and then time when will you see them again?
There's the never you'll never see them again
And the closeness component remains and so there's an untethering of this map
And so there's been brain imaging studies
beautiful work by
Mary Frances O'Connor University of Arizona
Showing that if you look in the brain and people that are in grief from loss of a really strong attachment
The state of brain and body that gets flipped on
Is a motivational state
It's
Exactly the same circuitry in the brain that one sees active if someone very hungry
Is put just outside the wall of some delicious food
Or if an animal that really wants to mate
I guess mate with animals you call it copulate
They really want to copulate with another animal is put just beyond the wall of that animal
But they can smell them. I mean these are highly motivated desiring states
So grief is a motivated state to to bridge the distance in time and space and yet it's impossible
And so the process of grief is a gradual waning of that motivation
And a gradual shift of the memory of the person into some
Concept whether or not it's a soul whether or not it's just the past whether or not it's their energy
You know again, it depends on what the forebrain of that particular person believes
Shifts that concept of that person into a place where the brain is comfortable. There's no more autonomic arousal
There's no motivation and we've all experienced this if you've had a loss
And I've had a loss for instance where my graduate advisor died and I adored her and every once in a while her daughter will call me
From her cell phone and she kept the same number on that phone and the name and everything
So every once in a while a ring
Barbara Chapman and I'll reach for the phone and then there's this moment where I'm like, oh goodness
So anyway, I'm going on and on just to color this with example, but
When there's a breakup
It's exceedingly hard, especially if the person is young, you know, if you look at suicides after breakups
Those are far more common in younger people than they are in older people. Why because the relationship represents the whole future
They have no concept that they're they know there are other people but it sort of feels like the whole world is shutting down
so
in
Breakups what's happened is the person is no longer available in time and space
This is why when someone breaks up you literally have to let them go, right?
You know constant pursuing of them is out of context is not healthy. They have a name for that. It's called a stalker
Don't do it. Um
But it's almost as if you have to
The brain has to think that the person is gone in time and space
And this has become much harder with social media, right? Because people can check up on people
They can hear from people in the old days like when I was growing up
You just like took the phone off the hook or you you diverted your attention
Now we are constantly renewing that the person is still there
And so love and the loss of love and the death grief are
Virtually identical. It's that motivational state
And this is why it's so hard to not reach out to somebody that you really miss and want back
I saw a study last week that
Had researchers asking participants to rate emotional and physical pain of a breakup
They found that women tend to be more negatively affected by breakups
Reporting high levels of both physical and emotional pain
But while breakups hit women the hardest they tended to recover more fully
Men on the other hand rarely fully recovered. I thought that was very interesting. I wasn't too sure what that meant
Yeah, it's interesting. Um, it also rings true with my my experience and my observations
It I think I mean this could relate to a number of things and here I'm painting with a broad brush, right?
But um, you know, how comfortable one is
Feeling their feelings is male or female is going to strongly dictate how quickly one moves through grief
This is the same thing as trauma
The more willing someone is to feel the full depth and intensity of the feelings that they associate with that trauma
The more quickly they're going to move through
The trauma, uh, again, I'm lifting from paul conti's words. So these aren't mine
But you know people use a number of strategies. They use distraction
They use states like they sublimate to things like anger
um
And avoidance of various kinds in order to not feel the traumatic feelings or not feel the breakup people, you know
Try and self-serve the alcohol or try and self-serve with multiple new partners or whatever it happens to be doesn't work
Just extends it because this map of space time and closeness needs to be fractured
And the only way to do that is for the brain to have to confront the reality
Which is that
Whether by death or by by breakup, they are no longer available. It's like the food on the other side of that wall
Is gone. It's just not there anymore
Or that the food that was accessible
Now there's a wall in between and you will not get through it
And you know, you can see this actually in animal studies that are kind of
Hard, they're actually very hard to watch you'll see the animal perseverate
Literally damage its own body trying to get through a barrier to something
It's highly motivated to see people do that post breakup
They usually do that by talking to everybody about the breakup
Um, which is its own form of perseverating on the motivation. What did I do?
What did I do wrong this and that and some of that analysis is healthy some of it's not now why
would one group
be
More of let's just say effective at dealing with breakups
It's probably the ability to really feel the full intensity of how sad it is and be able to confront that and here
I'm you know, I'm a male. I've only ever lived in a male body. So all I can tell you is that I think from a very early age
Um, there's a an ability that at least
I'm sure it transcends to women too
Or extends to women too, but learning to pack down feelings, right?
And so when are we really talking about when we're talking about pack down feelings?
I'm not a psychologist, but what we learn is top down control for brain to autonomic control
It's the same thing like I don't want to jump off the high dive or I don't want to do this public speaking
But I'm gonna I'm gonna kind of like I'm just gonna force myself. I'm gonna David Goggins it, right
grief is a is an autonomic state
Uh, we say it has valence has negative valence
But it's high levels of autonomic arousal
With a negative connotation because you can be high levels of autonomic arousal with happiness, right?
You can be very alert and aroused and happy very alert and arous and sad
It's very alert and arous and sad
and yet
We learn how to tamp that down. What is tamping down? It's
reducing our heart rate. It's
Going to work each day being a functional human being, you know, there's a lot of that
Rather than allowing ourselves to you know, sob uncontrollably into a pillow
Some people are better at this. I mean the late steve jobs was a big proponent of scream therapies
He used to go up into the hills behind stanford. He actually owned some still owns a property back there. He was really into
You know catharsis cathartic release of internal state that he felt would allow him to like return as a happier nicer person
He was also kind of well known for screaming at people in the office. So he obviously had a lot pent up inside
um, so I think
The better that we can lean into
The emotional states that we fear the most but in a controlled
Way where we're not harming ourselves or other people the better
The more that we try and avoid that and we try and sublimate or just you know, and I've done this
So I'm speaking from experience, you know
I would use the anger or the sadness from an experience to just work 10 10 times longer 10 times harder
To just get that much more focused
You're taking that autonomic arousal that narrow aperture and that energy and you're putting it onto something that moves your life forward
So in some cases that's good because you still need to function
And give but it can give you the here. I'll just say it gave me the illusion
That I was working through something because you get all the accoutrements and rewards of hard work
But what you don't do is remap that spacetime
closeness map and then you find I guarantee
You find yourself five or ten years later
Wondering why you're so exhausted or why certain things in life aren't going well
And it's because when they say you haven't dealt with the loss you never actually allowed yourself to feel the feelings
But once you do
It's like a valve it releases you hear musicians say that the most recent album was shit
Because I didn't have any heartbreak to work through right and it is strange how people
It's a difficult thing to pass because a little bit of it is kind of like alchemy
Right a little bit of it is kind of like turning something that's terrible into something that's useful and beautiful
it's fuel
but
You're right. It is a it's a
Hiding away from what it is that you actually need to do from the work that you need to do
And in a world which is a meritocracy where people want success and status and accolade and fame and you go well
enemies and
revenge and bitterness
resentment
Pretty good motivators. Maybe I could use some of that
Maybe I should go out of my way to try and put myself into positions where this motivates me
And working out where that falls on the ledger is is a difficult one
It is and I think it depends on life stage and it depends on how one is going to work it out
I mean the the narrative around the shark dive
I mean even as I say it now several that was 2017 was the second dive when I think about all that
I think like that was crazy
I was out there studying fear and I almost was the professor who died studying fear
It would have been a terrible end to the story
What was I doing? Don't do this. Don't do this
But you know, there are times in our life where we feel compelled to take on certain challenges for whatever reason
There's a phrase that doesn't exist in the scientific literature, but it captures two
Components of physiology that are absolutely factual earlier. We talked about limbic friction
As it relates to creative process and sublimation of anger and sadness and creating things from bad
Events books music, etc
The words that come to mind are limbic resonance
the human beings
Resonate with these extreme states, you know, there aren't many great albums written about
A good day walking on a sunday in the park like it's kind of boring
I mean, there's the the beautiful painting sunday in the park with george, but I'll be honest
It's beautiful, but it's also kind of boring you can look at the details of it for a while
People like intensity the scream is it, you know, people look at that for a long time and speaks to the psychosis of the artist, etc
You know, people don't generally bond through passive relaxed states unless they've also been through a lot together
Right. I mean you even think about uh the we could talk about this separately if you want
But all of us are here because of the autonomic seesawing. That is the reproductive act
It goes from highly around how you refer to it in your lab
Yeah, a scientist autonomic seesawing. It is it's very interesting that the arousal process is one of increase in autonomic arousal
In order to get true arousal, but then not so much that it inhibits arousal
Then mating behavior and then the the orgasm response in males and females is highly what we call sympathetic not emotionally some
It can be I suppose emotionally sympathetic, but from a pure physiology standpoint
It's a activation hyper activation of the stress system
Even though it has positive valence
and then
There's a very quick rebound to the so-called parasympathetic
Arm of the autonomic nervous system this deep relaxation, which we don't really know why I wasn't consulted the design phase
But we think that that post coital bliss and is and the kind of relaxing
The desire to not run around a bunch more for most people was to exchange
odorant molecules to increase pair bonding
And even if people aren't trying to pair bond because people don't always just mate to reproduce
but
that
Some of the molecules that are released in each of the two individuals oxytocin being the main one
give people a sense of kind of post coital bliss and
And it's a very calm one that creates opportunity for bonding and discussion that is all like pillow talk
There are other forms of pillow talk post nut clarity
Andrew
But for women it might be something different right of course a different different name
I only speak in the language of physiology
But for both men and women this happens it creates this little orb of closeness that is both
Physiological and but neurochemical too so what we can say for sure is that whether or not it was in vivo or in a dish
We are all here because two parents
Right a male and a female unless you're a condor where two females can produce a baby
This has now been shown right but as far as we know
Where a male and a female reproduce because they each went through this arc of arousal
Not too high arousal extreme stress relaxation that happened separately or together because in vitro could be
Fertilization could be separate
so the test of whether or not we get to reproduce is actually the ability to to
Assuming that people are doing this together and not through in vitro fertilization
Is a test of whether or not people can coordinate their autonomic nervous systems now there are ways around that and to override it
But by and large that's the way humans evolved and the way all other animals evolved
Now limbic resonance is
A good way I think to describe that process
But that carries over to other things too an album about an extreme loss a song or a poem about extreme loss
Brings the reader the listener into a limbic state that's very similar or approximates what
The creator
Experienced right the person created that art or that
Poetry and in the same way if something is about a lot of anger, you know
If you like loud fast music or something like that
It's an extreme state. It has a gravitational pull to it. There's again. I'm using this language limbic resonance
Rarely if ever do human beings bond through nothing they bond through shared experience and you think of what makes people feel close
Well, there are a couple things and this has everything to do with time perception
Typically when there's a high degree of limbic resonance, it means that
The molecule dopamine was increased substantially over baseline at some point
Dopamine is almost always discussed in terms of pleasure, but it's the molecule of motivation drive
And to some extent reward it tends to narrow our visual focus and believe it or not dopamine is the molecule from which
Adrenaline is manufactured
Biochemically you get adrenaline from dopamine
So these two act as close cousins to put us into these states of motivation and have energy to pursue things
When dopamine
Is very present in our system
Or if you're in the company of someone else and there's a lot of dopamine two things happen
First of all, you're very motivated narrowing a focus
That's one the other is that the way that you perceive time is quite a bit different
For instance, if you ever had an amazingly exciting day
Just tons of things maybe you meet someone new you're having the best time
I mean just think falling in love and the most incredible date that you can imagine how it begins and how it ends
It just feels incredible. It all feels like it went by very very fast
And yet when you look back on that day, it seems like so much happened now think about a
Opposite situation you go to the doctor's office and you're sitting in the doctor's
Lobby and you're waiting and you're waiting and there's no phone reception. So you can't scroll instagram
You're waiting and you're waiting. It's incredibly boring. It's a very low dopamine state
It feels like it goes on forever
And yet when you look back nothing really happened
So dopamine changes our perception of time and in terms of developing human bonds
This has been well established that if two people for instance go three different places in a given day
They tend to feel like they know each other far better than if they stayed in one place even for a longer period of time
Did you know that pick-up artists were weaponizing this about 15 years ago? No, it doesn't surprise me
But i'm sorry to hear it
It was common held wisdom in the pick-up artist community that you were supposed to have a three location date
To manipulate precisely this to make the girl feel like you had progressed further down the maturation process of
Of spending time together. Surely there have to be female pickup artists, too
Uh, yeah, I feel like their job's probably easier
I can't comment
I don't know going back never been one going back to dopamine
How just how triggering are our phones when it comes to dopamine? Okay, great question
We often hear that
You know that social media getting dopamine hit after dopamine hit
When we first get on social media after
For the first time or after a long period of time the amount of dopamine that's released we think is quite substantial
It's novel remember dopamine is about novelty surprise
And the sense that we are on some exciting track. That's what dopamine is really about
It puts us into states of readiness anticipation looking seeking etc
Almost always for things outside the confines of our skin
Just to contrast it maybe for a bit more of a future discussion
Serotonin does the opposite when there's a lot of serotonin in our brain and body typically it makes us feel satisfied
Sated and more quiescent comfortable with what we have in our own immediate sphere and within us, right?
The comfort of a good meal the food you have dopamine is about go go go
If you look at somebody who's high on cocaine or methamphetamine
It's all about pursuit because that's a very dopaminergic drug
You look at somebody who's taking a drug and i'm not suggesting people do this
But it really ramps up serotonin. Let's say a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor
Prozac zoloft etc
The side effects of those drugs if the dosages are too high lack of appetite lack of libido
Kind of meh about life, you know, then so they'll adjust the dose down. That's because those are serotonergic drugs
so
in in general
when
We are in pursuit of things dopamine is is quite high
so
Now you have to remind me your question because i've set up the dopamine serotonin
cell phones. Ah cell phones. Yes
um forgive me so
The thing about cell phones is when you first get on there
And you have let's say your no wi-fi on the flight or something you land
It can actually be quite stimulating. You get a lot of dopamine. Oh, there's this. Oh, there's that
But very quickly when you're scrolling on social media
You're no longer getting the novelty, but you're continuing to do it
You almost don't know why you're doing it at that point
It shifts over to something that's a bit more like an obsessive compulsive behavior
Where that we can define an obsessive compulsive behavior where the obsession leads to a compulsion
So the obsession is a thought the compulsion is a behavior
But the acting out of the compulsion merely serves to increase the obsession
Right. This is very different than being obsessed with food or obsessed with cleanliness. There's no payoff. Right. Exactly
There's no anxiety relief by carrying out the compulsion with ocd behaviors
Like scrolling social media the dopamine quickly wanes and then you find that you're just sort and we've all been there
You're scrolling like why am I doing this? This isn't that interesting that is this isn't that interesting
now
The algorithms for social media are very clever and I don't want to demonize it
I
You know provide a lot of a lot of my life has spent on you know on social media now, but
In the algorithms that they've incorporated function on the the most powerful
Way to keep people doing a behavior or an animal for that matter
Is intermittent
Random reward a random intermittent reward that you don't know when you're going to hit the jackpot
So you're scrolling you're scrolling and then you see something typically it's very high what you know in nerd speak
We'd say signal to noise
So if you're reading some interesting things this came out in the news this came out and then it's all of a sudden a riot
or a person that is jump is based jumping off of building or
You know for people that are are scrolling looking at bodies or something like that
Live bodies that hopefully people aren't looking at dead bodies, but look if something's very tragic
Then that has this gravitational pull
And then you what happens is you start getting
The system working for that next dopamine hit that you don't know when it's going to come
It's just like gambling
So I look at social media as initially being very dopaminergic driving rewards surprise and excitement
But very quickly transitioning to something more like ocd
And the kinds of behaviors where it looks if you if we were to look at ourselves
Through the lens of an experiment like we would an animal experiment
We think that animal is sick if you saw an animal digging in the corner looking looking looking looking for a bone
The dog is looking looking looking looking looking looking looking looking looking looking you'd think that's really sad
That's us
Right, that's us. I'm pointing it myself intentionally. That's us. So we have to learn to self-regulate the amount of time
but
That doesn't have to be a process of you know scruffing ourselves and saying don't do it
Don't do it think about it in terms of the positive the more time away from something
The more positively reinforcing it will be when you return and that just to sort of superimpose this onto the relationship conversation
you know
Many of us are fortunate to have partners that we love spending a lot of time with
It's also good to miss that person every once in a while now
That might be an hour for some people apart of no communication
It might be a week everyone varies on this on the spectrum
But the idea of missing someone is that positive anticipation that kind of pain, right?
It's a motivational state and then when you see them, it's all the richer so you can
Imagine that these dopamine circuits can be used to more successfully navigate a number of different things
And you know a lot of couples completely quash the excitement and the pleasure of being together
Not just physical pleasure, but just pleasure of being together because they just
Spend too much damn time too much familiarity or they're texting all the time, right?
or the you know and and this whole thing around texting has become a really interesting test of
Dopamine expectation
There's a thing called dopamine reward prediction error
If you think the reward is coming and it doesn't you drop below baseline levels of dopamine
That's why you should never tell someone that this restaurant is going to be the best restaurant
You've ever been to in your life exactly. I made the mistake of telling my girlfriend on the way here
I want her to read this book. I'm like this is an amazing book. You should read it and I caught myself and I thought damn it
I'm actually detracting from how
Good she's going to experience the book
Tell her it was terrible. Oh, yeah, it's really good though. This is the problem. It's all it's hard to do
so
I think the key is to
To leverage dopamine reward prediction error in the best way it's the surprise that you know
If you take kids driving home from school and suddenly you pull into the ice cream shop
They're going to be so ecstatic
But if you tell them you're going to go to the ice cream shop and it's closed
Huge drop below baseline
Does that mean if you tell them that you're going to the ice cream shop and it's open?
That's less than not telling them that you're going to the ice cream shop and it's surprised correct
It's it's they literally tear out into maximum surprise is the maximum dopamine release
Then successful completion of the missions as it were is the next and then
Unsuccessful is there not an argument to be made that you would be able to
Drag out the amount of time that dopamine is released for because of the anticipation
Yeah, so well and people do this in relationship quite a lot right anticipation is the kind of ultimate fuel
Of the courting dance, right?
I mean this is also but one has to be very careful because whether or not it's from the male side or the female side or whatever variation there of
There's you only get so many reward prediction errors before people start to
predict or associate
Low dopamine with somebody or some experience in other words if you you know, I'll use an example
Not for my own life, but if you say, you know, we're going to Costa Rica on vacation
And then you say listen, I have to work and they might understand but that's a letdown
It's a dopamine reward prediction error in the direction of lower dopamine. They might recover from it
They might not but most people recover from it. If you do that two or three times
What ends up happening you can model this beautifully and they've seen this experimentally in animals and humans
Then you say, okay, we're really going to Costa Rica this time
And you think well the surprise is going to be that you actually go the amount of dopamine that's released for positive
For a successful completion of the initial goal is far lower than it ever would have been
So you can only cry. Well, I suppose that's not the right way to put it. You can only
Create positive anticipation so many times and then create a letdown before
Completion that the delivery of the promise has very little impact
And so you have to be very careful with one's words better to say nothing
Then to let somebody down
For sure in the context of human relationship and you know, this plays out in some
less perhaps
amusing ways where
You know, you look at people who are successful in life and you always hear success build success and it's absolutely true
Like when students come to my lab and they do a phd thesis
It's very important for me to get them on to a research track quickly that they're going to experience some success
because if they spend
Four years and then it fails. That's the devastating and then they have to start over again
Same thing with kids. I mean getting some success early on
Even if it's low bar success really does build up one's positive anticipation
An ability to perform well in the future because dopamine gives energy
Remember, it's the precursor to adrenaline and the sense that the world is predictable
Now this can go a wrong way too
And I see this a lot with the idea that everyone gets a blue ribbon. This is terrible too because
If everyone is rewarded every child is rewarded regardless of how well they performed
If they're all rewarded to the same level you actually flatten the dopamine curve. And so in that sense, yes, everyone might feel
You know celebrated, but you actually are lowering motivation for the given activity
This has a whole
landscape of research in back of it relate to intrinsic versus
Extrinsic reward the strongest motivation is always going to be intrinsic motivation
If you reward kids or adults for something too many times even if they like that activity
they
The propensity to do that activity will be reduced
but if you reward without effort or without success
That is devastating for a nervous system. In fact, I've gone on record and I'll say it again and again and again, which is that
dopamine that
arrives without prior effort
destroys people this is
This is drugs. This is uh, you know, this is things like a cocaine and amphetamine. It's high levels of dopamine with no effort
Okay, they had to buy it. They had to find it. They did whatever it
But that's no there's no physical effort or mental effort involved in getting the dopamine peak
This is why hard work followed by reward great working hard on a relationship and then it gets better
There's a breakthrough whatever it is
That is powerfully positive
Dopamine that just arrives because you say, oh, you're here. So you get reward
Terrible and this is why rewarding every little positive thing that a child does with
You know their favorite thing eventually diminishes the value of that thing and diminishes their ability to get motivated on their own
It's a very very powerful system. One has to be very very careful how one leverages it
What are your thoughts on dopamine detoxing? Is that legit? Does it work? Well up until about six months ago?
I would have said no, but my colleague Anna Lemke was on the show. Oh, right fantastic
Um, I have such admiration and respect. She's great. Yeah. Yeah. I just a brief anecdote
I was I directed neuroanatomy course for the medical students at stanford
I should have known who Anna was and then one day she came in to give a lecture on dopamine and addiction
And my first thought was oh my goodness, you know have to get her on the podcast and have to
I want her talking to the world because it's such powerful knowledge
So if people haven't heard that episode already go listen to chris talking to dr. Anna Lemke
I'm going to listen to it. I've listened to all her podcasts that I was aware of but again
We were talking about it's hard sometimes hard to find podcasts. So I'm going to listen to that
Um, cannot listen to her enough times
you know the
the dopamine
You asked earlier about the arc of dopamine and how long it lasts that the
One of the key takeaways from that book
Dopamine nation that I've incorporated in my own life is that there are certain activities like cold water that create long lasting arcs of dopamine
Those can be very useful for putting us into long lasting motivational states. So
These are not big peaks and troughs. These are the pain of the cold water
Followed by this long long arc of dopamine wonderful
It's kind of an antidepressant positive motivator natural stimulus
I always say if you don't have access to a nice bath cold showers
Yes, we'll work if you have a shower that doesn't get cold enough keep in mind that the original study showing this dopamine increase
Had people get into 60 degree water, which is not that cold 60 degree fahrenheit for 45 minutes to an hour
So your water bill might go up
But you could just draw a kind of cool bath and get in that up to the neck
So because I realized there are sometimes some cost barriers to people they not everyone has an ice bath
No
dopamine detoxing. Yeah, so dopamine detoxing is something that
Apparently today my uh short term working memory is off. I I swear I can't get that in you. I can't think of any
I'm caffeinated. I can't think of any
pharmacologic reason for it, but no excuses
So dopamine detox I would have thought was not something real
It seemed kind of silly to me actually
And I'll tell you why it seems silly and why it still seems silly, but why it may have some utility
but then Anna
Dr. Anna Lemke told me that it actually can be quite useful to take some time and space away from
Social media certainly from any addictive drugs. That's the treatment for addiction and restore those dopamine levels to baseline
Now the way that dopamine detoxing was initially described in the bay area where seemed a lot of tech types were talking about it
Was in terms of I heard something like oh people aren't even looking at other people's faces
You know, they're really kind of living this like monkish lifestyle and like no food that they really enjoy
Know anything that to me seems kind of crazy and kind of extreme
I mean I can understand not ingesting a lot of highly palatable foods, you know eating some more blander foods
I can understand not
Certainly not doing any prescription drugs or taking some time off from caffeine caffeine increases dopamine receptors, which makes
The caffeine the dopamine that's available more powerful at evoking the dopamine response
I can understand avoiding certain substances and behaviors
But the idea that you weren't going to look people in the eye because there's going to be too much dopamine
I mean, I guess it depends on who you're looking in the eye and how much their look
positively arouses you but the fact of the matter is that that's not
That's not a very rational way to think about dopamine detox, but staying out of you know, high intensity
Highly rewarding activities
I think could be useful in terms of reestablishing that dopamine balance and everything we know from Anna's work is that
Dopamine, you know, if you drive those dopaminergic states too long addictive drugs, etc
People can do this with sex food drugs gambling
social media all sorts of things
Um pornography
You know what ends up happening is the amount of dopamine that's released over time goes down and down and down and down
And pretty much is traversing into the territory of pain and then people again are back to this thing where you know, they're scrolling internet porn
eight nine times or hours a day and then they're wondering like why this isn't effective for them anymore whereas it was before
And there's an additional issue with pornography, which is not often discussed, which is that remember guys in particular
the brain is a learning prediction machine and if
I'm not trying to say that all pornography is bad, but there are
Good data to support the idea that if your brain learns to be aroused by watching other people
Have sex
It is not necessarily going to carry over to the ability to get aroused when you're one-on-one with somebody else
Right the especially young kids who are consuming a lot of pornography. The brain is learning
sexual arousal to
Other people having so you're going to program yourself into being a voyeur
Or yeah, or just create challenges in in sexual interactions with you know with with peer with a with a real partner
Mary Harrington has the three laws of porno dynamics and the second law of porno dynamics is the law of fap entropy
And it says that whatever you start out wanking to will get progressively more intense over time
And I think that this is sort of speaking to that ever ever sort of escalating amount of
The wildness that you need to watch in order to get an ever decreasing
Stimulus that comes back. Yeah, and you know here i'm i'm approaching this only through the lens of biology, right?
I'm not a you know, I'm not a psychologist, and I'm certainly not
Um political in it in any way at least not I have ideas about politics
But I just don't discuss them publicly, but the but the idea here is that you know, I'm not saying
pornography as a stimulus is bad or good what I'm saying is it
in its availability and its
Extreme forms it's a very potent stimulus and very potent stimuli of any kind extremely palatable food
Extreme pornography um extreme experiences like bungee core jumping those set a threshold for dopamine release
and
Anna will tell you that and I'm sure she did that the higher the dopamine peak the bigger the drop afterwards
And it's not that you drop to baseline you drop below baseline
So again, it's not these things aren't good or bad. They just have to be controlled in a way because
when people are pursuing dopamine peaks over and over and over and they
Aren't getting them typically it's because they've been pursuing that activity
Far too often and you're saying perhaps take a break from that and there may be
An ability for yourself your system to reset right yeah
Yeah, I mean in theory all the things that we're talking about with pornography
Could be superimposed onto food or could be superimposed onto real sex, right?
um
That one also has to be cautious there, right?
but
The cycling back and forth between dopamine and low dopamine states dopamine fasting as it were but maybe just low dopamine states
These are natural rhythms that existed in the nervous system. We had to remember what the dopaminergic system is there for
I'll say it again. I wasn't consulted the design phase, but we know as it as a
Generic form of motivation and pursuit you can imagine the human or the animal that's hungry or thirsty
It needs energy to go pursue the thing
So the idea that you have to eat in order to get energy that's true
But you need energy in order to get the thing to eat so our nervous system has energy also that's dopamine and epinephrine
Yes, we use glucose and glycogen etc when we're pursuing things
But the idea here is you're pursuing something and then either by smell or by sight
You think you're on the right track so you go down that track and then ah, there it is
You know you get some berries or you get you know, let's get prehistoric about this or you get to kill
The prey and eat it and then it gives you energy to continue this pursuit or to reproduce
I mean, there's a reason why humans and other animals seek out reproduction is that every every species
But certainly humans have two innate
Desires built into them whether or not they decide to actualize this or not
Is the desire to protect young and make more of its own species every
Successful species does that even if people don't have children in general people care about
Children that because they of what they represent very few people dislike children
I mean, there are a few mutants out there that dislike children, but you always worry about those kinds of people
Yeah, you were talking earlier on about the fact that dopamine can be released
When you set yourself a little goal and then achieve it and one of the ways that you encourage your grad students is to
Give them a little bit of reward earlier on so that it keeps them motivated
Is this the same mentality that works during an endurance event?
When you want to say i'm just going to get myself to the next lamppost
So i'm just going to get myself to that hill over there. Is that the same dynamic? Yeah
We can call it milestoneing you just set some milestone and the key thing here is that and this is the beauty of the dopamine system
Just like the stress system is generic the fear system is generic
It's designed for a bunch of different scenarios the motivation system is also generic it can be
To achieve the next lamppost as a milestone or it can be five miles is the next milestone
You get to control that and it so it's completely arbitrary
Right. I mean in that one of the most brilliant things that was ever said to me by an extremely skilled psychoanalyst
Is so simple and yet I do think it's the most fundamental thing to understanding oneself is that it's all internal
Right if you finish a marathon in first place, no one comes along and drips dopamine in your ear
You self generate that it's all internal. It's all about your internal representation
Now that doesn't mean that there aren't good and bad events in life, but
The fact of the matter is that if you set the next milestone as
Just outside the distance of what you're comfortable with and you make it there
If you allow yourself a moment to register that win
You get energy to do to then set the next milestone and achieve it that energy is dopamine
converted into epinephrine into adrenaline and this is why you hear these incredible heroic stories like I mean
I think the movie sorry
I hate to say but the movie was less good than the book but like loan survivor the marcus latrell story and the
Actually, I think today or yesterday might be the anniversary of operation red wings
so all those guys sadly died except
marcus
And you know he in the movie he's it's like fast forward to where he I don't want to give it away
But where he basically is the loan survivor, but
In the book it's crazy. I mean the guy dragged himself on elbows and knees for miles and miles and miles, right?
You know that that kind of ability where you hear about people walking on stubs to you know, these incredible feats of human
Endurance and willingness to persist
those
People were able to do that not because of glycogen or they drank their goo or whatever the triathletes are always using
it's because of
nervous system
Energy the ability to continue to manufacture adrenaline and keep going and the and the extent to which that can continue is
No one will ever know I do believe that humans have a tremendous capacity to endure and persist
But that few human beings actually know how to tap into that system except under conditions of extreme survival
and you also hear from
Really good physicians ones that aren't into woo biology or woo psychology at all that to some extent
Yes, there are people that unfortunately die in their battle against cancer
No matter what but that the the desire to continue living is a powerful force in of itself
There may be spiritual components. There may be that's not the business. I'm in
You know so and how I don't know the experiment I would do to test it
but almost certainly setting of milestones and the ability to generate dopamine and
Adrenaline is what allows people to persist and live longer. There's no question about that
One of the best books that I've read this year is the expectation effect by david robson
So he is a science writer from the uk and he looked at
A whole bunch of studies the placebo effect, which everybody's familiar with right?
There is a particular expectation that an outcome is going to come from some sort of medication and lo and behold that outcome manifests
He found this across pretty much every area of anything that you care to care about
So my two favorite studies from this so so interesting
He realized that gluten intolerance self-report gluten intolerance has increased from 3% to 30% in 10 years
This is the why there's so many gluten-free options on the menu principally
They've got 30% of the population to serve. Yeah, so people need it and he was wondering. Well, what is it?
Human biology hasn't changed that much. Is it maybe that the foods have changed and people are responding to that?
Or is it maybe some sort of expectation because
The type of news stories that are hearing about gluten and about how bad it is for us and inflammation and all this sort of stuff
Maybe it's that and people are expecting it. So they brought people into a lab
They sit them down. These people do and do not have
self-reported gluten intolerances
And they give everybody the same meal
They tell everybody in the room that it's got gluten in it. It's got no gluten in it
after a while
people who
Don't have a gluten intolerance biologically who haven't eaten gluten
Have diarrhea. They have hives. They're breaking out in inflammation. They're having to run at the bathroom. Okay. Well, that's kind of interesting
They did another another story that he spoke about
VO2 max tests that they were looking at apparently there's a particular genetic mutation
That allows people to blow off co2 and upregulate oxygen in a better way
They brought people in even numbers of people that didn't did not have this genetic trait
Split them into two random groups. So there was a mix of both do and do not have the trait in each
First group was told you've got the right genetic trait. You should be really really good at this
Second group was told more. Sorry. You don't have it. You shouldn't be too good
No surprise perhaps at the group that was told that they did they ended up performing better
But when they actually looked at what was happening in the physiology of these people
They found that the people who didn't have the genetic mutation, but were told that they did
Had a lower overall lactate threshold. They had a lower overall heart rate
They were blowing off co2 more effectively and upregulating oxygen
Better than the people who did have the genetic mutation, but were told that they didn't
So he coined this term that said your expectations are even more powerful than your genes. I love that
I'm going to read the book. I that's a remarkable example
And I think that you know a lot these days is being made of epigenetic effects and things
But this is almost in the different direction. This is a
psychophysiological response
I find this kind of thing to be honest among the more fascinating and interesting aspects of neuroscience
If not the most interesting lately
Those examples are tremendous. So I can't counter those at all with anything more spectacular
But that the work of dr. Aliyah crumb at stanford. She runs the stanford mind body lab and she's done
simple experiments, but they're really elegant
Instructing people one group all about the terrible effects of stress
Destroys your immune system, etc, etc
Other people telling them also true things, but all the positive effects of stress it sharpens your bilia function
You can remember things better, etc, etc. You see exactly what
You are told basically
Now you can't lie to people
You can't tell them things that aren't true
It's just about the subset of information that you get dictates the response you get
Then perhaps the most traumatic was they gave two different groups of people
And then they actually each got the opposite condition to a milkshake
One group is told this milkshake is very high calorie. It contains a lot of fat and sugar, etc
Another group is told
The milkshake they're getting is very low calorie. It's very nutrient sparse, etc
Then they measure hunger. So how long it takes for them to get hungry again after ingesting it?
They also look at insulin and they also look at ghrelin this hormone that is secreted
As you get essentially makes you hungry. It's associated with hunger. There are other things too, but
You see exactly what you would expect which is that people that get the nutrient dense milkshake
Are satisfied for longer their ghrelin is suppressed and their insulin is higher
You see the opposite in the group that had the the so-called low calorie shake turns out is the exact same milkshake
This is remarkable, right because this is not simply the placebo effect
I think it's the placebo effect plus the expectation effect plus a real physiological effect because that's what you describe as well
And the way that ali dr. Ali chrome as she she goes by
The way she describes it is that any
event
Causes a real physiological response, but that real physiological response is braided in
With our expectation and our understanding of what the response ought to be
To create the actual response. So it's sort of real plus perceived equals
Your reality, right exactly. And so I love this kind of thing as you can tell I'm eating up the example that
That you gave I think it's spectacular because
What it means is that no, we can't lie to ourselves
We can't tell ourselves that you know drinking water is going to sustain us just as food would for
For five days. We're not going to be hungry
But to some extent if one understands that well, you can survive a long time on just water
And you don't need to eat then you might experience less hunger. That's the way the nervous system works
Well, you can definitely survive longer on just water if you believe that you can survive longer on just water
There is no reason not to believe this. So I was really really averse to the whole
Ronda burn the secret who sending out messages to the universe and david
positions himself very anti that as well in the book
But you can't deny the fact that the positive thinking has a real
physiological impact on what you do he was talking about they did a study with
older people
That were past retirement and they asked them to use what what sort of words do you associate with getting older?
And they split these people into two different groups and the sort of words that people used
Perfectly mapped on to how long they were going to live. So the people that use the sort of words alone frail fragile injury death
They were the ones that lived the shortest the people that said
Happiness freedom liberty
connection
Maturity those sorts of words were the ones that lived the longest so interesting your expectations can literally impact your longevity
There's I I'm yet to read the book in detail, but I've talked to a guy named ethan cross
He wrote a book called he's being on the show. Oh fantastic. Okay. I think that internal chatter world is a very interesting one
That neuroscience will eventually have something to say
About I think the most powerful mindset
At least to me is one that again, I learned from alley crumb. Um, this is a mindset that in her
Pure reviewed studies of different populations. It's clear exists
universally and people in the SEAL teams, but
less so
Or is perhaps even absent from the general population sadly
The idea that stress grows you
That challenge grows you, but isn't the only way that you can grow
I think is a very powerful mindset. So what do you mean by that?
So they she what they did is she surveyed a bunch of different
People with different professions and asked, you know, what's your view of stress? Do you think it grows you?
It diminishes your ability, etc
So this isn't giving people information
This is asking them for information and the only group that said stress grows you the more challenge the better you get
Etc the more stress you experience the more likely you are to to succeed
Was the this group from the SEAL teams? I don't know if they were new recruits or if they had been in a long time
But that was the the group
I would add to that that yes, if you adopt the mindset that stress grows you, you're going to be much better off
But also that stress is not the only way to grow in life, right? There's this idea, you know, we have this
And again, there's sort of a gravitational pull of this. I like stress grows you
You know forward center of mass or you know always be in friction limbic friction limbic friction
How about a more expansive or nuanced version of that might be
Stress grows you so if you're under stress, you're back on your heels from something you think
Okay, how can I get flat-footed or even forward center of mass?
You tell yourself stress grows me stress grows me stress grows me
But that doesn't mean stress is the only thing that will grow you right learning to cycle between periods of hard work and deep
What I call non-destructive
Uh deliberate reset, right? Um, that's what really works over time. I can attest to that
You know people who just really go out and tie one on in order to to recover
You can only get away with that for a few years before your body and mind start to give out, right?
so fine non-destructive ways to reset and
Also adopt the mindset that stress grows you and adopt the mindset that
You know, there are other ways to grow that don't involve stress and I think you're set up to have a pretty fantastic life
That's my you know, simple view of of the way these things work
Speaking of endurance and suffering
What have you learned from lex Friedman since you've been friends with him?
That kind of works a lot. You can text and recall him at pretty much any hour except
The early morning hours that he happens to be in because he's likely to be asleep. You know lex is a really interesting one
um
because
You know like a lot of scientists and engineers yet
He has that ability to really drop into the trench which is
Certainly not unique to scientists and engineers, but is really helpful
I think you know lex comes at things from a from at once a very engineering physics perspective
Which you know, obviously computer science robots and all AI and all that he loves that stuff
But you know, there's a phrase that he's used over and over again in our conversations
And he's talked about this publicly and I've started to pay a bit more attention to
Because he says it so many times which is you know approach life with love in your heart
You know, which is weird, right? You think about an engineer who's thinking like this goes there
And this is what it's going to predict the best outcome and then you think like approach things with love in your heart
and I think he's right because and I think that is very powerful because
There are so many pitfalls
And by pitfalls what I mean are energy sinks
That you know across the day from the time you wake up until you go to sleep at night
There's so many places for you to put your energy can go into online battles. It can go into
Uh, you know texting five different people. It can be investing in one person
It can be there's so many things and so much of success in any domain is about
Yes, maintaining focus. We hear about that a lot focus focus focus
But what is focus focus is really about not allowing energy to dissipate into these kind of meaningless trails
So I think about lex and I as I do for all people I think, you know, what animal does he best represent?
Or what animal best represents him? I think of all people like this
I have this kind of weird process where after I spend some time with somebody it just pops to mind
Like I can't tell you what animal comes to mind yet. You might see that after the ice bath later on
We'll see how long it's you might be you might be a polar bear. Um, super comfortable in the water
Um, the cold water, but I think that you know at some point
I realized that that lexes gets very fixated on things
Very very fixated, but he also knows how to disengage
And he really avoids energy sinks through this and losses through this kind of love
Thing that he's really into
Because anger is very energetically demanding. It's great fuel, but it's not efficient fuel overall
Right, it's it's like having a gas tank full of fuel, but there are a lot of leaks in it
Whereas I do think that doing things out of genuine desire. There's a calm
Sort of energized balance that comes with that and you feel like you can go forever
So this is starting to sound a little bit. Woo. It sounds like, oh, you know
The heart is more powerful than the adrenals and like they're both powerful
The adrenals can keep you alive and enduring for a long long time
But if you do things out of anger and friction for too long, your immune system will crash. We know this
but it is
essentially infinite
How much energy you can derive out of genuine desire
To engage with something or somebody what animal is he then?
You know lex well his hair makes me think he's some spiky thing
He's sort of like he's some he sort of has the like the persistence of the porcupine
But he has he's definitely has I think he as much as I don't want to admit it because I wish it were me
Not him, but I think the animal that best captures lex because he's also a bit of a loner is the wolverine
I've spent a lot of time thinking about actual wolverines not the Hugh Jackman version of wolverines
But the actual wolverines they're very solo animals unless they pair up to mate. They're incredibly strong
He is freakishly strong
I've done jujitsu with him. I'm not going to jujitsu. He is he's a black belt jujitsu, but he is freakishly strong
So if I had to pick an animal I'd say probably
um the wolverine
What's interesting about him I went to
Thanksgiving with him last year, which was my first time of enjoying that holiday here, which is a fantastic holiday
I actually think we don't have something in the uk where people sit back and do that
gratitude
Reflection period
Except for Christmas, you know people do that end of your review, but I really think and especially the time of your it's in it's perfect. So
we were talking and
He was talking about the fact that he was working hard
But he feels this gap between where he is and where he could be which I sounds like lex sense is a common
pattern. Yeah, and
he was saying that a lot of the friends that he speaks to will say, you know, you're doing well you're working hard and
He looked me in the eyes and he's like, I don't want them to say that. I want them to tell me to suck it up
I want them to tell me that I need to stop being such a pussy and keep going as I it takes an
unbelievably singular person to work as hard as he does. I don't think that the internet
Whatever people know about how hard he works
Is only a small sliver of just how obsessive and and committed he is
And for him to say that he wants to be around more people that push him in that way. It made me realize that
Perhaps I could be offering more to my friends as well that offering them just sort of
support
in the form of
acceptance and and and presence and I'm hearing you and dude, you're doing great or whatever reassurance in that way
Maybe isn't always the best way to go about things. So yeah, that was it's just something that stuck in my mind
It's something it's a little model that I've kept with me where I'm thinking look
Does my friend need me to tell him that he's doing good?
Or does he need me to tell him to suck it up and get his nose down because I know that you can do it
Sounds very much like Lex. I'm learning about your your internal workings a bit too
There are three kinds of reward two of them are often discussed one is rarely disgusting
But is pretty powerful and I think it's useful to think about toggling between these different rewards
Whether or not for ourselves or whether or not in trying to
stimulate and motivate other people
One of course is reward. You did great
Congratulations. That was awesome. Love that podcast
Great that you got an a plus on your report card or b plus because last year you got to see whatever it is reward
Then there's punishment, right?
This is obvious you screwed up like
You take something away or you take the anticipation of reward away, whatever it is you screwed up
You're punished. You're grounded, etc. You're not watching tv for a month or whatever it is no screens for a month
Then there's the third kind of reward, which is the reward that you hang out in front of somebody
At a distance like a carrot on a stick out in front of them
Which is not reward for what they've accomplished, but reward that they can anticipate if they accomplish something
I think this could be
Very effective in the context that we're talking about it, which is how would I do this with lax?
I'd say, you know, I really loved this particular interview
If only the next time you have that person on you also ask them this, right? That's not a punishment
You're not saying it sucked because it didn't include this. You're not saying it wasn't great. You're saying
If next time you were to do that
I think it would be even better
So you're hanging a potential reward out in front and I think that can be a very powerful motivator
So you can you know, we could build up a number of different examples around this
But this is not often talked about in sort of reward punishment schedules and motivation
We always think reward and punishment, but we think immediate reward immediate punishment
Now in terms of building habits
And goal setting and goal seeking we know that visualizing failure is
For better or for worse is a far better motivator than visualizing success if you want to get people motivated to start
Right to start now getting people to continue involves regular rewards for reaching milestones
However, and I should have said this earlier
I I want to make sure that we do emphasize that the best schedule really is random intermittent reinforcement
So if you're setting milestones on this run or in your intellectual pursuits or business pursuits or relationship pursuits
If you set a milestone and you get there you do want to have a little bit of an internal celebration
Remember it's all internal so internal celebration not extrinsic celebration
And reward but every once in a while. It's good to just not reward yourself now at what ratio
Should you do that? Well that the computer modeling data say that the optimal ratio of success successful trials and
Unsuccessful trials for learning and motivation is going to be about 85 of the time to reward yourself
And about 15 of the time to not reward yourself
So random intermittent lack of reward is another way to think about it
And I talked about this with jocco a little bit and he thought oh, yeah
Probably what we should do is have workouts where it's a big fishbowl full of ping pong balls
And about 15 of them are marked with reward
But the other ones is you do something and you get to go take a ping pong ball out
And if you take that out then you get some reward
If it's marked and if it's not then you don't and rather than every time you accomplish something
You go reward yourself. So here we're talking. We're getting kind of into the weeds of reward schedules
But I think if you really want to support a friend punishment
You should use very judiciously although if they really screw up a good friend as they say we'll put
The friendship ahead of the friend or the friend ahead of the friendship. Excuse me
The friend like you're gonna tell them what they really need to hear even if it compromises the friendship
If you really believe they need to hear that
Other times reward like that was awesome. Congratulations. And then
Occasionally if it's warranted
That was great ish
But it would be so much better if the next time you did this or that was great
But you know, honestly, I think it was a mixture of good and not so good
So I think those are three powerful ways to reward and they can be mixed up and toggled back and forth
According to whatever schedule allows that person to continue. What is your morning routine look like at the moment?
morning routine is
wake up
if I
Run about what time?
I'm waking up these days around 6 a.m. 6 30 a.m. I'm trying to go to sleep by about 10 30 p.m
Sometimes it's 11. Sometimes it's 10
I wake up
And I have to be careful here because that whenever I've described my routine in a little bit of detail people always say
I can't believe you don't go to the bathroom. That's like well
So I want to my pants exactly right foot left foot. So I want to be clear. I take care of my basic functions
But when I wake up I make a beeline for sunlight
So I'm going to get sunlight in my eyes for the you know, I'll probably go into the grave saying this
So forgive me if people have heard me say this before but the single best thing you can do for your sleep your energy
Your mood your wakefulness your metabolism
Is to get natural light in your eyes early in the day
Don't wear sunglasses to do it takes about 10 minutes or so
If you live in a cloudy area if you're in the uk in the winter
Yes, or the summer or the summer. Maybe you resort to some artificial light as a replacement, but
As much as one can get bright
Natural and if not natural artificial light in your eyes early in the day
without sunglasses
contacts and
Eyeglasses are fine. Don't try and do it through a window or windshield. It's going to take far too long
This sets in motion a huge number of different
Neuro biological and and hormonal cascades that are good for you reduces stress late at night offsets cortisol
A million different things really that are good for you. So I get that
And yes, I walk do not walk ideally that would be a walk
But sometimes we'll just go into the yard and have some coffee and and you know
Soak into whatever sunlight through through the clouds if it's a cloudy overcast day, it might be 20 30 minutes if it's a
It's a very bright day
It might just be a few minutes
But really the the quality studies on humans that have looked at this say try and get as much
Natural light as you can in the morning hours whenever it is that that is for you
Especially the first three hours after waking if you can work outside great
If you can get in your window because as opposed to just in a dark conference room, that's better
But if you can get outside that would be fantastic. So I get sunlight
I hydrate I drink water and then yerba mate is my favorite form of coffee. Excuse me caffeine
Are you waiting? How long are you waiting from 90 to 120 minutes? Are you doing any salts during that time?
Are you taking any electrolytes in I am a fan of water with element before I had element packets
I would just take a little bit of sea salt or pink salt your favorite element flavor
I like them all there's one. I don't like I'm not a fan of the chocolate one, but I like either
Yeah, some people love it my podcast producer. His wife loves that. So I give it to her the chocolate mint one, but
I like the raspberry the
Um the citrus one. I love that stuff mango chili is if you open the mango chili and breathed in shortly afterwards
It's like being pepper sprayed. It's absolutely insane. It's like it's like being blasted in the face
But yeah, I mean that's that's just the best way that cold glass of water and that first thing in the morning
and I mean it was you who
Reassured me of the what I thought was bro science about your adenosine system not being active for the first 90 minutes
And if you're going to pump caffeine onto that, you're not really actually acting on that
Your adrenal system is the one that you need to be looking at optimal you hydration all that sort of stuff
It's just such a good way to start the day. So okay, we've got
90 minutes deep what have you been doing in that you've had your light in the eyes
What have you been doing between that and the yerba matter in 90 minutes?
I do everything I can to
Not do email
Not do social media and to take care of a few critical tasks these days
I'm I have this obsession with trying to do one
Cognitively hard thing a day
one
And one physically hard thing a day now does it not extreme physical not david goggin's level workouts or anything but
In that 90 minutes, I'll typically try and read a research article start to finish
Or I'll work on a document that I might be doing a grant or research paper or planning a podcast or researching a podcast
I try and get my brain into kind of a linear mode. I try and narrow that aperture
As if I don't the distraction that's created by social media and interactions with others can kind of wick out into the rest of the day
So I'm not necessarily trying to finish something in that time, but I try and do something
Challenging I experience great
pleasure from
Battling through something mentally challenging
But that's something that I built up since my university years when I was about you know 19 or so got serious about school and
Really started to
Experience the the deep pleasure of like I figured that out or like that was really tough
I don't always succeed, but that's what I'm doing in that hour to 90 minutes
But I confess sometimes
We'll take a walk during that time and maybe talk through some things that are that are challenging
You know or sometimes I get lazy and I miss a day of that cognitive challenge
Then I do caffeine about 90 to 120 minutes
after waking and
Even though I prefer to work out earlier
I generally will then do some sort of physical workout. I have a very consistent routine
I've done over 30 years where I weight train for 45 or
Minutes to an hour every other day and occasionally I take an extra day off
And occasionally due to travel or other commitments. I'll occasionally double up two days and then take two days off
So it's really boring, you know talk about workout schedules, but it's really simple. It's like, you know, I'll do a
Kind of pushing day rest pulling day upper body push up rest upper body pull
Rest and then legs take two days off something like that. Are you doing on the off days? Are you doing some sort of zone three?
Always jogging or skipping rope. Those are my favorite forms of cardio sometimes swimming
But typically I'll go running for 30 to 45 minutes
Or if I'm feeling a little bit lazier because I always find the high intensity stuff to be easier than the long drawn out stuff
I'll sometimes throw on a weight vest a 30 or 50 pound weight vest and I'll go out for a shorter run
Or I'm a big fan of knees over toes. Ben Patrick. I know you had him on
We were down in Costa Rica with him and his wife who had the best time and learned so much
I'll occasionally
Do a backwards, you know, he'll walk
Or throw on the weight vest for that. We sometimes we'll get bands and we'll so there's a great way to combine this
We will sometimes get two people in one of these thick bands do hill walks in the morning while getting our sunlight
But that I don't really consider a workout. I consider that just kind of rehabilitate us at movement
So on the off days I'm doing cardio and sometimes that's in the morning. Sometimes that's in the evening
I do not like to wait trained on the second half of the day because I like to be really caffeinated when I wait train
I like to listen to loud fast music
Most of the time not always I keep my phone
Out or off of for most workouts
Podcasts maybe if I'm running but I really try hard when I'm working out to just focus on the workout
And those workouts the weight training workouts are always 10 minutes or so of warm-up
And then no more than 40 to 50 minutes of really hard work if I do train hard any longer
I don't recover enough to be able to come in a few days later
And when I train that way I generally make pretty consistent progress
And you're taking yourself up until what's that probably maybe 10 30 11 a.m. Something like that
Yeah, and then I'll eat my first real meal now occasionally
I'll wake up really hungry if I didn't eat that well the night before but typically the after I train
I yeah, I'll eat I like oatmeal after I train oatmeal fruit some fish oil protein drink
And then maybe 90 to 120 minutes after that
I'll have a real lunch my lunch is pretty much the biggest meal of the day if I have my way
It'll be a steak a salad maybe a little more starch although I sort of got it earlier
Um brazil nuts and that meal sometimes can extend longer
I love being a feeding. I love to eat. Yeah, so I'll eat and then I confess
I usually will work a little bit more for about 30 minutes or an hour typically email and then I'll take a
um 10 to 30 minute
Yoganidra nap or a nap and then come back refreshed
Um, I really struggled with the naps man. I come back after that and my emotions are all over the place
I'm disoriented. Maybe it's because I struggled to fall asleep super quickly
And therefore I'm extending that period out for a little bit longer than I need
I probably need to try the Yoganidra thing, but for me it's it I'm absolutely all over if I do that
I wake up and I don't know what day it is and my emotions always feel a little bit out of whack as well
I wake up grumpy from naps sometimes I'm told okay. There are a few times when I've woken up just really anger
I have no idea what that's about. I don't know any of the neurochemistry associated with that sometimes I wake up from naps
It's really pleasant
I'll occasionally if the nap is early enough in the day afterwards
I'll have a you know a nice double espresso and get back into work
That's the hardest part of the day actually if I was well structured in the early part of the day
It's that two or three p.m. The key is then to try and get something really useful done cognitively again
So some people might look at this and say wait, you're working for an hour in the morning and 30 minutes here
in an hour in the afternoon when you actually working but
It's really about the depth of the trench when you're working
And so if I'm going to drop into something again for a few hours in the afternoon
I'm really going to drop into it and that's typically phone off and out of the room
And my goal is to get to the evening time so that I can do the things that I want in the evening
I can enjoy like I'm always setting a goal of the next time block
So this is something I've been doing for a long time, but even more so lately
I don't think my goal in the next hour is to do blank. I think this is dopamine reward predictions
Inaction, I think okay if I get this workout done
Then I'll be able to eat at more or less the same time which I enjoy and then
Something else will happen. So I'm very focused on what I'm doing
But I'm doing it for the purposes of like opening up the next door to the next thing
So if I can get that afternoon work block done, I'm thinking if I can just really get this podcast recorded
Which I enjoy is that your usual time to record middle of the afternoon used to be in the morning
But I'm getting I'm putting more and more preparation into them all the time my poor podcast producer
He's like, you know, I always joke that the one thing these podcasts
Probably will succeed in doing meaning my podcast is they're going to cure insomnia because some of them are so damn long
But I experience so much pleasure from spending a week or two researching something and then putting some structure on
And as you know, I mean podcasting is its own its own sort of natural drug
It just feels good if you enjoy doing this sort of thing
Um, so typically what we're starting late in the day now and going till pretty late
For me the problem that I have so I'm fasted right now. We're what one minute to 4 p.m
You haven't eaten anything today. No, no, no, it's gracious. So but that's the only way if I eat
I've my thoughts become slower. I'm not as verbally articulate. I'm nowhere near as agile now. I could push this super super late
I'm sure and it would be probably a pretty bad idea
Maybe I could avoid maybe I could go protein and fat or just mostly protein earlier on and that would have a void
But I just find that my thoughts and my verbal articulation just goes through the toilet
It's adrenaline if you I mean, I think that
Sorry to interrupt you but if you ingest a bunch of glucose or you know, I think you're getting that
I mean, you've got to have a nice
I'm guessing that we were to tap your vein right now
If we could do micro dialysis on your brain that you have a nice low but steady level of adrenaline
And listen, this adrenaline thing this dopamine thing is no joke. This is the stuff of human evolution, right?
This is the these are the same neurochemicals. This is this is the energy drink of human evolution
This is not the rock star red bull, etc. That stuff just hijacks this very system. I'm not saying it's bad
It's just feeding this very same system. So if you find an eating schedule or a fasting schedule
That allows you to tap into that as a resource
I don't care what anyone says about whether or not fasting will make you live longer or not
Who knows right who if you're in the control group, you know, what's going to happen
So
But everyone presumably everyone dies eventually
So pick your pick your mode of eating be my guest
But if you figured out a way to tap into this
In a way that works for you by all means leverage that because until somebody comes along and says the intermittent fasting is unhealthy
Well, then to me it seems at least for me eating between 11 p.m
Excuse me 11 am ish and 8 p.m ish
Is great and what I can also tell you is that having a consistent meal schedule
Meaning a defeating window. We absolutely know. I don't know why this isn't discussed more
We absolutely know that that helps anchor your sleep schedule
And having a anchored sleep schedule helps anchor your light viewing schedule and a light viewing set
So it all starts to piece together
I think that what's lost in the discussion about nutrition except for the fact that most online discussions about nutrition are carried out by
Religious well, they're religious
But they also seem to be carried out by people that have is like
I don't know like like real feelings of powerlessness in themselves like it comes through like
Because they're quibbling over like whether or not you should eat a cracker or not
Or whether or not, you know
Inhaling oxygen, you know westward is going to break your fast or not
I'm I'm obviously I once I said David Sinclair came on my show twice and he's a fantastic human
I know your friends with him and um
He talked about the fact that his resveratrol goes into a small amount of fatty yogurt
I think because it's like breakfast, right?
So you need to mix it in and it's homemade yogurt and something else and something else
And it's like that it's it's a shot of yogurt, right?
It's enough for him to put his little capsule of resveratrol in and the comments were a light with people
Saying that's not a real fast
Because you've got it's so sad
Uh, you know, it's so sad that we can't have a nuanced conversation about nutrition online
That well, let's let's be fair calories and calories out applies, right?
I don't think the laws of thermodynamics have disappeared
Um, and yet you have people who would argue that it doesn't and okay
Like we'll let them have their their arguments
I think that the key thing is when you find an eating schedule that works for the other things that you need to do in life
it's really beautiful because
Then you really start to exert some control over these energy systems. What we're talking about is focus and defocus
We're talking about focus and deliberate decompression. We're not it's yoga nidra or a nap or simply a walk
um
And food as you point out is a wonderful source of caloric energy. We need it at some point
But it also can create this parasympathetic response where we feel very tired
Especially if you don't eat for long periods of time and then you eat substantial amount of starches
You will feel like calmer and more relaxed
this so
And maybe sleepy or maybe brain foggy
So I I've been you know, of course assaulted by this for this online
I do tend to eat some more starches in the evenings and fewer proteins and sure you can show me 20 double blind placebo controlled
Or randomized controlled trials saying that if you're gonna eat starches, you should eat them in the early part of the day
Well, I do that too after I train but ultimately what I'm interested in doing is maintaining
The kind of bodily health and aesthetic that I'm looking for my blood lip is that I'm looking for
But I want to accomplish things in life
So I think if one gets too distracted by what's possible with nutrition it can be it can really take somebody off target
no one ever
Succeeded in creating anything useful in terms of worker relationships by overly focusing on changing their dietary intake
But so once it works. So what once something works for you
I say just lean into it just lean into it and that can change over time
So that can really change over time. Do you know alex hall mosey? You familiar with him sounds familiar
Really hot shit on the internet at the moment this sort of gym bro who has founded this company and
Is now moving on to bigger and better things. He's eaten. I'm pretty sure he's eaten the same lunch
for
10 years or something. He always has the same lunch and he's got the exact same
Thought process around this that you do if you were going back to the morning routine thing
if you were to design
Or if you were to instruct someone to do the worst possible things
In the morning to set their day up for failure. What would they be?
Uh wake up and stay in bed. Uh, well, wait, there are good reasons to stay in bed in the morning
But once those are completed then
staying in bed
Is curtains drawn? Yeah curtains drawn just using your passively scrolling on social media
um
like there are
There are neurobiological data showing that when you are upright
You actually are stimulating this area of the brain called locus ceruleus
Whereas when you recline you actually are less alert literally the position of your body
Dictate some of your levels of alertness. That's why you suggest people to not sit like this
Uh at their work desk, right? Yes, and if you're look and
If you're looking down
While working you're actually less alert than you could be if your eyes are averted slightly over
Most people that are on their phone including me and the postural stuff is really bad too
I mean, I'm getting I'm trying to really combat that internal rotation. You know that the c-shaped human kind of thing, you know
It's really not good. I'm really trying in fact one. This is so common now
the c-shaped human thing that
It almost feels strange to be upright, you know, like people think exactly the open the the
Sort of external rotation is good for us. We know this but in bed. I would say in bed
So people are on their phone
They're in bed. They're not getting enough light or they just artificial light or they're trying to get the sunlight through the window terrible
Um
They are then going and sitting and getting into like hip, you know hip flexor contraction
They're drinking coffee too early in the day
They aren't getting into any kind of movement
But it's mostly about the sort of randomization of activities
Sort of making a cup of coffee while texting
Not getting sunlight, you know, then they're scattering that in with like a little bit of work
But then something hits that's stressful and they're diverting their attention
They're sort of building in this eight attention deficit like disorder
Through behavior doing they're not single tasking. They're not monotasking and they're not being deliberate or intentional with the things that they're doing
They're just allowing the morning to kind of come and take them wherever the wind blows
That's right
And I have to say even though I describe my routine accurate my morning routine accurately if I were to really optimize it
And I've done this from time to time. I would get up
I would hydrate and I would immediately exercise
I would use that
Early, you know peaking of the cortisol response that comes with waking to get the body into action
Sort of jockel-willink style right 4 30. I always see his posts, but I see them at 7 a.m.
Yeah
So, you know, jockel was up before me again today
Yeah, he seems to always beat me by a few minutes unless I wake up in the middle of the night for a moment, but
To really get into action because that's going to generate its own
Dopamine and adrenaline response any time I've worked out really early like if I have a flight and then
You know and then moved into the other components of my day
I find that I feel better all day long
I I also will say if I work out really early maybe between 7 and 8 a.m.
Well, then my first meal might land at 9 a.m.
So, you know, you need to be flexible with some of these things, but the general principles apply
I notice that you haven't put cold exposure into your morning routine
I'm going to guess you must have a cold tub of some kind. You have a cold tub in a sauna
I've been less good about that lately the best time to do that for me is on my cardio days
I do it after the run because you don't want to do it post hypertrophy because you're going to blunt some of the responses
That are actually you're trying to get by the the workout itself. That's right
And I have one I should say I have one rest day per week where I don't do any cardio or weight training
I really like doing having a complete rest day, but on that complete rest day if I can
I'll do 20 minutes of sauna and then cold for three minutes 20 minutes of sauna and then cold
I'll make the rest day reparative
And generally we make that social where we're talking about things and and we're very social in our working out like we we talk
My partner and I talk while we work out, you know, when it's set when it's time to do a set
I become a little bit of like the drill sergeant. So like let's do your set do your set
But then occasionally I'm the guy doing a set and I'm like, all right. So this afternoon, we're gonna, you know
But I try and I try and really focus and I enjoy training by myself too, but generally we train together and then
And then typically if we're doing ice bath or sauna, we try and coordinate those things
So I've seen a bunch of research about sauna. I've seen a bunch of research about cold exposure
Contrast therapy, which is huge here in Austin going from sauna to cold and it seems like 20 and three
Three rounds is very typical
Is there something that we're gaining or something that we're losing
By doing that cycle rather than doing a block of heat and a block of cold separately
Not that i'm aware of but you know that we finally have some good science to put to this and unfortunately
It wasn't from my lab. This is the beautiful work of susanna soberg who's over in scandinavia
publish a paper in cell reports medicine showing that the threshold you're trying to hit each week
Is at least you can do more but at least 11 minutes of uncomfortable but safe cold exposure
Per week total so that could be three minutes monday three minutes wednesday so on to 11 minutes and 57 minutes per week
Minimum so precise. That's what they found
What did they find increases brown fat thermogenesis?
Thereby metabolism. Thereby comfort being you know in cold, etc
um
Clearly, there's a resilience effect
Clearly, there's a dopamine increasing effect and clearly you can do more you could do all that in one day
Or you could spread it out throughout the week or you could do more it kind of depends on what you're shooting for
How cold people always say how cold how hot well for heat is generally
Uh between 187 degrees fahrenheit and 212 degrees fahrenheit
Somewhere in that range and for cold it's
Cold enough that you really want to get the hell out that you can stay in safely because I don't want to kill themselves
With doing this stuff. Did I see you say that um
evening time
heat exposure
increases growth hormone release by 16 times or something insane but subsequent
Sessions of the same only increase it by a very small margin. Yeah, am I talking about my asset? No, you're absolutely right so we can
We can delineate some protocols
If you want to get better more resilient cold exposure is going to be great anytime
post-cold exposure your body is going to heat up
Think of your body heating up as waking up. So if you are concerned about not being able to sleep
Then I would suggest you do your cold exposure earlier in the day, right?
Heat does the opposite so I'm laying out some parameters here heat does the opposite
You're going to heat up while you're in the deliberate heat exposure
But afterwards there's a post heating dip in temperature. We can talk this was all covered in an episode
I did with dr. Craig heller on thermogenesis gets a little bit down in the weeds
But take my word for it if you want to get the science you can go there to find the science behind this
So sauna at night is great
As well now let's think about how to combine these things. So let's say you
You know, you're on it. It's a tuesday. You've done your weight training on monday
Um, and you want to do your heat and cold. You don't have time to optimize everything perfectly. You could say, okay
I'm going to do my um heat and cold at 10 a.m.
Or 8 a.m. You get in the sauna for 20 minutes or so and then you get into the cold for three minutes
And then you might get into the sauna again for 10 minutes
And you get in the cold for another minute or so you end on cold
Why because it'll wake you up and presumably you're not you want to be woken up for the day
That also means don't then if you're doing it in a facility don't then go and have a warm shower
Right once you finished right coolest shower is fine because you want to clean off often
I mean the ice bath is clean ish, but it's you know
Depends where you're going in laboratories
You're absolutely right in laboratories if we want to preserve something in particular a virus we put in the freezer
If you want to kill a virus you heat it up
This is never as dirty of a sauna as you want, but the the cold tub
Well, yeah, that's on a sort of its own autoclave if it gets hot enough right and the cold
Cold stuff needs to be cleaned out now and again you get mold growing in a in a freezer
Which is kind of freaky to think about but you really can't it's never going to grow in a sauna
Never going to grow if it gets hot enough now. There is what I call the sober principle
Uh, which is if you are using deliberate cold exposure to increase metabolism end on cold
So finish on the cold not just because it wakes you up more
But because then you have to heat your body up naturally, which is a thermogenic metabolic response
So end with cold and if you really want to push it you can do things like don't use a towel use evaporation
Uh spread out your limbs and don't huddle so that you have to shiver more etc
I mean there are a lot of little games you can play but let's say you want to reduce post exercise inflammation
You're not concerned with hypertrophy gains of muscle size gains or strength gains
Well, then get in the cold after your your workout do that for one to some people can do 10 minutes reduce inflammation
Let's say you really want to hit growth hormone, which is what you asked
The biggest effects of sauna on growth hormone and they are big effects are when the sauna is only done once per week
But it's done in four cycles or sets we could say of 30 minutes each
So that means 30 minutes in the sauna at the temperatures I described before
Then a five minute break just air cooling off or 10 minute break then back into the sauna for 30 minutes
This is brutal then again in the afternoon 30 minutes in the sauna
then
10 minutes just air cooling off and then back into the sauna for 30 minutes
So that's two hours at 187 to 212 in one day in one day with a maximum of what less than sort of 20 minutes
Of rest in between those little sessions than the big rest in between
So you have to be very careful right he can kill you you got to hydrate
You need to make sure you get enough salt like it. I mean this is this is work, right?
Um, but you get you see in these human studies up to 16 fold increases in growth hormone
So you could imagine this could exert some very strong
Repairative effect if you're training for a big event or endurance event or maybe you're just really wiped out from the week
This is a stressor
But it's a stressor that delivers a potent growth hormone response now if you do sauna more often than that
You're not going to want to do two hours a day in the sauna because presumably you're doing other things
They have a life you have a life
And in addition to that the growth hormone effect starts to diminish if you become too heat adapted
In that raises a more interesting question, perhaps
Which is why is it that this two hour protocol really works if you do it once a week to increase growth hormone?
It's because it's a stressor and certain stressors increase growth hormone
Does it have to be heat?
No, you're probably also do four really long rounds of ice bath
And i'm guessing you'd probably see a similar effect. No one's ever really looked
Probably see a similar effect because it's all about the stress stimulus
Now those that work on exercise science and weight training would probably say yeah, you could also do a
This has been shown, you know at 90 minute 10 sets of 10
Multiple exercises for 10 sets of 10 high volume german volume training work out and get the same growth hormone effects
There's so many studies like this
I personally like to do the sauna two or three days a week
And if i'm traveling off and don't get the opportunity if i'm in austin, it's great because there are all these sauna places
But if i'm traveling abroad, i don't have the time then i might do i might take a day
I'm thinking wow i did three podcasts i'm exhausted when i'm in new york
I like to go to a place i have no relation to them, but i think it's called spa 88
It's a russian banya and i'll just go for the whole day
If i've been working really really hard they serve food there
They serve borscht and all this other kind of like pickled vegetables and um they must think that you're russian
You they must you must walk through the doors and they go hello brother
Sometimes i usually just don't the best way does it to appear russian lax?
I hope you're listening is to just not say anything just just to not that's the most russian thing that you can say is nothing
Exactly. They're stoic
That place is great and they have different sauna steam sauna. They have cold dunk and sometimes i'll just spend three four hours there
There's one in san francisco called archimedes banya
So sometimes that's an occasional thing now most people are trying to incorporate this into their daily life
And just like as we said for ice bath if you don't have access to ice or ice bath or cold tub you do cold shower
Or longer cool baths with heat
I realize not everyone has access to a sauna hot baths do work
Now one thing about hot baths and hot sauna is they will nuke your sperm
That is not nuke a nuke is a you know slang
They will reduce viable sperm count. So for males that are trying to
Reproduce you know trying to create children
You want to be careful about hot baths and hot sauna too often
Some people will bring a cold pack in and put in their groin. You can't do that in a bath
But it's I mean sperm are maintained outside the body the testicles are maintained outside the body
For a reason
Right the scrotum has varying elasticity in order to maintain temperature of the sperm
That's why that that's the the various effects that have been described are there on purpose
So why human evolution design this way? I don't know someone will say but in any case
Unless you're trying to you know, and again the ice pack approach is interesting
Some people do that. Actually, there's a kind of interesting relationship between cold and testosterone thermogen and spermatogenesis
There's a little cottage industry out there. I think on amazon people will buy these gel pack underwear of
I think they're called snowballs
This is cooling the scrotum in order to try and increase spermatogenesis. Okay now
I'm not aware of any data on this but people report
Anecdata and have shown their blood work and stuff
That it
It actually works to increase testosterone levels. I am not aware of any period studies. I am not
I'm not I would not be sitting as comfortably as I am right now
But but I find this sort of amusing on the one hand and then on the other hand
I think what we're arriving at is some general principles of physiology, which are that light
exercise
Temperature both heat and cold are all very powerful stimuli for creating
hormonal and
Neuromodulator dopamine epinephrine effects and when you start to dig beneath the surface of all these protocols wim Hof breathing ice baths sauna
Snowballs what you are finding is that these are all different stimuli to tap into these different neuromodulator systems, right?
You know sunlight on our skin and on and into our eyes organizes all these hormone cycles
There's a beautiful study out of israel just this last year pure reviewed studies showing that if men
And women are told to go outside and get a lot of sunlight exposure on their skin for 20 minutes a day three times a week
Testosterone and estrogen levels go up substantially feelings of desire and sexual passion go up
You know, there's a real effect of the summer months
For people and it's hormonal and that's because the skin is an endocrine organ
um
These effects shouldn't surprise us and some people hear these and they go
Oh, so basically you're just telling us to like get sunlight and exercise and eat
Well, and you know and avoid bright lights at night so that you can see but yeah, that's basically what we're saying
We're saying that because there's now substantial physiology to support that
There's nothing new in terms of the mechanisms the mechanisms haven't evolved in we believe hundreds of thousands of years
If not more the ways to tap into these systems are many high-intensity interval training. You're going to get increase in adrenaline
Yoganidra meditation a nap you're going to get increases in serotonin. So it's not trivial though
I want to be really clear these sorts of things
Are not trivial. They are exceedingly powerful because they tap into systems that we all harbor
So the beautiful thing is they work the first time and they work every time and there are very few things you can say that about
They work the first time and they work every time and the reasons they work are now becoming clear to us through these
More high-quality studies. There's a lot of conversations at the moment around concerns for the
Average amount of testosterone that men have got
Eastergens in the water and stuff like that
Should we be worried? How worried should we be?
So, um, I just recently came back from Copenhagen
I was there to give a talk for the Lundbeck foundation and there was another talk that the Lundbeck foundation put on
They do a great popular science series
Um
called coffee and cocktails
I'm not a drinker, but people it's so european. It's it's so different than over here
Is everybody smoking outside no one was smoking
But people would bring were allowed to bring in real glasses with ice in them and yet the auditorium was silent
This was a big con it's in the concert hall in Copenhagen
It's very beautiful venue and you couldn't hear an ice cube chink the entire night
And no clink clink clink no no chinking of the ice cubes
People were in there with their cocktails and enjoying enjoying science and earlier that week
There was a talk by uh, dr. Sheena swan. She wrote a book called countdown
She went on joe rogan's podcast. Um, I believe earlier last year
She talked about the decline of sperm counts from the 1930s until now and
Ties it in a very she's a serious researcher with national institutes of health grants, etc
Ties this to um the increasing presence of phthalates
The most difficult word to pronounce in the english language besides ophthalmology
Phthalates that are present main present mainly in pesticides if you look at sperm counts and testosterone levels in
males in different areas of the united states they are
Significantly lower in areas where there's a lot of pesticide use in rural
Areas where there's a lot of farming and pesticides
Very serious issue and in the offspring of mothers that
ingest
Phthalates
There's this the anogenital distance is what they study in the lab the lot the anogenital distance
literally the distance between the base of the scrotum and the
And the anus in males is much greater than it is in females. There's a word for that females don't have a scrotum
Obviously, so they measure from the base of the genitals to the base of the vagina to the to the anus in males
They go from the base of the scrotum depends on the study. Sometimes it's the top of the scrotum
You know, I always say, you know, you always have to be careful when people are measuring anything related to genitali
Because somebody's going to cheat in the measurement
so
So in any event, I don't know how they controlled for that
But she shows these remarkable pictures in mice and in humans of people that are exposed or mice that are exposed to phthalates
and basically males are showing the more female like pattern
of
Of anogenital distance when they're exposed to these phthalates in utero. Okay, this is not post birth
This is in utero the mother's being exposed. It crosses the blood placental barrier
What's happening? Well, this is reducing sperm counts. Now, what can people do about this?
Well, first of all, there's this question of whether or not phthalates are having a similar effect after a child is brought into the world
One doesn't know but we do know and this is goes back to my early graduate work was on the effects of androgens like testosterone and dh t on
different traits of brain and body
we know that
For instance, it just very briefly that the during pregnancy the brain is organized male
By way of believe it or not testosterone converted to estrogen
through a process called aromatization
but
The growth of the penis the fact that there even will be a penis etc is set by a
Testosterone called dh t dihydrotestosterone testosterone converted to dh t through 5-alpha ductase and on and on
That's an organizing effect on the system as they call it
But then there's an activating effect where during puberty the testes just start producing testosterone
Some is converted to dh t and the dh t is what creates the growth of the penis. Okay
In people that ingest phthalates during puberty and in the post puberty years
It's conceivable that those phthalates could inhibit the activating effects of androgens not just what we call the organizing effects of androgens early in life
Okay, why is this interesting and important? Well sperm counts are definitely going down. Are they going down so much so that
People are incapable of reproducing
Probably not because you know as they told us in school it just takes one and indeed it just takes one sperm
But it is a probability. It's a numbers game, right?
The reason you know people that take anabolic steroids unless they
Do things to offset the effect on their own testosterone in sperm production
sperm counts are down so the probability of
of
Successful insemination is of the egg is reduced also. It's a numbers game
It just takes one but having many improves the probability that the one will be able to fertilize
So the short answer is yes. I think it is
Very concerning now. Which thing should we be concerned about my understanding of the literature in here? I'm not an
I'm now venturing to territory for which I am certainly not an expert is that things like plastics that have bpa's
May be a concern drinking water may be a concern, but the most serious or
Enriched source of bpa's aren't things like printed receipts
But yeah, I was out for dinner the other night
It was probably about a month and a half ago and the server came over and I reached for the receipt
And as I was going for it like this one of the girls who I'd never met before she's a creator online
Hit my hand away. Are you really going to touch that?
And this is the first time I've ever heard about this. This is legit. Yeah printed receipts are are a
A rich source of bpa's and topically that could come through the skin could go transdermally
I mean now you'd probably have to handle a lot of receipts. I mean, I don't think you're a check out cashier
Perhaps this would be the sort of thing definitely check out cashiers and listen
It's going to vary some people are operating with a testosterone level and sperm count
That's already back on its heels so to speak some people have abundant testosterone and sperm
So it's really going to depend on the individual
I don't think people should get paranoid or delusional about any of this
But just don't start sleeping in a bed of receipts don't start sleeping in a bed of receipts
That's an interesting there are all sorts of jokes that could be made about that one
That I won't make but
There are also some other things like you know do a little bit of online research about phthalates
And don't go to fringe sites go to dr. Shana swan's website, right?
I believe she's about Sinai or one of the other larger medical schools in new york go to her website
She's a legitimate researcher and see what's there. See what the sources of phthalates are pesticides
Does that mean you should only eat organic fruits and vegetables?
Maybe I don't know which pesticides people are using on which fruits and vegetables, right?
so there's some research that needs to be done, but
The moment we start talking this way and people start saying oh, wow, this is really like hippie science
This is in hippie science. This is serious NIH funded researcher saying phthalates
Before birth can dramatically alter the trajectory of of the male
Stability and make sperm and testosterone
phthalates in puberty may be able to do that, but we know that that
Androgens in particular DHT and testosterone converted to estrogen have a powerful role in
Masculinizing the brain and body during those years
Why wouldn't people be you know do a half an hour of research online?
Or for instance the abundant data that melatonin suppresses pregnant excuse me suppresses puberty and yet people will take melatonin like it was
You know insane same level. Yeah. Am I saying melatonin is going to suppress your puberty if you took it as a kid you're messed up
No, and yet it's very easy to replace it with some of the healthier alternatives that are out there
So I think that one can have a thoughtfulness about this stuff
And it's a and it's action oriented without having to really freak out about it
How do you think that creators like derrick from more plates more dates or greg do set us someone who's changed the way that the internet understands?
Um hormonal profiles and supplementation because since watching a lot of derrick's stuff since he's become big on youtube
I have been much more considering the balance that's inside of my body
But I don't I don't think that that was super common before guys like him were around
Yeah, I look derrick's not a scientist by training, but he's done an immense service to
The world because no one was talking about this stuff. It was talked about in bodybuilding circles
Where they talk very openly
It was
starting to emerge in
testosterone replacement therapy clinics and then mostly guys were doing this stuff and lying about it
They're doing it, but then they don't want to talk about actually kudos to joe rogan who years ago came out and said
Yeah, he decided to start doing trt and to low dose of a testosterone
He's already successfully reproduced in this. Oh, you know, he brought it up and and you know
It's clear that this is becoming more common
Here's some of the general principles that I think
Forgive me derrick if I get this wrong in terms of what you believe because I never want to speak for anybody else
but my read of the science and the actual protocols
speak to the idea that
Many people do not need testosterone replacement
Young guys should really avoid doing anabolic steroids
They can really mess up their system not just physically not just for the ability to have kids later
But um lead to all sorts of sexual issues and sexual performance issues
Like there needs to be some medical incentive, right? Hypokinadism for instance
but
At the point where someone either has bank sperm or decides they don't want any more kids or is willing to do something like take
Hcg to maintain testicular and uh function and spermatogenesis. It's very clear that
Going with the lowest in a doctor described, right? I'm not talking about illicit use that the lowest possible dosage of testosterone
Therapy is going to be better than for instance taking 200 milligrams in a one mil injection every two weeks
Right because you get these huge increases and then these troughs. So people are something that you learned from derrick
Yes, and in talking with other people and I I'm no longer doing this
But I I did a run of it from 45 to 46 years old and nothing before that
And I did it because I'm working on a on a book really that has a whole section on hormone therapies
I wanted to see what it was like. I'll tell you basically testosterone gives you more energy to work more
Um, if it's done appropriately, right? Maybe that's the the secret for lex
Maybe maybe home always just brimming maze brimming and I'll say when I went into it my my levels were mid-range
They were fine high to mid-range. They were kind of like sevens eights
But I was doing some supplementation to support that I've since gone back to that
It was funny when you say something on the internet people think that means it's forever, right?
It is possible to start and come off, right? So so what I've done and and so here's what's what's relevant here people are now
Spacing out, you know 30 milligrams on monday 30 milligrams on wednesday 30 milligrams on fridays
They kind of a low reasonable dose again talk to your doctor. These aren't recommended dosages
That's more typical another thing that's really important is that people have traditionally blocked estrogen by increases
While doing this by taking an aromatase inhibitor nulvidex aromidex these kinds of things
That
almost often is a bad idea almost often because
Having enough estrogen around allows you to maintain
cognitive function
And libido a lot of guys think it's just you know
And it is true if estrogen is very high and testosterone is very low it could libido can suffer
But if testosterone is very high and estrogen is very low
libido can really suffer
So a lot of people who are crushing their estrogen realize that by coming off some of those drugs they feel far better
Far better. Interesting far better. So most people I know that are doing this are taking low doses of testosterone semi frequently throughout the week
20 to 30 milligrams every other day or so there's a lot of variation around this and then
Not doing anything to reduce
Aromatase or if they are taking very low doses not one milligram of aromidex
But maybe something like 0.1 milligrams of aromidex every third day or so again not a recommendation talk to your doctor
The the smarter clinics are starting to think about this and actually I don't have any financial relationship to derrick or to maryk health
Which is his clinic, but from what I understand they do a very good job. I did help them design a
herbal
Mostly herbal supplement for
Testosterone support for people who are not on TRT as things like Tonga Ali for doja
But unbeknownst to most people I I've not made one penny on that
That was just based on a conversation of the research with him and dr. Kyle Gillette and a few other people so
Estrogen can help maintain libido also can increase libido now. Here's something I learned that's really interesting from peter atia recently
Women as we know make both testosterone and estrogen and of course a bunch of other
hormones too
if they get their blood work back and you were to adjust the
Units that those hormones are measured in nanograms per deciliter in some cases
Pika grams per deciliter in other cases if you normalize them all to the same
Nanograms per deciliter you would find that a healthy woman has more testosterone than she does estrogen
That's right
I asked him this three times. I'm like, you're telling me that women have more testosterone
circulating in them than estrogen. He said absolutely now this maybe there's a there's a caveat to that during some phase of the menstrual cycle, but
That does not mean that their toaster testosterone levels are higher than that of men
But this is remarkable, right? This means that these androgens testosterone and and are doing interesting things in men
End in women and estrogen as we just described are doing really interesting things certainly in women
End in men. So this idea of more testosterone less estrogen good is always the case. That's simply false
You have to think about whether or not it's a man whether or not it's a woman whether or not
The goal is more or less
Typically people aren't going for less libido, but I suppose it's impossible
Some people out there with them
Some people might be highly distracted by an excessive libido. I thought that's a different story
But and then of course DHT
So I think one of the things that Derek has really contributed to the world
And I think is important for people know that a lot of the drugs
That are used to treat hair loss
Finasteride propitia things like that block DHT receptors to hydrotestosterone
DHT is responsible for beard growth in the face and for balding male pattern baldness people because they want their hair
Will take these drugs if they take it them in pill form
They're blocking DHT everywhere and they can experience severe defects in libido and sexual performance
Now before that choice between your hair and your erection
For a lot of people it is right
I mean for now there are now topical things and Derek talks about all this kind of thing
They're top really really deep he goes really deep into all this and what's interesting is you know
We also can take a step back and say like what's the landscape of health information that created this
opportunity for a
Kid in his 20s. By the way, no one knows his last name
Very clever. No one knows his last name
Um, I'll play Derek. It's kind of an avatar of a human right although he's real
Um, what created this landscape for this guy to be able to get this information out there
Even though he's not a physician
He's not a scientist
And I think what it is is that he saw that there was all this information nested in these very niche communities
That most people don't want to look like a bodybuilder, right?
And yet what he did was he sort of normalized the discussion about hormones
He normalized the discussion about other things like dopamine and cortisol
Etc. And what's interesting is that science now
Is kind of following suit, you know 10 years ago a discussion about hormone therapies would never come up in the hallways of
discussions with my colleagues
Since doing a an episode of the podcast on optimizing testosterone and estrogen
No fewer than 10 of like i'm not going to name names, but these are serious scientists
And it's a mixture of men and women have approached me about like hey like what can one do in order to
adjust testosterone or estrogen levels is
Um estrogen therapy for menopause a useful thing when should one start now?
I'm not an endocrinologist so all I can do is point them in the way of information
But this is an important area and here's why
Hormones control neuromodulators like dopamine estrogen and so on and those neuromodulators powerfully influence our states of mind
So if your hormones are out of whack your neuromodulators are going to be out of whack
Typically the treatment for depression would be to go in and just
Give a serotonin reuptake inhibitor or well butron type dopamine thing now that has its use, but I love this
Trend now not towards hormone therapy necessarily, but just toward a thinking a mindset of
How deep in the layers of my biology can I go to create these sort of waves of health that rise up to the level of
ability to focus
And etc for so many years
It's all been attacked at the surface kind of the waves
On the surface of the ocean and yet there's this like we're now talking about the deep tectonic plates
Movements that are affecting all that in any case
Around about 30 years ago. You took a real hard turn in life
It seemed like you drastically altered the trajectory that you were moving on for quite a while and I'm very interested
in how
Anybody manages to make severe life changes like that. I think that many people can
They believe that they have control over maybe their daily habits and little things here and there
But they don't have huge global control over their life direction. Certainly not in the way
that they want
Reflecting on that now
Does it almost surprise you the sort of the ability that you have to be able to change that direction? It seems so unbelievably rare
Uh, right. So it um, I don't know. Um, I like to think everybody harbors it inside themselves
I I can say without going into the whole backstory because I've done it before
I mean at at 19 I basically just looked at myself and decided that I was
A loser, right? I mean, I was able bodied which was helpful. I had a mind that could remember things which was helpful
I was interested in a few things
But none of those things were setting me up for career or ongoing progress and I had a lot of
Maladaptive behaviors right at the time. I was getting involved in fighting. I just I just didn't I wasn't completing my school work
I was just really in a bad place and
It was really fear and desperation
mostly fear
That inspired the the switch
Along the way and I haven't talked about this publicly, you know to any great extent
But along the way I hit numerous roadblocks again and again
Sometimes they were situational like people close to me dying and the grief that came with that
Sometimes it was my own kind of um, feeling like I was getting pulled back toward
A state of mind that wasn't healthy for me
Uh and so on but I think what I've
been good at
at least good at not great at but at least good at is
finding
Really good mentors that would allow me to get to the next
node of the next milestone
And I should say that some of those mentors were real people
That I I didn't say can you be my mentor? Um, not that that would be a bad thing, but
Really tried to model my behavior after people that I respected
And sometimes those mentors were people that
I didn't know at all. I mean, I'll just say this right now
I I mean, I'm an embarrassing by saying that but you know, I was a junior professor meaning before I got tenure
running a lab
I had a bulldog puppy
A laboratory and a home for the first time in my life and feeling very very
Overwhelmed and distraught and I made
Many of the things that I heard
Tim Ferriss say
Sort of central to my way of doing things. I didn't go four hours of work a week
But I did start to get extreme about organizing my schedule
So he was a big influence on you Tim huge huge and and I know Tim a little bit
We have some common friends and I feel very fortunate that now we're in touch because it's gone on his podcast
And gotten to know one another but just huge
I mean like there were no organizational forces in my life for me at that time that could help me navigate through this landscape of
You know, I'd never been a professor before I had
Taught it now those many years ago now, but um, I knew how to do science
I felt confident in my ability to take an empty room and a budget and create by the right equipment and do the experiments higher
The people I had no problem with that, but how to
regulate my time and my energy and how to
Communicate with people. I mean he had these like little things that I don't like the word hacks
I hate it because hacks are
Implies that you're using something for a purpose that it wasn't intended for that's a hack
But he had things like instead of asking people
um
You know like what's up when they come in your office asking them, you know, what specifically, you know
What can I do for you?
Like what do you need?
Right really cutting to the chase because time became a valuable resource little things like that tiny things on the fit on the surface
That translate into huge conversion in terms of time and energy
um
And even just setting aside some savings and things I it's not that I'm not
Dumb about money
But I wasn't I've never really taken the time to think about how I was going to invest money or do anything
So tim did a tremendous service for for me without realizing it and I've thanked him now a million times
I'm gonna thank him a million times. I'm thanking you. Thank you tim. I'm thanking you again things like that
So it's selecting mentors then eventually when it came time to start podcasting
I mean lex whether or not he knows or not, you know, just thinking. Oh, here's another guy who's he's a scientist
He's mit the fact he always wore that suit
That I'm gonna copy him and just always wear the same thing because I don't have to take the guesswork
I can take the guesswork out of it. There were little things that
We're super deliberate that just saved me time and energy
and I think that
That's helped me along the way and then the other thing is I have really tried to adopt this idea that
When it's inevitable
And it will inevitably arrive that stress grows us
That it really sharpens decision making it really sharpens decision making and you know
If you have a very stressful event and then you recover from it
The worst thing to do is just go and keep going you need to take some time and reflect about what led into that
So I think I'm very good at leveraging fear into positive change
If I really think about most of the major shifts in my life it was
I'm scared as hell to remain in this situation and I'm very good at broadcasting fear into my future
You know if I've ever been in a bad relationship it was
Clearly if I stayed in it couldn't have been so bad
That I felt like I had to leave so I would
Broadcast and project you know how horrible it would be for my future children and I might even
Build that up a little bit my system now one could say well, maybe you could have navigated it successfully
I'm better at projecting fear into my future
And that has led me to make I think better and better decisions over time. That's it
How much of the old andrew?
Still
Rises to the surface today. I know that the music that you tend to listen to when you're training is
Still pretty punky and when I work. Yeah, I mean I have two very polarized versions of music
I do love you know, I love bob dillon. I love joe strummer acoustic
I like you know, I like melodic music too, but yeah, I'm listening to rants. It's difficult fingers
I mean, I'm I mean, I was the first ever gig I went to
Stiff little fingers. I'm jealous. I've never actually seen them play live. I'm a huge stiff little fingers fan. Huge stiff little fingers fan
um
Huge against me fan huge rants of fan. I mean, you know for people that
Um of my generation, they probably remember it people were younger probably think oh, that's all 90s stuff
But a lot to me
I mean I have huge collections of like 80s and 90s music 70s music second wave punk third wave punk
I collect a ton of that stuff. I love it. I mean how much of me still exists. I believe that
We are all born fundamentally with some gift and it's our job to reveal that gift to ourselves and you know, here
I'm I want to thoroughly acknowledge someone else who's been a great mentor without ever meeting him as a robert green
I think is a is a fantastic guy fantastic. I've never met you robert
But I'd love to meet I mean it's one of these things where I used to put you in touch
He's been on the show twice amazing
I used to suggest the book mastery to graduate students and to undergraduates like, you know, learn this process of finding a mentor
um
And in science, we have natural mentors graduate advisors and postdoc advisors and I I made sure I will say this
I should have said this earlier when a mentor has sort of arrived in my life either virtually or in reality
I make the most of that relationship. I really nurture those relationships
I mean, I still go to visit the children of my dead graduates
advisor
Kids, you know, because I care so I mean these are like these people are like family to me
How much of it still exists? Well, the energy has always been the same
The energy is I have an absolute obsession from day one
This maybe was what I was kind of born with to I like to learn things and share them with the world
I was six years old giving lectures on monday after reading about medieval weapons or, you know, goldfish biology in class
I mean my parents thought it was crazy and they took me a psychiatrist and like no
He just really likes learning and really likes telling people about that about what he learns
so
And I had a little bit of an underlying Tourette's when I was younger I had a grunting tick
I had a little and when I'm tired it sometimes emerges a little bit and for me learning and kind of seeking
kind of calms that somehow
As does training
As is skateboarding I did boxing of course head damage isn't good. So I stopped boxing but
That's always been in me. That's how I'm that's how my nervous system kind of tilts left in that way
The energy
I would say I'm able to
Turn the dial
I'm able to tap into kind of some old hurts and angers as fuel
But I really try and orient towards things in a very Lex Friedman ish way from a place of like show them love
Show them do things from a place of love because it's a more continual resource
I really believe it's this dopamine epinephrine cycle positive feedback cycle. I really do
And so that's all there
You know, I
Have pretty much eaten the same way I have since college
I really I haven't really changed the way I eat that much
I mean, I probably ate more junk every once in a while
I scream and pizza and stuff and now I have less of an appetite for but I still am the same
I still train every other day. I um
I love music. I love movies. I love nature. I love the flora and fauna of life
I mean, I have this kind of obsession with fish tanks freshwater fish tanks. I love
And listen, I my ex-girlfriend is a uh, she's a florist. I I developed a love of flowers, you know in those years
I love, you know, I
I'm probably the one guy who was like wandering around in college
I would go to these like orchid festivals and some of them look like aliens and I just I just love learning
And I love digesting novel information
and um
and now
You know, I I have to say I'm in a place where the people that I'm closest to
I mean, thankfully really kind of support that and I can indulge it through podcasting
It's so lovely now that the environment of curiosity. I think that podcasts and and youtube and
creators have
Engended it's so cool. You know the the fact that you get to
Find out about something that you really care that you would have done right you would have done it
For free without anybody else knowing about it right and then somehow
Telling other people the thing that you found out in this version of the simulation is called a job or a pursuit or something
It's it's wild another thing
That has carried over from your youth or your tattoos
Which I've heard you talk about
But never seen
What's your relationship with your tattoos and why is no one ever seen them? Yeah
Um, yeah, actually it was tim ferris that outed me on this one
He was like I found a picture on the internet with you in full sleeves
um
Yeah, you know, I believe that you know tattoos are I mean this has come as no surprise or a
Literal expression of what we feel on the inside and you know, I and I'm not recommending this kids. Don't do this
I started getting tattooed really young how young about 14. I got my first tattoo no way we did them ourselves
With your first one is yourself. Please don't know. Please no one do this indian can a needle and um
We used to do these is really bad. They're called nicknack tattoos or we kind of would do this at home
Don't do it. It's really bad to get bad infections. They're ugly. They they
Blur they bleed that it's not good
Yeah, I started getting tattooed I
When I was a kid and growing up skateboarding in the punk rock scene
There were these guys that um in the town where I lived they called themselves the yatsi guys
I don't know why I don't know what that was about
But they all had full sleeves and they were super nice guys and they were all into skateboarding and
You know and vehicles and I just looked up to these guys. I thought oh, I like someday. I want full sleeves
I
Yeah, I've got full sleeves. I'm basically like neck to neck to wrists. So chest piece as well. Yeah, but yeah
Vax covered. Yeah, nothing on my legs. Nothing on my stomach ribs. Yeah. Yeah tops of my tops of my shoulders
And I got a big picture of Costello my dog back there. I've got a picture of his paw back there
I've got a picture of another dog used to have
There's still some space for a few things. There's some things very personal to me
Um, is that the reason that you prefer not to show them? Yeah, you know, I think that there are a couple reasons
I'll just be clear as to why first of all
When I show up to podcast it's the same way I show up to lecture in the
classroom auditorium and I
Swear on my life. This is my mindset and this is my mantra when I do it. I'm there to teach. It's not about me
It's about the student. It's about the people learning
I don't want it ever to be about me. I don't want the focus to be on me
I mean, obviously I'm the voice and the person talking
But I really want people to internalize the information and I do think that the tattoos because they have nothing to do with
The information are a distraction. They're just a distraction
I don't know. It would sort of like be wearing like a bright yellow shirt or something. It's not my style
I prefer to kind of make myself disappear as much as I can
Um and let the information come forward
That's you know, even when I gave scientific lectures, which I still do of course for my my professor job
I generally liked the room to be pretty dark and I wanted the light to be on the data on the slides
I was happy to be the voice, but I want people thinking about the data
So podcasting is a little different to come through as a voice not we're on youtube a voice in an image, but
I really prefer that it not be about me now
There's a human element too and I think things have changed a lot when I was growing up tattoos were not accepted
There are many work environments where if you have for instance
where
People prefer that their surgeon or their doctor not have tattoos
Some people might prefer their surgeon or doctor have tattoos when I was growing up if you had a
I never had one but if someone had a nose ring they had to cover it up with a band-aid or take it out if they worked at the
Coffee shop remember that you probably don't you're probably going to know or the or eyebrow ring
Trends have changed right things have changed and I'm kind of old school because I'm kind of old now 46
um and the etiquette for me has always been to
You know, and this is lex does this too is I I personally
Behind that if I can just show up as formal and consistent as possible that people will at least know that I'm taking them
Seriously, so I don't really do it for me. I pretty much do it for the audience
um
And also none of the tattoos are like that interesting. It's my dog. I've I really like raptors. I've got a bunch of birds
I've got I mean I have all sorts of different things like raptors like the dinosaur. No raptors like um
Red-tailed hawks and blue, you know, I like birds and I had either dinosaurs or trucks
That you know, you really need to love ford raptors. No, no no ford raptor
I drive I drive a toy out of forerunner and I love it. I've got one truck and I love that thing
Although gas right now
I mean it's you kind of got a wonder about having a gas driven vehicle like a forerunner
In any case, yeah, the tattoo thing I would say for for younger people coming up
Just be aware that you can't control other people's perceptions either
And so, you know, I always made it a point that I didn't want things on my knuckles
I didn't want them on my hands. I didn't want them on my neck. I didn't want them on my face
Do I judge people when they have them? No, but do I want them for me? No, I also think that this is very neuroscience-y
As a neuroscientist that we have dedicated brain areas called fusiform
Gyrus face area that's dedicated to the processing of faces
Even if I just put two dots and a line in between them on a piece of paper, you see that as a face
When one puts a tattoo on their throat or on their face, it actually changes the way that the face is perceived, right?
I mean, it almost looks like another mouth there. Right. It's a very different look. It's it can be a little bit jarring
I'm not saying one shouldn't have it, but it can be a little bit jarring
It's it changes the look of the person forever. It's not just that it's above the neckline
It's that it kind of competes with the processing of their face in its normal way
And so for me whenever I see somebody with a throat tattoo or a face tattoo
Sort of like it's hard to kind of orient around that and I think there's some biology to
To that relates to that but like when it comes down to it
I mean people need to be individuals and live their life the way they want to live their life
I've also never been that much of an iconoclast. I've not you know, I'm
Grew up in the punk rock thing. Um, you know, I hate in-group out-group stuff
I always had friends from a lot of different, you know friends are jocks and hippies and punk rockers and
You know straight and gay and like I don't care as long as people are living their best life
And they're not harming anybody like I'm like great go for it. I I'm very laid back in that way
Of course if people are harming other people
Then I believe that like a little bit less liberty and independent freedom. I mean liberty is you know, one of the highest things
you know for me so
But I don't tend to I don't consider myself a very judgmental person
But you can't always control the perceptions of others
So I would just think people should be thoughtful about what they want to accomplish in life in terms of a life mission
And just ask whether or not some of the permanent cosmetic changes they might make might might
Align with compete with or be neutral for those life missions
My life mission is very simple. I want to teach people the beauty and the utility of biology
I'm going to do that today
I'm going to do that until I take my last breath in one form or another because that's what excites me
And that's like what keeps the dopamine cranking dudes. Let's bring this one home
Look, I really really appreciate you the work that you've done the fact that I feel like I have a lot more agency over my life because
I understand that my internal processes are something that I can influence
You know the first time that I heard you say that you cannot control the mind with the mind
A lot of different things clicked for me. So I'm very glad that Lex bullied you or convinced you to start doing your show
and
Yeah, I'm looking forward to hearing a lot more of what you've got to do in the future
Well, thanks so much and thanks for bringing me on today. Obviously
we've been in touch and I
Align with you and I feel resonance along the life as a podcaster, right?
But also we've had a chance to interact a few times
I'm looking forward to more because I think what you're doing bringing knowledge to the world is is so important
And I so appreciate your your questions and learning from you
I'm also going to get these resources about the expectation effect and the rest
I've been taking notes here because I I'm obsessed with learning
So why should people go people want to make sure that they they listen to more watch more follow more of your stuff
Why should they go thanks for asking? Yeah, it's very straightforward. It's huberman lab
Is the podcast and it's all the standard places youtube apple spotify, etc
huberman lab on twitter
huberman lab on instagram and the twitter and instagram mainly are short content
I used to do a lot more hand drawings and I think you're doing instagram pretty much as well as any science communicator that I've seen
I don't think there's anyone else that's optimized it better than that. Thanks right now
Thanks. Yeah, I try and answer comments and respond to things and any of those three places and we have a website
Which is huberman lab.com
There where all the podcast episodes are links to all things in all formats
We have a newsletter and you know people can peruse that if they want it's all I should say zero cost to access
So that's been a major goal that we've stuck to which is to just we don't put anything behind a paywall
The information that's there is the information that anyone can access dude. I appreciate you. Let's go and get hot and cold
Let's do it
What's happening people?
Thank you very much for tuning in if you enjoyed that episode
Then press here for a selection of the best clips from the podcast over the last few weeks and don't forget to subscribe
peace
