When we spoke at the start of the year, I said it was way too close to November to switch anybody out
Turns out that I was wrong
Beginners luck
You said what are the odds that Joe Biden has a debilitating event between now and November including death?
So he runs a one in 20 chance of dying in any given year or above that. I don't think you know whether he's even going to make it to November
Debilitating event could have been a debilitating public event
Purposely left it vague and I didn't say the other part of it, which I now feel comfortable saying which is I
Don't I don't know whether I
Don't know whether Donald Trump will be allowed to become president
Would you mean by that I
Think that there's a remarkable story and we're in a funny game
Which is are we allowed to say what that story is because to say it to analyze it to name it is
to bring it
Into view I
Think we don't understand why the censorship is behaving the way it is we don't understand why it's in the shadows
We don't understand why our news is acting in a bizarre fashion. So let's just set the stage given that that was in February
There is something
That I think Mike Benz is just referred to as the rules-based international order
It's an interlocking series of agreements tacit understandings explicit understandings clandestine
understandings about how
the most important structures keep the world free of war and
keep markets open and
And
There has been a system in place whether understood it explicitly or
Behind the scenes or implicitly it says that the purpose of the two American parties is to prune
the field of populist candidates so that whatever two candidates
exist in a face-off
Are both acceptable to that world order
So what you're trying to do from the point of view, let's take it from the point of view of let's say the State Department the intelligence community the Defense Department and
major
Corporations that are have to do with
international issues from arms trade to
Oh, I don't know food
They have a series of agreements
that are fragile and
Could be overturned if a president entered the Oval Office who didn't agree with them in the mood of the country
Was why do we pay taxes into these structures? Why are we hamstrung? Why aren't we a free people?
So what the two parties would do is that they would run primaries you have populist candidates
And you'd pre-commit the populist candidates to support the candidates who won the primaries
As long as that
Took place and you had two candidates that were both acceptable to the international order
That is that they aren't going to rethink NAFTA or NATO or what have you
We called that democracy and so democracy was the illusion of choice
What's what's called magicians choice where the choice is not actually you know pick a card any card
But somehow the magician makes sure that the card that you pick is the one that he knows
In that situation you have magicians choice in the primaries and then you'd have the duopoly field two candidates
either of which was acceptable and you could actually afford to hold an election and
The populists would vote and that way the international order wasn't put at risk every four years because you can't have alliances
that are subject to the whim of
The people in plebiscites
So under that structure everything was going fine until 2016 and then the first candidate ever to not hold
Any position in the military nor position in government in the history of the Republic to enter the Oval Office Donald Trump
Broke through the primary structure. So then there was a full court press. Okay, we only have one candidate
That's acceptable to the international order Donald Trump will be under
Constant pressure that he's a loser. He's a wild man. He's an idiot and
And he's under the control of the Russians and then he was going to be a you know at a 20 to 1 underdog and then he wins
and
There was no precedent for this
They learn their lesson you cannot afford to have candidates who are not acceptable to the international order and continue to have these alliances
This is an unsolved problem. So I don't have a particular
Dog in this fight. I one believe in democracy. I also believe in international agreements and
It is the job of the State Department the intelligence community and the Defense Department to bring this problem in front of the American people and say
We have a problem. You don't know everything that's going on and if you start voting in populist candidates
You're going to end up knocking out load-bearing walls that you don't understand
But Trump was in office for four years. Did he turn the entire table upside down? He risked doing that
Say more
You remember that there was this uncomfortable
Accommodation given to the Central Intelligence Agency at the beginning of his actual term. There was a question about
Was he going to question?
The I have a very different point of view than most of my friends who are also, you know, at least nominally Democrats
Which is it was a very immoral thing that was done to him
He was asked the question will you pre-commit that you will accept the results of an election now?
If you were going to rig an election
You would ask somebody that to begin with and that's part of the game and he says well, you know, we'll see
So you have this very strange thing going on where democracy is the greatest threat to
Democracy now, how can that be? It's two different concepts of democracy one
Concept of democracy is the will of the people you hold plebiscites
And even if you do it with an electoral college or political parties
The idea is that the people are like, you know by an oven for the people the other idea of democracy is that democracy is about
Institutions that sprang from democracy once upon a time and that those institutions have to be kept strong
Those are two completely different concepts that are overloaded to the same word
Under that circumstance we have a paradox which is how do we keep the electorate from overturning the you know
The type a democracy from overturning the type B democracy and that's the unsolved problem that they will not bring in front of the people
So what you have is a situation in which I believe that there are many people in Washington, DC
Who think that Donald Trump cannot become president because he can now go for broke. He's also not going to try to run for re-election
He's relatively unconstrained. He's wealthy. He's
He's learned how to play a lot of these games and maybe got a little bit of an axe to grind as well after the last six years
no kidding and
He's a wild card, you know, there are three people who are doing amazing versions of the drunken boxing game
Kanye who's probably
The first one to really fail Elon and Donald Trump and all three of them tried to do something where you couldn't pin them down
you couldn't figure out
like what they were gonna do next and
That's what the order is keep keeps trying to do like will you commit to this? Will you say this?
we will you mouth these words and
and
None of these people would play the game
I find this all you ever see Emmanuel Augustus or this boxer who actually you know, I think Floyd
Mayweather said it was with his toughest opponent because he just he wouldn't fight in the style that anyone could recognize
Probably the most unpredictable. Yeah, and the most entertaining boxer I've ever seen in my life
I mean just check out any highlight reel and you won't even believe this is real
It doesn't seem possible. So that's what Donald Trump is. He's a guy who's got formulas that confuse people like Sam Harris
You know Sam and I have been debating this for years. I think that Trump is an incredibly intelligent man and that there's
incredible method in his tweets
Of old you can just you could put them into a data set and you say that there are five or six different types of tweets and then
The left falls for every one of them every time
So in the situation you have a question, how is it?
that Donald Trump and
RFK Jr. Cannot possibly reach the Oval Office and we have to have a candidate who is pre
Subscribed to perpetuating these institutions these agreements and these orders and there's only one out of three
Who who has that character and that person is not one of primary?
Right now we have no idea who's running the United States of America
I just came here in a Tesla and I did not steer once and I would say America is in full self-driving mode
And we don't know what the AI is that's running the Oval Office and that's really bizarre
Given that we have something like six minutes to make a decision about nuclear launches
We have no idea
What the United States government in the executive branch acts actually is but it can't be Joe Biden
Every time it seems that an election has happened over the last decade or so it's always been this one is different
This is the most important. This is the most important. Is there something different about the one that we're about to go into?
How should we think about this election as?
World War two unraveling
The order that has produced the illusion of peace
For this length of time. I imagine that you were
Let's say in the 2000s that you had this thing called the Great Moderation
There was a story that we had finally banished volatility from the markets. None of that was true
What you were doing was you were going farther and farther into a regime
Without understanding that sooner or later the Jenga Tower has to collapse
The the order that was put in place at the end of World War two
None of its architects are still alive
Very few pieces of information were passed down about what it actually is or how it functions because it's secret and
I think what you can say is that
We are now living on the fumes built from that victory
That is what is unraveling you're about to head towards a multi-polar world where the game theory in a in a dyadic
Game of two players doesn't look remotely
like the game theory in a in a five or ten player game
so
Kamala is essentially the youngest
Boomer possible and she's tied to
The last silent generation president will ever have which was a bizarre thing to begin with and she's
pre-committed to trying to continue that order
in the guise of a
Alternatively woke Wall Street friendly Indian black
Folksy, I don't even know what she is to quote the great Chris Wilmson. She's a meme of a meme of a meme
that was from our last talk and I
Would say this is probably the most insane election we've ever seen by
By a comfortable margin. I would say that there's no one in second place
I
Can't think of another election that is even close to this bizarre
Including the attempted assassination on Donald Trump
Yeah, the
There's so many things all
coalescing at the same time
from what's happening with the media to AI to discontent to
fake news and cheap fakes and
Construed constructed
Sorry fake news was a fake
story if you look at the
Google Trends fake news was a tiny story during the 2016 cycle that blew up immediately afterwards. It was the placeholder as
The intelligence community or the blob figured out what it was going to do next to try to take control of the international order
You have to realize that that's the first real surprise in
Presidential history where they lost control of the process. Well, I've got a surprise for you
I told you not to watch this before we get to do this
Actually listened did you what I told you not to do it? I know it's like pouring sugar on a picnic to keep answer
okay, okay, so
For the people who haven't seen it
We'll just do a quick recap
MSNBC was exposed today for yet another set of lies
They deceptively edited together this video of different Joe Rogan
Comments to make it appear that he was singing the praises of Kamala Harris. It's gonna win. No, she's not she can win
She is a strong woman. She is a person who served overseas
Twice she in a medical unit. She was a congresswoman for eight years. Yeah, she is a person of color
She's everything you want. She's gonna win. No, she's not she can win
They just want no Trump. No matter what what do you make of that? That's the most
brazen
Cutting together of something that millions of people have seen
They don't really
Whatever it is is not really trying to fool you it's trying to instruct you
You you're allowed to see the truth
They can make it difficult to find the truth, but it's hard to shut up Joe Rogan
they've settled for something else which is
Think about MSNBC and CNN the New York Times the Washington Post the Los Angeles Times Reuters AP etc as
a set of instructions
For how to keep your job
You're allowed to disagree will set the boundaries of the disagreement will set the topics of the disagreement
You may not even watch any of these things
But we'll make sure that it filters through to the people that you are watching so that they're outraged and
You're given a choice. You can choose to understand whatever you want and you can choose to say whatever you want
But if you say what you understand to be true
You can know what the consequences are you may lose your marriage you may lose your job. You may lose your friends
and so in essence we all know that
If you question the war in Ukraine or if you
Say look
I detest Donald Trump, but I'm voting for him because what's going on at the Democratic Party is unholy and insane
You're signing up for whatever Thanksgiving dinner
We have planned for you
what we're talking to your uncle we're talking to your spouse
and in essence this is
A lot like Caligula installing his horse as a senator
No one's fooled that the horse
is an ordinary human senator
The choices do you wish to say something?
In other news this episode is brought to you by element for the last three years now
I have started my morning every single day with element
It is a tasty electrolyte drink mix with everything that you need and nothing that you don't each grab and go stick pack contains a
Science-backed electrolyte ratio of sodium potassium and magnesium with no sugar no coloring no artificial ingredients or any other
Junk sodium plays a critical role in reducing muscle cramps and fatigue while optimizing brain health regulating appetite and curbing cravings
I keep harping on about it because I can feel the difference
You should give it a try and see how you feel as well. Best of all
There is a no questions asked refund policy with an unlimited duration
So you can buy it for as long as you want try it all and if you do not like it for any reason
They'll give you your money back and you don't even need to return the box
That's how confident they are that you love it right now
You can get a free sample pack of all eight flavors of your first box by going to the link in the description below or heading to
drink lmnt.com
modern wisdom that's drink
lmnt.com
slash
modern wisdom
I'd been trying to find this term for a while that
I'd learned through
film critics online
People like critical drinkers are sweary scottish film critic
And retroactive continuity red car. Yeah, I but I didn't know what retroactive continuity
I didn't know that that's what retconning. I just knew it as retcon
So retroactive continuity is a literary device in which facts in the world of a fictional work
That have been established through the narrative itself are adjusted ignored supplemented or contradicted by subsequently
Published work that recontextualizes or breaks continuity with the former. So the question is is
What we're seeing just the
Star Wars cinematic universe
Yeah equivalent. Yeah, this is this is Sherlock Holmes and professor Moriarty
Where walls offer ledge and yet here he is again
It's every episode of South Park when Kenny's died
so
It's very important to understand the back of house in everything that you're doing
So, you know, when you go to a hotel, um, there's an entirely secondary structure
of floors elevators
entrances cafes
That are necessary to support the front of house
uh, which is the illusion
of the hotel that you're staying in
And the same thing is true for screenwriting and the creative arts. I I think everyone should for example read save the cat
It's a book on screenwriting that points out that films aren't broken into
Scenes so much as they're broken into beats. They're about 40 beats in a film
And the beats have names and so if you read this book, you'll one one is called the bad guys close in and another beat
Is called all hope is lost
and these are mainstays and you're
programmed client side at a subliminal level to be able to follow
A film based on the idea that your brain is already tooled
Uh to absorb this stuff. There's a concept called spackle in Hollywood
Where it costs a couple of lines to make something that makes no sense makes sense. I think it's referenced and thank you for smoking
Where they're smoking in space and there's an issue with product placement
How does it make sense to have cigarettes smoking in space after sex and you know, you know, whatever
It'll cost us two lines of spackle. And so everyone's interesting every once in a while the craft
pokes through
And so this is the back retcon is a back-of-house concept and the the issue again really comes back to professional wrestling
The smark
Is a smart mark
A person who is being duped and agrees to be duped but has a metacognitive perch
From which to watch his or her own deception
So you're both the consumer of the story. Like when you go to a movie, you know, it's fictional. You don't sit there saying this is such bs
You know the the old thing I used to say is you don't scream. Don't you understand? It's just photons projected on a wall
um
We are complicit
In our own deception. Otherwise, we will never be seduced and there's nothing more wonderful than a than a seduction to which we are
willing and eager
This is an unwanted seduction
This is coercive. This is based on a lot of carrot being taken away
And more or less all all of what you have is stick
it's strange in a world where
Everything that everybody doesn't say is on the internet is permanently recorded on some version of a blockchain that's kept in screenshots
Even if it's not actually even if it then gets deleted from twitter
uh
It just seems odd to me that there is so much retconning of this you spoke about managed reality last time
Uh, you know a good example a nice simple example of this is
Kamala Harris was never called the border czar
Like we have they they went back and changed the old
articles from three years ago
Here's my question
When did you wake up to this because in my situation peter teal who I used to work for
Uh said this to me like eric
How did you get there earlier and I said well, I was in the university system and academics has a
Faster glide path into the ground than everything else. You could see it there in the 1980s
I don't know. I think it it has taken a little bit of time
Maybe moving to america seeing these things closer up. Yeah, there's been part of it
I have a strong
non-conspiratorial disposition
so I will always attribute to incompetence or negligence or
Fear of losing your job cowardice
You're running the packet
There's the lefty innovation packet and it's something that you're sort of obligated to run
If you're going to be a member in good standing of the american left
So one part of it would say that correlation does not imply causation
Data is not the plural of anecdote
Never explain by malice
What can be understood through incompetence? There's a large sequence of things
That you're expected to say if you want the pad on the back from your colleagues a random walk down wall street
Nobody can beat the market. You know that there are rich people three doors down who got that way from investing
But they're simply lucky idiots
All of these things
You're expected to run if you're part of the expert class so that the expert class doesn't turn
on their masters
and what it is
You see I was about to do the double copula is is I always do that
Um
What it is in my opinion
um
I'm gonna have to do it. I can't hit it get out of it. What it is is a
A collection
Of safeties so that you don't use the tools of data. Let's say on your masters and attempt to convict them
Give an example
For example, let's imagine that you have a high number of deaths around a vaccine
or injuries
That could lead to questions about under what
What legal regime the vaccine manufacturers achieved immunity?
and so you say, oh, no, no, that's just uh
Correlation does not imply causation
Of course, there are going to be runs in poker. Of course, there are going to be clusters of data
This is what being fooled by randomness is all about
So if you think about what those things
How they function inside of your mind they tend to keep you from seeking
remedies
You're not going to put somebody in jail if you believe all these things. You're not going to go poking into the intelligence community
If if a conspiracy theorist makes you think about a lunatic
You're not a lunatic. You're a grown-up. It's first order sophistication
Do you ever see a film called victor victoria? No
Victor victoria is the I think the tagline on the poster was the story of a woman playing a man playing a woman
And so it was a female impersonator who was actually julie andrews
Right, right now if you saw victor behind victoria, you certainly saw one level deep. That's one level of counter intuition
And most people when they get to one level of counter intuition stop pat themselves on the back
And at least they're not like the poor fools who only see victoria
Because victoria, you know is the female being impersonated
But what happens if you see sally?
Unless imagine sally is the person playing victor playing victoria now you've got a problem, which is you say that's a woman
So everybody who sees victor says you poor bastard
You are fooled and reddit is great for this by the way the average reddit post is
Huh, I see through that thing that you're taking in by but have fun with it
You know, it's a superiority contest
Contest at one at first order counter intuition
So at first order counter counter intuition conspiracy theorists are losers in their mother's basements who posited a new world order where
the flat earth society of lizard people controls the cosmos and
The funny part about it is the atlantic council exists
What's that?
But that would be sally playing victor playing victor. I mean in other words, of course, there are conspiracies everywhere
We've found a million conspiracies. I could tell you, you know various operations operation condor
Uh operation
C spray where that we sprayed bacteria on all of san francisco
We all know about the teskegi medical experiment operation north woods operation mackinburg
um
Operation ajax in chile
We know the conspiracies
Are the life blood of the world
Every trade group is a conspiracy
The the twitter files are about conspiracy
So we're we're living in a world. Hopefully you've achieved a point in your life where you've been invited to many conspiracies
And if you haven't i'm really sorry, but they're everywhere
Now what is a conspiracy theorist that somebody trying to figure out what these things are from outside?
That's what you've got to stop and how do you do this? Well, there are a lot of bad conspiracy theorists
There are a lot of losers and a lot of morons and a lot of idiots who imagine that lizard people are controlling everything
And so you try to make it look like the people who well, let me give you an example
The moon landing and the jfk assassination are not
In the same category
It's quite probable
That something funny is going on around the jfk assassination and it's highly improbable that the moon landings are fake
You know twa flight 800 seems very strange or what is like 300 missing man pads from the afghan theater
A bunch of people saw something streaking up to a plane and the explanation doesn't exactly add up
Now you have a problem
Like let's you know the the famous one that i like
Which is just so dangerous. It's funny. You can just watch the radio activity
If you can agree that nothing like building 7's collapse has ever happened in structural engineering
You can say well, that is interesting
It's just interesting that no building has ever collapsed like that
No steel building of this height, you know from from flame, whatever and the instant you say that
Some member of a group of 10 friends will say oh, yeah, I bet it was a bunch of thermite
Probably spied israeli is right. Einstein and you know you're thinking
Wow, gosh, that seems like a really high penalty to pay for just noticing
No building has ever collapsed like that. I'm not saying I
I don't believe that it's this kind of patent match of any type of skepticism with a slippery slope down to the most extreme
conspiracy and and that's and yeah, you're just in error
You're you took first-order counter intuition so that you became superior to the flat earth society
But you're not the guy who's going to figure out the iran contra scandal
Because if I told you the iran contra scandal, it doesn't matter how many documents you look at
You'll still never believe that that was true. It's so insane
This retconning this mass lighting gas lighting at global scale
It is mind-blowing to me that this is done on the internet when everything is held together
why
Because the the entire internet is obsessed with pointing out hypocrisy
if
No, no, no, no, no, it's not the entire internet
A large portion of very vocal large portion of very small accounts a large portion of
right-of-center accounts
Almost no one in what I considered my world does anything remotely like this
In other words
If if you walk into a physics department, good luck finding a republican
And good luck finding anybody who will believe
Who will believe
Almost anything that you tell them or or will do so publicly. I took a tour through the east coast the corridor of great universities
From massachusetts down to philadelphia
And you know, I have many friends and colleagues in this department and they take me into their offices
And they'd all close the door and they say you have no idea how bad it is in here
And these are mathematicians and physicists
And they are living in a world in which it is simply too dangerous
To dissent to ask questions. We'll get back to talking to Eric in one minute. But first I need to tell you about nomadic
I know what you're thinking. What you're thinking is what backpack does Eric Weinstein use? Let me tell you
It's the nomadic 20 liter travel pack and the reason he uses it is because it's the best backpack on the planet
I use it all of the team use it literally everybody that turns up does because there is nothing better
There are pockets for everything your sunglasses your laptop your phone
It's like the marie condo of luggage an absolute swiss army knife that will make your entire life better
Best of all their products will literally last you a lifetime with their lifetime guarantee
There's international shipping free us shipping on any orders over $49
And if you don't love your purchase for any reason you can return or exchange it within 30 days
Right now you can get a 20% discount by going to the link in the description below or heading to nomadic.com
Slash modern wisdom and using the code mw20 a check out that's nomadic.com slash modern wisdom
And mw20 a check out I did some research
Yeah tech company employee donations to midterm candidates by party
Well over 90% in favor of democrat
There is a 33 gap between republicans and democrats and self-described party affiliations of us journalists in 2022
And
There was this recent google
Furor a couple they're being popped for monopoly unfair competition practices on top of
Are they putting their finger on the scale and editorializing if you search for donald trump's name you get
Negative stories about donald trump and positive stories about camilla harris if you search camilla harris's name
You just get positive stories about camilla harris. Okay, but how how many how many let me let me let me let me keep going. So
I
don't think
I'm not saying that google isn't but I don't think that google needs to editorialize the search results if there is such an unbalanced
Original content pool that they're pulling from if you have this huge sway in terms of tech
If you have this huge sway in terms of the people that are writing the articles
I don't think you need google to put their finger
On the pulse you're already it's 90% in one direction if you take from that pool
It's going to move in that direction
So that you've you've now once again
Uh evidence the same
basic idea which is
We'll just chalk it up to emergence
These are all emergent effects that way you never have to posit intent. You never have to say that there's a finger on the scale
Great, you're out of it. Well done
That's insane chris pulled the ripcord and got out of it. So here's the thing that I thought that was really interesting
Wait, wait, wait, but I want to understand something. How do you think you get to these levels of bias among employees?
Do you think that something about being in tech makes you democrat friendly?
I think my working hypothesis is that it's cowardice
That say more
In order to keep your job, you need to tell the party line and the party line is somehow dictated top down not bottom up
Maybe it's emergent from the great society programs of the 1960s
Maybe the idea that the hiring practices
Not being allowed to discriminate in various ways and interpretation through the courts
means that the hr departments
Have to do things
that make it impossible to be
Uh, almost impossible to be a vocal republican in a in a large workplace
So one of the interesting things about that graph the 33 gap between uh democrats and republicans
If you go to about 1970 is when it really begins to diverge
But what you also see is that uh self-described independence move at almost the exact same rate as republicans going down
So you get a bit of a gain for democrats a large loss for republicans and also again for independence
So how many of these people are?
Uh republicans masquerading as independence when they do their self-report what what it's getting picked up by my colleagues
This is timore coran's theory of preference falsification that you have
Two sets of preferences. You have the preferences that you keep at home. Uh, and the preferences
That you show the world and this is the engine of revolution
Because there's always one guy like a james demore working at google who's so autistic that he's going to
Um spectrum himself right out of the workplace
And say what he actually thinks doesn't see the social mores that he's supposed to adhere to and this is why
what happened, you know
One of the gifts of the cheshaskos in romania is that they gave us this amazing footage of their undoing
And nicolai cheshaskos at a rally uh in bukarest and he's on you know, whatever
balcony
And he's saying his stuff and there's some noise in the back
He's like what's that noise he keeps going and somehow the noise starts growing louder and people are discontent
They they're just not willing to lie anymore and each person emboldens those around them and you see
The revolution spread like a tumor. Did you read that uncommon knowledge article that I mentioned the ben hunt? Yes. Yeah. Yeah
Uh, I thought that was very interesting
I live this
Right. I mean like if you look at my kayfabe article, it's 2011 because i'm worried the professional wrestling is going to determine the presidency
um, if you look at my article
uh
On the national science foundation the national academy of science conspiring against american scientists
That's from the early 2000s. I was cancelled in the early 1990s for pointing
This out long before being cancelled was cool
the
This is
I don't know what to call it. It's like an ether in which we we swim. It's all around
It's it's water to fish that we can't see
our entire lives are bathed in this and
You know, you've always had howards in types. Let's say on the left who are willing to point to
To issues and your parents would say, well, you know, be very careful with that book because
if you do know the truth
You can't participate in polite society if you're not part of the intelligence community or part of the inside group and
It the idea is that the truth can be made unfit so that to understand the world is to remove yourself from the chess board
thinking about the
whether it's finger on scale editorially whether it's
Drawing from a pool which is disproportionately represented from one ideology or another
Everybody is saying I don't know what's going to happen in november, but it's going to be a nail biter
And it does make me think well given that we have what appears to be
A disproportionate amount of sort of mainstream accessibility to
stories leaning in one direction positively as opposed to in another
I wonder what would have happened
Had that not been the case it makes a nail bite or actually seem
Kind of like an interesting
Who are these people who know all this stuff?
Why am I out of this club? Everybody knows stuff about what's happening in november? I mean the last time I was on the prayer
I said it's a million years
um
Donald trump was almost killed by an ar-15
Joe biden has been
Suffering with some level of dementia that's been progressing through his entire term in office
Well, when was the last time you saw msnbc?
um
With five geriatric neurologists
Watching his gait his speech and telling you their professional opinions from publicly available data
You're in the magic show, baby and the funny part about it is
The reason I don't want to hybridize with anyone else is that responsible conspiracy theorizing is very much in
adult activity
responsible conspiracy theorizing is not based on saying well
I've I've got the certainty over here
And I've lost it because I know I'm being lied to so I've I can tell you exactly what is going on. It's the lizard people
Responsible conspiracy theorizing says I know that the story makes sense and I know that I don't know
how to correct it
But you know neval ravakan once pushed me to do a twitter thread called
The invisible world is first discovered in the visible world's failure to close
Right, so the idea is we find out that there's a neutrino
Because a neutron has a certain amount of energy and a proton and electron into which it decayed doesn't have that same amount of energy
So something was lost
so
You know, there was a hypothesis due to both pauli and fermi
That there must be some particle that is diabolically neutral
Undetectable by almost any means possible that is carrying away this extra energy
And so the idea is the visible world that is the charged particles or the the neutron which you could detect
That world didn't close therefore there had to be something else
Well, you know when kamala goes from being incredibly unpopular to the loved candidate with no primary
The visible world just failed to close the idea that nobody ever convenes a bunch of geriatric
Neurologists to analyze joe biden is the visible world failing to close. This is the origin of anti interesting
These are all anti interesting events
and you can measure the control of journalism by its
Desire to report on what everybody wants reported
And is absolutely pathologically uninteresting not to the journalists but to the editors who tell the journalists what can and cannot be
featured in print
How do you think this is being justified to and by the people inside?
What I think I think I tried to come at that as frontally as anyone as you've ever heard
What if
Well, let's just steal man their perspective rather than making them the evil baddies twilling their twirling their mustaches
What if the idea is that an outbreak of truth?
And democracy would destroy nato and the world order
Let's imagine that that would undo the markets that would spread nukes
You know what what happens if if ending uh the control of social media would mean that weaponized anthrax
Plans could be spread frictionlessly
If four amino acids
lead to worldwide lockdowns
The amount of leverage in this system
Should frighten you at the same time that the shadowy figures are frightening you
And the problem with the heterodox is like we mentioned ben hunt. I think I've spoken to him once or twice
And what's his famous tagline?
Something like burn it all the f down
I didn't know that okay
Well, this is part of the problem when you wake up and you realize that your entire life is is uh
Embedded in a lie manage reality managed reality
You say I don't want to live in managed reality man. It's like are you crazy?
I don't want to live in managed reality if it's badly managed
But I can't live
in direct reality either
Because maybe that's just too dangerous
and so
You know, I I highly recommend that everyone
Learn the lesson of the united states versus the progressive
Which is a court case that would be famous but for the fact that we're determined to forget it. It was a stricend effect case
Where a magazine decided that it would be an excellent idea to point out that there are no nuclear secrets
And they said why don't we get I think his name is howard borland
Reporter who had no physics background to figure out the redacted portions
of the
Stanislav ulam edward teller paper that had been declassified declassified but redacted
That explained how you get a chemical reaction to start a fission reaction as the detonator for a fusion reaction
And so he figured it out
They had sharded the information. It was scattered throughout libraries. Do you know this? You don't know this story's great
Well, you mind god, you need you need a little bit more power in you add that in nuclear
Next time tequila dynamite
There were two cases in the 1970s one at princeton and one at the progressive magazine
I probably should have done the princeton one first
There was a guy named I think it was like John Aristotle
Who was a he was the princeton mascot like the tiger
Okay illustrious and he was a shitty shitty physics student
And he said you know what I'm going to use the fact that I'm a shitty physics student like below average
At at you know, princeton's like one of the greatest physics departments of all time and he said
I'm going to approach freeman dyson at the institute for advanced study and see whether I can work out how to make a fission bomb
That would actually work
So freeman dyson said I will give you no information
That is classified, but I will tell you whether whatever you come up with will work or not
The guy did it and as a result he turned it in that is not to be found in the princeton
Archives where all the junior theses are kept
And page 20 of it I believe is redacted because it was a working design for a fission bomb
And then the much more dangerous one was the progressive magazine versus the united states
where the united states
Do you know about the atomic
energy x of 1946 and 54 perhaps surprisingly no
Welcome to my world
There is a category called restricted data that is almost never discussed
Which is the only place in law
where
If you and I were to work
At a table at a cafe and I were to show you something that could
influence nuclear weaponry
The government doesn't need to classify it. It is born secret. The instant my pen touches the paper and writes it down. How is it defined?
Anything that impinges on nuclear weapons
Including just play information
So you don't have a cute clearance. I don't have a cute clearance. We don't work for the government
We're doing all we're doing is physics
Wow
Yeah, and this has been around since I don't know 46 54. It's the only place in law. It's never been tested in courts
And if you couple that to the 1917 espionage
Act which carries capital punishment
I believe that it is illegal to seek information at a q level
If you don't have an access to it. So there is a question which is if you're any good at physics
Are you potentially
Committing a capital crime by advancing the field if it could influence nuclear weapons?
We have no idea whether it would be found constitutional
But what happened was when the progressive magazine showed that at least a reporter
Through basically archaeology in like Los Alamos library and things
um
could find this
And and put it together
Then the only thing keeping the proliferation of weapons is the difficulty of producing fissile nuclear material
There is no nuclear secret per se
And you can say what it is
You've got a chemical sphere that implodes radioactive material that reaches critical mass. You have a fission explosion
And now the problem is you're
Using a nuclear bomb like Hiroshima Nagasaki level bomb as just the detonate trigger. Yeah, so it's going to rip apart this casing
How do you keep it from?
um
Destroying the mechanism that's supposed to do the fusing well the only thing faster than the other particles is light you've got to use light
From this reflector to actually do the fusion in the final stage
Wow, and that's what he figured out now. The reason you haven't heard about this is that we've been undoing the stric sand effect
We've been making physics boring
Physics isn't interesting physics isn't scary
We've got tons of i don't know chinese iranians people from all over the world studying irrelevant theories that aren't going to go boom
How did that happen? We don't know and i don't know whether you've seen the marquandris and ben horvitz video
Where they're talking about their visit to the white house in ai tell me
I really wish we were doing this over negronis or old fashions. Um, i'm sure that we could get one ordered
No, no that's too rogan. Okay. All right. All right. All right. Um, we'll just stick to experimental neutropics and high doses of caffeine fantastic. Yeah, um
So they're they're doing a podcast and they say that well, you know, they met with the white house and there's this question about should we regulate
ai
Now i don't know if you've been you undoubtedly you haven't but you might have
Talked to somebody who's really been through the transformer architecture and the attention mechanism
It's basically just linear algebra
And it's not very sophisticated linear algebra
So they said well, you can't ban math
In the white house said, oh, yes, we can we did it we've banned entire regions of theoretical physics and they said oh what?
So we don't know what that means. We don't know the most narrow reading of that is is that you've buried you've banned some kinds of nuclear physics
That's gonna say you're the physicist if you were to make a couple of bets. What do you think that they're talking about?
This is the big question
We don't know whether that we're talking about the stagnation of theoretical physics or just nuclear physics
Well, you're okay with speculating that's speculating
Um, i'll do the decision tree one possibility is that they're simply saying that they made nuclear physics very very difficult
to do and that has to do with not very sexy physics the physics of
protons and neutrons in nuclear
So that branch exists the other branch says
We used string theory to cock block actual progress in theoretical physics
And derailed an entire field at least in public. I can see where this is going
Well, i'm trying to say
I didn't put
Mark and ben up to this podcast
You go go take a look at that footage and you tell me what they're talking about
But it draws a very interesting line between what we were talking about last time which is this
Seeming theoretical dead end which everybody has been obsessed by
But before we get to that
Let me point something out you have never heard the phrase deemed export
Yeah
So you've never heard of restricted data. You've never heard of deemed export
You've never heard of united states versus progressive. You've never heard of the princeton mascot
All of these things can be looked up. These are all in a memory hole
The deemed export is information that is like a sensitive gyroscope for um, you know a targeting
System for for a weapon you can't give a sensitive centrifuges and gyroscopes to rogue regimes like north korea or iran
Deemed export is the information equivalent of it. You cannot share that theory or that insight
It's the extension to intellectual
Matters to ideas. There are ideas. You're not allowed to share
with foreigners
and
my point is
You don't know about any of this stuff. How is it then that you immediately say? Well, surely. We're not doing x surely. We're not doing
Why am I point is?
Do me a favor research the history of the government
Attempts to keep the manhattan projects
Secret like you may not know that herald yuri the very famous chemist. I believe published false
on misleading academic papers
That there's an entire complex that you're not supposed to see
Which is how do we keep all of these things?
Uh from providing advantage to adversaries
And if that structure exists and you've never heard of it and you've never thought about it
You don't know the history. Why are you so sure that you know that this is all nonsense?
In other news this episode is brought to you by
AG1 in my quest for the best greens drink on the planet
I went through just about every single option and after a year of testing. I found
AG1 three years later
I still use it every single day because it is so much more than just greens
It is the most comprehensive highly tested and rigorously formulated supplement
I've ever found with one single scoop of AG1
You're replacing multiple health supplements like multivitamins digestive aids immune supports and more
It is NSF certified meaning that even Olympic athletes can use it. There is a 90 day money back guarantee
So if you've heard about AG1 you're thinking about trying it
You can buy it completely risk-free and if you do not like it
They will give you your money back plus they ship internationally right now
You can get a yours free supply vitamin d3 and k2 five free AG1 travel packs
And that 90 day money back guarantee by going to the link in the description below or heading to drink ag1.com
slash modern wisdom that's all of this drink ag1.com slash
modern wisdom
That's a good point
That's a very good point
I think
The implication which is pretty interesting for me
That you were hinting at there is that there is a potential
of the obsession
with string theory
being a red herring
Very tempting shiny sparkly red herring popular one
that has curtailed
physicists from looking elsewhere
for quite a while
You're giving me that look you're giving me you're giving me a look as if i'm close but not close enough
No, no, no
When I say shiny what I mean is popular shown out front
Dangled and made to be glitzy and to the public but also internally it seemed to me
Did edwin did you not tell me the last time that you were on here? They're not there are no other theories just words
Is that not the guy from which everybody else is down?
Shiny that is saying everything else is crap and dangerous in other words
It's string theory can't sell itself as physics
By any telling of the story string theory is the most failed theory in the history of
Physics if you look at the number of papers the amount of money the number of people the number of phd's number of conferences
achievements in physics proper
Per investment or size of effort it is the most failed theory in the history of physics and the way in which
it survives
Is by hunting and destroying its enemies and making its enemies dependent on them
We all have a circuit in our brain that we're going to run to the string theorists to talk about the problem with string theory
Because of peer review. It's like when I want to report the police department for being corrupt
Well, you should go to the police with that
Wait, you're not understanding. I it's
So that's the problem. I think we're in I think we're on the same page. Okay. I think we are
Well, I think I'm just trying to say it's the problem of string theory not the equations not the shininess not the advertising campaign the problem
is
Look at how they treat everyone else everyone who is not a string theorist who is trying to do stuff that could end up as a deemed export
Or as restricted data
Is covered and splattered and shit
Lawrence Krauss and Leonard Susskin caused quite a ruckus with this not long ago
I didn't know that it had happened in my defense
I hadn't seen this podcast and it only came out like a few days ago. Absolutely. So
This is Lawrence Krauss and Leonard Susskin Susskin being one of the best theoretical physicists ever
No, no
Why is he somebody worth listening to then?
Um, he's very very smart and he's one of the most important string theorists ever and he writes
exceptionally clear and correct
Introductory books. Okay, but he is not a leading physicist
But is somebody at the forefront of string theory? Absolutely. And he said quote
I can tell you with absolute certainty
String theory is not the theory of the real world. I can tell you that 100 percent
My strong feelings are exactly that string theory is definitely not the theory of the real world
Is that taking it out of context? Is that him framing it somewhere else?
Or does that encapsulate the fact that he thinks string theory is a dead end that doesn't describe the world?
He's playing a game that I would I would say is logomaki an argument over words where he says that big s string theory
Is not the theory of the real world which is the theory
That was used to destroy all of its competitors and that little s string theory exists
I don't this is basically the attempt
To take a school massacre and plead to a parking ticket and no, I think that the prosecution should decline the offer
from the good dr. Susskin and say
No, no, no, you have 40 years of the destruction of your colleagues to answer for you've chosen to be
Um words family an asshole
To just about everyone who came up with a competitor theory and I've dealt with Leonard directly
He can be charming. He's a great raconteur. He's very brilliant
And he chooses to be a wolfgang pauli without achievement. He's taken a massive advance on a future career
Which you will never have at age 85
So this is a person who wishes you to think of him as the leading physicist
He absolutely categorically by the standards of physics known to our elders is not
and
Leonard Susskind is playing a game. He's saying
You saw kill bill one of the great
Romantic scenes of all time is filmed between Beatrix kiddo and bill at the very end of the film
He's absolutely destroyed her life. He's killed her husband fianc the father of a child
Forced in abortion. She's been raped every indignity on earth has been suffered by this woman and in the end
She wants to know how could you do that to me? And what are his words?
I overreacted
And you see in the film if I recall correctly she leans forward
and she says
You overreacted is that your explanation?
like how can that be
That my life has been turned upside down and you're offering to me is
I overreacted so
These people and I and I want to specifically call out the most aggressive of them lubis lubosh modal
Michio kaku Leonard Susskind
uh, jeff harvey michael duff
uh, andi strawman jur kumrun wafa have been on a tear
That nothing else exists destroying 40 years of competitors
And what does the bride say to bill?
Said you and I have unfinished business
That's where we are right now
your explanation to me eric Weinstein is
You overreacted Leonard Susskind
You and I have in unfinished business
What happens next? Oh, that's gonna get interesting
You're watching the beginning of the collapse
You're watching people running for the exits. We're not yet at the leman brothers
September 15 moment with aig looming in the background
But right now all of these guys are trying to plead
To oh, well, it's not string theory proper. We meant ha ha ha. We meant something related to string theory. Yeah, that's it
You know, it's like that moment comically when somebody is caught red-handed. We're
We're in the middle of shaggies. It wasn't me. It's theoretical retconning. Yeah
And uh, you know, there's this beautiful offering that hector makes to Achilles
We will give each other the honor of a proper burial
Achilles isn't interested
Let's do this thing. What does that mean?
Well, hopefully somebody will come up with some money to hold a conference to get these people in the same room with the people
They've tormented whose careers they've ended
whose funds they've stolen
The stolen valor of actual achievements in real attempts to change physics
And wouldn't it be delicious and fun to see Michio Kaku Ed Whitten Lenny Susskind?
Michael Duff Jeff Harvey
Actually have to face people who know what they're talking about
And have a discussion of what did we just do for 40 years? And we are we protecting the american public from restricted data?
I have no idea
But I can tell you this nobody in their right mind
Gives a startup 40 years of runway with never a call with investors
Nor a
Even a basic mvp most, you know
minimal viable product
We've been playing weekend at biden's and now we're also playing
Weekend at Lenny's
This is really funny
Who else would you want to
have a chat
With the guys on the string theory side of the world
Well, I think uh
I think peter wojt would be fun. He's got two new theories
Again, I don't agree with either of them. I have my own theory and I
I'm happy to fight with peter, but peter and I have been friends for all these years
Uh, I would love to have nima arcani. Hamed and ed frankel and others
Uh, judge this people who aren't really string theorists who appreciate
the best parts of string inspired mathematics, let's say or
string inspired mechanisms in physics there is there is
The the equations are not without interest or merit
it's the
The sociology should be hunted and removed with extreme prejudice. It's anti science. So
I don't know much or anything really about the inner workings of string theory, but
Sabine hossenfeld has been on the show brian greens been on the show
Uh, shone carol's been on the show. Oh, let's get them
all of them and
I saw a tweet
saying that
Somebody had been to a string theory convention
And had asked the question. What is string theory and the best string theorists on the planet came up with the answer
We kind of don't know what string theory is and the other answer is whatever it is that we're doing
Whatever it is that the string theory community is doing even if they did something had nothing to do with string theory
They've now tried to say how about this
And I don't know if you remember max. Well smart and get smart
So he was a comic version of um, james bond
An american bumbling secret agent who somehow solved cases and and and stopped terrible plots
But always by making x essence and when he wherever he was caught
He would say, you know, I'm not worried because right now we're surrounded by the third battalion of
The marine division said said
I don't believe that
Would you believe 12 police officers? No, mr. Smart. I don't believe that either
two cup scouts with slingshots
so
This is a this is a very old pattern. Yeah
Is this
Too far gone for string theory now
Is it the mask is beginning to slip to the point where even ed dutton's going to have to eat his words within the next decade
They'll never eat their words. They'll just keep lying
Lying as a way of life lying to the public as
I mean, I think suscan somewhere else in this interview says something like we have to keep interest in physics high
Yeah, look
science
Is fine
What we have now learned to call the science tm
Is an abomination and one of the things people don't learn about from regular investing retail investing
Is what's called relative value trades
uh
People say, oh, I I'm bullish on tech. I'm staying out of the tech market
If you don't have the ability to go short, you don't know what a relative value trade is relative value trade says
Uh, I think microsoft
Has the right idea over at open ai and google's gemini
Has too much political encumberment
So i'm going to go long microsoft and i'm going to fund it by going short google and therefore whatever tech does
They'll both go up or both go down as a sec in within the sector as the sector rises and falls
But you're betting on the relative trade hedge kind of exactly
The right trade at the moment is go long science because it's been beaten up with its association with the science tm
So short the science tm long science
Uh, I think is the multi billion dollar trade for smart countries at the moment
And you have to hunt out the science tm which lives inside of the journals
Lives inside of the funding agencies lives inside of the departmental defense mechanisms lives inside of
the cia
detra
all of these sorts of
blob related
Agencies that get their paws into science and by the way, I I absolutely want the military to pick up the funding of basic research
We have to overturn something called the mansfield amendment, which a previous generation was obsessed by
And modern academicians don't even know exists. That was when the military was funding basic research. They were our best friends
They stayed out of our hair. They were just paying a retainer so that they could call on us in times of emergency
And we stupidly gave away that funding source
And it's time to get it back and it's probably time to allow physicists, mathematicians, biologists, intellectual property rights
over basic
Research not just technologies because what right now what we're doing is you're impoverishing
The people who provide your safety and your prosperity. You're not letting them participate in the very society that they're funding
I've been using my eight sleep mattress for years and I absolutely love it
I used to find myself waking up in the middle of the night because I was too hot and this has been completely
Neutralized by the magic that is eight sleep. It is time to upgrade your sleep game with eight sleeps newest generation pod the pod four
Ultra it can cool down each side of the bed to 20 degrees below room temperature and for those who snore heavily
It can detect your snoring and automatically lift your head a few degrees to improve air flow and stop it
And it is clinically proven to give you up to one hour more of quality sleep every night
Best of all, they have a 30 day sleep trial so you can buy it try it
And if you do not like it after 30 days, they will give you your money back plus they ship internationally right now
You can get
$350 off the pod for ultra by going to the link in the description below or heading to eight sleep dot com
Slash modern wisdom and using the code modern wisdom a check out. That's e i g h t sleep dot com
Slash modern wisdom and modern wisdom a check out
Is this indicative of a broader problem in all of science is physics the tip of the speed or is there anything even further down?
Science used to be dominated by physics and mathematics in a certain sense after the atomic weapons proved their metal
And then the physicists showed that they could do
Things that nobody could imagine for example molecular biology is basically founded by physicists
worldwide web comes out of cern
Semiconductors come out of you know stanford and the the actual silicon that was in silicon valley
So
Then it became a biology focused
So right now when you say science most people think biology rather than in previous years where most people thought the physicists who could do everything
We need hearings
And we need to basically rid the national academy of sciences the national science foundation the national science board the national research council
The journals lancet nature science
Publishing houses of all of
The science
We've got to get rid of the science the science is infecting us. We need we need lawyers guns and money and
It does seem like a
fantastically asymmetric trade
You know, I think I hear this all the time in the world of trading look for limited downside and unlimited upside
I think we could make fantastic progress with within theoretical physics within five years
And I can promise you nobody's interested in funding it
What does it mean
when academicians go after
Harvard mit is it academicians though? Yeah. Oh, it's trolls with phd's
There's an entire community of
Trolls
Hunting people who dissent like I bet sabina haenfelder has people who are just sitting around trying to destroy her
Yeah, and the same was true. It's it's magnified. I think not just by the dissent but also by the platform
Same one exposure people get jealous of exposure. I don't think it's that oh
I think that it is very very obvious that if somebody gets attention and someone else feels that it's undeserving in one form or another
That guy's a phony and look at all of the whatever they get
I think there's some of that but I think to think that that's what it is is mistaken not entirely
But I think that it's a really big leverage function on top of it. I don't think that's true
right now we have a country with no president
and
We've moved on and what's taylor swift doing
Right, so my claim is is that anti interesting
Once you understand what anti interesting is
like
Assume that you actually want to just to humiliate people you'd give them a talk
If you can't play the piano
Um, and I want to humiliate you because you say you're a piano player
Away you go. I'll get you a grand piano on a stage in an audience. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah
No, this isn't that
This is something really interesting
And because it's also it's cheap. It's free. Why don't we find out whether somebody has something to say?
I'm telling you right now. I believe
I can explain where the particle spectrum comes from
I can explain the origin
of
This is my claim
The 16 particles that make up the first generation of matter not coming from particle theory but coming from general relativity
The most natural thing in the world is to say that's a really bold claim. There's no known explanation for the particle spectrum in terms of general relativity
What is that guy talking about? Let's get him in here. Let's get him on video. We'll humiliate him. This will be fun
We'll take away his audience. It never happens
Instead what it is is that there's this constant sort of whisper campaign against somebody like sabina. Oh, she's a popularizer
She's not serious. She's she has no her stuff. Blah blah blah blah blah
It's the uh, they sold out of uh pop pop musicians. I like their old stuff
Well, did you see this thing with shon carol and uh curt gy mungle?
I know curt theories of toe theories of everything. Yeah, um, I didn't see what him and shon got into
This is this is spicy. This is like the Kardashians for physicists. I love it. Oh, absolutely. Yeah
uh
So curt says
Well, what do you think of lee smolen steven wool from eric Weinstein and peter white?
And shon carol very deftly says oh
I wouldn't put uh lee smolen in with them
The others are amateurs lee smolen is a serious physicist
peter white
Just wrote one of the greatest books in physics and mathematics. I've ever seen a comprehensive guide
To the role of group theory within the quantum symmetry within the quantum
Nobody knew that this guy had this in him
He was running this blog and it was an excellent blog everybody in the community reads it nobody
And many people pretend that they don't because it's very critical of string theory
But he's very very good
Then he writes a book like this nobody saw it coming then he comes up with two theories both of which I think are wrong
but a really really clever
about the nature of the strong force
What would be called weaker hyper charge and what would be called weak isa spin and the origin of the left right asymmetry of the universe called chirality
And when I ask these critics, they have no idea what these theories are it takes took me like
15 to 45 minutes to get the basic idea of both
This is preposterous to for shon carol to claim
peter white is considerably better than shon carol
And if you don't believe it
Let's have the two of them on stage with each other. It's very funny. I would love to see curtz moderate that conversation
Yeah
Uh, so I had an idea that I really wanted to teach you about and I think I love this part of our interaction
Well, I hear something I prepared earlier
so
You'll be familiar with the term audience capture
Which is when you begin feeding red meat to your audience
You start to say what they want or expect you to say rather than what you truly believe because you've been positively
reinforced to do so by plays and comments and potentially money
There is a you know that I brought that up in the article on the international it on the intellectual dark web that very
Weiss
No, I didn't
So there is a new idea. Yeah, which I love. Yeah called criticism capture. Tell me about it. I don't know about so this is uh
Ethan Strauss and I'm relating this to your idea of an accuracy budget as well
Okay, and I think this may be pieces together. So let's see what you think
Criticism capture is more dangerous than audience capture
Most people have occupations where they get criticized in private
To have it take place in public as happens in media is a different dynamic, especially in this era
I happen to think one's response to criticism is important and almost defining in this field
The game isn't just what you do. It's what you do after what you're doing gets defined by people who hate it
I've contemplated hypothetically ideal replies when getting ripped at scale
Some are cruel some are nice some are strategic some are impulsive in a way
They're almost all dishonest nearly everybody in this situation attempts to seem above the fray
They're fighting like the woe jack of the happy face in front of the rage tears
That's why you see so many public figures on the internet starting off with lol when what they really mean is fuck you
In most instances, whatever you come up with is only marginally better than I know you are but what am I?
The basic theory is that people are more unhinged when addressing their criticisms
Not their compliments
I call this the Streisand squeeze in a slightly different context. So the idea is that he
a low value human
Becomes obsessed with you because what they get out of it
um
Is if you react to them
They want the attention and the portion of your audience that dislikes you to become their audience
and
if you
answer the criticism
Like intellectually
You're fundamentally playing into a gambit. So you try not answering the criticism and then it becomes why won't he answer his critics?
And then you're saying well, are you applying this criticism?
Um uniformly are you?
It's it's an absolutely
diabolical situation. So the
point that I find interesting is not
Although it is what is the motivation of the criticizer is interesting to me
But what is the response of the criticized is much more interesting to me. What are the options?
I'm actually just interested. What do you see is the options that are possible because I can't this is a problem that I can't solve
I understand. I think
There's a great point that Ethan makes where he says that the unraveling usually starts as a rebuttal to some criticism
Not the embrace of some inspired followers say more about him the impact of criticism
Isn't the impact. Yes, people fear the professional social and financial consequences of reputation harm
But often in media that's not what kills you instead. It's your own unforced errors
in response to the criticism
Some people some people change their messaging to avoid the blowback like a wide receiver shying from necessary contact over the middle
Some disagreeable personalities get their backs up and over correct
Their content starts to match the fevered pitch of their most aggressive detractors
They almost mirrored the derangement regarding criticism itself as a positive indicator
So I think we've all seen over the last five years people lean into
almost being a meme of a meme being a caricature of themselves
and
You know, I know that you had a
I think you were disheartened by
What you didn't see your audience do
for you when
Some criticism came for the portal. There wasn't criticism
I can handle criticism
You'll notice that I have a very strong civility issue
I have an anti stalker anti troll policy for example
I really like michael malis as an individual
but
When j. Leno had a bunch of hot oil or something scald his face
michael chose to make a joke and he said well j. Leno hasn't been hot this hot in years
and
It's not like I don't understand the joke
But it's like I don't know j. Leno and the guy just had scald. I just don't do this
I don't like getting energy from hurting people
I just did this terrence howard thing with joe rogan and I told joe. I will not go on a show as a debunker
It I texted you and said how impressed I was with your patience
It's not just patience. Terrence has a couple things that are really worthwhile and
It entitles me to say
A lot of what you're doing is just very very low quality
But this thing that you're doing over here I'll vouch for I'll put my name behind that that's really clever and really good
If I can't find one jewel one gem one positive thing to say it's it's for somebody else
and
Part of this is I'm trying to indicate this is what criticism actually is I'm modeling what criticism
I wasn't weak. I didn't shy away from what I considered to be the sort of
uninformed or pseudoscientific or historically inaccurate stuff and that
But I also had no desire to hurt
Terrence and in fact I wanted to elevate him and help him to make him feel silly or
You know that there's a time to hurt somebody
and I don't
Terrence hadn't done anything
You know, he's confused about things and he knows that he has something and he doesn't know
Where it comes from and all that kind of stuff and then
To hear some giant portion of your internet say, oh my god, you know, this is the way
This is the genius and another portion say this guy is an idiot and has nothing neither of these things are true
To get back to your point about criticism capture
I can't solve this problem because the critics are
Mostly stalkers. I'll answer a critic
anybody who's
The first thing I'm going to do if you call me like a cult leader
I'm going to say well, tell me something
What did you call Ed Whitten?
What did you call any suskin because that's a cult you want to talk about a cult?
I mean, that's a serious cult. There's no way
That you can um say well, you know, the
This tiny cult down the street
Uh, you know has a problem with pedophilia. You said well, did you check out the catholic church?
Well, no, we're not doing that. That's a religion. Oh, okay. I understand. So you're going to go after small fry
um
As long as you go after everybody evenly and fairly and academically
You're not a troll. I saw a great quote the other day that said cult failed religion religion successful cult
They're they're interrelated at it at a very important level
But you know like redemption is part of all religions usually and very often some of these minor cults are just a bad expulsion
destruction
I think that
What we have to realize is that civility wasn't some sort of nicety among uh 18th century gentleman
It's absolutely essential to high-trust activities like science that have incredible power over our lives
and
I am not aware of my critics. I have trolls. I have stalkers
I have people I fear physically and I think about legally and I think about protection from them
But i'm not aware of a single
Critic of my theories
If you if you ask anybody who jumps up and says oh, i'm a critic of eric's theories
I would say
Ask that person has that person uh tried to
Uh
Hunt down your previous connections and written to your friends and tried to dig up dirt
And if they answer honestly because I actually have the letters and emails that that these people engage in
These people are character assassins posing as critics
And I think that this is actually the big problem. We don't have debates
we have um
We have street fights
We have people pulling a knife
in a boxing match or you know
Plaster, you know
advantages in their boxing gloves or whatever is going on
We need fights. We need
Critics we need debates that are refereed that are ethical where people shake hands at the beginning and hug at the end
Touch gloves
You know
We don't have that and we're and we're dying from that. You'll notice that for example
In the string theory and the string theory critics, they basically don't appear on the same stage ever and this has to do with
Wrestling versus MMA
You notice that you don't see
um
If wrestling is so effective
Why don't we why don't we try it like professional wrestling inside of an MMA thing where you're jumping up on the cage and coming down and all this stuff
It's because one thing is an actual sport and one thing is a simulated sport and
I think that what we need is we need queensbury rules
Queensbury rules is how you avoid kayfabe
Um, you have ideas. You can't gouge eyes. You can't use small-digit manipulation where you break fingers
You can't go for the throat or the genitals
You put your finger on I've never heard of this criticism capture and I love it
And that's why I developed the concept of the stricent squeeze either you allow us to whittle away at you
Or you respond to us you boost us and you become part of the trap
If you ever watch like david attenborough
naturalism
You'll see pack animals whether it's orcas or hyenas
It doesn't matter
They do this thing where they nip at their target
Mm-hmm, and then there's this weird voice over which I don't understand at all. It says
you know the hyenas are trying to
Trick the animal into expending its energy
To to fend off these nips the nips don't actually do much damage, but they do exhaust the animal so it won't be able to fight later
Say, okay
So imagine that you don't respond to the nips
Do you live?
No, no, no you
Then the hyenas become emboldened
And then you die a different way
So my point is is that evolution would certainly have figured out not to respond to the nips if that was a winning strategy
Everybody's concerned about the social status. Isn't it interesting that everybody pretends that they aren't I am
Of course i'm concerned about my social status because it's my ability to walk into a department and talk to a college
I think what we're going to do is we're going to solve this problem because to not solve this problem
Is to effectively dead end?
um
Our most important scientific endeavors to say nothing of other forms of criticism but just in science
Right now the critics
Don't exist the stalkers are everywhere and the the lengths to which the stalkers will go particularly in my case
Phd-level stalkers people who write to my wife's thesis advisor
You know, you're talking about a level of insanity that I think
These people are emboldened because what they do in the shadows just isn't known. Can you see
my uh
kitties playpen pink fluffy version of
Of your terrorism capture
Can you see the line that I would draw between that and the idea that you have of an accuracy budget?
And how one could become perverted by the other sure look
But I love I love the accuracy budget thing and I've not heard of it before which is why I wanted to give you
The hypocrisy budget the accuracy budget all of these budgets to lead a human life the inconsistency budget
Yeah, can you explain because it's it's one of the coolest things that I've learned really appreciate that reason
In order to live a life in public you're going to opine on a million different things
You're not going to be giving full footnotes. You're not going to be giving um
Oh, I don't know bibliographies and
Counters and so in essence there's sort of a good faith
level of
hypocrisy and inaccuracy and
Self-kindness and all of these things that every human being exhibits
And if the idea is that we're going to hold
Everyone who's expressed inconsistent opinions or who's found a self-serving opinion now and again
And we're going to call that person a hypocrite or a lie or whatever
We're going to torch all of our best people. What if we took gregor mendel and his p pods?
where we found out about mendelian genetics
And we said well you faked your data
So everything you did is crap because he did fake his data
But he's also a genius who advanced the field Newton and his alchemy. Yeah for sure
and all of
In order to keep good people in the public sphere
The key question isn't have you ever exhibited inconsistency? Have you ever been
Cruel when you shouldn't have been
self-kind
Like for example, you made the statement in our last meeting. It's way too close to November for anyone
to leave the race
Does that mean that we should never listen to chris williamson again?
Horseshit in fact the most important thing is is that you own that in the first part of the interchange
And so my feeling is is that not only do you have
Uh a budget for making strong statements that turn out not to be true
But we also know that you're like a really good faith actor
And I would listen more to you the next time you say something like oh come on eric. There's no question that
Whatever it is
You know, so how do we get this idea of
No, no
That was hypocritical, but he's way under budget on hypocrisy
She's you know, she got that wrong
um
But on the other hand, uh, you know, she's told us so many things that are right
Her her budget doesn't go to zero like I think neil de grass tyson is really really wrong on gender
On the other hand so much of what he says is just true
And there's a move like i'm very critical of neil
But do you want to cancel a guy who's this good? It's explaining science
Sean carol is an absolute ass when it comes to
critics of mainstream theory and in a diabolical one
But he's civil
He's a great explainer. He really knows physics at a very deep level that many people do not currently
and
I don't want to see Sean carol removed from science explanation
I
I want to dance with him on a stage that would be fun
but
That is not a person that needs to be removed because he's got a really bad nasty streak to him when it comes to the
the criticism of mainstream physics
and I just don't understand this this
Desire for personal destruction. There's there's this someone's no principle of charity. Yeah, well, there are people who don't know
I should you say it differently
I've become aware that in that community
To show any kind of mercy or charity or generosity
Let's take the the debunking community
The people who are always telling you don't worry. I will warn you about the bad people on the internet you're consuming
They work at the level of the human and that's how you know that there's something wrong with them
I can't think of an individual who always gets everything wrong
You know
Donald trump has done a lot right broken blocks. What no, it's not broken clocks. Yeah
Yeah, do you think Adolf Hitler got to be the leader of Germany because he got every single thing 180 degrees wrong
That you could set your clock to him how wrong he was. No, he had to get things right
But he's absolutely diabolical. So what do we do? We put a perimeter around him and say look that thing is so dangerous
That we are going to act as if everything it says is wrong
And that's what this that's what this comes from it comes from a strategy
Where you can't afford to
Do fugu with certain people you could go
Japanese puffer fish served as sushi where the neurotoxin produces a delightful tingling sensation on the tongue if carved correctly
And if served improperly kills the patron
So you have fugu chefs and you can't afford to let an unlicensed
Chef serve fugu
And so in part the strategy is you say well puffer fish is just too dangerous to eat
And therefore puffer fish bad
I think that that's what we do too often. We've just decided that effectively
Um, the debunking community wants to go after people wholesale. It's much more efficient to destroy the human
What efficiency was sort of what was front and center there that
We all look for shortcuts, right? We have heuristics. We have a reputation. This person has been wrong x number of times
Therefore we can accurately predict that dot dot dot
but
it seems like
any
Inconsistency any hypocrisy any failure
is often
Magnified and scrutinized and and blown up
Out of proportion with the accuracy budget
But one of the interesting things that was I've been talking about recently is that um
Content creators like a podcast or a youtuber or whatever
We'll get criticized for the videos that they made or the guests that they brought on
Yeah, but they never get complimented for the guests that they didn't bring on
Give me an example like you've never had alex jones on have you no
so for instance, the the the number of
guests that
get offered to us get suggested that we should bring them on that I should bring them on and
I say no to because of
Me not believing that they're a good actor that I don't want to speak to them that I'm not interested in them
uh
but
Very few people know
The people that you said no to almost nobody does so you don't get any bonus points because it's very confusing like
For example, I might have alex jones on my show. I would never do
Uh info wars
Right and so the idea is
You're trying to figure out the context
Alex jones says many interesting things and he's been right about many interesting things and he's gotten things really dangerously wrong
um
You have to take and and by the way I've talked to alex jones, which is interesting. Um, the funniest part about it is
He uses alex jones as sort of an adjective like that guy is way more alex jones than I am
Um, which is really disconcerting like intellectually
um
James oakief does some good work and he does some work that I can't stand and I had him on or you know, I had
The woman who plays riley reid the pornographic actress as a guest on the portal and
I'm very disturbed by some of the things that she's engaged in but I find her
You know absolutely a charming soul and we talked about things that
Did not that we're not in the inguently
Exciting because we were talking about the context of the work
So the issue of serving fugu is really important and I think that it has to do with in what context does it occur
Does the host push back and sort of warn people about some of the issues that are dangerous?
And is the is is the host any or is that person good enough to serve fugu?
So when we balance criticism capture and how that feels for the creator the people that
People are fans of that me and you are fans of we are both
This is the funny thing about about content that ilan musk's jet is delayed
I imagine he's got lots of things to do but one of those things will probably be if he's tired
I'll open up youtube and I'll see what's on there. Everybody is a fan of somebody on the internet
Whether it's writing reading hearing whatever it might be
And when you combine that with this idea of an accuracy budget and basically the fact that
Everybody's accuracy budget starts in a deficit that the principle of charity is very rarely given to anybody on the internet
Uh, I had this idea of the peak hate rule similar to the peak and rule that
Everybody every content creator every sort of public person is known for their biggest and most recent
Sort of run in with something that people find reprehensible. Okay, uh, so uh, Jordan Peterson
Best known for bill c16. He's a transphobe and also, uh, Jordan Peterson is a Zionist pro-israel
Maybe that's the most recent thing that he's done or he
Man explains to cathy new i don't know who whatever is whatever his most recent thing is
um
Lex tweeted recently
I think that neither trump nor harris will destroy america of elected president call me crazy
But I think that trump is not a fascist and harris is not a communist. I think this is a reasonable rational position
But according to the internet, it's insane either way getting attacked by both sides has been mentally exhausting for me
Perhaps that's the design of the current political climate
Anybody with moderate open-mindedness needs to be pushed out in favor of a battle between dogmatic extremes
This doesn't seem like the right path toward truth has been mentally exhausting for me was the point that I made
and
The thing that I've realized now kind of seeing both sides of the fence being both a creator and a consumer is that
this
lack of principle of charity this over
magnification
From the creator side in terms of how it feels from a criticism capture perspective, right that your criticisms are more
Deleterious than your compliments are enthusing
Uh, and the fact that the accuracy budget doesn't exist basically means that
Apart from the most staunch. I don't give a fuck tim kennedy joe rogan style or I don't read the comments style approaches
Almost everybody that you like to watch on the internet is on this very slow
Descent where they begin to run out of fuel
That anybody to see more about anybody that decides to play with ideas that needs to push the accuracy budget
Right anyone that decides to actually push up against. I'm not too sure here, but I'm going to give this a crack. Okay
Uh, they are going to be
disproportionately
Criticized online that is going to be a deleterious and it's going to derogate their motivation
And that basically means that everybody is on this sort of slow and it's essentially a fight against
Like digital entropy. Well, look, I'm learning something from our conversation in real time like for example
I cannot
I don't have a good response to stalking
and what I realized is that my
Discomfort with the people who are coming after me
Is a stalking based discomfort and now I'm suddenly understanding why joe rogan is saying
Like don't read the comments, which is like a don't let the critics live rent free in your head. That's not my problem
I understand so in part
um
If I understand what you just said
I think kamala has some communism
In her appeal. I may not be
native to her, but I know that the
Under 30 crowd is playing with
Like neo marxian ideas and that I've been told by the democratic party. We need their votes
Don't worry
They won't get anywhere inside the party. We just let them mouth off and they don't get any legislation
Like I've been told here's the plan. We need you to stop coming after us. Of course, we're hypocritical
We're courting communists because we need the votes to win
But I guarantee you they won't be able to do any damage if we are elected. So
Now you say something about kamala and somebody says I can see the communism
Equity is communism. It's equality of outcome that
support for october 7th
Is revolutionary. It's not you're not talking about liberalism or progressivism. You're talking about
calling
The murder of parents in front of their children resistance
These sorts of things
Are confusing us because we have these very strange amalgams. I can tell you that part of kamala
Um
Is the appeal to the to the the hamptons crowd that she will continue the carried interest exemption in the tax code
That doesn't feel very communistic
another part of her is speaking to
um
You know radical islamists saying
Don't worry. We're going to be portraying this as a bigotry and islamophobia
You're just another religion like any other and you're being subjected to prejudice
So how do you deal with an amalgam?
Where you can't go long and short
I can tell you that there are parts of donald trump that I very much appreciate and there are parts of donald trump
That make it impossible for me to imagine voting for him when he was at a rally
And there was a protester being let out and he said, you know
back in the day
We all have our bad trump
We know how to take care of such people and if anybody wants to rough these people up
I'll pay your legal bills and I thought
Wow, you have no idea what you just unleashed and you're comfortable with that
I don't want that person with the nuclear football
My discomfort with donald trump isn't a class issue or
Whatever is that I saw a temperament that shouldn't be anywhere near that kamala harris shouldn't be anywhere near the nuclear football
I have no idea who's on top of the nuclear football because it can't be joe biden
I promise you that and i've been assured by the way
That what's really going on is that there's a team that is governing because biden cannot and that I should feel
If I knew who these people were I would be pleased as punch because they're far better than joe biden
Can you imagine being told that as an american? We're not going to come
We're not going to invoke the constitution and rid ourselves of a president who's incompetent
We've instead installed a great team that you can't see so don't worry
So in all of these situations chris, I think what's happening is
We don't have the ability to slice and dice the average person
I don't know if you've seen this poll that i'm running right at the moment still live
I decided to try to make pro-choice
and pro-life
The same category and I asked the question you want to pull it up on my twitter feed and read it
By the way, anytime you do a poll on twitter
You will always be told you don't realize that this is biased because it's your audience and you don't realize that your language is
prejudicial, but
It's funny that those complaints aren't levied at ap or harris or because every poll is subject to something like this
This one's really instructive
question
Is your position on abortion? Whatever it is exactly the same for the day after conception as it is for the day before full-term birth
Yes, of course 33 percent. No, of course not
67 percent
25 507 votes was a bit of time left. I don't think it's going to reverse though. Well, here's my question
First of all, is that already an interesting result because pro-life and pro-choice in their most staunch form
Are now sharing a position that it is either my body or my body my choice
or
This is a life
And it's always murder so both of those are now grouped and about one third of the respondents hold a pro-life or pro-choice position
The comments are dominated by people saying of course, it's a life. This is a monstrous question
How can you even think about this? I don't believe in murder
So in other words, it's not even the pro-choice people
But the pro-life people who are dominating the comments and that goes back to yates with
the idea that
The worst are full of passionate intensity and the best lack all conviction. It's not
Right, but it's the people within a clear ideological position feel very comfortable speaking
And the people who have a nuanced position have learned their lesson to shut up the quiet middle
And this is why mere negative stuff on the internet doesn't have a lot of effect on me
I just say oh my god
I've I've learned my lesson about the chihuahua effect. The chihuahua effect is is that the annoying voices that just
Yap all day long have time because they're not doing anything productive. They're mean people
They're not that important
So I basically just block on civility if you start using loaded language about clown
lol, you know
That stuff I just block you because I can't afford to have that person in my head
What I don't know what to do with
Is the fact that people don't realize that neither pro-life nor pro-choice as an example
Captures an average thinking person's response to the complex embryology of pregnancy and cessation
I've always said that
Uh
What is a position that you you know that famous peter question?
What is a position that you hold that most people would would disagree with I don't actually know if this is the truth
But it's certainly one that people don't talk about and mine is that both pro-life and pro-choice sound like the right answer to me
I can be I've got permanent recency bias. Yeah based on whoever the most
Uh, like the closest proximity last guy was if I've just watched Shapiro, right? I uh, yeah
Well, that doesn't make a lot of sense or so and I'm exactly the opposite
My feeling is that the the only two positions
I don't listen to in immigration theory is open borders and closed borders because they're both
Exactly, this is my get a room position
Close borders and open borders people should get a room pro-life and pro-choice people should get a room
The rest of us are trying to solve problems. I don't know what you guys are doing
And you know, it's not like I don't have absolutes in my life. I do
It's just that they're few and far between and they have to be carefully chosen
And I think this has to do with shelling points if you know that concept assume I don't so
If you don't believe the conception or birth
is the
uh, right limit point for
Interceding in a pregnancy
Then you're looking for some point that is much less well defined
You know, is it a particular Carnegie stage? Is it viability if it's viability?
What happens when the technology changes? What about frozen embryos, etc, etc? So we have this this pension
for
Clear positions that are wrong
over
nuanced positions that are right but lack a good shelling point and that always been the case
I noticed this so long ago that
Certainty is a proxy for expertise
I
It's a good version of it
It is uh, I the example I use all of the time
um
I I don't know why
it's the case
But Peter Zion
Geopolitics guy. Yeah, he has
Rogan actually brought this up and sam harris both separately
And it was so funny. It was this thing that I'd had after I'd spoken to him that I then heard Rogan said in episode and sam
Say on the intro to the episode of peter. This is the most certain man. I've ever spoken to in the world
I I don't necessarily have the chops or have done the research to be able to work out the veracity of what he's saying
But my god, it's convincing because this isn't caveated. It's not it seems to be so
The evidence would suggest that so on and so forth. This is exactly what's going to happen with nitrogen balance and the soil
In russia over the next five harvests. This is what we know
He's going to occur with the chinese battleships in the south china sea
Which is
So i'm exactly the opposite guy my feeling and I and I wish I would love to just push this out
Is pay the tax on the way in so for example
uh
Of all the free speech people
I am the only one I know who says categorically. I'm not a free speech absolutist
And I've watched my friends who said they were free speech absolutists
Pay the tax on the way out. Well, the problem is is that you know, you're going to meet a situation
In which you have to realize that that's simplistic. So the the key thing is there are a lot of things that generate applause
you know and
You've got to forego the applause lines
Right because those applause lines are there because people are saying finally somebody said it they just
I appreciate the clarity. There wasn't a lot of wiggle words
Can I give you a physics term that we've been playing about with me and a couple of my friends love to learn thinking in super positions
Yeah
Before collapsing it down, but there's some people who can't bear the uncertainty
100 i mean, I really believe that
That is probably the one
concept of quantum mechanics that actually like if you
The heisenberg stuff where people say well if you if you look at a system you interfere with it
That has nothing to do with heisenberg the superposition is actually pretty much a tight pairing between
quantum mechanics
And what it is that we need to do another version of this by the way is I
Some giant percentage of the population
says
I don't understand your argument when they say when they really mean I don't accept your argument
For example, you could ask me
I don't you could say eric. I don't understand anti-semitism. Jews do so much. They contribute to society. I would say
I understand anti-semitism
Now there's a question wait, wait a second
We're trying to label anti-semites as lunatics and you're saying you can actually yeah, I can run it in emulation
I have a sandbox in my brain. I've got a little anti-semite in my jewish brain. I'm sure he's loving it
He's having a great time up there. He wants to know why so many of your guests are jewish
Um
We've got to stop doing that we've got to stop saying I can't understand x
When we mean I understand x find x very very dangerous
and wrong
It's almost like a weakness or a fragility to not allow yourself to try and play that other side. What is that?
You need to be able to explain the other side's argument better than they can yeah
This is the steel manning thing that I think I actually
Forget who I heard it from first. I used it on sam harris and the first time I ever heard it be used was sam and jordan
Was how they opened up that pang bone debate
So I think he got it. I think you you can hear on something called faith in reason
Where sam asks me to clarify what that means and it wasn't original to me, but I it's a really important concept. It's very cool and
It's outrageously civil
Well, thank you. You know, this is
part of the reason you know
Something I I don't know how to deal with is that I coin a lot of acronyms concepts, etc
And people say why do you do that? It detracts from your message. It's a lot of clutter
And I I don't know how to respond exactly
We're missing a lot of concepts and one of the things that I know is coming from you
is
a book
In which you take all of the things that you pepper these conversations with
These concepts which are necessary for modern life, but haven't been
embedded in our education
Right. So like the stri sand effect before you get to the stri sand squeeze is actually something that's very important to understand in our media age
And if that wasn't pushed out, it would be very confusing as to why somebody wouldn't respond to something when they do have an answer
Our cognitive toolkit
Got hit with a lot of stuff having to do with the internet then the web
Then social search and mobile that is so much change
that
A brain that came before those five things cannot function in the modern world
And what we need to do, of course, and this is why I was suspicious that we're going to be in this criticism issue forever
Is we haven't yet invented the concepts that make modern life
Tolerable and I think that you and I and a bunch of people in podcasting land are casting about
For what are the missing concepts and I give this example of the word selfie because it was the best example I've ever seen
Why do hot chicks in restaurant bathrooms take pictures of themselves in mirrors? Nobody knew didn't make any sense
And at some point somebody coined the word selfie
And it was instant. We'd all seen this phenomenon, but nobody had had a concept
He was word of the year in one year
Yeah, and the reason is is that you needed it because it was there everywhere
But until it had some place where it could nucleate around this is good. So this is just
tied me in to
This makes this makes an awful lot of sense. So your idea of an accuracy budget. Okay
I think I need to request a meme budget
Yeah, because I one of the criticisms that people have for me and a bunch of my friends like george or whoever
Why does everything need a fucking name? Why does everything need to be an analogy?
Why does it have to be that?
Why does it have to be a yoghurt lid moment as opposed to why can't you say you just saw so and i'm like
For a few reasons
Firstly, this is great. Firstly
Remembering concepts is hard
And essentializing something taking it from this big long story the parable of the mexican fisherman
If you've heard the story a couple of times you remember what it is
You don't need to hear the story again. You just hear the parable of the mexican
Oh, yeah, of course
It's the guy that over complicates his life and ends up coming back to the place where he began
It's the same story as you get in the alchemist by paulo coilo etc etc fantastic
disc
Ego it pick whatever it is of choice and then it takes this huge big concept
And synthesizes it down and if you don't know it then you can click on that and you the hyper the the phrase
and or the uh
Fails over to a bumper sticker the bumper sticker to a summary paragraph and abstract to a short essay to a book
And so the idea is that the more you need of these things you can keep clicking through
Yep, yeah to expand out to expand out. The funny thing is that have you noticed that canned humor disappeared?
What does that mean nobody
Three guys go into a bar that thing that your uncle used to do doesn't happen in our world
at all
And almost all of the jewish wisdom that had been in the talmud
In my experience my father had
35 jokes, which if you understood all of them was a blueprint for life
and
Like i'll just say the punchlines
Knew he had a hat
Keep your goddamn jack
Uh $5,000 plus legal expenses now
By killing canned humor
You killed off the encapsulation of thousands of years
Of talmudic study about the very difficult trade-offs and constraints that human beings are under
And so you say yeah, I don't tell corny jokes. You sound like you from the catskills like well, no shit Sherlock
You just basically took the human endowment and flushed it down the toilet now something else. I want to play with if you if I can
The stuff that comes back at you on the internet if you had to pick and choose
What you think is fair and what you've learned from versus what you think is just a distraction
I wonder if that would be something we could play with like what have you
Learned from your critics. Where do you think there's validity? Where do you have an unsolved problem?
And where do you just have the idea of I can't have that in my head? It's the worst thing in the world
The most accurate I think is that uh, my difficulty in discomfort pushing back
Uh, my people pleasing nature is
In me everywhere that I go
uh, actually
Apart from when I'm in a restaurant
Dealing with waiters. I'm pretty good at making my sort of needs known there. Uh, but outside of that
Uh, sitting with discomfort
Disappointing people making them upset or angry
Um, I often feel like
Other people's emotional state to my responsibility. This is something that I have across the board
Um, and that means that I have a particular vector of weakness when it comes to the podcast because a lot of the time
I need to push back against ideas. I need to stress test and if you say something
Good example of this abigail schreyer wrote a book bad therapy. Yeah
And I fundamentally
Disagreed with a lot of the ideas in it
So I thought and I messaged a friend before I was going to do it and said this is my plan for the episode
I want to make my positions known
And not step in and throw a life boy to try and fix the problem and the you know perennial
Recovering people pleases out there may sort of feel the same that you say a thing which is
Going to induce some discomfort or something which is it stops. It's got a harsh end to it or whatever
And then you say would it be would that you sort of bring this thing into land by offering
So how can it be the case that therapy all therapy is bad?
Because it allows you or causes you to focus on your yourself and your issues
But you also include in that cbt something which is unbelievably practical and shows up as an evidence-based intervention for lots of people's disorders
Is it that and then it's is it that you step in to soften the blow
So throughout that episode in particular. I had to ask these questions and then as I watch
the guest
Get to this point
Which is exactly the the reason that you ask a difficult question as opposed to there is this compulsion inside of me
I'm dragged forward to go
Well, what I mean and and throw this sort of life boy to them
Because sitting with that discomfort. So that is by far. I think the most valid criticism now
One of the things that that nobody gets to see is how hard it is for people to achieve the things that they achieve. So
Apart from in sports
If you've got a guy that's got the world bench press record with long arms and you go, oh my god
Look at the length of his arms. Look at his bench press record. That's phenomenal. The dude that's five foot ten. That's in the mba
Oh my god. Look at his height. He's in the mba. You know, you can see there's physical characteristics
But then if you were to see
Douglas Murray and Malcolm Gladwell on stage together or Ben Shapiro and anybody
And you go, they're able to be disagreeable so seamlessly
for me to get even
Five percent of the way there. I need to do the equivalent of a one rep max
To to tell abe ask abe gel shire at cbt. Um, and that's
For me just an obvious area where hypertrophy and noob gains can be accrued most easily
So I think that's that's the fairest of of the criticisms
It anything else that you think is like
Something you find in the comments where you feel
Like, you know, you're you're pointing at something that's true, but you're not getting it right or
um
certainly
Actually, I mean one of the one of the criticisms that that comes up relatively frequently is
I'm both a misogynist
A red pill right-wing misogynist and also a blue-pilled left-wing cuck at the same time superposition
Super it absolutely thinking in the superposition, but you'll see the comments on the same video. Yeah, you'll see them underneath the same
video and uh
I it that is one of the things
as somebody who fears not fears criticism capture, but certainly would be a poster boy for
criticism capture being warping and it's something that I need to account for I
I do particularly well with positive reinforcement with enthusiasm with excitability
Can I give you my take on this because I think this is one of the most interesting things you just put your finger on
What you're talking about are cognitive clusters
So for example when I was on this is the first time I learned about it. I was on stage with ben Shapiro
and sam harris
and if you look at the
clusters of comments
On that video from the masonic theater in san francisco
They were like thank god eric was there because otherwise we'd be hearing about. Uh, is there a god? Yes. No
Which is boring as hell
Why is eric on stage? We're all here just to hear the atheist debate
The orthodox jew. So what you what you learn about
Is is that the cognitive clusters have no awareness
That they're part of this
dyadic relationship of what you are
And how they process so for example i'm colorblind as is my brother. Are you really yeah
Well, and the first thing that everyone says to a colorblind person. What color is that over there?
You go, I I don't fucking it's very it's very interesting being colorblind because it's the terminology is bad
You see color that you don't have the same
Um, it's not like the world is is black and white. It's just yellow or green. I can't tell
So depending upon what colorblindness you have you see different numbers in the pebble tests that they give you
So the question of what is the pebble, you know, it's basically
it's basically, uh
You know
Mindstorm versus green noodle or the green needle or the dress or any one of these things
Where people factored themselves out of the equation and they imagine that they are in a universal position as consumers
Of whatever it is that you just said
Right, it's like why why does he spend so much time on the stuff he's discussed on every other podcast
Why does he just jump in as assuming everybody knows exactly what this is about?
Your audience is unaware
Of the fact that they've been cognitively clustered
And so when you read these things you're not reading about you
You're reading about
dyadic relationships with different cognitive clusters and you'll find the same like
one of the
One of the things that I know is that a lot of people don't agree with the dialectic
They believe that there's a thesis and there's an in an antithesis and there's no synthesis
There's just people sitting on the fence who are pussies for not having a position
And so every time I attempt to synthesize things because things are in a superposition and i'm trying to talk about the nuance
They have an idea of he never says anything
Because to them to that person
Saying something is to say
Trump is the man
You've got to go with kamala. Otherwise you're just you know
Those sorts of people in that poll for example
The cluster that believes that
pregnancy doesn't change in any meaningful way relative to abortion
are
A meta cluster including pro-life and pro-choice. Yep
What what we need to do more of is to understand what it is that we're reading as feedback
I know for example
that
Many people find me overbearing
And it's not that I don't see that in myself
But nobody ever asks me do you see in yourself that you can be overbearing in conversation?
Totally. Well, if you can see it, why do you do it? Interesting question
Um, in general, I find that sometimes I I try not to be at all overbearing at all
And I feel like most conversations end up in a conversation. I've already been in I'm I'm old enough
I'm just bored because I think that humans in general are a large language model
That's one of the reasons naval hasn't done another podcast properly since rogan said I don't want to say the same things twice
Maybe
Um
But I I guess what I find is that
People don't ask about other people's levels of self-awareness. Oh, I love asking that
I love asking that that's one of the reasons that your question is so interesting
There's a a concept
Familiar or similar to what you were talking about before called tilting at windmills
An online stranger doesn't know you all they have are a few vague impressions of you too meager to form anything
But a phantasm so when they attack you they're really just attacking their own imagination and there is no need to take it personally
My brother has a version of this that I think is brilliant where he says that the person who's just cut you off in traffic
All you know about them is that they cut you off in traffic
You don't know about their work in pediatric oncology
And so until you actually have a fuller position
You don't realize that you've cut somebody off in traffic and been cut off in traffic
And the only data point you have represents the entire human of course
yeah
combination of fundamental attribution error and a bunch of others there's a
An equivalent an equivalent that I learned uh from instagram of all places
which
I think sort of shows this
Relativity or our assumption the opposition is the correct one
Every guy that fancies girls with bigger boobs than mine is a chubby chaser
Every guy that fancies girls with smaller boobs than mine is a pedophile
That basically
You have yourself as the reference point and then anything outside of that on either side is is some perturbment
Why do you think this is why do you think that we don't actually?
i'll be honest
Almost no conversation in my life
Moves above the level where I could set a large language model
To have it good question. So I think we have these social
Mores and and dynamics typically that we follow
uh by
not wanting to look silly or
Play outside of an area that we know
A lot of the time it causes us to go back to
Scripts that we've run before that we knew kind of worked. So I think confidence sort of social confidence has a lot to do with it
um
Thinking is expensive and it's hard
and
genuinely
Genuinely trying to be generative
During a conversation is tough
A lot of the time people are uncomfortable with silence which causes them to
Push answers out when sort of sitting back would have maybe allowed them to come up with something new if you're trying to
If you're trying to go quicker your direction can be less precise and you can move in a less agile way
You're just trying to get the things out as opposed to giving yourself a little bit of a beat
This is why the best definition
of a best friend
is
Who can you spend time in silence with without it feeling uncomfortable?
And who can you be around with the least filter?
I think those two together are a really good example of
Who are your people?
Present company excluded
Just for the reasons for the obvious reasons. Who are the guests who bring out the best version of you as an interviewer?
George Mack who's one of my best friends phenomenal writer
Rob Henderson, Gwendo Boogal, Rory Sutherland, Douglas Murray
On the guesting side
Rogan
So you've interviewed Rogan?
No on the on the host
Me as a guest guest guest guest guesting side, but I don't do that that much
So I don't have a particularly big pull to pull from but those are the guys that I get to play with ideas
And I know that we're focused on the idea. I know that Tim Ferriss was a really great example of this
Just such a great conversation list
You know, he's
If I'm imprecise with a question or if I'm trying to get to something
He takes the best version of the thing that I said as what he and he infers what I meant to say
And it's absolutely best
So he almost as such a great interviewer makes you a better interviewer by
Turning your hopefully quite good question into the best question by his answer
Sometimes reframes it sometimes moves it in the direction. It's really great. It's it's like a multiplicative
environment
Do you feel like you know things about Joe Rogan?
or Lex Friedman
Or Douglas Murray
That most people don't know
That make them so successful
Yes
in Tim Ferriss and
Certainly Rogan
And certainly Douglas. Okay, so let's take take Rogan because a lot of people are mystified. All right. So let me open up
the
Joe Rogan superpower as a podcaster is that he can ask a question with a statement
Nobody else same nobody else has landed on this and I realized this the first time that I got to sit down with him
so news to me
It's a it's for a couple of reasons. Joe is able to say
A statement in response to a statement
So you as the guest or some dusty academic author that's got a new book out and you're telling him about
You know your david bus talking about evolutionary psychology and it's all interesting and these are new concepts
and you finish up explaining about how
sex ratio hypothesis works
and Joe says
So interesting because in new york
You know, you have this sort of abundance of women and the guest then goes ah
So joe doesn't make a conversation feel like an interview because he answers statements with statements
If you actually listen a lot of the time, joe doesn't ask that many questions in his podcast
He's not a big question asker when compared with most other podcasters
He makes statements and the reason is if you listen to most conversations normal conversations between friends
Statement statement statement statement. It's back and forth one of the reasons that joe's show feels so naturalistic
Is that he asks questions with statements
It's very rare
Super rare. I've been trying to do it ever since I went on a show two years ago for the first time
I've been trying to cultivate that because I think it makes for such a beautiful conversational flow
One of the problems that you have is
As you start to push the guest's expertise the the delta between yours and the guest's expertise
Yeah, your ability to
Answer statements with statements becomes
Lower you need to say what do you mean by that or how's that the case or what would you say is this thing?
um
But that's what makes him
That's one of the reasons
That makes him so great. And that's why it's so enjoyable
as a as a guest on the show
I don't immediately resonate with that because I think that sometimes he has different dynamics with different guests
But it's very it's it's certainly at a minimum adjacent to something that I experience with him, which is
He's really
Less egoic than just about anyone I deal with
And the way that you see this like, you know, an interesting thing happened. It's happened a couple of times between you and me
Where when you said this thing, like, do you know what audience capture is like, oh, I don't I'm I'm straining because I
It wasn't much discussed before I brought it up, but I don't want to say that's mine
Right. I just I want to let it go, but I don't want to suddenly lose my claim on it
And that has to do with like ego and insecurity and
And what not wanting to be recognized. Yeah. Well, just in trauma from having had things taken away from you that you can never get back
Joe
Could take the shot himself
and instead
He serves it up to you
Correct
And maybe you can't even do as good of a job as he would have done but his job like until you piss him off
He's trying to make you
The best version of you and this is this is where
I come into tension with my people pleasing nature that
A combination of give someone a rope and they'll show themselves for who they truly are in any case that asking questions
that
you know sort of
It gives people the opportunity and the room to step on the landmines that they're going to lay for themselves in any case
but also
I want a guest that comes on the show to just have a good time
Yeah, I see it as my job to basically be a trampoline
So they're going to jump up and down and it's my job to be as springy as possible and make them seem as acrobatic and
as great as they can and
A lot of the time that means
Taking something that someone said and as opposed to trying to tear it down to
Is this what you mean or how about this or that's an interesting idea?
I've got this that's bill bill bill
Oh, that's so interesting so on and so forth and it can seem like pandering
I can see how it could seem sort of sycophantic in some ways, but
for me
as far as I can tell the the job of a podcaster is to make the guests ideas as
Good as is possible. This is this is the best light that they could be seen in and this is how they relate to me
And this is what I think about them and this is what I thought that you meant
Uh, and that's why it's fun. That's that's that's what fires me up
Do you know why I
Do your podcast there's like three in a row when I am really trying to do less podcast
Yeah, I keep bringing you out of retirement. Yeah
Well, no, but it it has to do with the fact that this is how I get a chance to see you when you're in la
And like we don't go out to a bar. So this is my chance to like hang out with you for a couple of hours
And in a way it's sort of sad. We have this dynamic where it's like also I'll save it for the podcast
It's it's it's frustrating because in part like
I have lots of friends that I don't podcast with I have great conversations with
One of the things about joe, for example, that I really I don't know how to tell people it
he's obviously
Like this thing about he's a meatball a meathead is a great troll that meathead read so much
He knows so much. He's interested in so much
that
A lot of what's happening is is that he's actually infusing the guest with an idea. He could take credit for himself
But he would rather that the guest
Looks good and it doesn't come across as people pleasing and I'll be honest. I don't really see
This criticism maybe it's because I see you principally in your interactions with me
um
I don't
I don't like the gotcha style. You saw this with don lemon and elon musk
Um where somebody comes from the gotcha style of interviewing. It's like well
Just softball after softball. I was like you idiots. What do you think life is? Do you think it's like?
You you you did the gotcha question that fouled the person up on air and you got to see them sweat and break down and and lose
That's not what makes great podcasting
You want repeat characters that you keep coming back to and you watch their development and I so I just want to say that from from my cognitive cluster
I'm not positive that these criticisms of you are valid. It may be with other guests, but like in general
I feel like you can you can establish
An evolution of thought without going through that sort of competitive nonsense. I appreciate that
Yeah, it's something i'm working on so one of the
Most important personality traits that me and my friends have tried to cultivate in ourselves is agency
It's what we're obsessed by it's what we talk about essential
Intentionalism which is a subset it is necessary but not sufficient in order to be able to build out agencies something else that we really love talking about
And upon reflection I realized that all of us had first learned about the word agency from you
so I wondered whether there is a
From my first podcast
whether there is a tension to navigate
between
wanting to maximize agency wanting to have control over the outcomes in your life
Basically believing that I will win the video game sort of no matter what's in front of me
And I will also treat life in that sort of playful manner as well, which I think is an element of agency
How do you navigate the tension between wanting to live a hopeful agentic existence and all of the doom and gloom that you're permanently embroiled in
I
This is a it's an amazing question and I it's strange to me that it didn't get followed up by almost anybody
High agency is a lifelong commitment for me and
You know the song boy named sue by johnny cash. Can you play it on the harmonica?
It's mostly a it's a patter song before it's like rap country. No not familiar
Let me see
My daddy left home when I was three didn't leave much for me mom and me
But this is old guitar and an empty bottle of booze
I didn't blame when you ran in head
But meanest thing that they ever did was before he left he went and named me sue
The guy must have thought it was quite a joke got a lot of laughs from a lot of folks
Seems I had to find my whole life through
Some guy some gal would giggle and I'd get read some guy would laugh and I'd bust his head
I'll tell you life ain't easy for a boy named sue. Anyway, it goes on
and basically this guy
has to become tough
and agentic
And he swears that he uh
You know, he'll search the honky tonk since saloons until he finds his father and kill him
And finally he chances upon a saloon and they're at a table deer deal instead was the dirty mangy dog who named me sue
And he gets into a fight with his father the father cuts off a piece of his ear
and uh
Finally sue gets the better of his father and um
It says, you know
You have the right to kill me. I don't blame you if you do
um
But before you know before I die
I want you to thank me for the spit in your eye because i'm the dirty mangy dog who named you sue or whatever
And they reconcile
That song to me is about dyslexia
It's about dysgraphy. It's about the torture of school
For being smart
And not even having a high IQ because one of the four components of IQ is something called processing
Which I just think is an abomination that that somehow gets into intelligence
I was a b-minus high school student in math mostly because I was charming or the grade would have been even lower
and
And so one of the things that weirdly I'm most proud of in my life and sort of the origin story that people don't
Ask enough about because it has to do with dyslexia
is that somehow
A b-minus high school student limps out of high school and three years later at 19 has a master's degree in mathematics headed for
arguably the top department in the world as a graduate school at harvard
And that's not a story about i'm so smart. It's a story about agency. It's about
Doing the thing that you're not good at like that. You're really really bad at and you know, my son who's currently
He's finished all of his physics courses in in the theory portion of his major as a freshman
Many years ago he broke my heart and he came to me and he said dad. I know I'm not a good student
But you'd think of all the things I'd at least be good at math because he was very analytical
and then suddenly he you know
During the pandemic
Um
He wanted to get out of the school. He was in because it was a bad fit in the science department
And he was stuck at home between 10th and 11th grade and he said dad
I want to know if it's okay if I use this time when i'm stuck at home
To study for the graduate record exam
As if I was as if he was a graduating senior in physics
And he says I want to take it in the fall
And I said well, let's review this
You've never taken calculus. You've never taken a course in physics
You're struggling in all of your technical subjects
Why do you want to take the g re in in physics and he said I've listened to you very carefully and you said that
We should get around college by using the graduate record exam as a college equivalency
Does the a degree just the way we have a high school equivalency degree?
And he said I've looked at all of the universities as to what their physics requirements are in the top 10
And it's very uniform because they have to be interoperable
I've reduced it to basically four books that I have to know. I know what the prerequisites are
And there's a test to see if it works so I can hold myself accountable
I've noticed that the only place holding the g re in physics is in arizona. Can we fly to phoenix?
And take the g re
Uh in physics as if i'm completing a four-year college
And I thought about it. I said
This means you're going to be ruining your summer. He says no no for me. It's fun
Let me try
Will you back it so I bought them the books bought the plane ticket
And the kid sat at the table for like two and a half months
We fly out and he takes the exam
But the kid's never taken any relevant class whatsoever
And he proves that he's
At least at that level
Life is filled with these opportunities
There are cheat codes everywhere
There are panic rooms where if you know which book to pull the bookcase just swings open for you
um
Both my kids graduated a year early because all you have to do is ask your high school
Hey, I really want to graduate a year early and it's possible
I don't know how to teach people that know is the beginning of a conversation
you know one one day I was having uh
A steak dinner I think with uh Dave Rubin and Jordan Peterson
And it came to the big five personality inventory which Jordan swears by
And he was discussing, you know, he can read off your Myers Briggs like that
And he says but that's not really as good as the big five
So he gave Dave his big five
I was terrified. I didn't say anything. He says you Eric are particularly interested. Why?
He said well, you're very high in trait openness
But what really distinguishes you is you're the most disagreeable person I've ever met or something close to it
And I think cultivating disagreeability even sounds bad. Well, he's very disagreeable, but it's it's trait disagreeability rather than
that
It has to do with non-acceptance
Somebody says there's nothing we can do
Well, is there really nothing you can do
Are you sure?
You know very often for example, I can get chat gpt to tell me things. That's not supposed to by figuring out how to do prompt engineering
There's almost always a way to do anything that seems like it should be possible
And cultivating this trait MacGyvering everything or finding the cheat code
Is a way of life and if you don't have that as a as a dyslexic
My grandfather was probably the most brilliant of four people in his generation and the four families that came west to make mayonnaise for
That's how we ended up in California
And he wasn't equal to it couldn't graduate from college
Couldn't get beyond his intelligence couldn't get beyond the deficit
the deficit and
One of the podcasts that nobody listens to me on that i'm proudest of is a podcast called something like teach me teacher
Where I basically go after educators and I say
You guys are the most dangerous horrible people to the neurodivergent
every second
Of my life spent in your classrooms before college before university
Is the second I want back is trauma is pain
All you did is instill in me that i'm an idiot. I'm a moron. I'm not good enough. I should go away. I'm bad
I'm aberrant like I got it. I really got it
You don't like me. I don't like you. You're bad people to me. You can think that i'm the student who's just disagreeable
but the fact of the matter is
life depends on disagreeable people
What would you say to
The people who feel like they
Didn't fit in when they were younger. They still don't fit in now
like life happens
For other people and they're on the outside sort of watching
It's an interesting question. I don't know how to give everyone advice
but
Is there something that you're best at?
Is there something that you don't suck at that isn't valued by the world?
You know, that's the kind of the beginning of you have to make
Some room for self-esteem one of the things that i'm not positive my grandfather ever said it
But I remember it as if he said it is you owe the world your eyes
Maybe your eyes aren't that good. Maybe what you see isn't true. Maybe you're confused. Maybe you're clouded. Maybe you're egotistical
Maybe you're a narcissist blah blah blah blah blah, but whatever your eyes are
they're yours
and you have a right to process the world and say what you see
and
One of the quotes that I like best of myself, which is not oft-repeated is most of us die never having heard our own inner voice
even once
It is so shocking
to speak
with your voice
The first time I understood anything about male female romance
Something slipped out of my mouth
That clearly was a lack of impulse control and it worked
it was charming
and
It shouldn't have worked it should have been crash and burn
But some point you'll have an accident where something will sort of work out better
Do you know the tom petty song even the losers?
Oh
If I ever get invited on the tonight show, that's what I want to come out to
so it's the song and
Well, it was me it's sort of like a bob dillon
It was nearly summer and we sat on your roof
And we smoked cigarettes and we stared at the moon
And I showed you stars you never could see
Couldn't have been that easy to forget about me
And it goes into the story
In which a guy who clearly is a lower status guy is on a roof and and in my mind
You know, he says I showed you stars you never could see like maybe he's an astronomy geek
And somehow he's got the hot chick on a roof and they're smoking cigarettes and he seems cooler than he is
And he says, you know something about uh
You kissed like fire so it doesn't tell us about sex doesn't get into like
The notch on his cane and and I love songs that talk about kisses as proxy for whatever happens
And in that story
He has an accident where he's above his station in the world as he perceives it
Somewhere you have an accident where you had your best day ever even the person who's the most shit out of luck
Has their best days ever
And they have to ask themselves. Well, what happened on that day? What was it that you did?
Start building on that and and by
You also have to realize that certain kinds of criticism has to be ignored
You can't process all criticism because a lot of criticism is designed to hold you back
As opposed to help you get better and your obligation is only to process constructive criticism
Now you can turn negative criticism and destructive criticism into something you can do
but
stop processing the criticism
That's actually poisoned so that the other person can get ahead of you and in the world
And I think that that that that thing about high agency
is
Try to find the cheat codes the one I've given before that I I love because I don't need it anymore
Is that in Penn station in new york your intermediate between washington dc and boston?
So you're not guaranteed a seat on the train
And there's a giant board which says which track you should meet your train whichever direction you're going
That means everybody runs to try to get a seat on that train
But there's a much smaller screen that says arrivals for people meeting trains since mostly trains are never met
And there's a tiny number of people who crowded around that screen
And they always knew what platform the train was coming in 10 minutes earlier than everybody else and you'd go to that platform
And you'd see everyone else who figured out that cheat code
And so my claim is is that
Somebody's winning
Try to figure out what it is that they're doing you can even pay them
Like just give me half an hour of your time. Tell me what you do. Let me watch you
If you're not good in a bar, whether you're male or female
Meeting people
somebody's good
Befriend that person buy them a drink do something kind
Breaking the fourth wall the exact solution that I found to be able to punch above my own weight
When we wanted to start this cinema series for the show was I realized that
Really big name guests like the the sort of top flight ones that are in the most demand
you can
Get them to be more likely to come on the show if you just go to them
if you find out where they are and you
often send a car for them and you show up there because
the likelihood of
catching Jordan or you or
Jocko or Goggins when they're through Austin is essentially zero
But say look, I'm going to remove all of the different bits of friction. I'm going to come to you
Can we make it work? That was one of the things that worked. So again, George
Has this question he uses to work out who is the highest agency person in your entire life
tell me
You're trapped in a South American prison
You know one of this one is it's absolute. It's one of those awful
5000 people in there. It's a hundred people per room. There's half the number of bunk beds. Everyone's got a skinhead
You have 24 hours to get out and you've got one phone call. Who'd you ring?
It's hard in my case
Why?
I happen to be
The brother of Brett Weinstein. I happen to have worked for peter teal
um
My wife is a total supermind
Uh, I've got no shortage of these people. You want to get one phone call? I know I can't figure out who most people
The thing that I worry about is that most people have no one
Yep
But you know, it has to do with people who are
extremely generative
and
high trust
and
Can readjust their thinking because no solution is clear
but
Yeah, I think a different version of that question is
Is your problem which call to place or that you have no one
You can even think of and then another version of the question would be if you could call anyone you don't happen to know
Them personally. Is there anyone that you would think would be the best person and another
insight for this would be for how many people would you be that phone call?
It's an interesting question
You know, we want to cultivate agency in ourselves
And every time that I've asked this question at dinner or on a podcast
So what's the most impossible situation you've gotten your you've MacGyvered your way out of?
Uh, I've managed to
Prepare myself pretty well typically. Um
It's not much MacGyvering, but I came off a
moped in Bali
and
Managed to lose the skin on basically the entire left-hand side of my body Balinese road versus me in a tiny pair of swim shorts and I lost
um
First round tko and I needed to come up with a solution to be able to get myself
Looked after while I was out there in terms of sort of healthcare. I needed to kind of manage my own
um
The protocol that I was going through and then I also needed to make the call about when to come home
And it wasn't like I had a ton of money to be able to get myself back
So
Did that spent a week later up trying to get better realized I wasn't going to get better also realized that
Indonesia versus the NHS for all the problems the NHS has I'd rather be in the uk
So managed to do that but that involved. Oh, actually that was an interesting one on the way back
One of the things I didn't want to do was not be able to have my foot elevated
But I had no I didn't know when near enough money to be able to fly business class. So flooded my eyelashes at
the mail uh flight attendant and uh, they took pity on me and put me in premium economy and a couple of other things
So that's that's one that comes to mind
But no south american prisons or or anything like that yet. How about you? Is there anything that comes to mind?
Yeah, not all of which I can discuss
But uh, not at liberty to say publicly. Well
No, I mean some of it is
I also have two children to shepherd through this world and there's a lot of technology
Just in terms of problem solving that I I love sharing with my audience
but there's some that I reserve for for my family alone and
You know
I would say there are lots of things that I'm not good at
To have jordan peterson come after you on conscientiousness. I think it's because he's asked me several times to do his show
I've never really gotten back to him. I don't know if that's so jordan. I totally apologize. Love you the um
I think that in general the thing that I'm most valued for in my family
is
When you need an elephant or two pulled out of a hat
That's what i'm really good at pulling rabbits out of the hat. Not so much. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, very much. So I hope that i'm the same
too
but you know, actually
probably geometric unity
is
I have only two claims. No, sorry. I should say different. I have only three claims on immortality
My children is my first
Geometric marginalism which I did with my wife, which is rebasing economics on the differential calculus
Not of ordinary calculus, but of gauge theory
is the second
and that is dwarfed by geometric unity and
The image I have when I think about this is of a
person
Cradling a flame in a hurricane for 40 years
Against all odds like
It is without question the most brilliant thing
I've ever done ever will do whether it is right or wrong whether it is fool's gold or real gold
Has not been determined by the outside. Well, I'll be stunned if it's fool's goal
but
I cannot believe I I don't even know how to live with it. It's so
It's so outside of ordinary. I can't answer questions people's like, hey, what are you up to?
What are you thinking about? What are you doing? And it's like if I told you
What what why does the conversation will always go south? Yeah, and
I think, you know, lex asked me this
Like what are you proudest of it's like trying
Not giving up not listening to every voice in the world which says let go of that thing. It's like now I'm betting that
10,000 of you are wrong and I'm right and I'm pretty sure I will win in the end and you will lose
But I will probably have to wait for this generation of humans to die or retire
What did you bring? What's that?
Which one the little things what are those? Well, I mentioned this woman
Uh, when I was on Joe Rogan
Bethsheba Grossman
And she's a national treasure. What you're holding in your hand
Is a three-dimensional projection of the four-dimensional
Platonic solid corresponding to the dodecahedron. I think that's called the
120 cell
So that's a four-dimensional object projected in three dimensions and it's the analog of the dodecahedron
There are five platonic solids
In dimension four
You'll give me that one
This is the thing that you can't even believe exists
That is called the 24 cell
It is a platonic solid
projected into dimension three that has absolutely no analog that was only discovered in the end of the 1800s. I think by shaffley
Almost no human knows it exists
And because of the fact that you and I have been able to do millions of views
More people are going to know about Bethsheba Grossman
Um
And we're going to take care of our mathematical artists who are able to transmit the most profoundly bizarre
Features of the world this has to do with something called an exceptional lee group called f4
It's 52 dimensional
It has it the its next analog is 78 dimensions called e6 e7 has 133 in the granddaddy of them all e8
Has 248 dimensions. Nobody knows why they're there. It's like a mathematical platypus from outer space with no context
and
I brought them sort of for no reason
Because I didn't know where we were going when I did the terrence howard thing
at joe's request
um
It generated a lot of interest and a lot of heat. I got a ton of criticism. Why would you sit down with a pseudoscientist?
You're normalizing this behavior
Terrence Howard is actually playing with all sorts of geometric shapes and dualities between geometric shapes that even professional mathematicians
Couldn't figure out neil grass ties and says I don't know where these come from
um
I didn't know where the conversation would head you always throw curve balls
And so I just want I brought a couple of toys and things in case they they came up. Have you ever read escaping flatland?
Oh, how can I not even know about this? So, uh, it's a book from the 1800s
And it is about a sphere that goes to visit a two-dimensional world of flatland
So in the two-dimensional world you have different shapes and the shapes denote the class
Well, this is abbots book flatland. Yes. Is this beyond that? No, but it's rough. It's also referred to as escaping flatland
I see I didn't understand. Sorry. So yes abbots book, uh, but I always think about that
I still really don't understand tesseracts and those
What are those vases that loop back on themselves? What are they fine bottles? Yeah, like I still hey shout out to cliford stole and berkeley california
Who produces them at acme climb bottle?
Uh, somebody I did a commercial for who never never asked for it
Just we have to we have to help these businesses
So people are aware you can order a climb ball go on. Sorry about that. It's just cool
But you know, I interstellar is my favorite ever movie and they tried to sort of represent a 4d tesseract in three-dimensional shape
Three-dimensional space and that's kind of hard to wrap my head around
um, but
Flatland is is an interesting
um
Equivalent just one down into a place that we can so for the people that haven't read it
This sphere is able to make itself
shrink and grow at will
In front of and it amazes the inhabitants of flatland
Because obviously as it moves up and down through its third dimension
It just grows and and shrinks in the two dimensions
So you have a sphere passing through a plane you've seen in the cross-section. Correct. Yeah, and it gets bigger and it gets smaller and
Flatland the flatland inhabitants are absolutely
amazed at this ability that it has to do and uh
It's just great. It's a really really cool
way to think about and I I also think about
You know the challenges that people have of orthogonal thinking. Hmm. Uh, you know, if you are
trying to play with ideas
That
Break against whatever the
Sort of the current flow is maybe it's with subtlety or complexity or nuance or or
Charitability and um, yeah, I like I like thinking about that sphere. I like thinking about him
It's a very odd thing that you bring up because
that example
When you said the title escaping flatland I was
goosebumps, um
I have not gotten back to sam altman who asked me for a proposal
Because i'm not sure whether i'm supposed to help sam now sam is a friend of mine and I think very very highly of sam altman. Um, despite all the
Mashinations and whatnot. I know him to be a person
Deeply concerned with humanity who will not be understood
Even maybe has to do machiavellian things in order to take care of humanity. It's very confusing situation
In a certain sense large language models are flatland
All it can do is read what we've already done
An extrapolate and so to the extent that we haven't extrapolated everything from what we've already can connect things that we didn't connect
Example I like to give his guns germs and steel may have been one of the great books of all time
But it was jared diamond taking things that were in the literature scattered
And without doing real original research. He came up with a thesis that was spell binding
the um
key question is how do you break out of flatland and there's a
A tool that is not understood because you learn about it in
I don't know middle school
And you don't realize what it is and that's the square root operation
the square root
Is how you escape flat flatland
You ask for the square root
Of two which is a an integer and you wind up in algebraic numbers that are irrational
You ask for the square root of negative one and you add end up in purely imaginary numbers that you learn in school
And you don't know why they're there even mathematicians don't really fully understand how to apply them in everyday life
Reasons we can get into in another podcast
You can apply it to the determinant of a matrix
If it's anti symmetric and get something called the fofian that nobody who's taken ordinary calc
Ordinary linear algebra is even heard of it's sort of reserved for the priests of mathematics
the square root
Is an example of a question
That you can ask inside of the reality that you're aware of
So for example the light between you and I is photons
And those are examples of bosons
But the matter here is sort of the square root of the light if you will and this is what we would call fermionic
Once you understand that the square root is the psychedelic of mathematics that breaks you into the panic room
That you did not know was even present in the house that you bought. I mean it's your house
At some point I realized that there was a space behind a wall
In our house and I said break it open
And the contractor broke it open and found all sorts of things that had been like hidden there since the 1970s
In a compartment that could be opened up and people had lived in the house. They had no idea that this thing existed
That's what therapy is like
That's what therapy is like
Therapy is inviting somebody into a house that you've lived in your entire life and them showing you rooms that you didn't know about
It's also the case that most of the really important programs in your brain have never run
Like I don't know if you've ever experienced real hunger
I don't know whether you've ever I've only once in my life gotten to a level of hygiene
That was so low that my risk taking suddenly changed
It's an emergency program that says you cannot afford
To not take massive risks if you're this dirty
I was in the Himalayas in the north of india and
I cannot even believe the risks I took when I was that dirty
It's an astounding thing that we live
In our own bodies and have no idea what's internal to us and in particular in our own mind
The issue about
Tesseract's like I could teach you to see four dimensions
If you take that Klein bottle and for people who don't know what it is they can google it
Imagine that in clear glass you take an ordinary bottle with a punt that little
Thing at the bottom that goes up
And you pull that punt through the wall and you bend the neck and you fuse the two now
Okay, you say well it has to go through the wall of the bottle
but if the bottle is clear
And you make the neck increasingly blue
As it goes into the punt and then it goes back into the clear
If the amount of blueness is a fourth dimension
You can see that it's not actually intersecting itself because the wall of the bottle is clear
But the neck is highly blue
So you are actually literally seeing
Four dimensions now I can increase that to five dimensions by changing the texture
Six dimensions with respect to the opacity
And you can more or less see six dimensions visually
Once you train your mind
I mean, it's like it's not a particular trick
Above that you really don't have the benefit it like the entire back of your head is your visual cortex
And you you can't use it directly then you have to start doing incredible things
Where you allow low dimensional sort of sketches to stand for higher dimensional objects
And you have to lean on the crutches of algebra
But if the question is that before you shuffle off this mortal coil you want to see four dimensions. It's entirely possible
We've got
An even more intense couple of months coming up than the last time that we spoke
You kind of hinted at it earlier on this velocity of stories and forgetfulness
uh either
Done on purpose
Done by accident done due to sheer
Random access memory limitations
How
Do you
What first off is the speed
of
meme and news velocity that we're seeing now
Just classic election year and i've not been here seeing this up close before
No
No the
I want you to think about the number of times you've seen a Mona Lisa mean
The Mona Lisa had to be the Mona Lisa for many years before it was worthy of so many means
That trump photograph
Where he's pumping the air
with blood on his face
Had about four seconds before it was a mean
The concept of the sacred and the archival
Is being lost because of the novel environment provided by the internet and the the tools of editing
You know the distracted boyfriend mean
Or hawk toa right these things are so fast
That they are robbing us
Of the sacred and you don't need to believe in god the reverence
If you've ever been to Florence and seen Michelangelo's david i'm going in a week and a half
Oh boy that the Botticelli room at the ufizi gallery
Uh
The day the david in particular because you see the studies when you go to the academy
You're walking through the studies for the david and then you actually see this thing
You've seen it a million times before and you still can't believe it
It's so different. It's so different than everything else like
You know i was just
I was just playing jules holland and jeff beck doing drown in my own tears and i was thinking i am the same species as jeff beck
I am the same species as Michelangelo. I'm the same speachy species as gaudy
And his ceiling of lissigrata for me. These are things that are just beyond
Anything how did I get onto this? Oh the sacred the reverential speed of means the speed of memes
We can't afford it
We are we too are entitled to the archival
We too are entitled to something that isn't a joke
You know the the cringeification of everything everything is being performative everything has been done. Yep. God damn it
Yeah, yeah, I know I know exactly what you mean the exhaustion that you have with it. I I feel as well
I like sorry, I like uh earnest people
I like cringe
You want to talk about something really contrarian like I was just listening to tim mcgros
uh
Something like that
Do you know the song?
Had a barbecue stain on my white t-shirt. She was killing me with that miniskirt. You know never heard this
The whole song
is
It's cringe
You know like shania twain's man. I feel like a woman is a bit cringe. I like it a lot
um
The tim mcgros song is the setup for a heterosexual
Romance between what must have been a 16 year old girl and a 17 year old boy who meted a county fair
And it's perfectly constructed and the reason that it's cringe is because it's so clearly perfectly constructed
um
It introduces the boy buying gasoline and a coke
He drives to the county fair. He sees a girl in line
Instant attraction. They skip stones together. So it's not just animalistic
There's a sweetness
And whoever wrote that song i'm assuming it's tim mcgros, but maybe with somebody else realizes that every woman has this question
Why aren't you going to leave me as I age?
What is so special about me?
Right and so they're they're singing along about she's got red lipstick and a miniskirt and all this stuff
Like she's above. He's below. I worked so hard for that first kiss
Not about sex. You don't know whether anything went beyond that kiss. You probably don't remember me
So you think that they don't have sex. It's very well constructed
And it's basically a song for men and women at the same time we used to know how to do this
And part of the reason that's emotional
Is that we really blew it with lgbtq
I
Really appreciate that we screwed up with gay men. We did not do a good job by them
Being gay and being male is a very strange different thing from the point of view of heterosexuality. It's a huge evolutionary puzzle
And we needed to make accommodations particularly for that community
But it is also true
That heterosexual families are as flawed as they are with the fighting with the
Recrimination etc etc are the the mainstay of a society that will last
And
I have an enormous number of gay friends. It's not some of my best friends are gay. It's like way too many of them are gay
So I spent a lot of time in in gay space
And what I've learned from that
Is that you can go about 85 percent of the distance talking about relationship sex and the abstract
Hope streams for the future
attraction
And then the last 15 percent is really different
And I don't want to be in your business at all
and it's constructed that way because
We freak each other out. We don't really want the specifics of the details beyond a certain point
And I think that that last 15 percent can't be shared between
Straits and gays we can go 85 percent of the distance
But the heterosexual community is now much more in need of help
Than it ever has been before and the idea that as soon as you say something
About boys and girls and fallen in love and all and just these assumptions about masculinity and femininity
That you immediately have to acknowledge every other type is is one of the things that I think is absolute poison for a society
There's special stuff about men and women that isn't shared with the rest of the rainbow
And boy meets girl boy loses girl boy gets girl
In this song
Is about rekindling the ability to say I have a right to sing about boys and girls without bringing in every other thing that can happen
We've got to get back to romance if you think about songs that mention marriage
Right
There are all sorts of songs where men and women sing them all sing along together
old songs
That appeal equally to both groups
And if you think about this the concept of a man putting a woman on a pedestal and a woman looking up to a man
Both of these things have to happen
For the magic to occur
I think we've stopped instructing our young as to what this is
And why it's worth working for and why being single
And racking up spectacular body counts is not an answer
The way you think it's going to be when you start out
you know
It's important
Not to keep changing everything every four seconds
There are there are novels think about when the sopranos came out and the length of those story lines
Think about the development of tony soprano
Versus let's say a beautifully drawn character
Like michael and the godfather
Tony soprano is drawn at some level that puts a great film like
Michael Corleone, you know michael corleone's odyssey to shame
How do we come up with something that's archival
And
One of the things that I say that nobody I don't think anybody's picked up on it
I have a line that great art
Is the reflection of our time in real time for all time
You have to accept that if you're shakespeare, you're writing in england in a particular era. You can't try to write universally
It has to be performed
In that time to feed back to the people who are living it with you and it has to be archival so that
You know, nobody says where for art though
In our modern context, but we're going to work our asses off so that we can go back
I can still recite the first lines of chaucer because my high school knew that it was important to know something in middle english
Where is that
How do we stop this memification? I get it everything's a joke
But now the idea is that the guy's throwing spitballs in the back of the class or the professors
And the class is not functioning. You know at some level
cringe
earnest
The hardest thing to say is I believe in this person like, you know, douglas murray is a mutual friend of ours
I don't know everything douglas has said. I don't know. They hadn't said some really horrible things
Nor does he know whether I've said those things, but I saw him attacked online. That's an archival friendship
I want to be friends with douglas forever. I really admire that guy
and
I think it's important for us in the podcasting universe
To be earnest and to say I care it's you want to talk about something radical
It's not reddit the average reddit post that I read
Has one point and it's wow you fell for that thing that I saw right through
Really
You're gonna use your time on planet earth to convince people that you see through everything and that everybody who fell for something
There's this brilliant moment
That brett easton ellis had when I was podcasting with him where he started talking
We were talking about seduction
I was like, can you imagine never falling for a seduction like
Never being seduced your whole life. Man. Are you missing out? How do we get people?
To be able to hold the illusion
So with respect to the next couple of months
I don't know that anything crazy is going to happen. It's still a million years
Kamala was not elected through a normal primary system that we've had since 1968 when everything fell apart in chicago for the democrats
Donald trump
The assassin assassination story is a very very bizarre one
I don't think donald trump is acceptable to the international order
I don't i'm not saying that they will take him out with a bullet
But they will certainly take him out with memes tweets data analytics
Skullduggery
Um, and i'm actually most interested in this other campaign
Uh of bobby kennedy, but more importantly at the moment nicole shanahan
Uh, it was just up with nicole shanahan in
The bay area and I haven't endorsed her and she hasn't asked for an endorsement. What she wants to work on is incredible
I wrote a paper on cosian labor markets and immigration and how to actually redo immigration properly
And nicole was thinking about ai
And ronald cos and his very deep theories of economics. Do you know about cos? I listened to the episode you did with her
So I know that much
To take kamala who is currently vice president
And the ridiculous things that she says that make no sense at all
And to talk to somebody who wants to talk about protecting the labor market the way andrew yang
Sam altman and now nicole
Shanahan are thinking about you're talking about people who don't even seem to be like the same species
I need to ask you this
Can you please try and explain to me what you interpret by
What can be unburdened by what has been? What does that mean?
I
Don't know if I should say I don't know if I should say
There's a line in marx
Where
Sometimes you hear certain phrases like a world to win aoc uses the phrase we have a world to win
Which comes from the end of the communist manifest originally written in german
It was the name I used to hang out in the revolutionary bookstore
In cambridge massachusetts with the communists because they print everything in every language
So if you're trying to learn multiple languages, they'll print the same text in all of these languages and you can compare
It basically says you have to wipe out what has been
To arrive in the new
Where's it from what can be unburdened by what has been?
It's not a direct translation, but it occurs in carl marx
I could I wasn't expecting this. I could find you the exact reference
If you think about what mal had to do to wipe out chinese history what pole pot had to do
You're trying to wipe out memory
Because the memory has all of this
burden
Why do you why why is it important to go after doctors and lawyers and teachers and professors?
Because in some sense they are going to resist
The new order that you're about to impose you're looking for a blank slate. I like a tether to the past
Okay, I'm gonna tell the story. I don't know that I've ever told anyone
Maybe I have maybe I haven't can't promise that's original to you, but
I was in hoi an in vietnam and i'm gonna lose this one
Hoi an is one of the only beautiful places that I found you know like hua in hoi an
A lot of things were really ripped up in that war
And
There is a an unbelievable and
Difficult instrument
Which the vietnamese language is very hard. So i'm gonna say it wrong called it would be written as dan bow
It's one string
And a giant lever and you pluck the harmonics
And it's supposed to be an intimate instrument. I think sometimes played by the blind
Where only the person who's intended is the recipient of the music
Okay
I
See this in a window in hoi an
And I become transfixed by it
And a woman says I see you looking at this in english
Would you like to come in?
And I said I don't want to impose she says no no no it's not mine
So she invites me in
And there's this guy
Who appears to be brain dead
He's like deformed
I'm not gonna get through this
You
And he's speaking very haltingly and I I don't know who he is
And something about music something about journalism something about a professional I can't really make out what's happening
I'm asking about the instrument
And this woman brings him a guitar
And
This
Deformed man starts playing
Some transcript like Chopin or some some piano concerto
On the guitar at some incredible level and I can't even imagine that his body can do it
And so I I have no idea where I am or what's happening
And
Then he motions for like a book and she brings a book
And it has all of these articles about this man tortured for his principled stand against communism
This man has been destroyed mind body to the point where
It's just painful to watch him and I realized that basically he just
Do you know what a nail house is?
If you google nail house under google images do it you can't do it or you're off the internet. I can do it
Tell me what you see
It's a
Toll building an individual standalone structure in the middle of a road
There are these people who will not give up their homes
When a shopping mall goes in or a road is put
And for some reason they'll build a highway to screw over the person who stands up and says I will not move
And
The idea is that that road is the future unburdened by what has been and then there's some holdout who won't go along with the program
If Kamala Harris is as unsophisticated as we think she is do we really believe that she is quoting from
The dark depths of why do you believe she is as unsophisticated as you have just claimed?
What did her father do?
I don't know look it up
And by the way, I am assuming that I will end up on the open skies watch list as a result of this podcast
That is crazy. By the way, what happened to Tulsi the trip the quad s on her
boarding pass
Donald j. Harris the father of camel Harris jamaican american economist professor emeritus stanford university
originally from st. Anne's bay jamaica
What kind of economics?
known for applying
post keensian ideas to development economics
Hmm
What's post keensian, I don't know
Post keensian economics is a school of economic thought with its origins in the general theory of john maynard keens subsequent development influence to a large degree by
a name I can't pronounce
I think that there was a lot of marxist thought
and I as a man of
His family comes from the far left
You recognize certain sorts of commonalities. I'm sure she would see them in me
Um
The democratic party is not communist
I don't think that's right. That's the critique of many of my right wing friends
But it is welcomed in a lot of neo marxian thought
I
Would say aoc is straight up marxist. I don't know. I think kamala is both is everywhere between
Chrony finance and marxism
You're talking about things for which you do not have language
So the reason that I said I don't think
That kamala can be as sophisticated as perhaps this obscure reference said
a hundred times
apparently according to the archive
Who's Charles Mingus?
I don't know
Kamala is a lot smarter than you're given a credit for
I mean, this is the uh
Your point about how many levels through it. Do you go this the first one? This is the second one?
This is the third one. Yeah, but in order to be able to do the
Ukraine is a country it is a small country russia is a big country. They are a bigger country
This is bad time is all around us in order to be able to do that
Self-referentially with agency
Knowing what you're doing the metacognition to be able to do that and play a role to me seems
That's like 200 IQ stuff to be able to do that. I don't think so
I think it's 130 IQ stuff
I think you could do it better than you think we could have a pretend
All right, I'm going to talk to you in a way you haven't heard before son
I'm going to school you on a few things
You can stop that silly grin and wipe it right off your face
All right, we can sound like however we want
I could affect some sort of oxbridge accent or I could do cockney doesn't matter
um
You're looking at characters
This is why I wrote the 2011 kefeb essay because you're looking at professional. Do you imagine
That the iron chic
You know, who is the iron chic who is triple h
Who is the undertaker? Do you think he actually works in a in a mortuary?
These are characters
George w bush as a debater in texas for the governorship
was really really smart
and suddenly he got real dumb and folksy and
Do you imagine he actually says nuclear?
He knows it's nuclear
you know
I would learn to say nuclear I could say nuclear
Yeah, I got to be careful with that nuclear physics and
I can I can get democrats to correct me and look like assholes every time. This is there's an old
FDR line, which is nothing in politics happens by accident
Don't get taken in at level one
Look, you know
Friend of mine dan bar k has a beautiful thing where he says
When someone looks at the window
And one person sees
The reflection and the other person is looking through the window and what's on the other side
They don't realize that they're seeing different things
I I believe that in part this is
a superposition of signals to wall street
to antifa
To organize labor to women in the workforce worried that they're never going to find mates and have children
these are
Ridiculous things crafted to appeal to many different people and and to be decoded by different groups
Kamala really is scary for very reasons
For very different reasons than donald trump is scary. It's a weird election for me because I know
Three of these people. I know j.d. Vance
And I know bobby kennedy a little bit and nicole shahanna shahanna a little bit better
and
I don't at all
Know the democratic ticket nor do I know donald trump
But donald trump isn't who he seems to be
Donald trump is much more methodical
Much better at business and very shady techniques at that
You know, I think I remember hearing a story about how
He bought a bunch of pianos for his hotel
And didn't want to pay full price and then explained
Well, I don't know if the story is true. So I'm going to be very clear about that allegedly allegedly and
I talked to people who are in business with him
And one of whom did serious business with him said to me
He's a very good businessman who you wouldn't want to do a second deal with
These are complex life forms and
I don't know what I'm watching I do know
That I I had a meeting
Sort of by accident with a person in the democratic party who really tried to explain to me
Eric, can you hold off
On the anti democratic party tweeting
You need a higher level briefing about how we're actually conducting ourselves
I just don't think that the surface is worth very much
We're in a lot of danger
And
One of the things that I don't love about myself in podcasting space
Is that I don't get to talk about
Why I'm
So worried about existential risk
It doesn't come out of needing gloom and doom to energize me
I am so
Head over heels with this planet with all of its wonder and beauty
That I can't imagine that people who who've never been to glacier national park have never been to a hindustani classical music concert who've
Never had great durian
are cavalierly
Putting it all at risk
Because it's fun to posture
On issues like ukraine or iran
and
That that's like a major distortion about who I am
most of what I am
is about just
waking up every morning and saying my god
I'm still here on this wonderful spinning orb and what are all these completely empty suits
Doing just to maximize profit that is putting everything at risk
And that's why I think this election is a catastrophe. I have no idea
what
Donald trump
Or kamala harris represent
I have a very good idea about what nicole shanahan represents and I have a pretty good idea
About what bobby kennedy wants to represent
Whether he does it
The job, you know, he's a complicated guy with a complicated pass and i'm not signing on for
But he's got a real pure heart and he listens and
He's unafraid to take on look the man is willing to die
I want to just be very clear about this bobby kennedy is willing to die
To take on the intelligence community like his uncle
This is a person of extraordinary courage of extraordinary intelligence and ability who's had a very complicated life
And yeah, there's you know like with anybody
There's a lot of stuff that I I don't want to sign on for but I'm definitely working with that campaign
Which is not asking me to endorse it
and i'm parking
my interest with them
um
And I want to explain what the calculation is because usually the question is who are you for who are you against it's not that
If more people will answer kennedy shanahan
until november 1st
You will get the maximum amount of leverage over the other two campaigns at a bare minimum
But if you throw your lot in with donald trump or kamala
The duopoly has won every election since
Millard film war that's 42 straight elections
If we do not break the duopoly it will break us
And the kennedy shanahan ticket is sophisticated in realizing
That campaigning could be something different it's trying to figure out what should campaigning be
But it's crazy to be an all-day session trying to figure out how to save the labor market
From ai and I also wanted I want to say something about jd vance
Without naming names
And I hope jd doesn't get angry at me for this one jd invited me out years ago to ohio
To a room in which I was the only democrat
The only person probably had ever voted democrat or
Lots of prominent people and we sat in an oak paneled room for three days in the middle of ohio
And I swear to god it was like talking to progressives who were worried about coal miners
It was people talking about the working poor
And unless you're going to believe that all of these luminaries and the republican party
Were there to fool eric Weinstein so that he would leak something from this meeting
These people actually cared about shit out of luck americans who were hurt by nafta who had been betrayed by the democratic party
And watching jd like he's campaigning. However, he's campaigning. I don't totally recognize that person
But I can tell you this that in his off moments where he's just dealing with me human to human
There is no question in my mind that he cares about the working poor and middle americans and people under a squeeze
And he cares about hillbillies and it's not a joke
You know black americans are famous for contributing culture to the united states of america whether it's dance or music or
oratory or writing
hillbillies are much more invisible
But hillbillies have been central
To providing culture for our country one of the most generative populations out there in west virginia in kentucky
And I think people forget that we had slavery in the 20th century
Lots of it white
you had
You had alternate money like bitcoin except it was script issued by companies people lived in towns that were owned by companies
They had private armies that were called
detectives like pinkerton
There was war look up the battle of blair mountain
or the harland county coal wars
JD vance is an error
to
Like listen to uh, you know what's on which side are you on? Oh my god
Pete seager there was a union organizer
Sorry, I come from very left like far far left. There was a union organizer
Whose house I think was shot up
by a detective agency
To intimidate him into not organizing the workers
and his wife
Stayed in the house and penned the song
Which side are you on boys? Which side are you on?
They say in harland county. There are no neutrals there
You'll either be a union man or thug for j.h. Blair
Pete seager took that song and made it almost like an anthem
The democratic party abandoned these people if you look at the statistics for voting
It's
Democrat and blue right up until al gore
And then it goes hard hard red these people were hurt bad
And while hillary was calling them deplorables
People like j.d. vance and the right were saying what do they need? We're not afraid of their bible fumping
We recognize the culture the endowment the contribution to american society
And I wish the democratic party were doing this. They're right there
Go speak to them stop spinning on them and shitting on them and pissing on them
But somehow we've got this sort of NAFTA coped up on NAFTA
Intellectual elite that says hey, we helped people in mexico
So some some coal miners got hurt boohoo. Look at the suicide statistics
If you look at suicide statistics the group that you think is on top
You know middle-aged white men are killing themselves at a level that nobody else is and that's a very clear marker of who's actually in distress
Young black women are not in the amount of distress that
middle-aged white men are
and
I think that that's one of the things that's going on in these campaigns that's so confusing which is that
I can tell you for sure that j.d. vance
Nicole shanahan and bobby kennedy
Are 100 percent sincere
No matter how they're campaigning or what
You're upset about in their off moments, and I've been with all of them these people deeply care about the shit out of luck
They're they're interested in taking on
Real power. I don't know trump
Look, you can tell it's not there's no allegiance. I
I can't imagine voting for trump j.d. vance
Is not the person being portrayed as weird you want to talk about weird
Take one look at the democratic party and the bizarre stuff that's going on with you know
I don't know
gender affirming care where you're cutting off penises and breasts giving it new names for radical mastectomies or
Reproductive mutilation. That's weird to try to do that at scale
A tiny number of people need that in their lives and by the way, you and I talked about this last time
This
Olympics was a real wake-up call for me the number of people who can't deal with the idea
That there are people with
Who've been raised female who may have xy chromosomes?
and this is
Treating this as if it's trans or if it's weird behavior
I mean, I was just sickened by the republicans. I was sickened by the conservators who are so adamant about trans
That they don't have decency and compassion for a soul who might be in an ambiguous category
Now that said, I also think that if you're xy karyotype
You should never be entering a boxing competition and using that leverage against somebody else
It's also the case that even if you're shit out of luck you have responsibilities
In something like a combat sport and and I felt like we tried to have a complex discussion
And I got hit with all of these people on the conservative side or like you're making this have to be so complicated
It's a tiny category
Well, show me the love in your soul first and then we'll have a discussion
Yeah, it was a an incorrect pattern matching
Don't you think?
From the I thought it was a a real thud in mouth
Moment for a lot of people on the right. I thought that they could have
All of the talking points that were being used about trans people were being applied to this which just
made it sound
like people on the right are the
Bigots for somebody that doesn't fit into one category that everybody had always accused them of being but it's another super position
right, how can you hold
the
Need some care especially for an athlete. Oh my god, but how do you also say to this person? Guess what?
I know that your love for boxing is this thing and it's your pursuit that's carrying you through life
I just
Unfortunately for you. This is maybe a sport that you're you can't do it
you know if if that's what's going on and there's a lot of
You know, there's also a question if you take like
Mike Tyson, you know, if you take Mike Tyson's fast twitch muscle
Somebody had to ask the question
Is that great athletic athleticism or is that just too much power to be
Firing at a human head. Um
I don't know the answers to these things
Joe invited me to combat sports to see ufc. It's remarkable how like I think nobody's been killed in the ufc ever
right
It's very important to actually ask these really tough questions and I think that
And you know part of the reason that I wouldn't take the question about
About bret is that the last time we had a discussion I I found myself being discussed
on my brother's podcast
And I don't want to be pitted against bret and heather. I love them. I think the world of them. They're brilliant
Their hearts are in the right place
But if we get into an argument about ovo testes, they're gonna lose this to biologists and I'm gonna win
It's not all about motility of gametes
Uh, the world will keep throwing curve balls at you
And you have to begin from a heart open place to say some of us are shit out of luck because we've fallen edge categories
And so I stand by everything that you and I did last time
It's a difficult place to be and if you have to simplify it as to boys or boys women or women
You're not getting it on the other hand. We have to stop normalizing what is effectively
A reproductive holocaust against children who we trusted to schools
Where people are allowed in to recruit
Into reproductive mutilation and you've got to combine these in a superposition or you're just not getting it
Eric Weinstein ladies and gentlemen
Eric, I really appreciate you every time that we get to sit down. It gets
Uh easier and more fun and appears to go for longer as well
Chris you're one of the best out here and I really appreciate it. Maybe the next time we just get a beer
Uh, we don't have to have I tried to do it
I tried to get that the line of cocaine. You said you didn't want it when we went to the bathroom
I look I'm trying to
embody my old club promoter world, but dude, I really do appreciate you. I uh, I look forward to
Making sense of what happens over the next couple of months at some point next year. We look forward to doing it soon with you
Thank you very much for tuning in if you enjoyed that episode with Eric
You will love my full length conversation with Tulsi Gabbard right here
Go on
press it
