What do most people get wrong when they think about happiness?
They think that they can be happy and happiness is not a destination. It's a direction.
One of the most important things that we've lost sight of, particularly in the current generation
of young adults, is thinking that if you're unhappy for any particular reason, something's wrong,
something's abnormal, and that's completely incorrect. We have negative emotions for a reason.
They make us feel unhappy. The negative emotions are a signal that something's
aversive outside of us, and that's not going to change. We need sadness and anger and fear
and disgust. Furthermore, we actually need negative experiences so that we can learn and grow.
Happiness is a direction, and therefore, we shouldn't be trying to attain happiness,
we should be trying to attain happy-earnest, which is obviously a neologism,
but that gets the point across. That's mistake number one.
What is an analogy that people can use to understand how happiness isn't a destination?
We think of happiness as a thing. We think of happiness as a feeling, a state, an affect that
we arrive at. What's another way that you can explain this disquieting of what happiness is?
Happiness, as we talk about it, is really a state compared to something else, and it's a long
kind of a number line. Getting happier means happier than what is what it comes down to,
and it's a status in which we have these macro nutrients more or less in equilibrium.
You'll never be perfectly healthy, but you can be healthier. You're never going to eat a perfectly
nutritious diet, but it can be more nutritious than yesterday. What's more nutritious than
yesterday? Well, you have a good, for example, macro nutrient balance to your diet. I'm a
health and nutrition nerd, as are you, and we know that you've got to get your macros right.
You have to be paying attention to your protein carbohydrates and fat, and have them more or
less in balance and proportion and relative abundance. The same thing is true for your
happiness. I start happiness discussions by saying there's three macro nutrients for happiness,
just like there's three macro nutrients for food that you have to get right. They are enjoyment,
satisfaction, and meaning. Those are the three things to pursue, and everybody can get better
at those three things. That's an analogy that people can actually, particularly people that
would be wanting to improve themselves. That's why they're listening to modern wisdom, that they
would actually help them understand the whole process. What is the truth behind people who
try to be happier, make themselves less happy? What they're trying to do is to feel good all
the time. Back in the 60s, you don't remember this. I barely remember this. The hippies used to say,
if it feels good, do it. I remember my dad hearing that and saying, that's the end of America.
He was right. The problem is that people still think that feeling good is the happiness state,
and they're trying to feel good all the time, as opposed to having a tangible set of goals.
I am going to enjoy my life in a better way. That's more stable, and it's not just looking
for pleasure. I am going to try to achieve things in my life with goals and direction that gives me
adequate access to satisfaction. I am going to do what it takes to find the meaning of my life,
even if it hurts. Those are strategies that actually lead us to live a much better life,
with actually a lot more happiness. Right. What is the relationship between feelings
and happiness then? Presumably, this conglomeration of different contributing macronutrients
arrives at a state of some kind. There is an outcome of some kind. If that isn't happiness,
what is it? Feelings are evidence of happiness. The smell of your dinner is evidence of dinner.
What happens is, if you're achieving these states, adequate states of enjoyment, satisfaction,
and meaning, you will get a better mood balance, such that you're enjoying more joy and interest
and a positive surprise, and you're suffering less from avoidable levels of disgust and sadness
and anger and fear. That mood balance will be evidence that you're actually on the right track
with the macronutrients that you're getting. In the same way, by the way, Chris,
that you'll have a lot more energy if your macronutrients in your diet are actually on point.
Right. In this way, is it advisable for people to turn the bar stool upside down and think,
rather, I'm not happy that is a problem to my current state is not one I would describe as
happiness, that's an indicator that one of the three macronutrients is missing from my life diet.
That's right. Every single person I've ever met in my whole life, and perhaps besides the Dalai Lama,
has issues in their macronutrient profile that can lead to progress. This is really good news,
by the way. One of the most deleterious things that we say to young adults today
and our kids is, you're perfect just the way you are. What could be more depressing than that?
It's like, I feel garbage, and you're telling me I'm perfect just the way I am,
that means I can't make progress. The truth is, everybody can make progress because I've never
met a single human being that is perfect in enjoyment and satisfaction and meaning. I have
a whole set of protocols that will help people understand where they can make progress and
where they need to make progress. What is the current state of modern happiness? What
does the research tell us? Because we're hearing stories, feelings of listlessness and hopelessness
and disconnection and all the rest of it. What is the weather report for 2024 happiness?
Like the Al was saying in the advertisements, your results may vary,
because you can be doing a lot right when society isn't. Unfortunately, society,
as we understand it, particularly in the OECD countries and the western industrialized countries,
happiness is going in the wrong direction. We actually understand why, but here are the basic
data. Most of the western countries, the industrialized nations, have been ticking about a half
point down every year in the percentage of the population that says, I am very happy about my
life. Typically, going back to about 1980s, 1990, in the United States, for example,
about 35% of the population said, I'm very happy about my life. About 15% said, I'm not happy
about my life. The other half was, I'm somewhat happy. That's the general proportion. There's
better ways to measure it with greater granularity, but that gives you an idea of what's happening.
You've been finding that that's ticking down. For the first time now, not happy is higher than
very happy. That's consistently happening now over the past few years. That's been just this
gradual decline. Now, some people are getting a lot happier, but society in general is seeing
this, and this is largely being pulled down by certain demographics. You find young adults are
less, way, way less happy than they used to be, especially young women, especially young women
with very progressive political views. They're really, really declining. There's one little
subgroup, which is Men My Age. Obviously, this has to do with macroeconomic factors,
et cetera, et cetera. These are interesting questions from a policy perspective, a sociological
perspective, but more importantly, from a psychological and personal strategy perspective,
such that we can live better lives. What do you lay the decline of happiness at the feet of
psychologically? There's climate factors and weather factors. I don't mean that literally.
That's a metaphor too. It's like you and me dating is a metaphor. The climate is the climate
of faith, family, friendship, and work in this country. Those are the habits of the happiest
people. There's tons of literature out there that'll give you 10,000 happiness habits.
Okay, but they're all trivial compared to the big four, which is your faith or life philosophy,
though the why of your existence metaphysically that will make you small and the universe large.
You must transcend yourself or you'll be stuck in the tedious psychodrama of Christmas.
It's great for a minute, but 24 hours a day, you're going to lose your mind. You need to
zoom out is the bottom line. I've got a bunch of ways that you can do it. I have a folder full
of ways that you can actually achieve this, which up to and including the faith of your youth,
but not exclusively. Second is family life. Family life is critically important and is
woefully neglected. It's societally increasingly neglected as well, which accounts for a lot
of this decline. Friendship is actually getting harder and harder to come by. We find that more
people say nobody knows me well. And last but not least, we have more of a dysfunctional relationship
with work than we've had in the past. It's less like a vocation. It's less like a mission.
Those are the climate factors. I know you're going to want to talk more about specifics in each one
of those silos. Then there's the storms. The storms have created down drafts of happiness
from which we have not recovered. In 2008 to 2010, it was screens, smartphones, social media,
especially among young adults. We understand the brain science on how this is incredibly
deleterious to happiness. Second, starting in about 2014, across most OECD countries,
but really in the United States and the UK, was the culture war. It was the incredibly
polarizing ideological conflicts where malignantly narcissistic political and media leaders were
conscripting child soldiers into their culture war by saying, if somebody disagrees with you
politically, they're denying your right to exist and you must hate them. Unbelievably terrible
for happiness. And last but not least was the loneliness that came from the coronavirus epidemic.
For young adults that were coming of age synaptically in the plasticity of their brains,
they literally didn't learn how to make friends and have proper in-person love relationships,
which is probably the worst thing that's happened to happiness in the last 100 years.
Why hasn't happiness been so robust that it's bounced back? What has locked in these losses in
the market? Well, if I could do one thing for somebody to make them happier, one thing,
it's eye contact and touch. That's the one thing. Why? Because the neurophysiology is
straightforward. You've talked about this on your show. The neuropeptide of connection is oxytocin.
It's intensely pleasurable. And again, we don't want to be reductive about the brain chemistry,
but this is a really important thing for us to understand. We're a kin-based species. We know
hours and hours know us, and we get pleasure from being close to our kin such that we are averse to
walking the frozen tundra and dying alone. Okay, that natural impulse is actually guided in no
small part by this neuropeptide that functions as a hormone in the human brain called oxytocin.
We don't get it when we don't have eye contact and touch. How do you not get eye contact and touch
by conducting your friendships through an iPhone with social media, by going to school on Zoom,
by never going into an office, man? I mean, it's crazy. Look, if I were in Austin, we'd be doing
this in person because it would be better and it would be better because we'd have more eye contact
and because we'd be getting more oxytocin over the course of this conversation.
Young people who've never gotten that have wired their brains differently,
and the result is it's not clear that they're ever going to be able to recover from what we've
done. I mean, I don't mean to be catastrophic about it, but I'm not entirely convinced that
we're not losing a generation to oxytocin deficit and lowliness.
This is bad news predictably for the lone ranger, sigma male guys out there who don't need friends
and I'm going to make it on my own and it's too hard to get out there and I'm just going to
retreat myself to my little digital cabin in the woods and not spend any time together.
It's one of the reasons why I'm such a critic of cynicism on the internet that things won't get
better and people who say that it can are the problem. It is so... I mean, look, if you have
managed to convince yourself that things aren't going to get better and you are robust in your
thinking and it's not going to change, all right, whatever, like I don't want you to
leave society, but so be it, but it's fucking evil for you to convince other people of the same.
For you to somehow convince other people that no, there's no point in trying to get into a
relationship. There's no point in trying to have friends. There's no point in trying to contribute
to society. All right, well, I mean, all of those things will very reliably make you miserable
and you're basically saying, my philosophy is the one to follow despite the fact that we know
the direction it's going to take you in. Yeah, no, let me make sure that I'm not actually guilty
of that by saying that I'm worried about losing a generation. You can rewire your brain. The question
is whether or not that society is giving us adequate opportunities to do so and if it isn't,
take those opportunities yourself. Nobody is permanently lost if they actually will
will do what actually needs to be done and adopt the attitudes that show that, for example,
you're better off when you're around people. You need real friends. You'll be a lot happier,
all the young men listening to modern wisdom, if you fall in love and get married and have children,
you'll be happier. You'll be a lot happier. It's not true what the red pill community is telling
you that you'll be subjugated and miserable your whole life. I got the data. Trust me on this.
This is the whole point. I'm worried about losing a generation precisely because the messages are
coming out that these things are stupid and don't make sense. That's the wrong set of messages.
I want to be transgressive and countercultural against the technology that's saying that you
don't need to be in person and against the culture that's saying that not being around
people is better than being with people. Bravo. Okay, faith, family, friendships,
contributing in terms of work. Faith, I'm a non-religious person, non-believing person.
Many people listening will be. If they don't have a direct route to access faith,
what are some of the highest return strategies they can do?
Remember, the point isn't faith per se, it's transcendence. You need to do something that
will make you small and the universe big. That's what the science really says.
Mother Nature doesn't want you to do that. Mother Nature is like, it's all about you.
You are the star of your psychodrama. Why? Because that's evolutionarily,
it makes sense that you'd be focusing on yourself all the time. Also, it's worth
pointing out that Mother Nature doesn't care if you're happy. Mother Nature only cares that you
survive and pass on your genes. Therefore, happiness, that's your problem in your business.
That's the key thing for us to keep in mind.
Just to interject there, I think that that realization that humans are not designed
to achieve happiness, that that's a state which might be, it's neither necessary nor sufficient
for you to do what Mother Nature wanted you to do. It was like a byproduct of it.
It's not like you're swimming upstream, but that most of the set points and motivations
that your system will try and push you toward are not going to be conducive to happiness.
So, in the question of why is it so hard to be happy or why is happiness a big
dearth in the modern world, it's like, well, it's been in a big dearth for a very long time.
There is no reason for your system to try and encourage you to be happy in the first place.
That's right. And to speak in terms that you've often used in your show,
that is to be managed by your limbic system, as opposed to actually drawing the experiences of
your life into your prefrontal cortex, the C-suite of your brain, where you're making decisions.
The divine path actually comes from being fully human. The animal path comes from not being
fully human. That leaving these sensations in the emotional centers of the limbic system of your
brain would say, do this because you feel that. That's no way to live. That's a really important
thing to keep in mind. Mother Nature says, you're the star of your psychodrama. You want to be happy,
you have to leave that behind, and the way to do that is to achieve transcendence from yourself.
Here's a really good way to do that. You and I are one of your neighbor out there in Austin,
Texas, is Ryan Holiday, our mutual friend Ryan Holiday. He's great. He's the world's leading
expert on the modern understanding of the stoic philosophers. He reads Seneca for fun and Epictetus
and Marcus Aurelius, and he's talking about, well, Cicero said, it's just amazing how he does that.
Why? Because he actually wants to achieve transcendence by doing the hard things that come
from the denial of the visceral pleasures that are embedded in the impulses of the limbic system.
That's really what stoicism is all about. That's the divine path of transcendence using pure philosophy.
Many philosophies will do that. I don't recommend Nietzsche. That's what a lot of the modern crowd
is talking about, which leads to some of the problems that we were just discussing a minute ago.
There are better paths. Some people will actually get this by getting out of their head in a
meditative experience using nature. One of the things that I recommend to a lot of young people
today, a lot of young guys coming out of college will call me, I feel lost. I thought I was going
to be so clear about my life when I got out of college. What do I do, professor? One of the
things that I often recommend is I'm not going to tell them to go find some specific faith or
sit in the mouth of the cave and talk to the guru or learn how to meditate immediately. What I say
is get up an hour and a half before dawn. That's called the Brahma Mahuta in Sanskrit. That means
in Sanskrit the creator's time. That is a very special time for the development of your own
brain because what you find is if you get up systematically before sunrise, you're going to
be more focused. You'll learn more quickly and your attention will be better throughout the
course of the day. There's a lot of research that shows this. Get out of the house when it's nice
and dark and cool and walk for an hour. Be ambulatory for an hour and such that you're
doing it as the sun is coming up by the end of your walk and you can hear the crunch of the
gravel on the trail beneath your feet. You don't have your device. I strongly recommend
listening to modern wisdom. Not then. That's not when you're listening to your podcast. You're
listening to your heartbeat. You're listening to the birds. You're listening to the sound of the
trail in your feet, et cetera, et cetera. This is a very good way to do it. There's a lot of science
to back it up. This is not just romanticism. Another way to do this is to actually stand in awe
of great genius. I recommend learning about the fugues of Johann Sebastian Bach and listening
with utter seriousness, for example, to his cantatas. He's got hundreds of them. They fell off his
pen. Learn about that. It's just going to blow your mind. You'll be small. Trust me.
You could start off a positive meditation practice. Why not? Or I go to Mass every day.
You can practice your faith. By the way, Chris, I understand that you don't have a
faith or a sense of this. You might after 40 and being open to the impulse to actually find
the divine in your life. That's a critically important way to actually practice this as well,
just the openness. I went to my first American Bible Church service on Easter Sunday this year,
and boy, that was an experience. There was a rock band. There was an LED wall. There was
pyrotechnics. I pulled up behind a super fast American muscle car that had God now as the number
played. I found that it was very enjoyable, and I can totally see why people do it. I'm
absolutely open to the potential of that. All right, that's faith, family.
Yeah. This should be pretty obvious. Not everybody, by the way, has access to
functional family relationships. I get it. Some people actually have to assemble a family,
but I'll tell you, it's a funny thing. I didn't quite understand this until later in life. Part
of the reason is because I had, at best, a cordial relationship with my parents.
It was there's nothing wrong. They were good parents, but I was doing my thing. I was living
in Europe through my 20s. I was a professional musician. When you were throwing people out
of bars, I was playing in a symphony orchestra, which is a different lifestyle, but it bears
certain similarities as well. You're out late at night, and you're far away from home, and you're
living your dream and the whole thing. I remember thinking in my 20s, I should get to know my parents.
My mother was an artist. My father was a mathematician. They were very interesting
and intellectual and cultured people. Then they died. They just died young. Now, my father was
pretty close to my age now, and it was too late. I thought, what does that mean? Does that set
me back? It turns out that I could fix that because now I have adult children. I'm a grandfather at
this point, and I talk to all of my kids every single day. I see my grandson. I'm moving because
my kids are moving, and my grandchildren are going to live in a different place, and I'm not going
to commute to them is what it comes down to. You must have family relationships or manufacture
family relationships in your life, and you must not have schism for stupidities like differences
of political opinion. The narcissists and politics will tell you to stop talking to people in your
family because they voted for Trump or didn't vote for Trump or whatever the thing is. It's so
idiotic that you would sacrifice your own happiness for somebody else's political cult.
It's completely nutty is the way that that works out. You need to have it, keep it, or make it,
and make it a part of your life that you exercise every day.
All right, friends.
Friendship should be the easiest because we're all surrounded by people all day long,
and it turns out it's the hardest for a lot of people. I'm kind of a striver whisperer
in my practice. I specialize in people that really want to make a lot with their lives,
that are serious about the entrepreneurial venture of their own life. They're the start-up
entrepreneur of me, Inc. I really admire that, and it's something that I teach. The problem with
that is it's very easy to no longer have real friends. They have deal friends, but not real
friends, and real and deal are different. Deal means friends. They're useful. They're very useful,
right? And it's good to have people who are useful to you, and it's good to be useful to others.
Don't get me wrong, but you need useless friends, too. People who just love you.
You need useless friends. I don't mean worthless friends. I have those, too.
You need people who are not useful to you, and you're not useful to them. They just love you,
Chris, and we have fewer and fewer of that. That's the reason that 60% of 60-year-old men today
say their best friend is their wives, and 30% of their wives say their best friend is their husband.
That's a sad story of unrequited love for men my age. It's really important to keep this in mind.
It's also because women seem to be able to hold on to that alloparenting
adjacent group of close friends better than men do. I mean, this is one of the reasons why
during divorces, men have a worse time of it for many reasons, but one of them being that
they often subjugate their friend group for their wife's friend group, and when the wife goes away,
the friend group goes away. Yeah, yeah. So in traditionally organized families,
in past times in particular, when dad left and made a living outside the home at work,
he would be cheating his family by hanging out with his friends, and so he didn't. And the result is
that he lost his friendship chops over the years and got lonelier and lonelier and lonelier.
Now, you'd think it'd be much better. Now it's much worse because everybody's doing that. Now
everybody's. Men are doing that. Women are doing that, and you find that women and men under 30
are now the loneliest cohort in our society, and the more successful they are in their lives,
the lonelier they tend to be in their lives. They're more likely to say that nobody knows
me well. The reason is real and deal, and you got to do the work. I mean, for a lot of people,
they haven't had close friendships since college or from high school, and when they're 28 years
old, and now 35 years old, they're 45 years old, and everybody's incredibly useful to them.
Now, to be sure, the most successful marriages are the ones that are based on deep friendship.
We call it companion at love, which sounds distinctly not hot. I get it, but it's important
because that's the closest friendship you're going to have, but it's not enough. You find that the
happiest people, they're very close friends of their spouse, but they have one really close
friend at least besides that. Introverts usually have one really close friend besides the spouse.
Extroverts have more like five. They don't have 20 because you don't have the time to maintain that,
but it's really important. How often do we need to see our friends? How do we determine whether
somebody is real or deal? What's the amount of time that we need to spend with them per week,
et cetera, et cetera? Yeah. There's lots of rules for that, and again, this falls into the
year results may vary category, but there's one thing that I do know when somebody says,
oh yeah, no, no. I have some real friends. Let's say, think about your most real friend
who's not your spouse. When's the last time you talked to them? I don't know. Two months ago,
not a real friend. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I mean, it's like, if it's your real friend,
you keep up to date with your real friends. I have two guys that I talk to every week,
and they, one lives in San Francisco and one lives in Atlanta. I live in Boston. I see them
in person. I saw one of them for breakfast yesterday in New York City. We take opportunities.
With one of them, we go on vacation together with our wives. That's the effort that you make,
because you want to see the people you love. You want to see them in person. You make the
effort. You want to talk to them. You miss them. You actually miss them. If you don't miss the
person, it doesn't hurt your heart because you haven't talked to them in a while. In a week,
it's not a real friend. What's the difference between real and deal? How can someone tell?
A lot of the time, we feel like real friends are also impressive. If you're on the personal
growth journey, it's difficult to distinguish real and deal from real ordeal.
Yeah. The difference is that with a deal friend, there's something in front. There's a transaction
that's happening that's more important than the emotion. Transaction trumps emotion. There's nothing
wrong with that with people in your life, by the way. It's not like you should fire all of your
transactional friendships. No, because you'll wind up without a career, to be sure. It's very good
to help each other. If the emotion that you feel for the person is more important than the
transaction you could undertake, okay, that's good. In which case, you can actually have deals
with your real friends. That's the key component. If for all of them, it's like,
I care a lot more about how the person is useful to me than the person's life. That's when you know.
Final one. What?
Yeah. Work is people listening to us right now. They want an edge in their lives.
I understand that. In a way that they measure that edge frequently is in their success.
I think I probably at first listened to you three years ago, maybe the first time I heard your show.
I think you just passed, I don't know, 100,000 YouTube subscribers or something. That was a
long time ago because you have a lot more than that right now. I remember you're like,
I can't believe it, man. Your career was kind of blowing up. I remember thinking that because
I was like, yeah, this young guy is doing great. It's very inspirational. I love people who are
in the hunt. I really, really love people who are in the hunt. The problem is that when it comes to
work, the hunt itself doesn't give you the satisfaction that you're going to desire. Mother
Nature lies to you in many ways, and we've talked about it before, but here's one of the biggest
lies that Mother Nature gives you. If you're successful in making progress in money and power
and the admiration of other people, then you'll be happy. You get happiness for free. Success first,
happiness second. You don't have to worry about happiness. You just have to be successful. Money,
power, admiration, maybe a little pleasure thrown in there along the way. Those are the worldly idols.
By the way, St. Thomas Aquinas in paraphrasing Aristotle and the Summa Theologia written in
1265 classified those as the world's idols. He was an excellent social scientist because it
turns out that those are the intermediate goods. There's nothing wrong with those things, by the
way. I'm not condemning those things. They're just incomplete for your happiness. If you have
those as the goals, you're in real trouble. Okay, so what are the right goals from work?
It's twofold. Number one, earn your success. That means create value with your life and work
in your life and the lives of other people, and you have to be rewarded and acknowledged and
recognized for the real value that you're creating. 10 years nonsense, loyalties nonsense,
merit, hard work, and personal responsibility, and you're rewarded and recognized for it and
you believe it. That's earned success. By the way, that's why I'm a complete advocate for the
free enterprise system. Not because I was like, rah, rah, rah, capitalism. I'm Adam Smith. No,
because it makes people happy when they're succeeding in a system that rewards merit and
personal responsibility. It's not perfect, but it's the only system we got that really does that.
That's number one. Two, now I'm going to sound like a commie. Service to others.
Service to others. You need to actually believe... Actually, that's not communism. That's capitalism
too. I take it back. Service to others is incredibly... This will bring you joy to your work. You have
to know that people need you. The essence of human dignity is about being needed. It's like feeling
it like an asset in society. The essence of despair is feeling like a liability to be managed by
your family, by the welfare system, by anybody else, which is why it's so terrible to be in
poverty because of the way that we treat people in poverty. We don't look at them as assets to
develop, which they should be because human beings are human beings with equal dignity.
We treat them like liabilities to manage by whatever system that they're talking about.
To create value in the lives of other people, to serve others means that they need you. That is
the true secret to everything else. Now, you get it like crazy because you don't have gunned
anybody's head to listen to modern wisdom. They're coming to you voluntarily, and that is this
affirmation. They need me. They like it. It's in the comments. Thank you. My guess is you get 20
emails a day from people who say that that podcast really changed my thinking. They need you. Well,
everybody needs that. Every single person needs that, whether you're picking apples or trying to
running for Congress, you actually need that in your life. Those are the two, service to others
and earning your success. I had an essay that I wrote probably about a year ago now. I want to
read it to you about the tension between success and happiness. One of the most common tensions
I talk about at the moment is between a desire for success and a desire to feel like we're enough.
Success is a strange thing. Presumably, we want success because we think a more successful life
will bring us more happiness, meaning, and fulfillment. Here's the problem. We sacrifice
the thing we want, happiness, for the thing which is supposed to get it, success. Failure can make
it miserable, but I'm not sure that success will make you happy. One of the most common dynamics I
see amongst high performers is this. Parents want their child to do well. Parents encourage their
child to do well by praising when they succeed and criticizing when they fail. The child learns
that praise and admiration is contingent on succeeding. This lesson metastasizes through
early adulthood into, I am only worthy of love, acceptance, and belonging if I succeed. Now,
powered by an internal feeling of insufficiency, this person is driven to achieve many things.
They're prepared to outwork, outhustle, and outsuffer everyone else because they're not just
running toward a life that they want, they're running away from a life that they fear. Success
and progress ameliorates the feelings of insufficiency. Therefore, success and progress becomes
prioritized above everything else. Now, don't get me wrong, many high performers genuinely love the
work that they do, and many are driven by a well-balanced, simple desire to maximize their time
on this planet, rather than trying to fill a void inside of themselves. But if I was to place a bet,
I'd guess that the majority of high performers are driven by fears of insufficiency,
rather than a holistic desire to be better. I think people who are high achievers on average
are more miserable than the average person. So what does it mean that the people we admire most
are the ones with the least admirable internal states? If the pursuit of success is in an effort
to make us happy, and in the pursuit of success we make ourselves miserable, why not just shortcut
the entire process and just be happy? Is that even possible? Now, external accolades count for a lot,
and I don't think that recanting all worldly possessions and retreating to a cave in the woods
is an optimal strategy. Some degree of external material success is important to make us feel
validated and satiate our desire for status and respect. But external success will not fill an
internal void, and insufficiency adaptation is this. If your drive comes from a fear of insufficiency
and you continue to disprove those fears with success in the real world, and yet the feeling of
insufficiency persists, what makes you think that the answer to this problem is more success?
Nice. Very astute. You're a natural social scientist. I admire it. And it's all true. Look,
everything is a ton of science that backs all that up, but you don't need it. Everybody knows
that. Look, if you go for the success to get the happiness, you're going to get the success,
because it will be unto you if you have the wrong dreams. Your dreams are going to come true if you
work hard on them, but you're not going to get to the happiness. The right strategy is to shoot for
greater happiness, and then you'll have enough success. Now, those words for a guy like you,
a driver like you, they give you a little chill, don't they? Because enough success doesn't sound
right. No, no, man. I'm not doing this for enough success. I know tons of guys back in high school
who have enough success. I don't want that. I want to be special, Chris. I want to be special.
How many people with a success addiction, which is the fundamental brain-delivered,
underlying dopamine-moderated or mediated addiction, which lies behind workaholism, by the way,
how many of those people have chosen specialness over happiness? That's what you're talking about.
Any loser can cultivate all these relationships and all these friendships,
but not every loser can work as hard as I do and become a Navy SEAL and do 50 pull-ups and have
40 million Instagram followers. I don't know. That's specialness. By the way, Mother Nature is
driving you once again. Mother Nature does not care if you're happy, but Mother Nature wants you
to be special so that you'll be able to survive more easily by having a higher rank in the kin
group and being able to pass on your genes because you'll be the alpha. But that's not what you want.
That's actually not even what you want. You're going to get enough food and you don't want 750
kids. What you want is a really, really good life and you're being driven by these ancient impulses.
That's exactly what you're saying. You've walked into a dopaminergic, moderated, and I don't know
why I actually had this thing come up on my screen right now. It's fine. It's fine. It's why we
walk into a success addiction that makes your brain look more or less like a methamphetamine
at its brain. How can people learn to unwind and detach themselves from their desire for success?
You don't need to unwind your desire for success. You need to understand and manage your desire.
That's what we need to do on all these things. You don't need to want different things. You need
to manage your wants for these different things. What does that? I don't drink alcohol. I don't
drink alcohol. The reason I don't drink alcohol is because there's a lot of alcoholism in my family
and I drank way too much when I was your age. I drank a lot when I was your age.
I stopped. I stopped a long time ago. I stopped over 20 years ago. I still want alcohol. I'm not
going to stop wanting alcohol. What I do is I manage my desire for alcohol vis-a-vis my behavior.
That's what we need to do. Of course, you're ambitious. Of course, you're driven for tremendous
success. That's wonderful, but it can't manage you, that drive, that ambition, that intense visceral
sense that you'll only be special if you have enough success. You can't let it manage you is
what it comes down to. Of course, you have these desires. By the way, Chris, you're going to get
married at some point. After you're married, you're going to look at a woman and she's going to be
incredibly beautiful. You're going to have a sense of natural human desire for her and you're not
going to act on it. That's the same thing is true when you could work the 14th hour instead of
spending the first hour with your kids, you're going to make the decision to sublimate that desire
and manage it. Yeah, that's interesting. I remember David Busst told me this story that a reader sent
into him saying that his book had saved his marriage because this guy had been married for a while,
maybe between five and 10 years, something like that. He'd found himself being attracted to other
women and he took that attraction as some sort of sense that his existing relationship was wrong.
If I was fully, totally Renaissance period besotted with my partner, I wouldn't have eyes
for any other woman for the rest of time. David explained that there is a very, very well-embedded
reward system that men get when they look at even a pair of rocks that slightly resemble boobs.
You are driven to just sexualize and look at anything, whether it's geological or otherwise.
He said that it sort of liberated me from this sense that the desire itself is wrong and that I
must tell myself a story about it. It feels a little bit to me like this line that we have drawn
between when I get enough success, I will allow myself to be happy or I will have justified
happiness. Happiness will come as a byproduct along for the ride with success.
That is kind of the same. Look, your desire to continue to chase this thing may not really
cease all that much, but your choice about whether or not you do work the 14th hour today
is one of those. It's kind of further upstream. I'm going to guess what you need to do is go
further upstream than this and think about how many hours a day do I want to work? How much work
do I need to put on my plate in order for me to need to work those number of hours?
Because otherwise what you're going to end up doing is failing at things that you've intended
to do. If you've put 14 hours of work on your plate, you kind of need to do it until you no
longer need to do it. That is a more sort of life design position. That's right. The unfortunate
fact is that you won't know how to do anything else once you become hopelessly addicted because
these behavioral patterns feed on themselves, notwithstanding the fact that you're getting
unhappier and unhappier. Furthermore, there's one other thing that's worth pointing out.
If you were an untreated alcoholic, nobody would say, like, dude, last night you put away
two bottles of vodka. That was impressive. I admire you for that. They'd be like,
get some help, man. That was pathetic. But if you work 14-hour days, they're going to be like,
man, you're going to be the next Elon Musk. What do you admire about Elon Musk? He works all the
time. People will admire the fact that he says, I haven't taken a day off since 2008 or something
like that. We love workaholics in our culture. We love success addicts. We love people who are
self-objectifiers. Let's think about that a little bit. I bet when you were a kid, did you have a
good relationship with your dad? Yeah, not bad. I bet that he said that you shouldn't objectify
women. You shouldn't look at them and say that they're nothing more than sex objects or that
you should treat them like real people. Why? Because you're a boy and you have an impulse to
not do that for all the reasons that David Busse has made very clear on your show. Okay, well,
you shouldn't objectify yourself either, Chris. A self-objectifier is somebody who looks in the
mirror and says, that's a success machine. That's somebody and these affirmations. It'd be like
looking in the mirror and saying, that's somebody who can say, stay stoned all day.
You wouldn't do that. That'd be pathetic. It could be weird. And yet that's the thing that we do
with the self-objectification, which is downstream from success addiction, which actually is related
to workaholism, which all these weird patterns of behavior that we establish often even before
adolescence. All right, let's get into the macronutrients, the component parts of happiness.
We've got three to go through. What are they? Yeah, enjoyment, satisfaction, and meaning.
They seem self-evident, but they're not. I'll give you an example. Enjoyment sounds like
pleasure, but it's completely different for all the reasons that we've kind of discussed.
Pleasure is a limbic phenomenon. Pleasure is a set of signals in your limbic system saying that
something is either really good for helping you survive to get calories or really good for getting
mates and passing on your genes. And we become ingenious in the laboratory, creating new ways
to get those sensations. So everything from gambling to pornography to methamphetamine to
fentanyl to alcohol, all these things do is they mimic different ways that in the Pleistocene,
before we had substances in these behaviors, that we would get pleasure from something that
actually helps us survive and pass on our genes. Unfortunately, all those things that I just mentioned
are addictive and bad for you because what you're doing is you're artificially stimulating something
you don't need to do and in a way that your body and brain are not accustomed to. And so they're
incredibly unhealthy. A lot of guys, especially your age, don't realize how dangerous pornography is
for the brain, for example, but what it is is it just fires up that impulse to pass on your genes
in an artificial way. Okay, so why do I bring that up? Because all those limbic searches for
pleasure are different than enjoyment, which is fundamentally an experience in the prefrontal
cortex of your brain. And you don't have to not have pleasure, by the way, I'm Catholic, I'm not
a Puritan. And what you need is the source of pleasure plus people plus memory, thus delivering
the experience into your prefrontal cortex, which is part of happiness. I'll give you an example.
I was doing work with a big beer company, and we were talking about these ideas. And I said,
look, associate your product with enjoyment, not pleasure. And I said, what do you mean? Well,
don't run a commercial of a dude alone in his apartment pounding a 12 pack. Why? Because that's
the pursuit of pleasure, and everybody knows is addictive and dangerous and irresponsible and
pathetic. Do the ad where the guy is having a beer with his brother or his friends, you've taken
beer plus people plus memory, and that equals enjoyment, and that's part of happiness. If you're
doing something as pleasurable, and it can be addictive, and you're doing it alone, you're
probably doing it wrong. That's where pornography comes in. That's where gambling by yourself
comes in. That's where eating a whole cake by yourself comes in. That's where using what drinking
alone comes in, all of these particular behaviors. And that's an example of how the neuroscience
of this can be intensely practical in helping you to lead a better life and change your habits.
What else is there to say about the way to use pleasure, people, and memories? Is there
something you should do to embed memories more effectively? Are there types of pleasures that
seem to be better for happiness or not? Are there types of people? Is there a way that you can
reinforce this? Do I need an ebbing house forgetting curve, flash card, anky deck to be able to
remember all of the shit that I did? I mean, hey, man, let's make it. Let's make some money.
So, I mean, see, you're such a natural entrepreneur. It's unbelievable. You go
right to a product. It's great. Yeah, the people shouldn't be addicts. It's not going to be helpful
to you if your community of people who help you enjoy things that are pleasurable are also drunks.
So it's obviously the case that you want people who are trying to enjoy each other's company,
as opposed to simply focusing on the source of the pleasure, the chemical or behavioral
source of the pleasure. That's really important. And then actually...
Just to interject that, I wonder whether there's an analogy to be drawn between...
Let's say that a bunch of people in a crack den, all of whom are just smoking crack and the only
reason that they're there is to be around other people that also do crack. That's just the environment
that they exist in. I wonder whether there is kind of an equivalent if you were to, let's say, be
a professional athlete of some kind training in a facility with a bunch of other individual
athletes, but all of whom were only there because they also needed to use the facility
individually. That they were there for the personal pursuit. Now, obviously, the pursuit of
training versus the sort of direct pleasure that you get from taking drugs. But my point being that
there's a lack of interaction between each of those individuals. They're very much siloed
within their own experience of whatever the pleasure might be. You were at a gaming...
A games place where tons of people can play Call of Duty, but none of you are playing against
each other and none of you are speaking to each other. You're with people. It's doing it in community,
but it's not integrating with the people. Yeah. Interaction is critically important. You're not
with other people. You're not actually with other people if you're just in a crowd. I mean,
you can feel unbelievably lonely walking down the street in New York City. You're technically
all walking down the street in New York City. With little kids, you'll see this when you have
children. Before they learn how to interact with each other, they do something called
Parallel Play, where you'll bring two little kids, two little two-year-olds together, and they'll
be playing with blocks, but not together. Parallel. They want to be looking at each other
as a way that that works. That doesn't stimulate oxytocin. If you want to get into the neurochemistry
of what we're talking about here, you're not going to get the benefit of pleasure plus people
plus memory unless you're doing something that really stimulates oxytocin, which means intense
interaction, eye contact, and ideally human touch as well. Right. Okay. So this is an argument to
give your friends a hug when they just win at a board game to reach up and high five.
I play a lot of werewolves. Have you played werewolves? No, I haven't. Okay. So werewolves is like a
it's a role-playing card game where everybody in a circle is given a particular character.
Some are good guys, some are bad guys, and you don't know who's who, and you have to bluff your
way through the game and certain people can be killed off. Yeah. There's another game called
Mafia, which is basically the same, but with different characters. And I have observed people
that have been married for 15 years where they completely straight face just lie to their partner
about what their role is. No, of course not. Honey, I love you. So we've had to make a rule
that what happens during werewolves stays during werewolves because the potential blast radius
of the loss of certainty. The loss of trust. Yeah, exactly. I play with a lot of world-class
pro poker players too, which is just like a kind of, to be honest, an unfair fight. My point being
that with that, as soon as the game's finished, everybody gets up, everybody's sort of high
five. There's been a ton of tension for a long time. Some people have been working together,
some people have been working against them, but they've been working together too,
and everybody's sort of high-fiving and all the rest of it. And it's very enjoyable.
What is there to say, just to round this out, what is there to say about memories?
What can we do to maximize the yield of memories when it comes to enjoyment?
The key thing is actually to do something that's not part of your ordinary routine.
The more that you'll actually disequilibrate your experience around, for example, a particular
occasion or in a particular place, that will add to the memory such that it will be easier to recall,
to put together and to recall, and you'll be able to recreate that enjoyment again and again and
again. What you'll want is to do something where the experience doesn't stop at the end of the action.
That's what you really want. What do you mean when I say disequilibrate?
Disequilibrate what your ordinary routine is. So you'll notice that the things that you do every
single day, you don't remember them. The things you don't do every single day, you remember them.
And that's how the recall so that you can have the duration of the experience be richer and longer
to do is to, when you're going to hang out with your friends, go someplace with your friends.
Is this a degree of novelty?
Yeah. And that's one of the reasons that I recommend that couples, for example,
leave the house, that they do things together outside of the house. So they don't get into
too much of a domestic routine, which is a very sort of uninteresting way to run your marriage,
is to do the same thing over and over and over and over again. You're just not going to get the
benefits of enjoyment in the same way. I had Susanna Hallinan on the show forever,
ever, ever ago. Now remember, she had this really great book talking about how to make time move
more slowly. It was so fascinating. And it seems to me, at least my current sort of conception of
it, which may need to be updated now, is novelty and intensity. Those seem to be two of the things
that increase the frequency of memory blocks sort of being dropped in, that someone that's
listening has driven to work a thousand times. That's a thousand journeys, but it was always
the same route. So you have condensed 1,015 minute, half hour blocks down into essentially one memory,
apart from that one time that there was a car crash next to me and it was different because
novelty and intensity. And yeah, I think just trying to keep that in mind to turn left instead
of turning right when you go to the shops, to go to a different restaurant, to travel to a
different hotel, to do the whatever, I think important. It is important and there's a lot of
ways that you can do that. My wife and I have tried to do that. We've moved 20 times in the 35
years that we've been together. I mean, it sounds like we're in the witness protection program,
I realized. But part of it is just because when we decide that we want to do a new thing,
we do a new thing. We've moved three times in the past five years because you know,
where do we want to live? Not here. Try that. And it's not a search for novel. It can become
a pathology to be sure. You actually can't stop any place. But the whole idea that you can live
in a new way, try a new thing and not letting it turn into kind of a groove. One of the reasons
that the perception of time speeding up happens as people get older is because their openness to
experience starts to decline, particularly after 55. Your openness to experience increases
through your teenage years, into your early 20s. And it stays relatively constant until
your mid 50s. And then it really takes a big dip as a matter of the way that we typically
measured it and what we see. Your love of new things starts to decline. You've got to fight
against that. If you don't want time to go terrifyingly fast and suddenly life is over,
one of the best ways to do it, as you correctly point out, is to inject more newness of the ways
that you do things in your life and to do that with your partner as well.
All right. Satisfaction.
Yeah. Satisfaction is a weird one. So satisfaction is... We talk about it all the time,
but we don't really define it. Satisfaction is the joy that you get after struggle.
And this is the weird human mystery. Only humans want pain. Only humans want to sacrifice and
struggle because then the rewards are sweeter. The more you struggle before, the more... And
everybody knows that's true. And yet we don't follow through on that very often. We're always
looking for the easy way out. That's the reason that there's this call of the wild that people
have when they listen to people like David Goggins or Jaco Willink because they're whole or rich
role. These are all mutual friends of ours, obviously. And it's like the thing that's calling
from nature to people when they hear this and they find it so attractive is like, yeah,
man, I need more pain. I need more pain in my life because then my life will be sweeter. And yet
they're going through life trying to find the easiest way out. This is a real mystery. Actually,
it's not. The divine path requires struggle and the animal path wants convenience and ease and
a complete lack of pain. It wants sort of an analgesic existence. So one of the things that we
do is we try to teach our kids this. When your kids are little, you say, don't eat before dinner.
All parents say this. And the kid is always like, why? And you make up a bogus excuse like,
it's bad for you. You're not going to get your proper nutrients. It's all nonsense. You don't
want your kid to eat before dinner because you want your kid to be suffering a little bit of
hunger before dinner. So they'll enjoy their dinner and be happier. That's what you actually want.
But you can't quite articulate it. And you don't want to tell the kid, it's because I want you
to suffer. You want the kid to suffer. And so that's an important thing to keep in mind. And
that's a real conundrum. And the more that we can understand that, the more that we can expose
ourselves to suffering for the right reasons. You really should get up before you're ready.
And while it's still dark, it's best for you to do that. You should work out in the morning. It's
a good thing to do. I mean, I get it. Not everybody can do that. You should do these things that
actually hurt. And your day will be better and your life will be happier. That's the first mystery
is trying to sort that out. The second mystery, however, is bigger in satisfaction, which is
that Mother Nature tells us that if we get that thing, like that millions YouTube subscriber,
you're going to love that forever. How long did you enjoy that? Like half an hour?
Five minutes.
Yeah, that's pretty good. All right, five minutes, right? But your brain told you the whole way that
when you got that, it was going to be awesome. So Mick Jagger is saying, I can't get no
satisfaction. That's wrong. You wouldn't try and try and try and try if you couldn't get no
satisfaction. You can't keep no satisfaction. That's the real problem. And you try and you try
and you try. And that's what the reason for that is what neuroscientists call homeostasis,
which of course you know about. And homeostasis is the tendency of any physiological system to go
back to its baseline. So you're ready for the next set of circumstances. It's true for your
emotions. It's awesome. It's awesome. Forget it. I got to go back so that I'm not distracted from
then so I can stay in the hunt is what it comes down to. Otherwise, I'd start to death after I
got food. You know, be like, I was good enough and then you die and you don't want that. So that's
the key thing. And the mystery is that really smart sophisticated people never figure that out.
And they conclude that they just didn't have enough and this gets back to your success problem.
This gets back to the success conundrum. It's like, yeah, I got that thing, but I'm still not
satisfied. So I guess I needed 5 million. I guess I needed 50 million. The first thing that a
billionaire concludes is that he needed another billion. Have you seen that study where when
pretty much anybody is asked, what level of wealth would you be satisfied with? It doesn't matter
what level of wealth you're at. It tends to be almost exactly three times your current income.
It's like at about three times where I'm at now, that's my sort of settling point, but it scales
all the way up to a billion. Yeah, yeah. There are different studies that one of the studies,
I mean, some studies say it's 40%, some studies say it's 300%. The bottom line is more because
that's what your brain is telling you that the secret to satisfaction that endures is more,
more what? More money, more power, more pleasure, more honor, more Instagram followers, more
sexual partners, more, more. And the problem with that is that it doesn't recognize that there's
a divine version of that that actually works. I did it again. I keep getting these weird effects
on my camera, that there is a way to hack this neurophysiological matrix, this evolutionary
matrix. And the way to think about this so that you're not subject to this, you can be free forever,
by the way, is by remembering that satisfaction that endures is actually a function of all the
things you have divided by the things that you want. Haves divided by wants is the right mental
model for you to pursue. And that means, of course, you have a have more strategy. Of course,
you do. You also need a want less strategy. You need to manage your wants just as much as you
need to manage your haves. I realize that's very Buddhist, but it's actually in every spiritual
and philosophical tradition. And so the way that I do that, the couple of ways to do that,
one way to think about that is to think about the metaphor. The metaphor of success for entrepreneurs
is kind of like you're an artist, and you're putting brushstrokes on a canvas of your life.
The right metaphor is at some point in your life, at least, is actually the sculptor,
where you're chipping away the jade or the marble to find the true work of art within. And that
means getting rid of the detritus, the part of the block of marble that's not the horse or the rider,
so that you can find the horse and rider inside. And one way to do that that I often do is I used
to have a bucket list. Everybody who listens to this podcast, those are bucket lists. I have a
reverse bucket list now, where I take my worldly cravings and desires and ambitions, which I still
have. I'm turning 60 in two weeks. And I still have these dumb, craven, trivial desires, so I'm
a weak, weak man. But I actually will write them down on my birthday, and I will cross them out.
Not because I'm not going to get them, but because I want the management of those cravings
and desires to be in my prefrontal cortex and not in my limbic system.
Can you give us some examples of what you cross out?
Yeah. So one of the things will be, for example, these worldly metrics of success in my particular
industry that are trivial. So for you, it would be a certain number of YouTube subscribers. For me,
it would be a certain number of sales of my latest book or prestige inside the university
or whatever it happens to be. And I realize, I know, I authentically know, as do you,
that these things are trivial. And yet we look at them as a marker of our own specialness and our own
sense of accomplishment. When I write them down, I acknowledge that I have the desire.
When I cross it out, I say, I have the desire, but I will not be attached to this goal.
That you're physically negating the attachment from the goal. I mean, of course, the attachment
on understanding dukkha is that concept of the first noble truth of Buddhism that life is suffering
because of dukkha, because of this sticky craving for the inadequate things. But it is not saying,
I'm not going to do that. I'm not going to get that. It's saying that I'm not going to be attached
to that. And it's incredible. This year on my birthday, by the way, I got a big one coming,
man, with a zero. My attachment is bothering me right now. I'm going to admit it. I have too
many political opinions. I really do. They're weighing me down. They're making it harder to have
friends than they should be. So I'm going to write down my 10 strongest political opinions,
and I'm going to cross them out. Not that I'm saying that I don't believe these things,
but I'm not going to be attached to my rightness. That humility is going to set me free. And that's
a kind of a metaphor. Thich Nhat Hanh, the great Vietnamese Buddhist monk, he wrote that our greatest
attachments are to our opinions. And that's triply true for me right now. So man, I need freedom.
And I'm going to get it by talking about the wants, not just the house.
That practice, the exercise of writing down the things that you want and then crossing them out,
sounds great. Symbolically, lovely. The writing, the physical writing of something lovely.
Presumably, that's not just a master key downstream from that. And yes, I'm still going to have it.
But where are you going in your mind? Is there a practice which is more repeatable and robust
that when your desire to correct somebody about their view on abortion arises, that
where are you going to there to permanently be crossing it out?
What it does is it makes you remember the attachment in the moment of behavior. That's
what that thing does. That's what the important thing is. Because when it's in your prefrontal
cortex, then it's a behavior that is manageable in the executive centers of your brain. And so
what will you do instead? When somebody sits down next to me and says something that I really just,
I don't believe about abortion. And I think that I think, now I have my opportunity because my
prefrontal cortex is managing. And I say, tell me why you think that. Would you please tell me why
you think that? And you listen to learn. It's an extraordinary thing. And by the way, you get smarter
and you're wrong less often and you get less embarrassed and you lose fewer friends. And
when you do that, the other person that you're talking to, I just gave a long lecture on the
neuroscience of the absorption of messages and political communications that I just gave that
lecture today. And one of the things that you find is the more that you do that, the more people
think that you're a very smart person who makes very good points and that your point of view
is actually quite persuasive. To shocker how that happens. Can you you mentioned earlier on
something I've heard you talk about before to do with the common idols that people kind of get
waylaid by? Can you just go through this? Yeah, that was, we mentioned that just a minute ago.
That was the Aquinas for idols. Money, power, pleasure, fame. Money, power, pleasure, fame.
Now Aquinas asserted, this is 1265. You didn't have data. But man, he was the best. And Aquinas said
that everybody falls prey to one of these things more than anything else. That this is an exhaustive
list of the things we care about the most. Now, money is pretty obvious. Money or wealth or,
financial resources, anything that actually allows you to buy stuff and shows that you're
a very important person. These markers, these medium of exchange and store value.
The second is pleasure. We've talked about power. Power is the ability to control the behavior of
others. And the last is actually a really kind of a, a lot of people listening to us are like,
I don't care about fame. I don't want to be Instagram famous, but that's not it. It's really
the prestige and the admiration of the right people. I mean, if you can be completely screwed
up if you were on the Disney channel as a kid, and what you want is the admiration of strangers.
And they're literally people's brains who are wired like that because they got famous before they
were, while their brain was still in formation. And they'll be like somebody who got addicted to
methamphetamine as a 14 year old. They'll never be normal is what we actually know. But most aren't
like that, but they still want to be considered somebody for the people whose opinions actually
matter. Those are the four idols. And I play a game with my students. What's my idol? Because
once you know your idol, you can actually control your behavior and manage yourself in a much more
effective way. You have to know your weakness is the way that this works out. And a lot of people
that actually don't. So do you want to play the game, Chris? Hit me. You want to play what's my
idol? Okay. The way to play what's my idol is not for me to say which, which of the four really
controls you. It's to say which of the four do you not care about and start eliminating them.
Because then we're going to wind up on the one that's really harder for you. So money, power,
pleasure, honor. You got to give away one. Which one are you going to give away?
Power. How come? I don't notice in myself a desire to really accumulate power of any kind.
Okay. So I'm going to make a prediction about you. You hate it when people have power over you.
Oh, yeah. That's it. People who hate having, people having power over them are averse to having
power over other people as well. You're a non hierarchical person. You're a non hierarchical
guy, right? Yeah. The org structure of the business would suggest that as well. Yeah.
Yeah. And that's almost always the case. Okay. Good. So now we've got money, pleasure and fame
or honor or prestige, average. You got to give another one away and it's harder now. What are
you going to give away next? Money. Money. How come? One of the, of all of the different mental
pathologies that I have, materialism, desire for sort of flashness in terms of possessions is just
not something that I have. I have a degree of scarcity mindset, which a abundance kind of
ameliorates. But for me, it's just, it's not something that I really think about very much.
Did you grow up with nice things? We were like lower working class, I think. Okay. Lower middle
class kind of like I do. Lower working class. Oh, lower working class. Okay. Like my wife grew
up in Barcelona. So it was, you know, sometimes you paid the light bill and sometimes you didn't
pay the light bill. Okay. You didn't grow up with nice things. This might be the case. Now, when
it comes to this, there's a very interesting set of sociological theories that you can never be
actually comfortable more than one and a half classes above that in which you were a child.
So if you were kind of lower working class, that means that the tastes above upper middle
class are going to be like, that stuff is boring, man. It's like, you want me to collect art? Why
would I spend my time collecting art? I want to talk about stuff and ideas and things that
actually excite me. And so that might be part of it. But also, you've had a pretty, I mean,
age 36, you've had economic success beyond your wildest dreams, right? And you probably figured
out that there's not that much stuff that you can buy that's really that fun. All right.
As soon as you can fly business class and not have to think about the cost of a coffee,
most stuff downstream from that, I mean, you know, there'll be some things, once I get a family,
there'll be, I think that you kind of transcend your own desires in that way. And it's more to do
with providing for the kids and so on and so forth. But yeah, you know, I'm very, very glad of that.
And I think lots of people don't realize that they're kind of blessed by having no or a limited
materialism set point. That like, if you look at how much money you need in order to be happy with
the worldly possessions that you have with the degree of keeping up with the Joneses that you're
motivated by with the shows of affection and love and gifting that you need to do to other people
or that you need from other people in order to feel loved. If you don't have that, that's basically
like you needing, you being a much more efficient system financially, like there is somebody else
out there who needs 10 times your salary to get the same level of satisfaction out of life.
So I reframed that probably about five years ago. And just it's one of the things that I'm,
I genuinely feel blessed about whether that's from genes or environment. I'm like, I don't need it.
And by the way, it's great, but it's not a super virtue because we haven't gotten your idol yet.
We're getting that. Don't worry. Don't worry. We're brought back down to work soon.
And what you find is that there are certain guys who are way, I mean, they objectify themselves
with their relationship to money in the same way that women often do for the same reasons
evolutionarily and their physical appearance. Why? Because this is going to predict your,
you know, sort of as a predictor of your success in mating markets, despite the fact that you're
not even in mating markets. So a lot of that's primordial and has to do with, you know, what
the idol is for all kinds of reasons that we could talk about. Okay. Now it's getting uncomfortable
because there's two left. And you've already, through process of elimination, told me that
these are the things that you care about. Okay. So number one, let's put these in order because
you got to get rid of one of these. Pleasure and honor. You got to get one. You got to get rid of
one. Pleasure can go. You like pleasure, don't you? But, but now I know what you're really like.
I found out what you really want, Chris. It's not a surprise to anybody. My desire for prestige
to be recognized and validated by the world. I know, I know, because you're doing this,
you're doing, you're doing something you're performing in public. And most people who are,
you know, strong, you're in a strong extrovert. Clearly, you have openness to experience. You
have an agreeable nature. You're probably not highly neurotic. You've got all the things that
actually go into somebody who wants to be a follower.
If you do a big five on me, I come in, neuroticism is moderate. Get most of my energy from being
on my own. I'm an only child. I choose to work on my own. So, you know, that turn it on, turn it
off thing is definitely there. But yeah, I'm glad that I've managed to lop as an
extroverted, low neuroticism person. But I fear that the source code may be slightly different.
It might be. It might be. And, you know, you don't know until you know. And, you know,
there are people who present in a particular way and have a habitat that's quite different
because they've been able to, they're so good at getting along in society.
But what we do know now is what your weakness is going to be. So, five years from now,
I predict you're going to be married. And the argument you're going to be having with your wife
is because you're going to be doing something that's going to bring you new heights of success.
And your wife is, and then you're going to have this argument with your wife who's going to say,
I don't want you to, I want you to be around more, Chris. And you're going to say, yeah,
but you love all the great things that this lifestyle brings. And then you're mad at me for
doing the things that it takes. And she said, I'll take you. I mean, I'm going to accept those
things that I don't have you, but I'd prefer to have you. That's what I predict is the argument
that you're going to actually have with your wife because you love success. You love success. It
feels good. That's the thing that actually, and what do I mean by it feels good? That means it gives,
there's a lot of dopamine that comes from success, which gives you anticipation of reward. And when
you get the success, it taps the ventral tegmental area of the crisp brain, which gives you this
little burst of joy. That's what's happening when these weird things, these markers of success,
actually happen. And those things happen to be that centering around the admiration of other
people that you got to keep your eye on, because all the mistakes you make in your life that you
look back on with regret are going to be because you follow that particular idol.
Meaning final horseman of the apocalypse.
Yeah. So this is the most important meaning. I can go because I'm very disciplined. I can go a
long time without enjoyment and I can go a long time without satisfaction, but I can't go 10 minutes
without meaning and be a happy person. And this is the biggest problem that we have among young
adults today. I have all kinds of tests that I give people to see whether or not they have a proper
sense of meaning in their life. And I'm not judgmental about what that meaning is going to be,
but I do know I can tell people when they have a crisis of meaning. And this is the biggest
predictor of unhappiness for people in their twenties today. Now, most people in their twenties
are actually not in the active pursuit of meaning, whereas in about 1960, most people were in an
active pursuit of meaning. That's a big set of generational differences that we have. And it's
a big one of the biggest explanations for the things that we talked about earlier, which is the
degradation of general societal happiness, particularly among the young. So meaning is
actually kind of a combination of three things. It's coherence why things happen the way they
do. You have to have a theory of the case about why things happen. It doesn't mean it has to be
right or it has to be mine. They have to be like, this is why things happen. Yours tends to be very
scientific about why things happen. Second, you have to have a sense of purpose. Purpose and meaning
are not synonymous. Purpose is a subset of meaning that is direction and goals. Purpose is I'm going
in a particular direction towards specific things. That's what it comes down to. And significance
is the belief that your life matters. So it's coherence, purpose, and significance. Now there's
a test that I give my students, and by the way, that I give my children. My kids are younger than
you. All three of my kids are in the 20s. And all three of my kids had to answer these questions.
I made them write a business plan when they were coming out of high school,
which is like a business plan for the enterprise of their lives for the next five years. I'm a
B school professor. I can do this. And I'm the venture capitalist. So I deserve a business plan.
And the point was, what are you going to do to find the answers to two questions, the two
meaning questions? Why are you alive? And for what are you willing to give your life joyfully at this
hour? You need answers to those questions. You need to be alive for a reason. And you need to be
willing to stop being alive for a reason. Those are the meaning questions. So what are your answers?
Why do you believe you're alive? Why are you on earth? A sperm and an egg is not the right
answer. And a stork isn't either. I think the thing that I often come back to when I ask myself
this question is, to understand myself and the world around me, I get so much joy. I'm at my best
when I'm learning about things and engaging with ideas. Downstream from that, I can teach
it to other people and do all of the rest of the stuff. But maybe I'm revealing my only child
bona fides here. But so much of it is just me understanding myself and the world around me.
It's been the single lineage trajectory throughout all of the good things that I've done.
Yeah. And you just told me what you want to do with this life that you have,
what you enjoy the most, where you find the greatest productivity. But this is a little bit
different. Why do you think that you were placed on this earth? What is the purpose
for which you were placed on this earth? Now, if you're a radical materialist, you might say,
it's just all random, man. I wasn't, I wasn't nobody. Yeah, for sure. But my guess is you
don't believe that. Why did the universe create Chris Williamson?
I think to find and talk about good ideas, that seems to be the thing that comes to me.
You want to serve others? You just told me. Why do you want to talk about things? Otherwise,
you wouldn't bother, we wouldn't be having, we're having a conversation in public
because we want people to listen to it. And it might just be completely
venal on your own, my part, because by the way, my idols map exactly onto yours. I'm the 60-year-old
version of you. Sorry. I know, I know, it's like, maybe you'll still have hair. If you're lucky.
But okay, if it's purely venal, that's just not good. And that's a bad answer to the question.
But if it really is, I want to serve the world by uncovering its mysteries. And in so doing,
people will be able to lead better informed, better lives. In other words, you were created to serve
in a certain way, solid. Now it gets harder. For what would you give your life joyfully at this
hour? Mom, dad, and like perhaps a golden retriever that's younger than five years old.
Would you really give your life for your mom and dad? Yeah.
You would die for them despite the fact that they're significantly older?
Yeah, I mean, they would be, I would be in a lot of trouble. But it's something that I would be
prepared to do. There would absolutely, as with almost anything I've ever had to do with them,
there would be a very long protracted negotiation, which all of us would be dead before that was
finished. So it might be a moot question. It's a hard one. And it's a especially hard question
for young adults who don't have children yet. It's a really hard one, right?
Well, where are we getting that deepest sense of meaning from? What is it that we transcended
ourselves with? You're like, you know, from the utilitarian perspective, when you think,
ah, how much longer have mom and dad got left? And, ah, did they really want it? Ah,
you know, look at what you can give the world you haven't even passed on their genes yet.
Like even from their perspective, they would probably say, even fuck you,
like just don't let, especially because I'm an only child, like don't let the bloodline end here.
Like, God damn it. Like at least, you know, like, come into a cup before you do this so that we
can, you know, use some lady in a turkey base to somewhere I can actually keep this guy. I don't
know. But yeah, it's a, it's difficult one. It's difficult one, man, like to think about.
For sure. It wouldn't be my country of birth. And it wouldn't be my new country of adoption.
It wouldn't be the faith that I don't have. It wouldn't be the sports team that I barely
keep up to date with. What's your sports team, by the way? Texas Rangers. Really? Oh, yeah. I'm a
Barca man. Well, look, we both, we both swapped sports. I've followed an MLB team and you've
followed a like Spanish football team. I married a Catalan. There's no other way. There's no other
way to keep family harmony. Well, do you have a best friend? Yeah. Would you, would you, would you
die for him? I definitely consider it. I bet you would. He's younger than me. The utilitarian in
New York. Yeah, I just can't get out, can't get out the front of my brain. Yeah. But this is the
point. This is that this is the introspection that's required to actually find a full sense of meaning.
This is worth going away for five days on a silent retreat and thinking about these questions.
And it's funny because, you know, my adult kids have come to very different revelations about
this because I push them, push them, push them, push them. I have a, I have a son who's a sniper.
I have a son who's a Marine sniper and he just got out of the Marine Corps now. He's in the
reserves, but he was active duty for four years as a Marine sniper. This is a, this is a scary job,
man, for me as his father. And he went in as a knucklehead, you know, and he came out at 23,
married. He's now five months out. His wife is pregnant. And here's his answers. I mean,
because he found his answers by actually putting his life in danger and doing all these really,
like, wicked things. I was created because God made me to serve other people. He believes that.
These are not the right answers. These are his answers. I would joyfully die for my faith
and for my family and for my fellow Marines and for the United States of America and our
allies, Chris. So this is, this is solid stuff. And he's, I'm telling you, he actually has called
me. I screened his call because he called while we were talking. Sorry, sniper. Don't shoot me
through the window. Carlos, he's the best. And he's six foot five and he's, you know, covered in
tats. And he's, he's happy because he has these answers to these questions, but he did the work
is really what it comes down to. And this is what I recommend to a lot of people who feel
that little bit of hollowness, that slight bit of deadness within where things that I'm doing
every day, you know, it's like, I don't know, I don't want to stand in this line. What's the
meaning of me actually drive sitting in traffic and doing this? When you have the answers to those
questions, there's a why for even the most trivial things that you're doing in your life. And that's
a really, really beautiful thing. If I can do one thing for people, it's actually to encourage them
to look for the answers to those questions. How can we improve our coherence?
So our coherence is the why things happen the way that they do. And that theory of the case is
really tricky, but it gets back to the sense of transcendence. If you pursue a strategy of
transcendence, coherence comes in its wake. Even if you can't quite articulate why things happen the
way they do, you have a sense of why things happen the way that they do. If you study dystoic
philosophers with the utmost seriousness, the understanding of why things happen the way they
do, even if they're random and even if they're unfair, becomes acceptable to you. And that
acceptance of that is a sense of coherence on its face. Maybe you're a complete, radically
physicalist atheist who denies the utter existence of free will. If you study the science
with enough seriousness of that, you can make your peace with a coherence that actually comes
from the randomness of the universe. My father was a PhD biostatistician. He was the smartest guy
ever met. And he said when he was dying of cancer, when he was more, he was just a little bit older
than me. And I said, it's just sucks. It's not fair. And he said, somebody's going to be on the
left side of the distribution.
Spoken, spoken like a man that looked at a lot of graphs throughout his career.
It's coherence, baby. But you can get coherence in a lot of different ways. You just have to do
the work to figure out what you believe. Purpose. Purpose to create the goals and the
directionality of your life. Now, this is not a sense of attachment. A lot of people will say,
well, I'm going to make my bucket list, and I'm going to earn this, and I'm going to do that,
and I'm going to meet this person, and I'm going to shake hands with the president. I don't know
whatever the dumb thing is that people are really into. That's not it. The Buddhists talk about
intentionality without attachment. Now, there's a, there's a, the way to think about purpose.
There's a, do you speak Spanish, right, Chris? No. Okay. There's a word in Spanish. It's a very
evocative word, rumbo, which in English is, it's not common. It's called rum line, R-H-U-M,
rum line. It's a navigational term. That's the straight line that goes from where you are to
where you want to wind up. To do navigation properly, you need a rum line. Rumbo is actually
used in Spanish in the vernacular to say, this is your directionality. This is to figure out your
purpose in life. What you need to figure out is where you think it would be good to end up,
to have a straight line to get there, and then to have a complete utter lack of attachment
on whether or not you're sitting on that rum line. That turns out to be the way to understand
purpose. That's intention without attachment. Of course, I'm going to lay out the things that I
want to do. Of course, I'm going to. I'm completely flexible if life takes me in another direction
for something that actually meets my moral metaphysical, my love goals in a better way.
That's the way to actually be thinking about purpose.
If suffering and difficulty are so important to meaning, how do you advise new parents who are
successful because of the challenges in their past, but now have more resources to make life easier
for their kids than their parents did when they were growing up, that by using the things that
they've worked for, they may rob their children of the very challenges that would make them happy?
Yeah, guilty, by the way. Guilty. Guilty is charged. It's the greatest privilege is feeling like you've
had a lot of success and you earned it. That's an incredible privilege. The greatest,
the worst thing you can do for your children is making them wonder whether or not they earned
their success. Did I did it to me? Or is it my dad? Was somebody kicking down the door for me?
Am I a baby Nipo? That's a real problem. A lot of that has to do with the fact that we're simply
trying to make it so that the difficulties are cleared away exactly as you say. This leads to a
lot of problems that we see today. Safetyism, the fact that we're completely freaked out about
a lot of difficulties that don't exist and we're enured to the problems that really do exist. We
don't let our kids walk to the store, but we give them as unlimited access to smartphones and social
media at age 13, and they're like predators and creeps and god forbid politicians and
dictators and pick talk are climbing out of the screen and into their brains and destroying
their sense of self-worth and creating social comparison and all these deleterious things.
What we need to do is to set our kids up to do really hard things. It's telling them that it's
okay if they fail because what we tell them when we're protecting them from everything is that
it's not okay to fail. We create a pathological fear of failure, which is a death fear. We're
giving our kids a death fear. All death is is the death of who you are to you. There's an essence
to you, so a client would say that your soul is your Christmas, that a dog's soul is its dogginess.
Each one of us has an essence to us. No, we define that essence on the basis of who we see ourselves,
and if you are never allowed to fail, you become the person who doesn't fail, and failure becomes a
death fear for you. Why would you install a death fear on your kids? Well, because you want to keep
them safe, and that's a terrible thing to do. The way to get beyond that, even if you're blessed
with tremendous financial resources, so they don't have to worry about making rent when they're kids,
they don't have to worry about getting their caloric needs, is you have to say,
I expect you to be doing difficult things, and I don't expect you to succeed all the time.
If you're not failing enough, you're not doing it right. Okay, now you're going to say,
how do I do that? Okay, here's how you do it. Do it yourself. It does not matter what you tell
your kids. All that matters is what they see. If you want your kids to grow up in the Catholic faith,
make sure that they see you on your knees on Sunday. That's all that matters. If you want
your kids to do hard things, do hard things. If you want your kids to deal with failure, fail,
and have them see how you fail. And that's why these lessons in modern wisdom are important
for 60-year-olds and 20-year-olds, and kids.
Talk to me about the difference between happiness and unhappiness. Is unhappiness simply the absence
of happiness? Are they different networks, are there ways to avoid them separately?
Happiness is not the opposite of unhappiness, on the contrary. So the experience of happiness has a
lot to do with a positive emotion, and the experience of unhappiness has a lot to do with
negative emotion. We go through life with different kinds of positive and negative moods,
and they're largely produced with different structures of the limbic system of the brain
because we're reacting to different outside circumstances, some of which are opportunities
and some of which are threats. So it makes perfect sense that unhappiness is not the
absence of happiness. These are different sensations. Largely unhappiness is experienced on
the right side of the brain, and unhappiness on the left side of the brain. We know this because
of the musculature of the face. When people are experiencing a lot of negative emotion,
the left side of the face is more active. And you can tell when somebody's about to cry,
the left side of their face is more active. It twitches a little bit. When you're married,
you'll see this. And you're like, uh-oh, uh-oh. You get like a five-second warning. It's just
amazing. It's what it's like if your husband studies neuroscience. So it's important that
we understand that because then we can manage both our happiness and our unhappiness and we can see
which is a greater challenge. Happiness or unhappiness in our lives. For me, happiness is
not the greater challenge. For me, unhappiness is a greater challenge. I have very high negative
affect. I'm a naturally negative affect person because I fall in this personality characteristic
called the mad scientist, which is unusually high positive mood and unusually high negative mood.
That's important thing for us to understand that you know which is your challenge. And so
I'm spending a lot of my effort managing my unhappiness as opposed to trying to boost my
happiness. And there are lots of, there are terrible ways to do that, like drinking alcohol,
looking at pornography, gambling, workaholism. The best way to do that, by the way, is vigorous
physical exercise seven days a week. And so that's what I do to start my day, the first hour of the
morning. Not because I'm some sort of, you know, look, vanity doesn't favor me. The reason that I
do that is because I want to feel less unhappy. So there are different pathways for making people
more happy versus making people less unhappy. And all of the stuff that we've gone through so far,
although fantastic and maybe great for refining your happiness level, you can still be
pressing the accelerator harder whilst you've still got the brake pushed down. If you don't look at
these things, which cause unhappiness. So what are the other biggest strategies beyond high
intensity training that you do seven days a week? What are the highest return tactics that you use?
Clear away the barriers to your happiness, because one of the sources of unhappiness is not
having access to the sources of happiness in your life. That's the source of aggravation and
frustration. So clear away the barriers by getting rid of your prejudices against
trying to develop your faith or spiritual life. Clear away the barriers to the prejudices that
you have and the difficulties that you have toward family life, friendship, the behavior and
attitudes that you have toward work, et cetera. That's really important. Third, and probably
for many people, the most important is taking seriously the mood disorders that are so common
in our society today. Understanding the essence of what chronic and generalized anxiety is all
about in people's lives. What clinical depression actually means and how to treat it. Because the
greatest source of unhappiness in misery for a lot of people is just straight on common mood
disorders. And they can't actually even get to the better things in their lives because of these
barriers that are actually coming in terms of these sources of unhappiness. That's the big ones
that I'm talking about. General high levels of negative affect that do not go into mood disorder.
I strongly recommend physical diet and exercise, the kinds of self-care that have a lot of discomfort
attached to them. Always be thinking about the hygiene of removing barriers to your happiness
and taking care of your mental health. Those are the best ways to think about it.
Why do you think it is in the modern world that anxiety appears to be the most prevalent
emotional state that people are in? Why has that one emotion grabbed a hold of the 21st century so
much? Anxiety is unfocused fear. Fear is a natural physiological phenomenon that comes from
a stimulus that then lights up the amygdala in the brain passing a signal through the
hypothalamus into the pituitary glands, thus leading to the adrenal glands putting out
epinephrine and later on cortisol, stress hormones, in response to some sort of a threat
that should be intense and episodic. The problem in modern life is that we don't have these intense
episodic episodes of fear. On the contrary, we have minor threats that are very diffuse but chronic.
That leads to an unfocused fear, aka anxiety, which is a very slight drip of cortisol going
into your brain again and again and again. How do you get it? By opening up Twitter,
how do you get it? By being on an overly long Zoom call when you need to pee. How do you get it?
By actually being in a work relationship that's ridiculously tense that you're not doing anything
about. Modern life is all about not having your life threatened but feeling constantly under a
little bit of threat, which gives you unfocused fear that leads to a stress response that comes
from your adrenal glands and that gives you a tremendous amount of agony that's just spread out
and constant. One of the things that you've mentioned there, you said that you have a
disposition towards negative emotional states. How much have you found in your practice and also
with yourself that people can rewrite their childhood and their past history? Because I
think a lot of people feel trapped by their past and that they're stuck in their patterns.
This all sounds well and good, Arthur, but really what you're talking about is putting
a little bit of icing and some sprinkles on the top of a dog shit cake.
You can rewrite your past. You can't actually make a different past. What you can do is understand
your memories in different ways. It starts with an understanding of how memory actually works in
the brain. Memories are not extant. They're reassembled from all different kinds of parts.
That's the reason that memory is so unreliable. You can remember with incredible vividness what
happened on 9-11. I was in New York on 9-11. I saw the first plane hit the first tower.
I remember it vividly, but the data show that what I remember vividly is probably not completely
accurate because I'm reassembling that memory so frequently from literally the different parts of
the memory stored in different locations in the brain. Those will get corrupted, just like files
will get corrupted in a computer from time to time. One of the ways that will get corrupted is
because of the biases that I have in my ordinary life. This is the reason that you and your sister,
I realize you don't have a sister, but if you had a sister, you and your sister could be looking back
to Thanksgiving 15 years ago, which I realized you didn't have because you're British.
And one of you could say, oh, that Thanksgiving with Uncle Mark and Aunt Betty, it was so great.
And your sister was like, wasn't that the one where Uncle Mark got blind drunk and then beat
up the neighbor and passed out in the front yard? That was terrible that year. You're both right,
but you're assembling the memories from different places with biases and emphases placed in different
parts of the memory with different corruptions that have happened across the decades. That's a
really important thing because you can reassemble your memories in different ways by helping people
to emphasize the parts of the experiences in your past that were positive and not just negative.
Some people are retrospectively unbelievably negative. And that has everything to do with
the way that they've stored and are reassembling their memories. And you don't have to do that.
You can actually choose to look back on the parts of your childhood that actually were sweet.
And the more that you do that, the better you'll get at doing that. And the more that you'll naturally
reassemble those memories in ways that favor you more, and you're not wrong. You're just looking
at different parts of the experience and repairing the memory assembly process.
Yeah, I love that. What about the role of envy, another emotion that's very prevalent in the
modern world? What is that to say about envy?
It's evolved. And the reason is because we live in a hierarchical kin-based species.
We actually were a tropical species evolved to live in kin groups that are hierarchical. Now,
some of that we can get beyond, like we invented coats so we don't have to live in really hot
places anymore. But some of it we haven't gotten beyond. We're still kin-based and we are still
very hierarchical. And the way that you tend to see your likelihood of survival and gene
propagation is rising in the hierarchy. And the way that you know that you're rising in the
hierarchy is paying attention to people who have more than you, and wanting what people have who
have more than you, aka NB. Now, that's a big, I mean, that's a survival tendency in the Pleistocene,
but it's maladapted to the modern world. And it's exacerbated by the technological
innovations that we've had such that we're aware of the hierarchy of the entire human race
all the time on social media. The biggest problem that we have is you don't feel envious of the
loser down the street from you, who has a slightly different RV up on blocks in his yard compared
to yours. You envy the Kardashians, which is completely absurd. You envy somebody who's got
all the wealth in the world. You envy a billionaire, despite the fact that you've never met one in
person. So that's the biggest problem that we've taken an evolutionary tendency and we've blown
it up with our technological means and turned it into an actual form of mental illness.
That means that we have to take it on on his face and use our prefrontal cortex to combat
these limbic tendencies that are ruining our lives. That's a lot of what I talk about. You mean
making sure that you're consciously not comparing yourself to people outside your group.
If you need to, get rid of the apps and stop paying attention to these rich people only because
you enjoy watching the lifestyles of these rich and famous folks. That's an unhealthy thing for
you to do. A lot of the things that I often talk about to get rid of this as well is to separate
your envy from the malicious. Malicious envy is that you feel envious of people who have
something that you don't feel that they've earned. Ignore that and pay attention to where you have
benign envy where you think that they've done something that's really virtuous and turn your
envy into admiration. Then you've actually made it into something that's really beneficial that
will benefit you and won't make the world worse. Yeah, it's so interesting to think about how
that very adaptive impulse that we had, I need to track my place within the hierarchy,
but that was 150 people. If that, it was probably actually 70 people.
Yeah. Just speaking of what we were talking about earlier on when we were discussing the
slot that your intimate partner takes up, I had Robin Dunbar, he's been on the
show twice now, maybe three times. He's so fantastic. The first time I ever recorded with him,
it was I think 8 p.m. on a Friday evening in the UK, 2 p.m. here in Austin. He just had a big
glass of wine that he slowly worked his way through as he was just unloading evolutionary
psychology, social psychology insights. You've got this sort of small group within maybe a slightly
larger tribe and you can track your place within that hierarchy relatively easily, but if envy is
the only one of the seven deadly sins that doesn't feel good, which is kind of an interesting
insight. Not even fun. Not even fun to do it. You have essentially an unlimited way that an
envious mind can find to subjugate you below someone else. Well, yeah, sure, I've got more
money than them, but they seem to be a little bit better educated than me or their wife slightly
hotter or they drive a faster car or they seem to be a bit more muscular or whatever. There's a
million different ways that you can do this with now essentially an unlimited global marketplace
hierarchy within which you can compare yourself. Yeah, this is one of the reasons that men have
now become orthorexic, that men are now weirdly comparing their biceps. Men my age are paying
attention to their physical prowess by looking at these YouTube channels in ways that we wouldn't
have any concept of. They would live happily, but instead they're like, I don't know, man,
I think I need to go on TRT. Why? Because I don't know. I mean, I'm looking at all these other guys,
they look great. You wouldn't even be conscious of this. You'd be happily living your life in your
own silo, but this exposure that we have to this massive comparison group is unbelievably unhealthy
because you're always doing this hierarchically evolved thing, this tendency, this habit that we
actually have and you have to combat it on purpose. There's no way that you're just going to make it go
away by changing your environment. This brings up one key point, by the way, because of all these
things that we're talking about. It's very efficient, inefficient to try to improve your life by changing
the whole outside world. It's very inefficient to curate the entire outside world. It's efficient
to work on it yourself by moving your experiences from your limbic system into your prefrontal cortex,
aka to be metacognitive. That's what I talk about all the time.
We've gone through a lot of the big sexy things, I think, from your recent thesis.
Is there anything from your book or from your work and from this kind of domain of work in general
that you wish people paid more attention to? Is there something that is seemingly unpopular and
sexy but has more bang for its buck that you wish you could bestow more people to remember it when
they read stuff that you've put out? Yeah. There's a concept that people don't
pay attention to very much because our world has largely been organized over the past 30 years
by technicians, engineers, and bureaucrats. We've handed the keys in our culture over to people that
say that if we can solve a series of complicated problems, we'll live in peace and happiness
forever. That's a completely misguided understanding of the human experience. There's two kinds of
problems in life. There's complicated problems that engineers solve. These are problems that are
ferociously hard to solve, but once you solve them, you can replicate them with effortless ease.
That's like making a toaster or a jet engine. Those are complicated problems. All the problems
that we really care about in life are complex problems, which is to say that they're very
easy to understand the solution and completely impossible to solve because they're dynamic in
nature. Your toaster is complicated. Your cat is complicated, is complex. You know what it wants.
It's warmth and scratches and a litter box and food, but you never know what it's going to do.
That's why it's interesting. Your marriage is complex. You know what it means to be happy
in your marriage, but you can't get there with any amount of stuff and any amount of money and
any amount of technology. A war is complex. I win, they lose. That's the solution. How do you get
there? I don't know. A football game. Look, you like sports. I like sports. I love Bara. I love
watching soccer. I love watching Spanish Premier League soccer. You know, the best day is Bara
wins, but I don't know. That's why I watch because it's a complex thing. The biggest mistake that
we make is thinking, and a lot of what we've talked about in this episode comes down to this,
is thinking that my complex human problems are going to be solved by external, complicated
solutions. That's what the world keeps trying to tell me. The world says, if you take this and you
try that and you buy this and you adopt that, then you're finally going to be happy. It's not true.
It isn't true. Here's the thing about life. Life comes down to the complex problems of the heart,
which are all about love, and you can't solve that with a product. You can only live that in
real time. You want a better life? Live it in real time. Be fully alive right now. Suffer with it.
Experience it. That's what you have to do. That's what we had to do two million years ago,
and that's what we still have to do today.
Hell yeah. Arthur Brooks, ladies and gentlemen. Arthur has been really great. I adore this blend
that you have of Eastern and Western, of neuroscience with the mindful. It's really,
really great. I'm very, very glad that we stopped circling each other and finally managed to sit
down. I look forward to speaking to you again soon as well. Where should people go? They want to
keep up to date with all of the things that you're doing? Where do you want to send them?
arthurbrooks.com. That gives you links. I write a column every week in the Atlantic on the science
of happiness every Thursday morning, and it has the books and the videos and the workshops,
a lot of free stuff and surveys and clips to my favorite podcast like Modern Wisdom.
Well, that is the way that I wanted to hear you finish out. Dude, I really appreciate you. It's
been really, really great to catch up. Thanks. Thanks for what you're doing. You've made my life
better and you're making millions of people live more mindfully and better in their lives with more
love. Thank you for doing it. I appreciate you. Thank you, man. If you enjoyed that episode,
you will love a selection of the best clips from the podcast over the last couple of months,
and it's available right here. Go on. Give them a watch.
