You just did Piers Morgan.
Um, well, I, it was like a live segment from this morning.
Sure.
Yeah.
Okay.
Yeah.
How was that?
Is that the first time you spoke into it?
Yeah.
All right.
What did you think?
Uh, it was okay.
It could have been way worse.
It could have been way better.
They brought me in.
It was a segment on like, um, the differences between like Trump and
Biden and their senility, basically as Biden's senility going to be a huge
problem.
And my opposite person is like Tommy Lauren, and it's a very much like
mainstream media opinion, like, or a mainstream media appearance.
So it's like, give me your like 30 seconds, splurge, give me your 30
seconds, splurge, and the next question.
And I hate that bag at fourth, like drives me crazy.
So.
Well, I mean, it says everything that we're having a discussion about who is
the most senile among all of the different politicians that might influence
the future.
Yeah.
What a world.
But at the end of the day, the voters only have themselves to blame.
So that's true.
But then I guess you can only vote for the people that are there.
No, there's a lot of people to vote for.
These are the two most popular ones.
I think that the system is delivering the people that have the
widest support right now.
Yeah.
Right.
People, they might not be universally liked, but you only have to have a
plurality of the support to make it through.
Like people are looking at you like, ah, I guess, like, sure.
But people might not like them.
Like 80% of people might not like Biden or 80% of people might not like
Trump, but those 80% of people don't all agree on who should run instead.
So that's the issue.
Right.
Yeah.
Interesting.
I wonder if people could coordinate better, whether or not you
would have better outcomes.
I don't know.
Vice media shutting down, no longer publishing.
Have you seen this?
Are they shutting down or are they just not going to publish
articles on that website anymore?
That's technically what it is.
In a memo to Vice employees Thursday, CEO Bruce Dixon said that the
company will be cutting several hundred jobs in the next week as part of its
major restructuring vice will discontinue publishing content to its own website.
And instead we'll put more emphasis on our social channels as we
accelerate our discussions with partners to take our content to where it
will be viewed most broadly.
What do you think?
Cool.
I guess.
Does anybody read like website stuff from vice?
I feel like they were most known for the YouTube video content, like the
investigative journal stuff.
I should know the lady's name.
I wish I did, but she does really cool stuff.
I remember she went to China to investigate the Uyghur stuff.
Yes.
She like, she does a lot of cool stuff.
There are a couple of cool things on vice in terms of what I've seen for
video content.
I don't read their website as well.
So I don't know.
I mean, vice is one of those things where when you do see articles shared,
it's usually like rage sharing, you know, white people can't suffer racism or
like some, some, something that seems to be purposefully that almost like
rage trigger people to click on it.
Sure.
But I have definitely enjoyed me some vice mini documentaries, 20 minute, 30
minute, you know, lunchtime viewing things on YouTube.
I've seen one, there's a bunch that they do about party culture in the UK about
like aging rage of ravers, like people still doing drugs in their 50s, 60s,
70s, like classic Larry British people.
Okay.
So that's good.
But I don't know.
I just wonder, you know, you just did Piers Morgan, Tucker Carlson has left
his sort of mainstream credentials behind and moved independent.
Piers is leaving talk TV and going to basically be a full-time YouTuber,
essentially, although it'll probably be a little bit more advanced than that.
I don't know.
It just seems like there's some interesting movements.
Maybe it's more so in the video side of things, but you know, that was vice's
written content and that's being pivoted.
What do you think?
What's the state of modern media landscape and what do you think's in the future?
I don't know.
It's different from different perspectives.
As a content creator, my guess is going to be alternative media is probably a lot
more money.
Mainstream media is probably a lot more exposure.
That'd be my guess.
In terms of, are we moving towards a more alternative media landscape where
everybody is consuming alternative media?
That's kind of already happening or has already happened.
In some ways, mainstream media has kind of integrated itself into alternative media.
So people might get all of their, for instance, their news through Facebook or
Twitter, but that might be coming in the form of headlines for mainstream media
publications.
Um, I would definitely say it feels like we've moved past, especially with Tucker
Carlson leaving, it feels like we've moved past the age of the pundit where you
had these like huge, like larger than life figures, like the Anderson Coopers, the,
the Tucker Carlson's, the Bill O'Reilly's, the John Stuart, I guess, is back now.
He's just pivoted back.
Yeah.
Um, well, he tried to go to Apple and there was some editorial differences, I think,
that caused issues at Apple and then he'd wanted to bring up some stuff to do
with China and that wasn't allowed.
And yeah, he ended up basically going full circle back to somewhere that oddly
had more freedom or at least editorial freedom, I think, as far as he was concerned.
Yeah.
Um, yeah, I don't, I have no idea with a, I think we have huge issues in our media
landscape right now.
I don't think they're necessarily tied into mainstream versus alternative, but I
know that that's where everybody's fixated on.
Um, what is the, what should people be more concerned about then with regards to
media landscape?
Epistemic grounding.
Uh, we live in like completely different worlds more today than we ever have.
And it's probably true every single day that our factual understanding of the
world has diverged so much between the different like groups that it's becoming
unworkable or maybe has already become unworkable, such that I think, I think it
was finally when the Jewish space lasers were clearing out real estate for Oprah
in Hawaii that I realized I was like, Oh my God, nothing can happen anymore as it
is there where we're past anything ever happening that just happens.
There are going to be no more normal plane crashes.
They're going to be no more diseases.
They're going to be no more vaccines.
It's all going to be a conspiracy.
It's all going to be a secret missile attack.
It's all going to be a secret Jewish super weapon.
It's all going to be a secret Bill Gates microchip.
Like nothing can happen anymore without it being part of some grand narrative or
grand design, which I think is really sad.
Why?
Why, um, like what's the undercurrent that's driving that?
Is it just a multiplicity of different people being able to comment on it?
Is it the fact that free access to information means that everyone has a
different perspective on the same story?
Is it the fact that there's no centralized, uh, flow of information, which
is giving someone like the narrative?
Somebody sent me an email a while ago that I thought was really interesting.
I think it was just his idea.
I think he called it like the magic box idea or something.
And basically, I think as humans, we become further and further separated from
the actual things that are happening with everything that we interact with.
So for instance, um, if I do the oldest example, you're from like an abacus, right?
Yes.
Right.
Yeah.
Like I can see the math happening there.
I know exactly what's happening.
You can't lie to me about an abacus.
Okay.
Um, if I have a calculator, it's a relatively simple device.
It only does math.
I can see exactly what's going on as the devices become more and more complicated
and you become less and less aware of what's happening under the hood.
It becomes easier for you to insert more random stuff that you're not aware of.
So like nobody thought that an abacus would track you.
Nobody really thought a calculator would, but as your phone tracking you, is it
listening to every single word you're saying, even with no evidence presented
for any of these ideas, which there never has been, that your phone is secretly
listening to you and recording stuff and because a lot of people on tech sites have
like tried to investigate this, people still think it.
And I think that that example with phones can be blown up to literally everything
from carbureted to feel injected cars, from bureaucratic organizations that might
just like manage a local level thing to the FDA that does, you know, vaccine
approval on a nationwide level, from literally every single thing in our
life, things that we used to look at and kind of understand, things have gotten so,
so, so complicated that I think that people are kind of starting to fill in
the blanks very easily and quickly with a lot of other stuff.
There's no real way to like argue against them, you know.
And you will slot into it stuff that just fits your priors, your biases, some
half remembered truth or some whim or hearsay.
And you just sort of throw this into the workings.
The abacus example, whoever gave you that, that's a really smart.
Just thought of that on the spot.
Really?
You got it, you got it on the view.
That wasn't any original.
No, that was me.
You got a destiny, original analogy right on the spot.
This is some real shit right here.
But no, yeah, it's, you can see the working.
You can see step by step what's laid out in front of you, but people weren't given
the workings of what was happening in government or in war or in news previously.
There was still a degree of opaqueness to what was happening.
So what is it that's different between a hundred years ago and now?
I think that ironically enough, the people that seem to have the biggest
problems with liberalism, with like freedom and everything.
So I'd say the anti-institutional people that are like, well, we need to bring
back religion and kind of like conservative social values or whatever.
I think that they've, to some extent, fallen to be the biggest victims of, I hate to
say this, because we're liberal, like too much liberalism, too much freedom.
And that there's probably some important guardrails that kind of keep us in track
or in check about like how we need to live our life.
Like in a given like tribe, it's probably good if there's like shame around like
eating poop or having like sexual attraction towards children or trying to stab
and kill somebody.
Like there are some socially cohesive elements that are good that we all kind
of like enforce these things to kind of keep everybody a little bit in line.
Whereas today, because we have so much freedom with the internet, which is the
thing that has changed our life more than anything else in the past 20 and 30 years.
Nobody wants to talk about it.
They just talk about it's either feminism or it's Red Pill or it's Space Lasers or
it's Biden in the deep state.
But the internet has dramatically changed in such a quick time period.
It's such a quick time period.
Right.
When I was in grade school, cell phones didn't really exist.
Not really.
Not like they do today.
Yeah, same.
Things have changed so much.
And now people have the ability to select for their world way more than they ever
did.
And that is incredibly damaging because there's some amount of friction that is
incredibly healthy for the human mind.
It's good to be able to step into a room.
Look at like grade school or high school or college.
Everybody manages to make friends, but it's not because they all swiped right on
each other to get the perfect match of qualities.
It's because when humans spend time together, they learn to ease the friction
and they kind of get along with each other.
But now that we have the ability to hyper select for every single fucking thing
that we want, it is, I think it's incredibly damaging to the human mind
because it lets us select for too many things that we no longer have to become
comfortable with.
Like an example I would use is that like, you know, if 30 years ago, if I really
wanted to fuck my toaster, I'm probably not going to fuck it that much.
I'm probably not going to talk about it that much.
Absolutely not.
Um, and I don't even know if I'd be able to find like a, like a, anybody or
any camaraderie, it would just be really rough.
But today I could probably type in like toaster fucking recommendations and get
like the top 10 models ranked from like quickest to slowest orgasm for like
toasters that I want to fuck.
And now I've got like a whole world of people that all support my toaster fucking
ambitions.
And that's funny for the toaster fucking thing.
But when we talk about like vaccines or COVID or education or the FDA or the
deep state or and your Tate or any of these things, well, now it gets like really scary.
And that's the world we're in where you can select for your reality rather than
having to deal with the reality that might not be as much fun to deal with.
Right.
So it allows echo chambers to continue to propagate.
There was something, you may have seen this, someone explained where Emos went.
And they basically talked about the lack of development of subgroups that they kind
of come together briefly and then sort of fracture off into other.
I mean, you'll remember like Emos and Gothen, like there was genuine cemented subgroups.
Maybe they only existed for five years or something, but they were there, right?
There was like an actual, they had an identity and they had dress and they had
all the rest of the stuff.
But I wonder whether the sort of universality of everybody trying to optimise for
the same things, which is really like clicks and attention online, no matter who
you are, even if you're just like some normal person that wants to have like more
fans and more friends on Instagram and be more popular in school or have a better
Snapchat streak or whatever the hell it is.
I wonder whether there is something about this universal currency of status where
everyone eventually has to play that game because there's only a few routes to be
able to be successful within that one thing.
And the same thing is going to be true of your ability to sense make.
Like there's only so many different paths that you can have to be able to reach
that or to be able to be successful as a fucking newscaster or to be able to be
successful and catch attention online.
So I wonder, I wonder how much of this is just people trying to, trying to make
sense of the world and instead what they do is find things that confirm their
biases and then just sit and steep in those groups.
But for some reason it doesn't seem to cohese in the same way that it used to.
That's, it's really interesting to say that because I have another theory or
idea on how society is like kind of falling apart, not falling apart, splitting
apart, and it plugs into that perfectly.
And that I think that people aren't fundamentally different today than they
have been for the past hundred thousand years.
We're all humans.
We have more or less the same.
Raw materials.
Yeah.
The, the biggest thing that I think has changed, there's two things happening
right now and that we're becoming more separated than we ever have been and
more similar than we ever have been.
And the way that I feel like this is working is people are withdrawing into
two separate groups that are enforcing within these groups an insane amount of
homogeneity.
And I think the reason why this is happening is because it feels like our
communities have gotten larger and larger and larger and larger and larger and larger.
So for instance, um, it might be that maybe 30 or 40 years ago, maybe I
super identify with the kids in my neighborhood, um, you know, because when I
was growing up, the people that you hung out with was whoever you could walk to
or when you were old enough, whoever you could bite to, this is your community.
These are the people that you hang out with.
Um, you develop ideas, you develop intense, at least for me, like high school
rivalries between football teams, between like, yeah, like that's like your
community.
Um, and then when you get a little bit older, maybe you identify as an adult
with your neighborhood, maybe you identify with a city that you're in or a
political group in your city or sports team or whatever.
I think that these were, that maybe it might be like older, it might have been
like, uh, churches or unions that you're in.
Um, these are the things that I think people identified with and they have,
they enforce a lot of homogeneity in these groups, which is probably normal
to some extent, right?
You're going to want people around you to be very similar.
That's just no hang around with people that align with who you are.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Um, and that could mean appearance and race.
It could mean ideology.
It could be a billion different things that people relate on a lot of
levels, could be religion, but today what's happened is the internet has made
it so that the smaller groups are not really fun to be in.
They don't really feel important.
They don't feel impactful or meaningful.
So instead what happens is, is the group that you're belonging to is larger and
larger and larger forcing homogeneity on a neighborhood that you live in where I'm
from Omaha, Nebraska is a lot different than forcing homogeneity on, you know,
160 million people in the United States versus the other 160 million people.
So, um, to draw back to kind of what you were saying earlier is that as these
groups become larger and larger, it's harder.
I think it feels like it's harder to have these certain types of subcultures
and everything because everybody's part of like this global culture now, which is
all enforced by, um, and facilitated by the internet.
Right.
And then, but you also have, it's interesting that you say both becoming
more similar and more different.
Yeah.
And that we're getting further apart because these different groups are flying
away from each other at the speed of light.
Yes.
Um, but within these groups, you have to have a
cohesive opinion, right?
You have to have an opinion.
If you're, if you work in a warehouse in Alabama, you still have to have an
opinion on whether or not Leah Thomas could be in, uh, an athlete in college or
whether you, you know, if you work in, uh, or live in Seattle, you need to have
an opinion on AOC or if you live in LA, you need to have an opinion on whether
we should be supporting Ukraine or Israel.
And like, yeah, these, the huge global culture has extended beyond the neighborhoods
and the churches, everything to include everybody.
Yeah.
Everybody has a phone or the internet.
The number of things that you need to have an opinion on or the number of
things that you're exposed to has increased the level of purity and
agreement within the group that you need to adhere to in order to not be
ostracized by the group has also increased a little bit.
I think that is a, I would say that that's probably like an artifact.
So it feels like you have to be more pure, but it's not really that you have
to be more pure.
It's just that there are so many more issues that you probably have to be more
there's more ways to get wrong.
So like, yeah, yeah, exactly.
So like, for instance, like 20 years ago, uh, I don't know if there would have
been a social group enforcement on like the type of beer that you're drinking.
But after the, whatever the trans Bud Light stuff was or Budweiser stuff was,
that might be part of your group now.
It's not that they've gotten more pure and that they demand more
rigidity to the ideas than they used to.
It's that now there are more ideas that you have to adhere to basically.
Yeah.
So it appears like they're more pure, but it's just more stuff that you have to
keep in mind.
Yeah.
I think Bud Light is a really fascinating little canary in the coal mine of sort
of modern culture.
And I've had a number of conversations about this where when Bud Light happened,
it was a huge big deal.
Bud Light was almost like a simulacrum for America.
It's like, see, this is something that used to be pure and, and, and, and
patriotic and it was, it was.
Trucks and eagles and yeah, all of that.
I'd love to see what's happened.
These, these wokeys have come along and they've, they've annihilated it and,
and, and all the rest of it.
And then full circle only, when was that 12 months ago, 18 months ago?
It wasn't more than two years ago when that happened with Dylan Mulvaney, right?
It was in the last two years.
And now you kid rock, the guy that shot the fucking cans with an AR-15 is
drinking it on Rogan's.
I bought $10,000 a stock.
I think like the day after all that broke.
And I, yeah, my, it was obvious.
It was like so stupid, right?
Yeah.
I posted those games on Twitter.
I was like, thanks, conservatives.
Yeah.
What did it go, what, where did you go from and to?
How far is that?
I don't remember.
I don't remember what it did.
I just don't beat that.
But it's moved, it's moved a good amount.
Yeah.
But yeah, it just seems to me.
The speed with which people will foam finger wave for or against something and
then forget the position that they held so vehemently.
I really, really have a huge problem with people that are like so adamant that
a thing is true and then only shortly after that are so adamant that a thing
is either no longer true or they don't recognize what they said before without
at least going, ah, do you know what it is?
Maybe, but like, weren't the, you know, like libtard wokeies that I thought that
they were, maybe that was just one malignant marketing campaign that went
around or whatever, like just show your working, like show your thinking to
take you from where you were to where you are, because it just sounds an
awful lot like wherever the tide sort of comes in and wherever the tide goes
out, that you kind of get ripped along with it.
And I don't know.
It's one of the reasons why I'm quite skeptical of people who don't caveat
much about what they say.
If you speak in absolutes, like you better be certain because my threshold to speak
with that amount of certainty that I know that this company is one thing or I
know that this company is another thing, it's like, it's pretty high.
So you either don't know what you're talking about or have done tons of work,
which should be evident in the way that you speak about it.
I have lots of ideas about this.
The first thing, the first thing to be a criticism of people in general, it
feels like nobody's capable of having a moderate reaction to anything.
I'm going to be honest when I saw the Bud Light stuff and the trend, I thought
it was cringe, but like, that's not a reaction that people can have anymore.
It's either the worst fucking thing in the world or it's like the most
important foundational bedrock part of LGBT, like nothing can just be like, oh,
that was kind of dumb or oh, that was kind of cringe or not kind of like that.
It has to be zero to 100.
So that's really annoying.
Um, a second thing is, uh, let's see, changing opinions or people that felt
like they had strong opinions about one thing that have changed dramatically.
Uh, these are two things.
I talk to my stream a lot about these things, watching the evolution of my
parents beliefs politically has been unreal to me.
Um, my dad, my mom and my dad, uh, my mom is from Cuba.
Uh, so she's a Cuban immigrant, very, uh, pro-American people in general,
very pro-Republican people.
We all cried when Alianca Salas got shipped back to Cuba under Bill Clinton
and Hayden and blah, blah, blah.
Um, my mom and dad are very patriotic.
Okay.
20 years in the air force for both of them.
My dad, when, if you join the military in the United States, it's probably
true in every country in the world.
When you join the military, you get a ton of vaccines.
Okay.
You just, they up and down the line, it's like 20 shots.
You don't even know what you're getting.
Right?
That's what they do.
Uh, my dad actually had a vaccine injury and it is deltoid such that, um, he can't
really raise his arm very well, like past this level and that he gets like paid
disability from the air force from that.
It's a real injury from vaccines.
Okay.
Despite that, when we grew up, you had to get your vaccine.
It was a non-negotiable.
My mom would never even think for two seconds that like her children would not
be vaccinated.
It wouldn't, it wouldn't even be a second thought.
Um, today, I think we've had three family members so far die from COVID.
My mom will not get any of the COVID shots.
And I don't think she trusts any vaccines at all anymore.
Um, so the evolution of her belief on that has been crazy.
And I'm sure there's a lot of Republicans that have followed the same path.
The evolution of the treatment of Russia, when I grew up, I heard all about the
chai comms, the Chinese communists.
I heard all about, uh, you know, red China and the Soviets.
She would always refer to Russia as a Soviet Union.
Um, and today for her opinion on, you know, the rush is like, I guess whatever,
Stevie, but it's not our deal.
We don't have to be concerned with it, whatever.
Um, that's insane to me.
The difference in treatment between the demeanor of the president, I remember my
mom came home one day, uh, and she was crying over the Monica Lewinsky stuff.
And I didn't understand it.
God was super young at the time.
Um, and she was trying to tell me that like, you don't understand, like the
president is the commander in chief of the armed forces, the way that he treats
women, that rolls down to everybody.
And my commanding officer is going to treat me this way.
I already have to deal with all the sexism in the Air Force.
And then for her to listen to those Trump grabbing by the pussy tape.
So she's like, come on, Stevie, boys will be boys.
It happens.
It's not a big deal, blah, blah, blah.
That is, yeah, that, that.
Yeah, that's, that's wild.
Yeah, it's insane to me.
Um, there's two, there's two underlying things.
There are two really important things to keep in mind that have taken me too long
to figure out.
One is that people don't genuinely, uh, generate beliefs from some consistent
underlying system.
They inherit constellations of beliefs that all kind of rely on each other from
social groups.
So if you join a social group that says, um, like Andrew Tate is innocent, they
probably also think that Donald Trump is a victim of the deep state, that there's
a swamp that needs to be drained.
They think that the election was stolen.
They think that the vaccines are fake.
They think that space lasers probably did have something to do with Hawaii.
Um, they don't trust the FDA.
Um, they think that, um, we shouldn't be wasting time with Russia and Ukraine
and Putin is probably more on the right than we want to admit.
They like, they, they have all these beliefs that are part of the constitution.
And it's, it's true for the left as well.
I'm not like, I'm bullying people on the right, but it's true for the left as well.
Um, that they have these, these constellations as well.
But the, the thing that bothers me the most, and then I'm sorry, I'm wrapping
this up, I have to, yeah, the thing that bothers me the most is, um, I did this
for a little bit and then I stopped because it was truly depressing.
I thought that people are just kind of dumb.
They don't do any research or homework.
You get these like constellations of beliefs and you don't realize how wrong you are.
So what I started to do was for big content creators, if you're going to make a
big claim and your job is alternative media, bet some fucking money on it.
Okay.
If you think that Trump is going to win and you're 99% sure at 99%, you
should be able to give me not 50 to one odds then on a hundred bucks.
You're 99% sure.
One to 99.
Okay.
Sure.
When I started making bets with people on stuff like that, I expected people to
tell me to fuck off or I expected people to take the bet because
they were overconfident, but a third thing started happening.
It was incredibly surprising to me that actually aligns with, you know, Peter
Bogosian, yes, yeah, it aligns with a lot of the stuff I've seen him do.
Somebody will say something like Trump is winning the next election 99% and I'll
be like, Oh, okay, do you want to bet?
I'll, I'll take a thousand dollars and if I'm right, you pay me a hundred grand.
Okay.
Cause you're that confident.
And instead of telling me to fuck off or instead of saying, you know, whatever,
what they actually do is they start to speak and all of a sudden I realized they
have all the information in their brain.
They're like, well, hold on.
He could get sick and die.
He could have some senility issues.
He is old, maybe for some of the end diamonds, he might have done stuff.
Other stuff could come out, uh, like it's, it's not even that they are afraid of
the bet or they're just like immediately tell me to fuck off.
It's that they actually do have the information there.
They're capable of exercising the critical thought process.
They just don't most of the time because of the social pressures for our belief
systems.
That was the really.
And I stopped doing it.
I was like, this is insane.
Wait, so you know all this, you know all of the reasons why what you said before
was dumb.
It just took somebody to put a quantitative value on your conviction for you to
appropriately scale back your belief.
That was crazy.
And why was that so depressing to you?
Because I was just telling me they were dumb.
Not that like, not that they actually had all the information, but they were
choosing not to apply it.
I remember when I did a Glenn Greenwald recently, um, who's a hack who the only
recent ever heard his name before is because he happened to be the journalist
that Edward Snowden wanted to dump the, uh, Snowden papers.
Okay.
Um, and we were debating and he was bringing up, it was over the January 6th
Trump stuff and he was bringing up, I studied his videos.
I studied the arguments.
I've read the papers.
I know all the bullshit arguments and he brings up like, oh, well, there was an
elector scheme in Hawaii and you know, they, and now they're doing another one.
And it's the same thing.
And I'm like, hold on the elector scheme in Hawaii, the state legislature approved
both those slits of electorates.
I won't get into the details, but I didn't actually say that.
I was like, well, hold on, wait, the Hawaii thing, what do you mean by bringing
up the Hawaii thing?
And then he actually went into detail about the Hawaii thing.
I was like, wait, so you knew what was going on here.
But you still brought it up as a comparison because he, because once you
bring up all the facts, it's completely different from the Trump thing.
So yeah, my, my view on people as like an internet debater, try to change
people's minds, things have shifted a lot over the years where at first I thought
like people are kind of dumb and they are, they fall into a lot of these bad
thought processes and thought patterns and cognitive biases and blah, blah, blah.
And we do have those, but people are actually a lot smarter than I think
people realize.
And if you treat a person as smart and you present them with the right
information and you try to break them out of like an echo chamber or this
epistemic circularity that they get caught in, I think people can surprise you.
There just has to be that push to do it and a recognition that like you're not
misunderstanding this because you're stupid.
So because there's an immense amount of social pressure that's like boxing you
into this thought product.
In other news, this episode is brought to you by element.
Element is a tasty electrolyte drink mix with everything that you need and
nothing that you don't.
It's a healthy alternative to sugary electrolyte drinks and it will improve
your hydration.
You don't need to have caffeine first thing in the morning because you're a
denicine system that caffeine acts on isn't even active for the first 90
minutes of the day, but your adrenal system is and salt acts on your adrenal
system.
Element contains a science backed electrolyte ratio of sodium, potassium
and magnesium that helps to curb cravings, regulate your appetite and
improve your brain function.
Best of all, there is a no BS, no questions asked refund policy so you
can buy it 100% risk free.
And if you do not like it for any reason, they will give you your money back
and you don't even need to return the box.
That's how confident they are that you love it.
Right now, you can get a free sample pack of all eight flavors with your
first box by going to the link in the description below or heading to
drinklmnt.com slash modern wisdom.
That's drinklmnt.com slash.
Modern wisdom.
I had this idea called the soft signal of effectiveness that there is a
trend on the internet for people to be, you know, the most vehement like
flame sword wielding motherfucker, like I'm going to come for you and I'm
going to tear you down and you make you look stupid.
It's going to be filled with sardonic comments and all the rest of it.
But I think that that activates whoever you're speaking to's defense system.
That's the antibodies just come up.
I don't want to be made to look like a complete idiot.
So I'm just going to stand my ground.
And I think that.
Sure, there's times where ridicule is a useful tool and you can use that to
kind of, oh my God, like that discomfort kind of kicks you out of stuff.
But for the most part, because people just embed themselves into their beliefs,
especially if the fear is I'm going to look stupid or lose status if I get this
wrong, that actually going, okay, well, tell me about that.
So just walk me through your thinking and being a little bit more gentle.
So soft signal of effectiveness being most of the guys that are the real
hardcore vehement, piss taking people.
I don't think that they change behavior particularly well.
And the question is, what is it that you're trying to achieve with this
communication that you're having?
Are you actually trying to get a good outcome of bringing people closer to
something appropriating truth?
Or are you trying to look cool and dunk on the other person during this discussion?
Yeah.
Yeah.
And then you have to be mindful of so much about like they're changing their mind too.
This is something that I kind of bring up, but it feels kind of bad to do this.
But like, if I'm debating somebody who, let's say somebody like Ben Shapiro,
okay, who I respect as an intelligent person, he's clearly intelligent.
He's really good with this company, but Ben Shapiro is a pundit on the daily wire.
And he's the part owner of the daily wire, which is a conservative news outlet.
His livelihood to some extent depends on him remaining in the good graces of a
conservative audience.
So if two studies were to come out tomorrow, the larger studies of all of mankind
prove that socialism and socialized healthcare are the best things to, you know,
increase the standards of living for everybody, for somebody like me, because
I'm not like, I don't have necessarily a political alignment.
I can say like, oh, I changed my mind.
These are like, cool, I follow this now.
But if you're a hardcore dog in on the conservative side, it's going to be really
hard to change your mind on that because that's not what people are coming to you
for is to just hear your unique take some things.
They want a little bit of the reinforcement of the, I don't want to say the echo chamber
they're in, but a little bit of the reinforcement of like the social
constellation of ideas they've inherited.
And then I'm going to start using more left-leaning examples because all your
conservatives are feeling very bullied in your audience right now.
Same thing with on the left that like, when, when research and data was coming
out that for a while, we got way too hyped up on the trans kids stuff.
Okay.
Personally, I still think that there is a strong argument for people under the age
of 18 to have medications made available to them.
Um, and that's a whole other thing you get into, but people got way too gung-ho
about it and you need to be willing to critically accept research that might
not reinforce that position.
And a lot of people on the left were totally unwilling to hear or see any data
that might say that like, oh, you know, um, distance rates might be like this
or giving medication, these people might not produce the best outcomes or some
of these studies aren't the best that we're using for this particular thing.
Um, yeah, people, people have a really hard time accepting information.
Sometimes that is contrary to their, uh, you know, their belief system.
And well, it's part of the acceptance within the group.
And then it's also a, you can think of it kind of like a smooth ball, right?
If you've just accepted this worldview wholesale that it's very easy.
I don't need to do a ton of sense-making myself.
I'm going to be accepted by the group.
Any hole that you pick in one of those things, well, what does this say about my
opinion on immigration or on gun rights or on abortion or on how we should deal
with the Ukraine or on the sense of agency or what we should do with
socialized healthcare, all of these things sort of start to crack and crumble
underneath the pressure of one of these threads becoming unpicked.
Basically, yeah.
And, and more importantly, because of the way that it works as a constellation
and not that they're all uniquely generated, they all are kind of self-reliant
on each other.
Um, it can't be the case that, um, Oh God, my, the past six months has been
fighting with conservatives over Trump.
So that's all my example.
I'm so sorry.
Okay.
Listen, progressives have big problems too, but it just can't be the case
that the FDA is trustworthy.
That can never be the case because if that's the case, the whole premise
of the FDA being untrustworthy has to do with the concept of the deep state.
It has to do with the government being against us.
It has to do with pharmaceuticals being corrupt.
It has stacked on top, on top.
Yeah.
It's all, they're the, they're all like, it's like a Jenga tower, but there's no
foundation.
They all find a way to keep the blocks in the air.
Yeah.
And you can't pull anything out because wait, that does, because everything
would completely totally fall apart.
And the problem when you're in a social group is you can't have an incongruity
of applied ideas because that implies that you have an incongruity in
fundamental values.
What, what, what do you mean the applied ideas?
As in, if I'm with a group of conservatives and I say, I believe in
affirmative action and a $15 an hour minimum wage and the conservatives go,
okay, well, you're, you're an idiot.
You, uh, want to destroy the economy and you're, uh, you know, bigger tree of
low expectations for black people.
Okay.
I don't care what, like our values are fundamentally different.
So our applied positions are obviously going to be different.
I'm, I'm for, uh, and this isn't my personal position.
Like I'd say like, Oh, well, I'm for a minimum wage or for production.
You're not, but that's of course our applied positions are way different.
We have a difference in values.
But if I'm next to somebody that is near me ideologically or supposedly
identical to me ideologically, well, if we start to, um, if we start to separate
on applied positions, so maybe I believe that, um, we need to build more housing
to help homeless people and somebody else says, well, we need to, uh, enact strict
rent control to keep rents down.
If we have a disagreement there, that person isn't going to attack me on the
applied position.
He's not going to say, Oh, you want to build more housing?
Rent control is obviously better.
That person's going to go to the core belief and he's going to say, Oh, well,
you hate homeless people.
Now the core belief attack from somebody close to me hurts a lot more than from
the conservatives.
Like, wait, hold on, I don't hate homeless people.
Right.
And I'm sure it's the same for you in a manosphere.
Uh, well, you're not, I don't, I know you branched out from that, but like,
if you think of like a manosphere or like a red pill person, if they're on a
show with a bunch of feminists and like, you hate women and you're damaging to men
and blah, blah, blah, yeah, you're a feminist.
Obviously we disagree, but if it's two red pillists disagreeing with each other,
like I think that your advice is horrible for young men.
You're not advocating for them or whatever.
It's like, wait, what the fuck do you mean?
That's my whole platform.
What do you mean?
I'm not advocating for them.
Now you've got a huge, uh, disagreement.
I think this is called, I think it's called the, it might be called the bigotry
of small differences, but basically that the, the closer somebody is to you,
ideologically, these little differences seem to, yeah, yes, yes, I've seen this.
There's a really good little process that I went through.
A friend asked me, how do you know if the content creator that you're consuming
is someone that you can trust basically?
How do you know if they're trustworthy?
And the same thing is true, I think for friends.
You can actually use this for friends just as easily as for content creators.
Yeah.
So if they're subscribed to my channel, youtube.com.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, that would help.
But first one, when was the last time that this person surprised you with an opinion?
Uh, second one, when was the last time that they publicly admitted that they were wrong
about something?
Third one is, does their in-group bind together of the mutual love of their in-group
or the mutual hatred of an out-group?
And then the fourth one was, do they speak to people with
differing points of views and value sets for reasons other than mocking them?
And if you go through those four steps, and there's probably like a million others,
they're just like kind of obvious ones for me.
There's no one really that triggers at least a few of those that is also a shite stuff.
Like it's very rare, unless they're doing it performatively and playing some 5D chess,
it's very rare that someone goes through those things.
And I think that even using that for yourself, whether you're someone that creates
shit online or just wants to be able to make sense of the world, thinking, okay,
when was the last time that I admitted that I was wrong?
When was the last time that I had an opinion that people would have probably been surprised by?
When was the last time that I consumed a piece of content that I probably
going to disagree with? Do the people that I hang around with, do we mostly talk about
things that are shared values or shared hatreds? It's just a nice little process to go through.
And that's helped me, we consume content too. Like the people that make it also consume it,
you're sat waiting for an Uber or doing whatever, you're waiting for someone to arrive and you're
like, I'll see, I'll watch Taylor Lorenz versus the Libs of TikTok lady, and I'll see what goes on.
And you start to form opinions about this sort of stuff. So I think it's important,
like that's just a really nice self-correcting mechanism or at least like a
process that you can go through that helps. Yeah, I definitely, I super agree. Yeah.
I would add on to that for an individual that's listening to this or for content creators or
whatever too. Something that I've helped a lot is don't try to free yourself from biases. I think
that this is a fool's errand and I think it lures you into a false sense of security.
I think it's better to just be aware of like cognitive pitfalls and then try to correct
for them afterwards. So for instance, you mentioned that thing about getting upset,
people will dig in. I absolutely dig my fucking heels in. I will. And if I don't like you enough,
and if we're arguing passionately enough, I'll argue that two plus two equals five,
if I disagree with you that much. And I know that about myself and I know that that's the thing.
I'm not going to claim that that doesn't happen and I'm not going to spend my entire life trying
to make it so that that doesn't happen. I'm not going to get mad. I'm not going to mad.
But instead, what it'll do is listen, when I argue, I get heated, I know that. But the next day,
if I've got a big argument, I'm going to review it because when I'm removed from the argument
over 24 hours, now I can go over and it's like, okay, did this person make a good point? I feel
like I didn't have a good response to this. Like, do I need to strike them my argument?
Were they better on some things? And I need to just like take parts of their argument.
Like being able to correct for biases rather than to try to eliminate them is a way healthier
mindset. When I was doing research as well on certain podcasts, fuck, the conservatist
still comes again. But like for Dr. Malone, the guy who said he was the father of the mRNA vaccine
when he was on Joe Rogan, before I started doing research, and I would do a lot of this on stream,
I would write at the top of a notepad for claims I want to write. The first thing I would write
is I do not like Joe Rogan's opinion on vaccines. I don't trust Dr. Robert Malone at all. The reason
why I write these two things down is because I know that this is priming me to disagree with
anything that they say. So I have to be extra careful when one of them says something like,
oh, well, you know, oranges actually make your dick bigger. I might just think immediately,
like this is so stupid and write that because I hate both of them. But I need to keep in mind,
okay, hold on, I know that I'm primed like crazy against both of these guys, I'm aware of that.
So I need to be careful when I am evaluating their claims because I might just say that they're
not true because I just don't like them. Like adjusting your sight on a... Basically, yeah,
the zeroing on your brain. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, zeroing in on your brain. That's a nice way to put
it. Yeah, you have to just like try to correct for biases or be aware of them, but don't pretend
that you can get rid of them. You absolutely cannot. There's no way as a human being.
Do you think that the debates that you do help to change minds? Obviously, you've spent, you've
got this big one coming up and you've done it a number over the last few months. And it's like
a high price, although you're interested, right? You're engaged and stuff. What do you think is
the net outcome of you sitting down with Glenn Greenwald and Alex Jones, or you sitting down
with Norman Finkelstein and Lex Redman or whatever? I think there's several things that happen. One
is that hopefully, this is a broad, broad, broad narrative thing, but hopefully it shapes the
views a little bit of both sides. So if you're a pro-Palestinian and you hear me argue, maybe you
moderate a tad on some of the things that you're saying about how evil and bloodthirsty Israeli
citizens are. If you're a super big Zionist and you hear me argue, hopefully you moderate a bit on
your opinion. It's like, okay, maybe Israel has made some mistakes historically. And then if you're
homeless in the middle, those are the people that I try to like scoop up basically are people who
email me and let's say like, Hey, I was really big on this pro-Palestinian stuff, but all the
demonstrations and the pro-Hamas stuff made me feel really like crazy and not at home. I'm glad
that I found something that's reasonable or maybe it's like, Hey, I'm like a super pro-Zionist guy,
but you know, I'm really uncomfortable with how much people support like the mass settlements and,
you know, the demonization of Palestinians and pretending like we never have to make any
concessions ever. And I'm glad that you're there. So yeah, I try to like kind of scoop up the people
who are a little bit politically homeless right now. And then hopefully I can kind of soften the
positions on both sides, depending on what particular issue that I'm arguing with.
Which is presumably why you've got a problem with the short soundbite thing because it doesn't allow
the entirety of the conversation to be encapsulated.
Yeah, basically. And people, I don't like short soundbites because people don't engage with them
like short soundbites. I don't make 30 second videos. If you hear me say something in 30 seconds,
that's going to be an excerpt from a larger conversation. If you hear me say something like,
destiny says that Palestinians have historically always been violent towards Israel. Okay.
I think that's a true statement. That's a soundbite that you can cut. And if you have that soundbite,
what you would say is like, in my opinion, you can say like, Oh, destiny believes that
Palestinians have historically always been violent towards the state of Israel. That's fine.
But you can't take that and say destiny thinks that Palestinians are solely to blame for the
problems in between Israel, Palestine, or destiny only thinks it's Palestinians who have made
mistakes historically with Israel, Palestine, like people will extrapolate so much from one clip
instead of just watching a larger conversation or getting more of a holistic view on what's
going on, you know, it like the equivalent would be like you hear a friend, like if we conducted
ourselves in the real world, like people treat content creators, you'd be hanging out with a
friend and you'd be like, Hey, what do you want to eat? And your friend was like, you know what,
I can really go for a pizza right now. And you're like pizza, do you hate all Indian food?
Like what do you mean? No, I just want a pizza. Do you hate steak? No, I just wanted a pizza.
Okay, well, you just said that you like pizza. Do you not like any other type of food? Or it's
just like so bizarre that you think in 20 seconds you can get a clip and have a full summary of
like what somebody has thought about an issue or said about an issue. Did you watch how much
have you got to watch that Taylor Lorenz versus Libs of TikTok debate? Did you watch much of it?
I watched there is a part of it was posted on Twitter, I think like three minutes and I watched
that was a how much how much I get 15 minutes into it. Okay. And it was a car crash. It was
so you say that books should be banned from schools, which books have you read? And it was
like, I've actually read this one and this one. And this one, you think that children's body parts
should be cut off, which parts exactly? And it was just like this, I don't know, like an
unstoppable object in an immovable force, like just clashing up against each other.
And Taylor Lorenz has got this mask on outside, which just seems to be like it's like purpose
yeah, like it's like, this is my joke that like every single like, if somebody like,
so many Democrats got long COVID, so many Republicans got vaccine injuries. It's
just so crazy how that worked out, you know, every, every conservative they got vaccinated and
those 10 people that have died from vaccines and every Democrat seems to know like five people
with long COVID is crazy how the it sorted itself out that way, you know? Yeah. What's the,
because there's woke fishing, what's the other one like trad fishing, I guess, but this is like
trad triggering, right? It's like purposefully doing thing. Say what you want about Taylor Lorenz,
like she knows the optics of what she's doing. Have you seen her Instagram?
Oh, no, I'm not. It's just, I don't need to spend too much time on it, but it's a lot of
like meta memes about what's going on kind of about the situations about all the rest of it.
So she's obviously playing this like huge. Oh, do you think, do you think that the mask was part
of the meme then? Absolutely. Oh, I have so much more respect for her if that's the case. 100%.
I thought she was like, oh, that's really funny then. I saw it and I was just like, oh God,
why people still wearing masks outside? It's 100% because she knew that by sitting down doing it
that I think I'm not calling Taylor Lorenz a media genius. Like I think that she's like pretty
reliably an idiot, but there are certain things that she's able to play, like certain games that
she's able to play where she's doing that. And the reason that I think this, I've got my biases
based on her Instagram and her Instagram is very meta. It's all about the narratives about her
or about what she's been talking about or whatever. And if you saw it, you'd go,
yeah, like it takes a degree of sort of stepping out from it and seeing it from where it is.
It doesn't make her points or her any better of a person, but...
Interesting. Yeah, I think the mask was a bit.
I'll check that out later then. That's pretty funny.
Yeah, it's pretty funny. It is pretty funny. The only thing I would have made it better,
I guess, is if she showed up with like a little bandaid on her arm for that.
I just got my 7th boost.
Yeah, 50th booster shot, yeah.
I had this conversation the other day about whether or not we've passed peak woke,
like whether or not we did about a year and a half ago. That's my guess.
When would it have been?
I feel like... I think that there have been a couple court cases. One was near,
I think it was about two years ago, it was at a school called Overland Something.
And I think a black person tried to steal something from a bakery across the school.
And the students and the bakery called the cops and they know the person there.
And the students protested saying the bakery was racist,
but the college joined in with the students, basically. And I think that
college basically ended up owing like $30 million to the bakery over that lawsuit. It was huge.
There was that, there was the whole flushing the Harvard and the two other
administrators get raked over the coals on the weird, yeah.
That was really cringe. And I think most people saw it as such.
I think a lot of the pro-Palestinian stuff, which is unfortunate because they do need
good international representation, but the marches and all of that was not good publicity for them.
Yeah. And I just, I feel like people are looking at all kinds of the
council culture stuff a little bit less. I feel like anecdotally, like the word retard
is coming back a bit more. It is. Shingolas used the word gay in his SNL. Did you watch this?
I have not. Oh, he was gay and cracker, didn't he?
He was great. Gay, cracker and retard.
Okay. All in.
My chat said that and they said I need to watch it because he said gay and cracker.
And retard. Okay. Wow. So yeah, he's doing this bit about how as a young boy, you're basically
your mom's gay best friend. And he says, you remember that? You remember when you were
young and you were just gay and then starts rolling into the gay. So he kind of tempers
it a little bit and plays it down the line. But yeah, I think you're right. I think,
like those words coming back into resurgence. And there was a novelty around this,
like actually being woke, being aware of all of the different social issues and this sort of
performative empathy, toxic compassion thing that was like novel and made you seem progressive
and aware. And now it seems like a meme. Yeah. And it also, it didn't really penetrate as much
as people thought it would. It's very funny because the perception in the United States,
fuck I'm about to bully conservatives again, the reception in the United States is that
the far left was a huge problem. And there might be some extremists on the right or whatever.
But the reality is the far left didn't make it anywhere legislatively. Of the of the justice
stems that got in, they've moderated so much that now the wokeies have abandoned them. They're
super angry about Bernie Sanders and his position on Israel Palestine. They've not liked AOC for a
long time because they thought she sold out to Pelosi and she's not attacking other Democrats
as much. So they have no power in the lawmaking bodies. Largely speaking, like older Americans
don't vibe with the super woke stuff basically at all. And the only place that these people kind
of have powers in like school administration is going to say, and even for like some of the school
stuff, people are kind of looking at this like this is getting kind of silly. You're not seeing
like the huge protests and demonstrations like you used to against like the Milo Yiannopoulos
and everything. But on the right, their party is about to jump off a cliff following Donald Trump.
Something like 80% of Republicans would literally follow Donald Trump to the end of the earth,
which is a big problem for the Republican Party, but they seem to not think that they're kind of
captured by anything. So it's funny that for the most part, like the Democratic Party and Democratic
voters are basically like center left. And they kind of like got tugged along a little bit with
like the crazy woke stuff. But now they're kind of like, this is like whatever. But on the far
right, I think it's something like, I say far right, but it's the majority of Republicans,
I think it's something like 70% of them don't believe in the results of the last election.
They think that it was actually rigged.
Like when you look at policies in terms of far right, disbelieving the last election versus
allowing trans fucking like child porn bucks in schools or whatever the neck, the most recent
accusation is, I don't know whether people would find an equivalency between those two things.
The biggest problem that I think are the thing that people oftentimes underrate is how pervasive
the belief is. So for instance, like Nazism in the alt right, in my opinion, was a big concern
because of the type of belief that it was, but it never really picked up that much.
It was a fringe belief.
Yeah, it was a fringe, right? And then that and I had a huge problem from 2016 onwards of like,
you know, like people on the left calling everybody a fucking Nazi.
I'm like, bro, do you, no, stop. Then I have a neo-Nazis. It's not a good label to call all
of these people Nazis, all these people alt right. It doesn't make any sense.
And I agreed, like I said, for the, especially for the trans stuff, although I think we've moved
past like the peak culture moment for that, although a lot of that was also, it continued
to be perpetuated because conservatives apparently had nothing else to talk about besides trans
people. So they fed into it a lot as well.
That's true, man. I mean, we saw so much of the discourse was not necessarily about the first
incident. It was about the reaction to the incident and the subsequent reaction to the reaction
and the discourse that came out about that. And also the overreact. This goes back to the
moderated reactions thing. I feel this is a totally unsubstantiated belief. I can't prove
this at all, just my feeling. I feel like a lot of parents got mad about stuff in school libraries
and about what their kids were in class, not because it's gotten worse than it ever has been,
but because with COVID and with children staying home for the first time ever, parents are actually
looking at the curriculum of whether children were learning. And for the first time ever,
they were like, wait, what the fuck is this? Like, well, it's not, not a problem just because
you're not aware of it. Sure, which I agree. But I have an issue with people thinking that stuff
has become uniquely bad. Something that I believe in very firmly is I think the downfall of Andrew
Tate, I also can't prove this. I think the downfall of Andrew Tate started with those stories that
came out of the UK about little boys in class bullying little girls using Andrew Tate stuff.
Those stories got huge. And then the talk of like our little boys in school learning things
from Andrew Tate and blah, blah, blah. And it was horrible. And people, you know, had, you know,
we get very defensive about children in many ways. Yeah. But the thing that I was thinking was
like, yeah, I'm sure this is happening. And it's definitely horrible. But how much are we just now
seeing, you know, little boys and girls bullying each other in school? Because we've got cell phones
in front of everybody. This isn't a new thing. And I'm not saying it's okay. But like, we've always
bullied the fuck out of each other to school. Yes. Yeah. So to circle back, I'm not defending
the whatever weird trans books or sex or gay sex guides or whatever exist in school libraries.
I'm sure they're out there and I'm sure a lot of them are inappropriate and dumb. But like,
there's a switch. Thank God it hasn't happened to me yet. But parents like flip a switch when
they become parents, where they forget every single thing about being a kid. And they're like,
Oh my God, this is the worst thing ever. I can't believe my kid is fucking seeing this shit and
blah, blah, blah. And it's like, when I was a kid, I don't know if it was like this UK,
but I remember staying up at night, where you would go to like, it was channel 14 and 15. And
it was like the cinemax like softcore. Yeah. But it was like blurry. But like every now and then
that it would like come through half a boob kind of see like the boob and it was like green. Yeah.
That's what we did as kids. But I feel like if parents saw their kids doing it today,
be like, Oh my God, it's the wokeness that's like getting my 12 year old to think of porn.
Or if like a movie like Mrs. Doubtfire came out today, they'd be like, wow, Robin Williams
pushing the woke trans cross dressing agenda. It was like, interesting. Yeah. Yeah. That is a,
I don't know, man. The capturing of smart people's attention in Douglas Murray,
good friend. And he said, he can't believe how many people have spent their time over the last
few years debating about whether men and men and women are women or not. And that's a critique,
I think, both of this shouldn't be a discussion that we're having, i.e. sex is something which is
binary and real. And also the overreaction from his own side of this capture, when there are other
things that we could be focusing on. He went and did this documentary around the streets of
Philadelphia looking at this tranq epidemic. Yeah. Like that's a huge problem and fentanyl
and opioid crisis, all this shit. Like those are really, really, really big problems.
But they don't play quite so well. As the culture war stuff. Yeah.
Yes. Yeah. And so you've got like DeSantis passing stuff in Florida of like banning hormone
therapy for trans, it's like, how many people is this even impacting? I remember when
Matt Walsh went on Joe Rogan and I think Rogan asked him, how many kids do you think are on
hormones? And this is right up to you in a whole documentary on it. And Matt Walsh was like,
it's probably in the millions. And the answer is like 5,000 over like some of you is like,
really dude? Yeah. Yeah. I mean, another thing that's played into this, and there's always
something new. And dude, I'm, you know, vehemently against almost all of the bullshit woke stuff,
but not only for the reason that I think that it's in itself is dog shit, but that it captures
everyone's attention on all sides. You get the reaction, then you get the subsequent re-reaction
and then there becomes this big debate and it gets blown out of nowhere. It's like,
the especially for some reason, especially the woke stuff for both sides, seems like such
a shelling point that everybody can get super passionate about. And this most recent thing
with Gemini with Google. Oh God, I don't even know. What is this? Google's AI disaster. Have
you not seen this? No, my mind is all studying for this debate. Yeah. What's this? Allow me to
educate you. Go ahead. Oh, wait, wait. Is this the thing where when you ask for pictures, it's
always of like black people and Asian people? That would be correct. Okay. I've seen the memes.
I don't know anything else about it. Okay. So I don't know it in depth, but I'll try and give you
a good overview. It tried to be so anti racist that it ended up being racist. Okay. And it annoyed
people on the left because if you asked for an image of some Nazis, it was black Nazis.
And then it annoyed people on the right because if you asked for an image of the founding fathers,
it was black founding fathers. So everybody got pissed off. And then it sort of hid,
it did a combination of hidden, erased history in this regard, but people were using it,
using its anti racism to be really racist. So they would say something like,
can you give me an image of 14th century philosophers drinking grape juice and eating
watermelon? And it would be for black people drinking grape juice and eating watermelon.
So just the whole retroactive changing of history after the Super Bowl thing,
where they collected, corrected Alicia Keys voice, I think at the start,
it's all part of some like a big constellation of different data points that are making people
very concerned about what's happening to history. And what's an acceptable, it also has implications
for whether or not Google itself is a reliable search. Is it going to deliver information in a
way which is actually factual? Like given that so many people are going to use that to try and
find something out. What if all of the real stuff is hidden down on page fucking five?
You don't know. So yeah, I mean, from a branding position, very bad, very,
I could not have done it more poorly than this. And it's probably, according to
Mike Baker, it's probably gone through a million differently. This isn't the sort of thing.
It's not like a Bud Light thing that perhaps was just one part of the marketing department
that threw a case of six packet at Dylan Mulvaney. This is gone through an awful lot of layers
before it's got here. So it doesn't seem like it's happened by accident.
So you think there was like an intentional ploy to make it like not racist or?
I think that they are force feeding diversity in so much. Obviously,
they didn't mean for it to be so apparent that like anyone with the most basic prompt in history
could create something which had a stand out. Like you can't make it to make a family of white,
or you couldn't get it to make a family of white people. I think the only way you could
get it to make white people is if you ask for Ukrainians. But it was like a Native American
president. And show me an image of the king of Spain from the 18th century. And it's like a black
guy. So I think that it was force feeding diverse. And you can say ask it things like show me
you're working or ask like explain to me why you did this. And it's just the most rudimentary,
basic, wokey talking points, like the most cringe. Like it is important that we represent
people from diverse backgrounds and like just it was that. So it wasn't much complexity to it.
But this force feeding of diversity plays into the DEI concern that a lot of people have at the
moment. And it's just more distraction. I'm like, God, like if this hadn't happened, if you just
made it an accurate representation of what people needed. But now we've got another and
right now, this very moment, could be talking about something else that would be really useful.
But it's an important now it's another important cultural moment to try and dissect to work out
what's going on. And it just every single time it pushes us back, pushes us back, pushes us back.
I think there are two huge issues at play. The first thing is I always tell people if you're
trying to engage in real true political discourse, you're trying to understand people don't ever
start with the assumption that people are doing like evil, crazy stuff. I think that when you're
when you start from that perspective, you've already lost the ability to understand the other
side. So people on the left that want like trans kids legitimately feel like or a lot of them
legitimately feel like there are children that are in need that have to get some medical stuff to
make their lives workable. Basically, they and I think that probably comes from a place of
compassion. Generally speaking, I think that when people on the right are fighting against
stuff related to trans kids, I think they genuinely believe that there are a lot of children that
can get confused and then get swept up in online communities and then start taking medication
or hormones and they don't know what's going on and it's going to be damaging to them. And I think
it genuinely generally comes from a place of compassion. I think it's important to start from
there because if you start from the place of like, while my enemy is trying to destroy the country
for XYZ reasons, you're like, you're totally lost, right? The people that did the instruction on
January 6th, I imagine they genuinely thought that the election was stolen. They really did think
that that election was stolen and that there was some craziness of happening and that's why they
had to go to the White House and try to stop the confirmation of vote and everything. I genuinely
believe that they thought that now that they were just like, we're going to mess everything up right
now because we're some real bad dudes. I think that I only say that because usually when corporations
make mistakes, I think that they're usually trying their best because when a lot of people are involved,
I think they're usually trying their best. Now, if it's just like one or two people involved,
sometimes like personal agendas can really mess things up. But if it's a lot of people involved,
the idea that there's this top-down order of like, okay, guys, fuck white people, we're going to do
this, we're going to edit them out, we're going to make sure that we're blah, blah, blah, blah, blah,
as opposed to somebody like, listen, we got to make sure that these are diverse enough. We don't
want to have so every single thing is spitting out a million white people and then they probably
overcorrect. Also a lot of cowardice, I think. Cowardice? Cowardice. Absolutely. Yes. So this is
Andrew Schultz taught me about this. Schultz's razor is it's not coordination, it's cowardice.
Sure. Yeah. Because somebody might be scouting and like, hey, are we fucking up right now,
guys? Because you don't want to be the one to, for sure. And that could absolutely be a thing
too. Absolutely. I think that's a big part of it. And especially with this dynamic we're talking
about now, because if you're the guy, it's like being the fucking first person that stops clapping
after like, some dictator stands up and gives a speech. I'm not going to be the fucking first
person to stop clapping. I'm not going to be the guy that says, maybe this whole diversity thing,
maybe it's going too far. Maybe we don't need to do affirmative action. Maybe we should keep the
SATs. Maybe they do actually have a, you know. Maybe men actually need a little bit of affirmative
action in school. Or maybe we're going a little bit too far on having, you know, 20% of our
advertising for trans people. Oh, so you think that women, you want to get women out of the
boardroom and back into the kitchen, is that right? But remember, it's because a slight difference
in applied position will be interpreted as a huge difference in fundamental moral belief.
You want to cut trans advertising because you hate trans people. You want to get back on the
diversity stuff because you think white people are better than black people, right? That's always
where it goes. So it's so hard for, and in these environments, it's going to be a lot of like-minded
people, so hard for them to course correct, which is why I talk about how when those two groups like
branch off into their own thing, that is incredibly destructive. I hate the fact that conservatives
all talked about how we need to get out of the schools because they're corrupt and whatever the
fuck, because well, now the people in the schools are even more fucking insane. I need you there.
You need to be there. You got to be participating. Or when left-leaning people don't want to
participate in certain aspects of like conservative culture, when left-leaning people
don't want to celebrate success or wealth or businesses doing well or patriotism. Okay, well,
cool. Well, now if I have a, if I'm a patriotic American, I basically have to be a fucking
conservative because I'm not going to be patriotic on the side that's telling me to hate my country
for fucking slavery and colonialism and white supremacy. Recap that. So it's the difference
in applied position is indicative of a difference, a change in value. That's what people feel like.
Yeah. Yes. Yes. Yeah. Okay. So just because this is something that you want to have happen
in the real world, there is an implication about your moral stance. Because for most people,
they didn't do the work to go from the initial, the grounded ethical stance to the applied
position. And since they didn't do the work, it's one and the same to them. That's why if I talk
about Israel-Palestine, it's so frustrating, it still happens. When I talk about Israel-Palestine,
I say, I don't think I would say anything happening right now is apartheid or genocide.
They don't hear, okay, you don't think it's apartheid or genocide. They hear,
you think it's okay what's happening. You think that Palestinians should live in territories
where they never get a state. You think it's okay to kill civilians. That's what people hear.
The same way that you might say, I don't know if I support affirmative action.
You just don't like black people. You think that it's their fault, everything in the United
States. Or if you say, maybe we've gone a bit too far on the diversity stuff, they're like,
oh, okay. Well, the only reason you can think now is because you hate diversity and you're a white
supremacist. Yeah. Because yeah, those things are so connected. So it's a, it's not a slippery slope
of, it's like an interpretation of slippery sloppiness. It's this very small iceberg above the
world. It's not even a slippery slope. It's a horizontal platform. That's it. These things are
here. When I, that's why when you, there's a, who's the Alex O'Connor worker or whatever,
there's a ethical position. I think it's called, it's, you can be an ethical anti-realist who
believes in non-cognitivism. And when you believe in non-cognitivism, what you're saying is,
when I express a moral proposition, I say that murder is bad. What I'm actually doing is I'm
just expressing an emotional say, murder, boo. I don't like murder. Murder, boo.
Emotive. I think it's non-cognitivism, right? No, no, no. Is it emotive positivism?
Fucking goddammit. I can smell a random philosophy. He's gonna, he's gonna scream at me. He
taught me about this two nights ago in Miami. He came out for my birthday. Emotive fucking
epistemics or something like that. Maybe that, but yeah, it's basically, I mean,
this is one of his best ideas that he taught me and I've now forgotten. But yes, it's basically
whenever somebody says that they're in support of something or against something, it's basically
yay abortion or boo abortion. Exactly, yes. And then they work back from that position and just
try and retry. They don't even work back. They just sit there. Yes. Okay. That's why, so like,
for instance, if a girl releases a story, I cover a lot of, we call them rape reviews on my stream.
It's a little crude. Rape reviews. Yeah, because people put out the Me Too stories and then we'll
read through them. It's like, okay, well, what is the, do we feel like it's a credible allegation
of what's going on? Okay. And for a lot of these things, if you say woman raped, you're saying,
what you're really saying is what happened to her was really bad. And if somebody out-
Boo, rape. Yeah. Or boo, whatever that was. And if you're kind of like, well, I looked at this,
I think the guy was definitely pushy. There might have been like some groping,
like not good sexual stuff. I don't think it was rape. They hear you saying rape, yay.
Or if you push against the diversity measures, white supremacy, yay. Or if you push against
the trans youth stuff, like, oh, discrimination, yay. Oh, trans suicide, yay. Because for a lot
of people, the applied position and the ethical position are one in the same. These are inexorably
linked and there is no difference that can happen. Which again, if you're debating somebody
different than you, who the fuck cares? I don't care if we have different applied and ethical
positions, we're supposed to. But if it's somebody similar to you, we can't be disagreeing. What do
you mean you don't think there's a genocide? Do you think it's okay to murder innocent civilians?
Like those two things are linked and they're not. It's a total non sequitur. Yeah.
Just how unified is the left compared with the right? Do you think at the moment this can be
within the cultural commentary space? This can be within the people who support the side.
This can be within the politicians that are a part of it. Do you have a sense of how fractured
each of these are comparatively? I feel like the right is more unified,
probably because they have a figure like Trump to unify around. The left is a little feels a
little bit more scattered, but there's also going to become, this also is like very dependent on
the communities that you're in. Like I said, like if you're online on Twitter, your impression of
the American left in the United States is like a crazy woke mob of like cancel culture children
running around the streets. And then you forget that like, if you go, you know, to like, you know,
like North Carolina or Georgia, and you're talking to like 30 year old, 35 year old,
50 year old, like black voters and stuff, these people are not woke, pro-trans people running
around on the street saying like, my child needs HRT, right? This is not the demographic at all.
Or even when you look at like older democratic voters, like generally these people are going
to be kind of the, the, the cool old woke people, the, the cool, like the cosmopolitan elites who
are like, yeah, I am a, I am a woke person. I believe in gay marriage. That used to be like the,
the woke position. What would be yuppies or something. Yeah. But those people largely had like
cool social beliefs. Like I think that we should have gay marriage. I think freedom of speech is
important. I think that, um, yeah, it was like, we should probably have some kind of like worker
protections and unions need to come back and like those kinds of work things, not the like my four
year old identifies as a, it, it's a whatever. Yeah. Also, oh, and on a real quick thing too,
um, because you brought this up early with both sides on this, one of the big issues the left
has is a situation will come up. Somebody comes on and they say, my four year old child is trans.
And I know that because, you know, they kicked right in the womb or whatever. And then conservatives
will go, you're fucking insane. Okay. The, what should happen is, is what I do when somebody
comes to me and they bring me a crazy left leaning belief and they'll go, what about when this guy
said that this thing can, can happen when they said that like all women are constantly being
raped by men by looking at them. Then what I say is, oh, that's really dumb. And then you move on.
One of the big reasons why some of these small issues get blown up so much is because the people
on the left will take the bait and they will start defending absurd shit. There is not an epidemic
of people with four year old trans people in the United States. There is an epidemic of people
willing to defend them though. And that's the issue. And that's why people on the right feel so
justified. And like their culture war stuff, even if it's not a huge amount of people,
yeah, it took me a long time to figure this out. Cause I'm always thinking, I'm like,
why is it such a huge issue? Trans people are like 1% of the population. If that,
depending on how many intersects it can be, 90% of the discourse. Yeah. And when you talk
to conservatives, you look at you go polls, I think the, the one that I saw was I think
conservatives think 20% of people are trans in the US. And I'm like, well, why is this the case?
But then when you look at the left, well, how many people are there willing to defend it?
And now I understand more. Okay. Yeah. Wow. Yeah. That's very interesting. So it's like a,
it's not about the volume of incidents that occur. It's about the volume of the,
the volume of discussions that occur around that people willing to defend it. Yes.
Whereas if everybody in the office is like, yeah, this is really dumb. Then you've defanged
the right. Well, because who the fuck are they going to fight against? Right? So when Tim Pool
and all these people obsess over these weird books and libraries about like guides to gay sex or
whatever, like, if this is brought up to me, I'm going, okay, if that's in those libraries,
yeah, that's pretty weird. It probably shouldn't be there in schools. And then you're done with it.
It's not going to be a huge thing on like, well, LGBT people and gay people need to blah, blah,
blah, blah, blah, blah, like, no, this, it is weird and it's dumb and just don't defend it.
And then move on from it. Why would you, why would you stake your position there and die on
that hill? And there's so many more important things to fight over. Who do you think's doing
the best work in the political space at the moment? Is there anyone that you're,
that you watch yourself? Or is there anyone that you think, even if I don't watch them,
I can respect the way that they work with this stuff?
I don't watch enough because I stream and I work like all the time. So it's hard to like sit down
and listen to like podcasts or shows or whatever. Yeah, I don't want to venture any guesses because
I'm sure there are people out there, but most of what I see is not good. But it's also those are
mostly the people that I debate and everything. Yeah. Yeah, it's an interesting, an interesting
world at the moment. I think looking at- Wait, I will shout out one guy. His name is Josiah or
pondering politics. He's a cool guy. His channel was like exploding recently. He does a good job
at trying to evaluate things like pretty fairly from the democratic side. Yeah.
Not Crystal and Saga. Who's the other guy that's kind of like slightly left-leaning,
being unrogan a bunch, records in that green. He's got like a neon green behind him.
No idea.
Fuck, the guy's name.
Even if you think of it, I'm not going to know I'm probably.
Right, okay. Well, he seems to be like kind of popular. And then you got a debate with,
second time actually, we had the last time, one of the last times that we were together
was at the Vulcan when you were on stage with Alex Jones and then you had another crack. How did
that go? About as I expected it to, yeah. He's definitely very much like a showman, which I
can't tell that it makes me hate him more or less. I don't know. How'd you mean?
Like I think that he is legitimately a grifter and that like he knows he's putting on a show.
Like I remember when we were talking, he did this thing where when we were having a conversation
back before, I think I started like, I started like mocking him and he looked at me and I think
he put his hand on my shoulder and I moved his hand. I was like, don't touch me. And I
remember when we... Were you genuinely irritated? No, I just don't like it. If somebody's trying to
like show like physical dumps, like, no, get your fucking hand off me. We're not gonna do this,
right? If you want to kill me, we can kill me, but you're not gonna put your hand on me. It's
fucking weird. You're not my dad. But I remember after we finished, right? And I'm, because I feel
very strongly about all my political beliefs. If you talk to anybody in my personal life,
they're gonna tell you that like, if we got to eat and you bring up something that is great,
it's gonna be just like a stream. I'm gonna be arguing with you. I just feel very passionately
about everything that I believe in. But after the show with Alex Jones, you know, like I'm still
like pretty like in the zone of debate, like he got it was like, oh, that was, that was a great
show. It was real funny. When you did that, uh, get your hand off me thing. Hilarious or whatever.
Right. And he just like walks away. And I think for him, I think it literally is just like a big
show. Like he just has fun with it. He's like WWE. Basically. Yeah. Which in one sense might make me
dislike him less because I'm like, okay, well, he doesn't actually believe in the crazy things he
says. But then in another sense, kind of makes me hate him more because it's like, well, fuck,
your listeners definitely believe this shit. And now I don't know if you're propagating this for
like fun and people are really taking it seriously, even though you don't. Yeah, I don't know.
Yeah. I understand what you mean. If someone is compelled because of the way that they believe
that it legitimates the gregarious position is like, oh, well, you kind of at the mercy of your
emotions as opposed to if, yeah, that's a difficult one. This is why I don't usually spend much time
figuring out if like somebody's a grifter or not because it doesn't matter. The harm is real
regardless. Well, if you're on the internet, everybody's a grifter and everybody is a shill
and everybody is stupid and everyone is in it for the money and doesn't really agree with what
they believe in. And they're just doing it because they're a part of the whatever the
immediate apparatus, but the people, the followers do. So that's what you have to address. Even
a bench appear on all these people are grifters, the people that listen to them really believe it.
So it's the second order. It's the second order thing again, but it's not about the
incident. It's about how the incident is interpreted. It's not about the event that
happens. It's about how many people then are prepared to defend themselves in that event.
Yeah. Yeah. Well, I don't fucking know, man. It seems to me like a very messy time. And I'm
really, really hoping that it's just going to be more sane out the other side of this.
Everything seems to be ramping up ready for November, but I don't know. We'll wait and
see. Do you think the red pill is dying? That's something that both of us have spent a little
bit of time orbiting in one form or another, either you debating it or me getting abused
by it. What do you think is happening with the red pill at the moment?
I think most stuff has like a probably like a two to four year shelf life for internet content.
And I think I kind of came and I kind of went and irritated and the, uh, the pre trial or
pre indictment imprisonment probably hurt a bit because it took away a lot of the publicity.
I think that the, the nature of like the conversations for the red pill stuff, I think
was really bad. Um, I think the, like the content strategy from a lot of the red pillars, I think
was very sub par. Uh, like for me, the way that I've stayed fresh and relevant for 15 years of
content creation is because I'm always finding like new stuff to talk about or a new angle to
kind of like hit something from, or like I'm kind of moving on with contemporary events.
I feel like for red pill stuff, I feel like I could have written the script for those shows
after being on two of them, um, to where it's like, okay, guys, today we're going to talk about,
does body count matter? Do guys value you for the amount of money that you make?
Do women fuck over men and divorce? Are men lonely because they're simps? It was like the
same topics for like over a year, such that it became like a meme or when I would show up on a
show, some of my fans would like bingo cards of like, okay, well, when is the body count
question coming up? Hypergamy. Yeah. Hyperg, are women hypergamous or not? And then it's like,
and then, and then it, and it's funny because like the questioning would always, there's a fallacy
called all roads lead to Rome. I think if there's not, there should be one. We're basically literally,
no matter how somebody answers the question, it always goes back to what you want to do. So I might
say to a girl, have you ever dated a guy? You say you don't care guys at all. If you're a dated a guy
that's five, five, and the girl might be like, no, I haven't because you hate short guys, you know,
you won't. And she's like, well, no. Okay, have you ever dated a guy that's five, five? Yes, I have.
Oh, when? When I was in a high school, I actually did a guy that's five, five. Really? Are you
together anymore with him? Well, no. Oh, you dumped him because he was a short king, right? Like,
yeah. Or it's like, are you dating a guy that's five, five? He's like, yeah, I am now. It's like,
Oh, really? Is he rich? No, he's not that rich. Does he have a huge dick? Yes. Dick is pretty big.
Oh, hypergamous. You just want the pool boy that you're probably going to, you know, find a rich
guy and stuff like there's always a Andrew Tate actually is the perfect example of the all roads
lead to Rome. Okay. When Andrew Tate had the pretrial imprisonment, there were never going to
be charges because it was all a scam. It was just a sham kangaroo court. Now that there are charges,
if, if there wouldn't have been charges and he would have been released with no charges, no
indictment, it was because obviously it was a scam, right? But now that there are charges,
well, obviously, because it's a scam, of course, they're going to make up charges. So now they're
going to go to court and if they go to court and they get, if they go to court and they beat the
charges, it's because it was bullshit the whole time. But if they go to court, go to court and
they're convicted, well, it's because it's bullshit the whole time. They're going to make it up always.
So literally no matter what happens, it's always because of your particular prediction of the
world. So you end up with these prediction models that will predict every single event,
which means they don't actually predict anything, but it allows you to escape the
cognitive dissonance of your predictive model, not being correct. So you don't have to worry
if you've got a good view, like a good blueprint of the world, because literally no matter what
happens, you've always got a way to make sense of it in the future. Well, this is why that four step
process of when was the last time someone publicly admitted that they were wrong? When was the last
time they surprised you? If someone came out and had a discussion about this and was like,
do you know what it is? I actually think that a lot of the time I do actually see girls in
relationships with guys that, hypothetically, I wouldn't predict that they were in a relationship
with. That guy just seems to have game. It's not really about the fact that he's tall or fit or
rich or has status or any of these things. He just seems to be like a really nice guy and she
wants to have a family and he ends up being, you go, I wasn't expecting that. I wasn't expecting
that. That was something that would have surprised me. You think, okay, well, that shows an evolution
of talking points, but I don't know how many times and this is why I've still fascinated
an evolutionary psychology and intersectional and intersexual dynamics and all of that stuff.
It's still very interesting to me, but the whole lambasting women for having standards that are
too high, that never was something that really crossed my world of content creation. But even
now it's like, okay, so what else is happening? Here's an interesting angle. Here's a much more
interesting angle for me for something that's contemporary and new. This skew of young girls
to the left and this skew of young guys to the right. Given the fact that most people date
within their political affiliation and because politics are becoming more important to each
individual person now, that's interesting. That's like a new, okay, so where's this coming from
and what does this mean? 30% of Democrat parents are afraid that their son or daughter would
marry a Republican. That's interesting. What about parental pressure and how does that play
into it? That's interesting. You can keep talking about the same thing, but do it with a different
angle on it, continuing to just hammer away in the same points. Fair play if you have that degree
of patience maybe to be able to just have the same conversation a thousand times, but I don't have
that in my toolbox. The description is boring, the descriptive part because yeah, it's the same
thing over and over again. And then the prescriptive part is boring because for a lot of these
movements, people don't actually give you good advice to kind of navigate it sometimes unless
you can become a top one percenter. Instead, what they try to prescribe is a world that doesn't
exist anymore. This is no good because women have birth control because women are earning
money and blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. That's not changing. You have to give advice for the
world that exists now, not tell guys you have to become a top one percenter. You need to earn so
much fucking money that the traditional girls or whatever will go back to liking you. It's never
advice geared towards how do you navigate the modern world where women don't need men as much,
where women are looking for different things in relationships. How do you navigate that?
It's just like we need to go back to the days of old and everything is messed up now because of
feminism and complaining and blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. Talk to me about the ADHD diagnosis.
It seems like a big change for you. Yeah, it's a totally huge change.
I think when my son was seven, he had huge attention problems in school such that he
was rolling around on the floor. He couldn't stay in his chair. Between classes, they were
having him crawl through resistance tunnels to burn off energy. It was a huge problem of focus.
At home, it was really hard to get him to stay on task for chores. If I wanted to go out and pick
up leaves with him, doing the yard or whatever, it's really, really, really difficult to get
him to stay on task or anything like that. Then at some point, because we considered initially
maybe his autism or something weird like that, I don't know. Then the school psychologist,
school therapist or whatever floated the idea of ADHD. Then we took him to get an evaluation and he
got clearly marked for ADHD. I didn't buy that because I can play games with my son. If we're
playing like Minecraft or something, he can sit down on the computer for 16 hours. I would do
these bullshit tests and say, okay, Nathan, we're going to sit here. We're going to look at each
other for five fucking minutes. You're not going to move. We're going to sit here and do this.
I know you can do this. We would, and you could do these things. I don't, this,
the ADHD thing is bullshit. I don't believe it. I didn't even believe that ADHD was really a real
thing. Then, now, that's my personal feelings on it. At the time, that's written at the top of
the dock. Yeah. I don't believe that it's real. I would never take a brain pill medication because
I don't want to change who I am, blah, blah, blah. My responsibility as a father to him supersedes
my own personal views on it. For nothing else, I owe it to him to at least do the research.
When I started doing reading and research on ADHD, I come across a whole bunch of things that I
didn't understand relating to ADHD. The most shocking thing was for everything that I researched,
because I was trying to find, does his behavior show up? I found all of my old behavior showing up.
Huge discrepancies on standardized testing where I might do 98th or 99th percentile and everything
versus GPAs or homework. I didn't ever do homework. My GPA was a 2.7. That was curved up
because of honors classes and AP classes. My GPA was horrible. I had to have a teacher sign my
assignment notebook and then my parents sign it or else I would get a detention because I was so
bad at doing homework. I didn't like to read. I would cry if I got assigned reading for more
than a few pages. I could never do it. I remember in high school, I used to do cliff notes and
spark notes and extended reading so that I could avoid doing the actual reading. It was just a bunch
of really, really dumb behavior. I always thought because I could play video games for 16 hours,
I must not have ADHD. That's three of 15 other different behaviors. I'm like, Jesus Christ.
After I read all that, I was like, okay, fuck it. My son, I guess, if I'm to believe ADHD is real,
my son probably has it. He got medication. It helped him a ton for school and he's
continued to stand it and it's helped him a ton for school. Seven years later, think about five
or six months ago, I've got a friend that's staying with me and she suggests she's like,
listen, everybody knows you have ADHD. It's like a joke on a stream and blah, blah, blah.
It's like, yeah, but everybody has ADHD. Everybody has autism, whatever. She has
Adderall and she's like, you should just try this for a week. I'm like, okay, fuck it. Why
not? Sure. I enjoy recreational drugs. I tried the Adderall and for the first two or three days,
I was definitely like amphetamine high. I don't know if you've done amphetamines
recreationally. It's like a euphoric. You feel so good. You're in a good mood. You're super
heavy. I'm like, okay, this is cool, but I'm fucking high. I know it is. I know what an
amphetamine high feels like. And then on day four, the euphoria, the like amphetamine euphoria of
like doing a drug recreationally basically disappeared. And then when I went to streaming
stuff, I noticed that I could pay attention to what I was doing without having to have a game
going on in the background, which was a really huge departure because if you've ever watched any
old videos, you might always like playing Minecraft, playing video games, do something
while watching a video, but I could just sit and like read stuff. And then I noticed over the next
week that I was like, holy shit, I can read stuff for like four hours a day. I could just sit and
read and read and read and read and I'm retaining the information and I don't feel like I have to do
a million other things. And that's basically after that, I was like, fuck it. I went to a therapist
very easily. I could get ADHD diagnosis because of my childhood stuff. And then I got a prescription
for Vyvanse. And yeah, I don't think Vyvanse is, it's a, it's an amphetamine similar to Adderall.
Okay. A bit more powerful, a bit less powerful, a bit more something else.
Adderall is a combination of four different amphetamine salts. Vyvanse is one of those
amphetamine salts, but it's got an attachment of another molecule that makes you digest it
slowly so that it like is an extended release amphetamine basically. It's a, it's list extra
amphetamine or list extra amphetamine. It's a lysine attachment to a dextra amphetamine thing.
And then when you eat it, your body, I think the liver pulls off the lysine thing and then you get
the slow release. To get time release version. Yeah. Similar. If there's something that you,
presumably you'd done your research to work out what it was that you would have preferred to have
had. The other, basically the other option is Adderall XR basically, I think. Right. Yeah.
But yeah, for the past four or five months, I've learned like the entire history of Israel
Palestine. I've read like 100 page papers on like legal theory for my debate with Lynn Greenwald.
I'm able to research and retain information and be interested. And I haven't played like
basically a single game in like almost half a year in like four or five months.
It has dramatically changed my engagement with the world in like an unbelievable way.
So James, my business partner in Newtonic had an adult diagnosed with ADHD as well.
And what does that do? You know, you're a person who thinks that you know who you are.
You've been you for like fucking 35 years or some shit. Like
you thought that you knew the landscape of your own mind and who you were. And this is
me, Stephen, out in the world. And then someone comes along and kind of says, well,
this is a part of you that you haven't been able to fully understand. Does that change your sense
of self? I think that my whole life, and I think this probably happens as everybody gets older.
I'm sure it's happened to you. The smartest age that you ever are is 19 because you know everything.
I've always joked that like if I go back, maybe even with you, I said this, if I could go back
in time and talk to myself, I wouldn't believe anything I'd have to say, even if I knew I was
coming from the future yet. Yeah, because at 19, 20, you know everything. One of the things I've
learned as I've gotten older is subjective experiences are very, very hard to understand.
So I try to be really careful when I speak about other people's subjective experiences
and your mind and how you relate to the world is another one of those subjective experiences.
So I guess in my mind, and it's funny because I came across a lot with ADHD stuff,
that ADHD can be simultaneously like overdiagnosed and underdiagnosed at the same time to where
if somebody is just like either lazy or has an attention problem or whatever the fuck,
because for a variety of reasons, they might get an ADHD diagnosis. But if somebody has ADHD,
they might feel so like my feelings are like, if I just focus, I know I can do this. I'm just a
lazy fucking piece of shit. There's no reason why I shouldn't be able to fucking just stay on task
for three hours. Everybody can do this. There's no reason I can't do this, right?
And my feeling is that like, I'm probably just more lazy than the average person. And so that's
why. But then after doing a lot of reading and then taking like a pill for a little bit,
and I'm like, okay, well shit, I wonder if this is like the ordinary mind or if this is more
close to the subjective state of other people. Yeah, it just makes me-
Has it changed your theory of mind about other people? Obviously, you know, if you're
lambasting yourself, basically saying you should be more disciplined than this,
you should be able to stay focused. Why can't you just do this thing without getting distracted
every two minutes or without having to play a video game or without having three video screens
open at once? You know, that's an internal monologue that you've habituated. It's a very well worn
path. I'm just fascinated by people that have like, oh, and now I have a very different story
that I tell myself about why I am the way I am and what that means and why that could be the way.
And yeah, it seems like a huge pivot. Yeah, I mean, I just try to be open to everything.
Maybe there's something that'll, you know, dramatically shake my subjective interpretation
of myself in the future, but I'd rather be more open to it than more closed off to it,
because I want to feel like I'm making progress towards a better version of myself,
rather than like, well, I have figured it out when I'm 20, and now I'm not going to
change my feelings at all. And I know there's a lot of things that I skew off the norm for,
like I remember when I was like 20, 21, 22, like if you would ever come to me, no, it would have been
like from like 22 to 25 on stream, people would ask me questions like, oh, like I've got a toxic
relationship with my mom or dad, like what should I do? And my answer is always very simple. You
just cut them out of your life, never talk to me again. That's so easy. Why would you,
why would you maintain toxic relations with your parents? What a stupid thing to do? Like,
that's so dumb. But then as I've gotten older, I'm like, okay, well,
people have feelings about their family. And it's pretty obvious that most people's feelings are
way off of where mine are. So it's pretty stupid of me to suggest something for other people and
assume that, you know, it's the same thing for everybody. So I just try to be really aware of
the different subjective experiences that people can have, and that mine might change in the future
too, because I don't want to get locked in on some dumb shit. Yeah. Yes. I felt quite bad
watching, I didn't reach out because there was enough people doing that already, but I felt
quite bad watching the entire internet kind of scrutinize your relationship over the last few
months. The divorce stuff? Yeah. Yeah, man. Like, I know that you appear as like this sort of
emotional punching bag, stoic fucking brick. Well, everything is super transparent, and everyone
knows kind of everything that's going on. And you have a capacity to be able to deal with discomfort
that seems to be like, I know, beyond certainly outside of the norm. But that made me, it made
me feel uncomfortable, like watching everybody else dissect your fucking, like this intimate part
of a downfall of a relationship online. So I imagine that like rolled in with a fucking ADHD
diagnosis, plus changing the chemical structure of your mind. Like that's what I mean, like the
last 12 months. Oh, it was a lot for sure. I remember that I was a lot. Yes, it was a lot.
I scaled back on my last prescription request, I scaled back a little bit of my dose of my
vivants, because I noticed that my, because I wear these stupid little things to track like
through my gym stuff, my heart rate, my resting heart rate had risen like 17 beats per minute.
That's a lot. In like two months. That's a lot. And the research that I did, I think that the
average heart rate elevation for somebody on amphetamines, I think was 4.9 beats per minute
over a whole lifetime of like doing these amphetamines. So for mine to have risen almost 20
in two months, I'm like, holy shit, my something's going on, something is exploding. And I don't even
know if there's a possible medication, but then, but now it's all settled. And I realized it was
probably just that period of like a lot of like stress that I'm dealing with from my own relationships,
from like the public stuff, and you've got to keep streaming through everything. And then like the
research provides me with everything. Yeah, it's a lot to deal with. But yeah, yeah, it was definitely
physiologically, it was definitely tough. But I've always felt like I have the tools to deal with
everything. And in some ways, there are, there are parts of my life that look incredibly difficult,
that actually make things so much easier for me. I talked with, I talked with Lex, I've talked with
a lot of people that are more behind the scenes about this, because a lot of people look at my
life and they're like, it's got to be so fucking hard to have your relationship and everything
else like out front and center for all these people to dissect. And my thought is it's got to be so
fucking hard to try to keep that secret. Oh my God, because if you try to keep things secret,
it's got to be so scary every day on the internet, something might get leaked, somebody might find
something out. And now you've got to like try to figure out like, how do I defend this without
revealing too much? And what do I say? And what else is going to leak and blah, blah, blah. For me,
there is the added stress of when everything's public, everybody can comment on it. But it's
also like, this is it. There's no way to hide. And also you see what you get, like there's never
been a time in my 15 years where something has leaked of me, was like, Oh my God, that's the real
destiny. He does this behind the scenes. That's what's going, this never happened. Like you basically
you get what you see. Yeah, which in some ways makes things easier for me a lot.
Yeah, will you do the same thing when next relationship rolls around? Or you have you
got to like, maybe we don't need to go quite so public with stuff. Have you got, have you got a
strategy for that? I think now I'm being really, really, really critical of who I would select
next. Like I've got like a whole list of criteria that I'm like writing down and evaluating for
people because I'm trying to figure out like what works what doesn't. I've got like my X's on this
like list of criteria and like what would have worked or what didn't work or blah, blah, blah.
I don't know if I'll ever be dating again, or if I'll get married or what that looks like,
just because my life is so crazy. If I do do another relationship, it would probably be
another open one. If I do do another relationship, it's probably going to end because most
relationships do. And when it does, everybody, if the red pill service popper will say, well,
it ended because it's an open relationship, despite the fact that I had four monogamous
relationships for this, that all ended for a variety of reasons. But um, yeah, I mean,
we'll see if I did or not again, it just depends. But my life is like really crazy and really busy
and it's hard to slot anything in there. Yeah. Yes. Yeah. Not dating again is a, I don't know,
like I wonder, I wonder what will happen when you're further outside of the blast radius of
your most recent like fucking slow motion car crash, public car crash thing. It's just,
it's a lot for the other person to deal with. That's the issue. So you have to find somebody
that is willing to deal with all the public stuff, probably somebody that works in content creation.
Um, because otherwise it's hard to explain this world to like a normal human being.
Allow me to step you into this world that you didn't choose, that you don't really understand.
And how do I make you understand why there's like a whole forum of people that obsess over every
time you turn your, you know, discord on or off or people that try to figure out like what our
address is or why people say I'm a pedophile or why, you know, this guy, you know, why is it today
that Muslims are trying to find your address to go and jihad you and like it's, that's a lot for
an ordinary person to be brought into. I think that is a lot for an ordinary person to be brought
into. Yeah. Speaking of that, it's assumed that I know nothing about the Vosh scenario,
because essentially I don't, but I know that there's been stuff that you've been at least
commenting on. What's the 30,000 foot view of the last few weeks?
I hate being charitable to him at all. What's happened is, is Vosh has made a collection of
fairly edgy statements in his past that on their own are all, I would say, probably defensible,
but taken collectively against people that don't like him, can present a very compelling narrative
that he's like a pedophile basically. So like, I think for instance, there is like an argument
before relating to why he didn't, he was, I wish I could remember, I don't want to misquote this,
because it's so important to get the exact wording right. So I could be misquoting,
you can go and find the video if you want. But I think he was in an argument where he was like,
it was something like in a very edgy way, he's like, I don't know why people care so much about
child porn because of the harm created to children, but we're okay buying and having things every
single day that are made by children in sweatshops where they kill themselves. But then people will
hear something like, oh wait, so you want to make child porn legal, but his argument was really,
well no, we should probably make sweatshops illegal. But it's just like a bunch of stuff like that,
that's piled up over time. And then, so that's like the factual foundation. And then the rhetorical
foundation or the content direction foundation is Voshe has very intentionally isolated himself
from the rest of the world, and he conducts himself in an incredibly aggressive bullying way.
So he doesn't really have anybody in his corner to defend him, or to lend him any credibility,
because he's made enemies of anybody that would be friends with him, and he's been incredibly
uncharitable to everybody else in his part of the world. So he's done it to himself. So I'm not
really, I don't feel very much sympathy. I might feel sympathy over the hyperbolic statements that
get blown up, because I've made like a lot of statements that are hyperbolic that get blown
up. But I don't feel sympathetic that this is what he has to go through right now, because he's,
yeah, he says completely untrue factually untrue things about me all the fucking time.
And now watching it come back to bite him in the ass and him to have nobody in his corner
to defend it is really funny. Charlotte Freud. Exactly, yeah. It doesn't surprise me, or at least
I certainly see looking at the world of streaming, you guys put an awful lot of hours in, like,
that in itself just practically gets you out of the way of being able to spend time socially,
just doing stuff. And then because so much of it is on its own, you do streams with other people
sometimes, right? Like maybe even like a good bit at the time. But so many streamers are just
spending hours and hours and hours and hours just them and a camera and a screen. And it seems like
of all of the different content creation methods, it's the one that is the most isolationist.
Like it's that and then only worse than that are those people that try and like
rebuild ghost towns, like in fucking Greenland or something like that. Those are the two that
are the worst. So yeah, I mean, I have a great degree of sympathy for streamers overall, because
it's a rough job. Not as much as to say it's a harder job than like being a bricklayer.
Retail, yeah. Was it retail? I don't, you're talking about Hassan, right? Yeah. Not that hard.
That's another funny example where I actually, and I've given the same thing in the past,
Hassan was 100% correct in his assessment and his statement. He just said it in kind of a bad way,
but he doesn't have anybody to defend him either. And it's funny because he blamed my
community completely for that clip blowing up. But I'm willing to bet that you would agree with
the entire context of the statement and that what we do for work right now in ways it can be more
sold or stronger, it could be more difficult than jobs that work prior to this, just because of all
the added stresses and all the added things that are going on, but you're compensated generously
for it. And you have a greater degree of autonomy and operate. You chose it. Exactly, yeah. And
that's always the big difference. Like a McDonald's worker in a second would step into my life,
I would never step back into working at McDonald's ever. So even if there are more challenges and
more soul-destroying aspects of this job, which there are, if I got divorced as a McDonald's worker,
I don't have to deal with, you know, 75-year-old fucking Rolo Tamasi, you know, making arguments
about why this McDonald's worker broke up. Like I don't have to deal with that. I don't have to
worry about like fucking nude pictures leaking or everybody having an opinion on some shit I said.
But I make 100 times the money that I did when I worked at fucking McDonald's and I get to choose
every part of my life I want to engage in. So yeah, so it's not, did I have a point, but man,
for him, the socialist guy that lives in a $4 million mansion and is a $250,000 Porsche and
flies in private jets and wears $1,000 outfits, it sounds horrible coming from him. Optics are a
big deal. Yeah. And fuck him. I'm not defending him because yeah, that was his fault. I could have
been a big defender of him on that art because I love defending takes like that because they're
technically correct, but they're optically horrible. And those are my favorite things to defend,
you know? Yeah, dude, I, you know, I did a video, which is still up on the channel, I think,
something like what no one tells you about working for yourself. And oh shit, yes, that's the same.
It's all of the thing. It's all of the points. If you are both the organ grinder and the monkey,
if you're both the task master and the worker, there is always in the back of your mind,
is this the best thing that I could be doing with my time? So not only do you need to design what
you have to do, you then need to discipline yourself to go and do it. And then you need to go
and do it. And then you need to review and question whether or not that's the thing that you're
supposed to do. And even when you're away on holiday, whatever that even means, there's always
this degree of, well, I could be working a little bit more and then work begins to bleed into leisure
time. So there is this huge, big, long list. And someone brought it up on a Q&A a couple of weeks
ago where they said lots of people in the personal development finance space are disparaging about
nine to fives, but I actually really love my nine to five. And I feel a bit bad because I'm like
a second class citizen for liking this like cucked job type thing. Why do you think people
have such bad opinions about it? And I was like, that's a first off great point. Secondly,
it made me realize I've never disparaged nine to fives. I'm like, look, if you can find a way
to be able to work for yourself, I think it's a reliable route towards having a fun life that
you're probably going to enjoy. But it's not the only route. I know tons of people that have nine
to fives that lead perfectly happy lives. And there are all of these other side effects that
come along with it, like having to be the person that when you're going to get up today,
how long are you going to stream for? Or you choose. And if you don't stream for long enough,
who says when enough is done, like what's the rules around this? How hard are you supposed
to work? How well are you supposed to do in your job? All of that gets externalized when you've
got a job, which is liberating. And it's just, what's your personality? What's your predisposition?
What do you want? People have an inability sometimes to just like analyze like the pros and
cons things have to be fully good or fully bad. I don't know if this would be a huge point of
disagreement for us, but you do like a lot of like health and fitness stuff, right? Yeah,
like, like a position that I have relating to like food is I don't think there's no such thing as
like a good food or a bad food. Foods just do different things. If you've got like a sugary
calorie bar or like a candy bar that's just like empty carbs or whatever, that's all it is. It's
energy for the day, high in sugar, like that's what it's not necessarily a bad thing. If you've
hit all your micros and macros for the day, but you need 400 more calories, if you want to eat a
fucking kick at bar, it works, right? There's no such thing as like a wholly good food or a
wholly bad food. Something super high in vitamins or whatever. It doesn't matter if you can't absorb
it for whatever reason or if you're not deficient in it. Like there's no fucking point. It just,
it is what it is. Like understand the pros. Utility. Exactly. Yeah. And I think when it comes to like
nine to fives or entrepreneurship, it's the same thing or with like renting or buying a house.
Yes. There are pros and cons to both of these things, right? I'm a millionaire and I don't,
well, I own a house with my kid and my kid's mom live. That's irrelevant. I don't own a house
personally. I live in apartments. I'm probably going to live in apartments for the next like
10 years. I'm going to buy a house and settle down somewhere, but it's, but people would think that
like once you've got money, the most important things to buy a house because you don't want to
set your money on fire. I'm not setting my money on fire when I'm in an apartment,
any more than I set my money on fire when I go to a restaurant and buy food. Like I'm literally
paying for something that I'm going to shit out my toilet later, but that's not wasting my money.
I'm getting a meal out of it. Same thing when I'm renting an apartment. I'm not wasting my money.
I'm paying for a place to sleep and live every day. There are super big pros to entrepreneurship
if you've got the mind for an entrepreneur. And I don't mean the mind like you're smart enough.
I just mean the mind that like you enjoy self-direction, yeah, you enjoy like the uncertainty,
the ups and downs and you can navigate variety. Yeah. Not everybody enjoys that. And nine to
fives, I've known people that have stepped into the entrepreneurship and then going back to the
nine to fives and like, listen, I can fund all the hobbies that I want to do with my nine to five.
And I don't have to worry about, you know, where's my paycheck going to come from? Is this going to
be a slow month for me? Yeah. So yeah, there's pros and cons to both and the demonization of
like nine to fives and you're a fucking loser because you're not a rapper or because you're
not a small business owner or because you're not a fucking, you know, superstar streamer,
YouTuber. It's like, no, fuck you. You can do whatever you want to just, yeah, figure out
what works at the pros and cons for you. Yeah. I think that's good. And that's not something
that I've heard a lot about, like, you know, championing. It's part of this disparagement.
I think that we're on the same page that you're relatively pro college as well.
I'm super pro college, yeah. But if you think you've got a better path besides that, then,
yeah, by all means go for it. But for all these people, fuck,
all these people will complain about the deep state, the politicians, the lobbyists, and the
Bill Gates and blah, blah, blah. When you look at all these people that you think have rigged the
world and they're corrupting everything, blah, blah, blah, what do they send their kids?
They're not, Bill Gates doesn't tell his children like, oh, you're 19, you're not going to college.
They all send them to fucking Ivy League schools. They all send them to the best schools. They get
the best degrees. They all post. They're supposed to be the most woke ones. They're the ones that
will be the most brainwashed. Maybe, I guess, but like they're going to college. They're not like
telling you, you would think that like, well, if they'd figured out. Well, you look at the
Steve Jobs didn't give his kids iPads type argument, which is be aware of what the
lifestyles and technologies are of the people who are in power. And if the people who are in power
are sending their kids to universities, like if you just want to model what they're doing,
they've got skin in the game with regards to that. Yeah, for me, I mean, you know,
I don't disagree. I'd learned basically zero when I went to university, but I had great life
experiences and it taught me an awful lot. It was like, it was like Navy Seal Hell Week for
five years of socialization of, you know, you need to learn what it's like to get drunk and lose
your keys in Manchester and have an argument with your friend at three in the morning. You need to
learn what it's like to have an argument with a housemate where you can just request from the
university that you move flats. Like that, all of those things, when are you going to learn that?
25, 30? Part of the transitioning into adulthood. Yes. So it just, I think it prepares people and
but I understand that, you know, it's all a big scam. No one learns anything that's important. And
in an ideal world, yes, would higher education actually educate you effectively along with
giving you the life skills? Probably. But of the two, they're like, I would give it 50-50
for what you come and maybe even more on the life skills side of things to be able to, okay,
well, what's it like to have your attendance be so low that maybe you're going to get kicked out
of university? Because that might happen with a job in a couple of years' time when you're ill or
some other like administrative fuckery happens. Is that the first time that you're going to
ever encounter something like this? No, like you can get to do it with lower stakes and move through
that stuff. And people have this weird thing where they're like, well, it's just people should be
wasting their time on humanities and English degrees and it's like the majority of degrees
people get from colleges are STEM degrees. I did business and marketing and I've got two degrees,
one of which is a master's. Can't remember anything from either of them. I might as well
have done women's studies. Sure. Yeah. Or all the people, I think it's like, I want to say it's
like 50% of people get STEM degrees anyway, like they probably needed it. If you want to be, I think
it's a really high percentage. Yeah, somebody, go look it up. You've got the fucking iPad.
Yeah, it's not connected to the internet. Oh, my God. Yeah. But it's a really high percentage.
I think it might have been over a majority of the degrees are STEM related degrees anyway,
like that's the vast majority of people go to school for are that. But I think people have
this impression that like 85% of college students are humanities students. Taylor Swift degrees,
or whatever the fuck it is. Yeah. And then also too, and again, a moderated position,
like there are ways to do it intelligently. Like people say, oh, I don't want to go to college and
get $100,000 in debt. You don't have to get $100,000. That's not the average student loan debt is on
$100,000. I think it's like like $28,000 or something. It's not $100,000. Also, if you want
to go to community college for two years or do this or whatever, like there are ways to make it
more manageable as well. You know, you can be smart about it. You don't have to go all in and
be an idiot. It's just the my the scary thing for me, heavily anecdotal, by the way, the scariest
thing for me is that when people say, forget college, don't do that. In my mind, the people
that don't need to go to college know that there isn't a guy who's got this huge portfolio projects
that he's worked on that's got like all this knowledge who's 18. And he's like, God fuck,
do I need to go and get a comp side degree and blah, blah, blah. He knows what he's going to do.
People point to Bill Gates is like, oh, well, Bill Gates didn't go to college. Bill Gates didn't
fail remedial English. Bill Gates did not go to college because he couldn't get his fucking GED.
Bill Gates did not go to college because he thought he was going to make it big trading
fucking crypto. These are not the same comparisons. So if you don't know what you're going to do and
you've got like a general idea, yeah, go to college, get your degree, do that. But don't
tell people like, oh, no, don't go to college. The university has something grand planned for you
because most of these people are going to fuck around with dropshipping on the internet for a
year and a half, hook up with a chick and get her pregnant. And then the rest of their life is
going to be retail or service, starting at 21, because they just didn't really have strong
direction. That's not liberation. Yeah. What do you think is going to happen in November
election time? My belief for a while has been that I think Biden is going to win.
I think he's going to win pretty handily. My feeling for that is because I think the biggest
thing that was going to hurt him was going to be the economy. But I think that the sentiment on
that has already adjusted pretty heavily and I don't see it going down. I think that we're on a
huge up shoot right now economically. And the Fed is even talking about considering dropping
rates or whatever. So if the economy is fine, foreign policy wise, it's just Ukraine and Israel.
It's funny, people give Biden a lot of shit on foreign policy. But if you compare our foreign
policy aims right now compared to what they were under Trump, our involvement is way better.
I think that Israel and Palestine, that's a worthy thing to be involved in, if for another reason
than to restrain Israel. And Ukraine, Russia, that's a worthy thing to be involved in. We're not
in Afghanistan anymore. We're not in Iraq anymore. Biden ended the participation in the Saudi
League coalition to go and fucking drone strike Yemen all the time. The strikes that we are doing
in Yemen are very specifically on missiles. So that's good. I think that the foreign policy
stuff is good. Even if people try to make it into a thing. I think domestically, I think our economy
is good. The border is an issue. It always is an issue. But I don't think Republicans can yank
the illegal immigrant chain for seven months or whatever. I think that they probably pulled
that one too early. So I just, basically broadly speaking, I think the road to the elections
and all of the special elections that have gone on over the past couple of years have been
really good for Democrats. So I think as long as, I think the road forward for Biden is
pretty safe as long as he doesn't, his brain doesn't leak out of his ears. I think it's pretty safe.
That's a big F. That's a big F. For Donald Trump though, he's got all of these indictments.
He's got the New York case that is, I think they're trying to start that one in March.
What's that? The New York case is where he was making, he was getting Cohen to make payments
to Stormy Daniels. The Hush payments basically, which just kind of looks bad. The porn star
fucking cheating on his wife and all that. So you've got all the news of the indictment stuff.
You've got whatever crazy shit that Trump says abortion is still really fresh on people's minds.
And now you're getting more stories about like crazy laws. Is it still fresh on people's minds?
I think so, yeah. I'm basing this on opinion polling. And I was with my community doing
door knocking in Ohio for like get out the vote stuff. And as you go around, and I always try to
do it at least one day so that I can like have the experience and talk to people. I was really
surprised at how many people when I knocked on doors, the two issues that everybody always brought
up were protecting democracy, which seems like shit I would hear on Twitter. And the second one
was abortion. Everybody. What sort of people, is this a broad cross section, older people,
younger people? It was, yeah, it's older people. You're knocking on doors in Cincinnati, Ohio of
like likely registered voters basically, making sure that they're still registered to vote. And
they know about the upcoming primaries and elections. Yeah. So I think abortion is going
to be a big driver. I don't think like the Afghanistan pullout. I don't think that's going
to be a big negative driver. I think it happened and then whatever. Yeah, that's my broad view.
I think the road ahead for Biden is pretty easy as long as he maintains. Okay. And I think the road
ahead for Trump, I don't see it getting better because he's not in office. There's no way that
he can do anything good. And there's a lot of potential pitfalls coming up that could be really
scary. Yeah. How big of a deal do you think what's going on at the border is? I've had a
number of conversations about this. It does seem like a really big catastrophe. I mean, it always
does. Like Republicans have yanked that chain for a decade. I feel like it's a bigger catastrophe.
It's always a bigger thing. Have you had a look at the stats around this? Like you tend to have some...
Yeah, I've seen numbers. It's hard to know because like they always change
like how they count some things. Like I think under the Obama administration,
like they were changing how they consider like a deportation. Ended up being like somebody that
was met at the border and turned away. There's like these weird things that go on with the numbers
all the time. I agree that the border is a problem, but I don't believe that it's like a uniquely felt
problem that's having a drastically negative impact on the average of my life. I don't think that
that's happening. So it's a problem because the media says it's a problem and because people want
it to be a problem, the Republicans do for a good reason because it probably is the strongest thing
they have electorally. But I don't think the country is falling apart or like crazy shit is
happening because of stuff going out of the border. But Democrats do need to find a way to
deal with it. Although right now, the things that suck is that one, Donald Trump had COVID,
which helped a lot because he was able to do, was it title 42, title 49? That basically said,
because we're in a state of emergency, I can enact crazy measures at the border and people
just weren't illegal immigrating as much because of COVID. So he had a huge benefit to his last
time in office because of COVID. And then when Biden came in, he was... Because he got COVID.
No, no, because of COVID. Because he got COVID. I was like, it's like you being ill as the president
unlocks some super secret power. He got the COVID event basically. Right. Okay. Oh, right. Yes.
Biden tried to use title 49 to control border stuff, but he wasn't able to. And then the
amount of people coming to the border now is a lot higher. As a percentage of turnaways and
everything, the Biden administration is doing better than the Trump administration, but there's
such a greater number of people there to deal with. It's just a difficult problem. Apparently,
that is the rumors that I've heard because they know that Biden is going to be soft on them.
People say that and I'm curious where the truth is on that. People say, so it is true that more
illegal immigrants come to the border when a Democrat is in office. But I'm curious, is it
because Democrats want to let them in or is it because Republicans say that Democrats will let
them in? Because remember, Pamela Harris' favorite thing of like, do not come. Do not come. One thing
that the immigrants do not come. That was a funny meme of hers. Yeah, of her saying that. And it's
not like they don't let you in just because it's a Democrat in office. I don't think there's like a
meaningful change in border policy with a demon office over Republican. But if you say it enough,
I don't know, maybe that's why people do come in. Yeah. Right. Okay. So this is like the shadows
on the wall, but the shadows have been created by the Republicans. So the Republicans could be
advertising the weakness of Democrat immigration policy. And that is what is being taken by people.
Which for the most part is about the same under Biden as it was for Trump. They ended like certain
types of like family separation at borders, but nothing, I don't think anything meaningful has
changed between Trump and Biden. But so I'm curious, like I haven't seen statements and I'll
fully admit because I've been doing Israel Palestine stuff and then the rebels before that. So I
haven't followed this issue as closely, but I haven't seen a bunch of statements from Democratic
lawmakers who are like, we want the immigrants to come to the border, please come or like illegal,
we're going to be softer on them. We're going to do something to let these immigrants in or
blah, blah, blah. I've never heard that. I've heard a lot of Republicans saying that though.
So I'm curious like what the statements they hear. That's very interesting. Yeah, the difference
between being like effective in terms of rhetoric and effective in terms of the impact that actually
has on the world, because it could be creating the second one whilst trying to achieve the first
one. Yeah, well, I mean, every election cycle, there's been something that's been timed quite
well, you know, emails for Hillary, the Biden under Biden laptop story, I'm kind of waiting.
Oh, for a thing? Oh, dude, there is going to be a thing. There has to be. It's like, I don't know,
do you remember when lost the TV show? Do you ever watch that? I remember lost. I never watch it,
but I just, you know, you always knew that the season finale was going to finish on a cliff
hanger. Oh my God, what's the cliff hanger going to be? And it feels like that now. But this is
the problem blurring the line between entertainment and politics. I shouldn't be waiting for the
next election cycle to come around. And for whatever the revelatory story is, like I'm about to see
prison break season three finish, it should be treated with a little bit more like seriousness.
Well, I think the issue is both of these guys have been investigated quite a bit. And by both of
these guys, I mean Hunter Biden and Donald Trump. So I don't know if anything new, it doesn't seem
like we're getting much new about Hunter. It might have dried the well on both sides.
Well, the, but the problem is on the Hunter Biden side, I think that's probably true because,
especially now that this confidential informant was heavily compromised.
Oh no, I don't think that it would be just Hunter Biden. I think that there will be
something. Or no, what I'm saying is in terms of what could leak, I feel like for a lot of the
Hunter Biden stuff, we've milked this cow. But the problem is for Trump, we potentially have
new wells of information because of the ongoing court cases. That gives you a novel ability to
reach in through investigative power, through discovery, through criminal indictment, through
trial to reveal stuff that's never been revealed before.
Here's a statement of some kind. Here's a court recording. Here's a whatever.
Like for the J6 commission, a lot of the people near Trump pleaded,
pled executive privilege. I don't have to say what I said because this is to the president
of the United States, which works in front of a congressional committee, doesn't work in front
of a criminal proceeding. This pleading kind of like pleading the fifth, but it's special.
Yeah, for the president. Yeah. But that didn't work in a lot of the,
like the Jack Smith federal investigation cases. So it could be that there's more stuff that could
come out, or as the stuff is continually brought to the forefront of American minds, they have
like a slightly less favorable view of Donald Trump. Because I do find, for instance, for
a lot of the Donald Trump cases, when a lot of Republicans, all even Democrats just don't know
any of the facts. And when you present a lot of the facts, they're indefensible. It's not even
close. It's like unhinged insane shit. So I don't know how much that'll affect things,
but also Democrats have been yanking on the, you know, Donald Trump is doing illegal stuff and
we're going to get him chained for four years. And it didn't seem like much came out of that,
or for eight years, I guess. Yeah. So who knows? I know. I bet $3,000 on buying it. We'll see what
happens. Okay. I bet money on it. I believe strongly in it. What do you think about Vivek
Ramaswani? The Trump clone guy that dropped out because he realized he has no political
future because he just served there to, yeah, be a Trump clone, pick up some popularity, write a
book. Yeah, that's what you think about him. I don't. Yeah. Okay. Yeah. Well, it was an interesting
one. I think someone that's young, just generally young at all, that's involved in American politics
just stands out. Yeah, young is cool, but he talks like a salesman. I feel like every time he was
talking, I was hearing a pitch for like a new Dyson vacuum cleaner. Well, there's a degree of
that no matter what industry you're in, whether it's in content creation or politics or media or
anything, there is a swing at the moment toward as much authenticity, as much relatability as
possible. I guess that goes back into what you were saying about the openness and honesty around
relationships and dating and fucking an adult ADHD diagnosis, all of these different things,
just being open and honest about them, allow people to find
areas of your story or anybody's story to like hook into and go, oh, that's kind of
like me or that's like my sister or that's like my best friend or that's like my whatever.
And people had a problem with the rocks appearance on Rogan, because they said it was,
he kind of seemed very curated and it was super, super smooth and all of this. And what they wanted
was like, who's the man behind all of that? Yeah, precisely. Like I want to speak to Dwayne,
I don't want to speak to the rock. And I think people felt like they didn't really
necessarily get that. And then I think that Tucker Carlson and Putin, that interview was just
like the same thing. It was like we got a very well curated orchestra, like a curated performance
by Putin. And we didn't really get to see anything that was real there.
Yeah. One issue that I had with people is somebody being genuine is not necessarily a good
character trait. And people overrate that too much. People can be genuine and be a bad person,
a genuinely bad person. But people will give a lot of people credit just because they're
genuine. It's like, okay, sure, like this person might be genuine, but that doesn't,
that's not necessarily a good thing or necessarily a bad thing. Like they could just
be really bad. Like they could be a genuinely bad person. It reminds me of, for a lot of debates
that I do, I gotta hate this. I hate this. It's going to happen under this fucking video. No,
not as much because we're going to disagree as much. When I debate people that I disagree with,
I'm very rhetorically careful about how I present myself. I don't want to come off as too argumentative
or too destructive to the conversation. I want to be constructive. I want to be somewhat agreeable
so I'm finding common ground. But ubiquitously under every single one of these videos, this is
such a great conversation. I love that two people are talking and they're not shouting to each other
and blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. And it's like, okay, that is true. But like comment
on the conversation now. Okay. Just because we're talking and we're being agreeable doesn't mean
it's necessarily a good conversation. That's a good first hurdle to get over. But now talk,
like evaluate the conversation itself. Yeah. And I find like that happens, that same thing happens
with the genuine part of like, oh, I like this guy because he's genuine. It's like, yeah, genuinely
evil, genuinely an asshole. Like that's not a, yeah, it reminds me, I'm sorry, fuck, there's so many
examples. Have you ever met a person in real life? Big red flag, by the way, if you have ever met a
person in real life and you're like, oh, why don't people like you? What's going on? The guy's like,
I'm just too honest. No, it's not that you're too honest. You're an asshole.
Yeah. Yes. I remember when I was in school, there was kids that would misbehave or whatever.
And there would be like extra dispensation given by the teachers to the kids that were naughty.
You know, they were the ones that were always disrupting class or weren't handing homework in
or weren't doing whatever. And then me is one of the nerds. I would be held to a higher standard
if I misbehaved in class. I would feel like I got picked out by the teacher and told like
that I shouldn't be doing whatever. I'm like, hang on a second. He just like fucking like
kicked a bin over and you didn't, you just sort of went over and like
quietly told him to do that. And I always used to feel, it always used to feel unfair
that like the people that were able to behave were held to a higher standard than the people who
weren't able to behave. And I guess it's kind of like this. It's like, look, you can be yourself,
but if yourself is being an asshole, then it doesn't make you more virtuous. That being said,
is it better for somebody to be a genuine asshole than a lying, like virtuous individual?
Yeah, I guess it just depends on what the lying thing means. And that's a really hard thing personally
to sort through for an individual. And it's a hard thing to sort through and how you evaluate
other people. So like for instance, let's say that I'm meeting a girlfriend's family,
I'm not going to that dinner as destiny. I'm not going to be making edgy jokes about how much
money would you accept to fuck a dog every single night if you were getting paid money?
That's not going to come up in that family conversation. I'm going to be respectful.
I'm going to ask questions about the family's job. I'm going to be like on my best behavior.
Am I being a fake fuck by doing that? Am I being disingenuous? I wouldn't say so. I think
that you wear different hats depending on who you're talking to. The issue comes from,
are you communicating things that don't comport with your core values when you're talking to
somebody else? So if I was meeting a girl's parents and they were racist and they asked me,
you agree that black people are lazy? And I was like, yeah, I guess they are. That's a problem,
right? Assuming that you don't actually think that because now you're violating core principles,
core values. I find that a lot of the time when people are criticizing people for being not genuine,
it's just because they're wearing a different hat, not necessarily because they're lying or
misrepresenting themselves. But yeah, that's a hard one to sort through anyway because some
people might think that they're lying or misrepresenting themselves.
It's not like we and our nature and the way that we present ourselves are transparent to
ourselves either. Sure. A lot of the time we get skewed or manipulated just by the situation.
I don't know. I got caught up. I was talking to such and such a person and I was tired or I
wanted them to like me or whatever. I didn't mean to say X, Y or Z. But this is kind of going back
to what you said at the very beginning, which is like giving people a little bit more grace,
hoping for the best in people and believing like, look, I think that if I was you,
I would act the way that you are. I don't think that most people are evil. I think that they're
trying to do good. Like just starting from a place of more gentleness, I suppose, and a little bit
more gentle, Steven. A little bit more room, giving people a little bit more room and hoping that
they can come along for the ride. That seems like a much easier way, a much nicer way to live life.
It can be, yeah, but it's not so much fun to watch and that's where the eyes are. That's why I
say it's people's fault sometimes because of the type of content that they consume. That's the
direction that the content heads in. We're not in this media landscape because the Jews pushed us
here or because there was an alt-right conspiracy or because the woke tards got us here. We have
the media landscape we do today because it's what we enjoy watching and we definitely reward
them. We put a clip up from the Piers Morgan interview and it was a clashing with Piers
Morgan over alcohol and going sober. He said that sometimes people that go sober can be boring.
I said that assumes that people who drink are interesting and we went back and forth and
there was a bunch of comments. Hey, I'm sorry. Hold on. He made the argument that alcoholics
that get sober could be boring? Not necessarily alcoholics, but that I was saying I went sober
for a good chunk of my 20s and found it was good for not being hung over once every week or once
every two weeks, so I got more productive and made changes in my life and like yay sobriety,
even though I didn't drink that much. He said, well, do you not find that if you do that you're
just going to be around people that are boring? I was like that assumes that people who drink
are interesting. We had a little bit of a back and forth on that and then he'd grown up in a pub
and he said, look, I've seen that it helps people to come out of their skin and you know,
some people are a little bit socially anxious and so on and so forth. I was like, well,
that also shows that the people that you're around, the friends that you're around,
you need to sedate yourself in order to be yourself with them. You need to find better
friends. The issue isn't that you need alcohol, it's that you need friends that can help you to
be yourself around them and I don't think that alcohol, I think alcohol is actually masking a
lot of those problems and many people haven't not had a drink, especially in the UK, like classic
working class culture, haven't not had a drink since they were 15 or something. The longest time
they went from when they first ever had one to now was two weeks and they don't ever think,
but they'll be concerned about whether or not creatine or ace K or artificial sweetness or
getting them. Meanwhile, they're putting a reliable poison into themselves and I love
me some alcohol too. I was a club promoter for 15 years. I'm a part of it and just trying to
thread that needle. Anyway, we titled the episode as clashing with Piers Morgan over
alcohol and going sober or something and so many people in the comments are like,
this wasn't a clash. Where's the clashing? I'm like, okay, fucking debating Piers Morgan,
but you clicked on it. So what's the game that you want content creators to play?
Is it clickbait if your interpretation or the threshold that I have for clashing is this
and the threshold that you meant for debating is that? This would be the part to where I'm
critical of audiences, but I don't know how much the culture can change there. This is the part
where I would shift my critical this then to content creators. I think the left has had a huge
problem with this for a long time, but I think the left for a long time assumed that you just
can't defend left-leaning ideas because right-leaning ideas are too easy. It's easier to just say
affirmative action bad because it's racist versus, well, how do you defend affirmative action?
But I think that something way different has happened. I think that people on the right
have spent a really good chunk of time figuring out how to make their ideas entertaining and fun
and funny. And people on the left just assumed that like, well, we're right and it's difficult. So
fuck you, you either get it or you don't. And I'm not going to sit here and educate one.
It's quite an elitist perspective of this. Very, very, very elitist. Yeah. So I think as a content
creator, you have a responsibility to two different things. You do have a responsibility
to be factually correct and to not spread misinformation. I think you also do have a
responsibility to be entertaining and funny. You know, for all the theories on Trump, I have one
bullshit theory that I genuinely believe that a huge chunk, I'm going to say 45% of Trump's success
goes back to all the way back to the red pill stuff. The game, I think he's a really funny guy
and I think that carries him really far, more than being genuine, more than whatever, identifying,
yeah, the fact that when he goes on stage and he starts talking, he's funny,
he can work a crowd really well. A lot of people knew him from the apprentice where he was like
almost universally liked. I'm pretty sure those were popular reality TV shows from the apprentice
and everything. He's a funny dude. His tweets were fucking hilarious, whether you were on the left
or the right. And I think that actually goes really, really, really, really, really far.
And it plugs into something that I thought funnily enough, because people always bring up like,
you know, like, well, what was it like for you in high school? Because you were short,
you were underweight, you had bad acne and my going through high school, I always just thought
the fact that I'm funny makes everything work. I can literally talk to huge groups of friends
from different areas. I had no problem talking to girls. I didn't even know that 5'7 or 5'8
was short for a guy. I didn't even think about that because if I can make somebody laugh,
like, I'm good to go. And I think it is true for Donald Trump that a huge part of his success is
just the fact that he's funny and people will watch him for that.
Riz and Charm are massively underpriced by most people because most of the time on the internet,
at least with the, like, performative autism, hermetically sealed box that almost everybody
exists in, especially the terminally online people, it's never actually humor. They're not
playing with wit and charm and interpersonal flow. What they're doing is trying to find some cutting
sardonic, like, weird dunk take, which isn't the same. That doesn't come if you say that
in person, in an interview or to a friend or on a debate, it sounds petty. And it sounds,
usually sounds quite demeaning and it doesn't sound, whereas Douglas Murray against Malcolm
Gladwell, when they were debating about, is independent media more important or better
than mainstream media or whatever it might be? And Douglas got, like, three laughs,
big, relatively big laughs throughout the entirety of the conversation. So guess what?
He won. Like, he won in the hearts and minds of so many people. And the same thing goes for this.
This is what Sam Harris said. If you do a debate and you get between two and three absolute zingers
where most of the room laughs, it's really hard to have lost that debate unless you've
been absolutely sideswiped by all of the facts and everything else. And you've looked like an
idiot outside of that. Like, people like charm. Yeah. And people will act like people will say
things like, Oh, like, that's why debate is fake, because people just go by who they'd like more
and blah, blah, blah. I'm sorry. But that is every single facet of your life. Every single
facet of your life is going to be influenced heavily by how other people view you and how
social you are with other people, whether it's for promotions at work or job performance,
whether it's relationships with professors in college, whether it's, you know, politics,
how will people like you, whether it's as a content creator, whether it's the front of the
group of a table waitlist at a restaurant. Yeah, whether it's how you relate to a significant
other. How many autistic guys or girls have you heard say something like, I don't know
why they're so fucking mad. I was 100% correct. That doesn't fucking matter. You think that
matters? Yeah, I know this better than anybody. Yeah. Yeah, that doesn't fucking matter how
right you are in the conversation. People are like, Oh, you don't care what I'm saying. You
just care about how I say it. Yeah, no shit. They care about how you say it. There's a big
difference between, Hey, I'm really worried about you. You're getting a little bit of late. Wait,
like, let's do something like work out or eat better versus saying like, you're a fat fucking
piece of shit. And if you don't lose fucking weight, I'm going to divorce you, right? Those are two,
you might be communicating factually a similar thing, but the delivery is, is incredibly important.
And the dumbest thing about this is people fucking know this. People know this is important,
because you know that the way that somebody communicates with you is going to influence
how you perceive the message and how you take it. And you're going to get irritated when people
are short or snarkier. Yes. Your desire for other people to ignore that doesn't extend to
your enjoyment of other people being humor, like a full of humor and funny. Like,
you are more than happy to be charmed by that guy or that girl that does that thing. And you're like,
I really don't agree with most of what that particular content creator says,
but there's something about the way that they communicate. I just, I really, I really love
the fact that Matt Walsh is dry and sardonic. I really love the fact that like, Destiny makes
like retard jokes. I really love the fact that like X, Y, Z, like those things just
cut through an awful lot of the biases in the, and the pre, and meanwhile you're saying to the
world, no, no, no, you shouldn't give privilege to people that are entertaining in a funny. Yeah.
You can't get to have it both ways. And so many, yeah, I think John Stewart wasn't the smartest
person in media when he did the daily show, you know, however many 20 years ago or whatever. He
was really funny. He was really entertaining. That's back on TV now. He's running it back.
I don't know how funny it is now. I'm not sure. I just haven't watched this much.
I saw, I saw one little bit of a monologue. It was him offering that black justice lady.
Is there like a black, there's like a black lady. Is she on the supreme court or is it a guy?
Oh my God. You're talking about Clarence Thomas, I think.
Yes. Yeah. Was that the daily show? I thought that was Stephen Colbert,
mining that up. Oh, it might be. I can't remember who it was.
Offering them. Oh, no, no, no. John Oliver, I think was the one.
Thank you. Yes. British guy. Yeah. Yes. Offering them an RV and a million dollars
if they. Yeah, to step down as a supreme court justice, which is funny.
What's next? What are you doing next? What's the focus?
In two days, I go to New York City to do that Finkelstein debate. My conversation,
I had a conversation with Jordan Peterson, I think two weeks ago, that'll probably get
published sometime. Was that with him or virtual?
No, it was with him. I went to DC, I think for that. And then next month, I'm trying to find,
because I started this vivance, but past like four or five months on my stream have been
very research driven. I've taken like more notes and studied on this thing,
probably more than I have cumulatively for everything else in my entire life.
So I'm trying to next month, figure out like something a little bit more chill to do,
something more bite-sized, something more like culturally relevant. So maybe it'll be like
research about like the border or immigration or something, but something to keep my family
a little bit more engaged than me literally reading the end of like books on stream.
I hope that they weren't enjoying you playing Minecraft because that's gone out of the window.
Fully put state or all of your gaming content is a gaming streamer by taking a drug.
Yeah, but I think it's probably okay. I think people like the political stuff more that I'm
more focused on. I just want to make sure it's like relevant and entertaining and not like
hardcore deep dives on the history of like entire conflicts.
How did you find Jordan interpersonally, I don't know how much time you get to spend with him and
in terms of your debate and stuff?
And personally, he was fine. Ideologically, he was about where I thought he would be,
which is kind of disappointing. I was hoping I'd be surprised.
I have this theory that people get broken by events and then they never recover.
A really good example of this, do you know Brett Weinstein?
Yes.
I think is a perfect example of this. Have you read the stuff that he was writing or talking
about during the Evergreen College fiasco?
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
I thought that all of it was unbelievably reasonable. I thought he seemed like a reasonable guy,
everything was like cool, but I think that event like broke his mind over the wheel.
And then now he's on Joe Rogan saying, I think 13 million people have died probably from vaccines
in the United States. I'm like, really? I think for Jordan Peterson, I think it was the C16 stuff
that like the woke fighting or whatever, like people will have this moment where they fight
against another side and it's something a switch flips. And because they get attacked
by other sides so much, they become entrenched into the antithesis of that movement.
And that's unfortunately, because I think Jordan Peterson has a lot of,
or had a lot of really insightful things to say about philosophy, not philosophy, I'm sorry,
a little bit about philosophy, but mainly psychology that I really appreciate listening to.
But now it's just like all the, I feel like I'm just talking to a random Trump voter.
Like, I think I was trying to bring up the frustrating, I think I brought up this idea
of the constellation of beliefs that people have. And it was funny because I think in this
interview that we do, in like one minute when I bring up climate change, he's brought up the WEF,
I think like eating crickets, like the everybody will be poor, but you won't own anything and you'll
be happy. And depopulation and 20% of Europe is dying because of the vaccine, all the overhead
deaths because of like to try to, and it's just like, yeah, the, when I see minds that it feels
like they get captured because they become entrenched in the opposite. If we ever bullied
them last, that's just like a great wasted potential for me. And I feel like he suffers
from that quite a bit. I don't know whether those two guys have had that happen because
of that situation. But I certainly know, the last time that we were together, I told you
about the peak hate rule, which is that every content creator is best known for their most
well-known transgression and their most recent one. So Jordan would be like, he doesn't,
he hates trans people and doesn't want to say their names. And he calls sports illustrated models fat,
like Hassan would be, he said that Americans deserve 911. And he thinks that being a streamer
is harder than working in McDonald's or whatever. Like everybody, every creator is captured by
the biggest thing that they did and the most recent thing that they did. And that's definitely
the way that they're interpreted. And I can totally see, I even see this in myself, man,
like, you know, there's been a big change in scrutiny and attention and stuff over the last
year. And there's no media kit, there's no one throws a training manual at you to go,
Oh, and by the way, when you reach half a billion people a year, this is how you,
like how you think about yourself or how you deal with attention, how you deal with criticism on
the internet. And if you have a constitution like you, maybe that's something that is a little
bit easier to do. But even for you, it must be like, Oh, fucking hell, I feel like this ambient
fucking vigilance of an awful lot of people. And then if you have all of the way down the spectrum
to the person that's the most sensitive in the world, they're going to really struggle with that,
even though that wasn't necessarily what they asked for, but they did ask for it because they
decided to just do this thing and they keep going and then you accumulate this audience.
All of that, I can completely see how one of the responses from people would be, All right,
you've made me feel the world that I wanted to love me and validate me, jilted me.
Fuck you, I'm out. I'm never going to listen to you again. You're all shills or part of the
WEF or you're all libtards or you're all like, like, well, are you all whatever, like racist,
transphobic? It's very easy to do that because you never have to deal with the unrequited love
thing again, ever. Yeah, it's just frustrating because it's such a thought-terminating
view of the world and then you end up losing your reasonable faculty to evaluate positions and now
you've just bought into the opposite of whatever the other side said and it just feels, it's
disappointing and dumb, I think. Yeah, humans humaning is inconvenient a lot of the time because
there's other stuff that they could have done. Destiny, dude, I appreciate you, man. Good
luck with all the debates and I'm not sure the next time that you come through Austin,
but we'll have to do barbecue and a training session or whatever it is that you've got on.
Sounds great. I look forward to it. Thank you very much for tuning in. If you enjoyed that episode,
you will love my last chat with Destiny, which you can watch right here. Go on.
