If it's really the case that sex work is work, then what is the problem with being asked
by your boss to give them a blow job?
It's work.
It's just a service.
It's like being asked to do it over time or make a coffee.
No one actually thinks that it's just like making a coffee.
Louise Perry.
Welcome on the show.
Thank you so much for having me.
Given your political background, how does it feel to have Ben Shapiro quote tweeting
your work?
I didn't know he had.
Did you not see this?
Let me tell you.
So there is a tweet that someone put out a couple of days ago explaining about how don't
kink shame the naked men doing parades in front of children and twerking in front of
cops.
And that was one photo, which was a news story.
And the other photo was the chapter list from your book, which said things like men and
women are different and loveless sex is not empowering.
And it said people of the West choose your future, something like that.
Wow.
Okay.
Yeah.
Okay.
That explains things.
I have quite like a heavy notification filter on Twitter, so I don't always see everything.
The contents page though completely blew up like three months ago, long before the book
was published.
The publisher just put up online the cover, the title, the fact that Kathleen Stock wrote
the forward because she's got a kind of existing reputation among her haters, my haters, and
the contents page.
And that was enough to have like a several day Twitter storm.
Why do you think that was?
Those statements.
I mean, I guess because, I mean, I did write the chapters with the knowledge that they're
like, they're simultaneously obvious and also incredibly provocative, which was like
precisely my intention because some people read it.
I mean, some people read the whole book, but some people read the chapters in particular
and they're like, yeah.
And other people read them as like fascist, basically, I mean, like so politically outrageous.
I mean, I'd say that the response to the book so far has only been out for a couple
of weeks in the UK and not yet in the States is like 80% really positive and 20% complete
outrage and not very much in the middle.
I think, well, what do you think's going to happen when it comes out in America?
That's a good question.
I mean, the like the culture is more intense in America in every way.
It's so similar, I think, to what we have here.
I mean, actually, I think we import it really, but yeah, I don't know.
I mean, I did, like British political context is different from American, right?
And I write for the New Statesman magazine, for instance, which is like traditionally
left-wing outlet.
I have come from the left, even if I wouldn't necessarily consider myself still a part of
the left and so on.
So like, I hope the book doesn't just get treated as like yet another socially conservative
take on the sexual revolution, because even if I'm reaching some conservative conclusions,
I'm doing it via different priors, if that makes sense.
Yeah.
Well, didn't you say I start from feminist priors and end up with socially conservative
conclusions?
Yeah, some socially conservative conclusions, yeah, which means that there's sort of something
in it for everyone to hate.
Except Ben Shapiro, apparently.
He's not read the whole thing.
I'm not sure how he might think about some of the early chapters.
You've been co-opted by the right wing of America now, and this is your future.
So I was at the Heterodox Academy, Jonathan Heights organization, I was at the conference
for that this weekend.
One of the speakers said something that kind of, I think, sort of is a good synopsis of
the thesis of your book that says, there are many ways to change the world, few will make
it better, many will make it worse.
Yeah, it's true.
There's a real discretion quote like that.
I can't remember exactly how it's phrased, but something like, it's really easy to break
things and it's really hard to make things, which I think is, it's like a really fundamentally
conservative observation.
And true.
What's wrong with the sexual revolution then?
So my argument in the book is basically that there are some really important ways in which
men and women are different from one another.
So some of those differences are physical and should be fairly obvious.
Like only women can get pregnant, men are bigger and stronger than women are on average,
like on average, but also that the difference is massive between the, between the means.
And also there are psychological differences, which a lot of feminism of the last half century
or more has been really invested in minimizing, but I think definitely there, if you look
at the research, and it will see just look at the world around you.
One of those differences, for instance, is that male sexuality is different from female
sexuality on average, that men are more likely to be into things like casual sex, watching
porn, buying sex, all things that have become much more socially acceptable post sexual
revolution.
And my argument basically is that the sexual revolution was kicked off by the pill, and
the, which, which did a pretty good job of severing the link between sex and reproduction.
And it's kind of gave the impression that sex could just be a leisure activity that
didn't have to mean anything, it could just be sort of a bit of fun.
And my argument is actually that that idea that sex is just just a bit of fun, it doesn't
really mean anything, suit male interests much more than it does female, because casual
sex in particular is just one, one men wanting more than women do, and two women carry all
of the risks associated with it, like physical risks, like pregnancy and violence and so
on.
So my argument basically is it's a bad deal.
But originally, it was the sort of thing that was pushed by liberals and feminists,
right? This is exactly the sort of thing.
Yeah. Yeah. I mean, the, yeah, so the, the popular narrative that I'm challenging is
one that the sexual revolution was like a feminist accomplishment.
And I don't think that's true.
I mean, which is not to say that there aren't some things about it that have been good for
women. I mean, I mean, if you look at the story of recent decades in particular, there
are all sorts of ways in which women are doing great actually, like women are women are going
to university more often than men are, they are right up until they have children are
doing better in the workplace. You know, this is, it's not to say that like everything is
like the battle of the sex is women are like losing across the board, not at all.
But I think in terms of sexual culture, that I'm concerned, I'm concerned for women, I'm
also concerned for men. I mean, there's a lot in the book about, for instance, the really
malign influence of porn on young men, like that in a superficial and short term way, it's
great to be a really attractive man in this sexual culture, right? You can basically attract as
many partners as you like, you know, consequence free sex is freely available to you. But I think
actually in the long run, that's not a very, that's not a happy way to live your life.
You say that your complaint is focused more against liberals than conservatives. Why is
that?
I mean, because I'm expecting liberals to read it. I might be wrong about that. But I that
that's the space that I'm coming from originally. I went to I went to such a left-wing
university.
Where did you go?
I went to Soa, London.
I don't even know what that is.
It's like a really, really small, really crazy university. So I, you know, I've, I've read
all of the, all of this radical stuff as a student and I'm coming from a feminist background
and coming from, as I said, the new, the new statesman I work for is, is, is historically
left-wing. So I'm kind of, I'm trying to speak to those people. But I mean, the books for
conservatives as well, because there are bits in it that I think every, everyone will, will
find, will find challenging.
The fact that a lot of what you're talking about here is conserving some fairly traditional
views around men's and women's roles with each other about sort of chivalrous conduct
and having constraints on the way that men and their aggression and their desire for
multiple sexual partners, like that, that is a fundamentally conservative value. So it
seems to me like the conservatives would have far less to disagree with you. Not again,
there's something for everybody to disagree with, but that the conservatives would probably
have far less than the new wave of liberals.
Probably, yeah. Although I should say that the, this idea of like constraining male
sexuality, which is, which is, is, is central to my thesis, basically. It is conservative
in the sense that it was, it was considered to be like a mainstream idea before sexual
evolution in the West. But if you look across time and place, like that's not necessarily
considered like a trad thing to do. I mean, like, if you look, for instance, at antiquity,
the idea that some high status man would have access to sexual access to his underlings was
like completely accepted. It's really, I don't know if you've read Tom Holland's book, Dominion?
No, you don't mean Tom Holland, the guy that plays Spider-Man, do you?
No, I don't. A common, a common mistake. No. No, he's a British academic and historian writer.
And he's got this fantastic book called Dominion, which is about basically about history of
Christianity and the ways in which Christianity influences the modern world, even if we consider
ourselves to be a religious or post-Christian. And he has a bit in there where he talks about
me too. And it really triggered a lot of my thinking about this, actually, a few years
ago, where he points out that in, say, the Roman world, no one would think that Harvey
Weinstein was doing anything wrong. Like, the idea that this guy who's at the top of the
tree of his particular hierarchy would be able to have sexual access to anyone kind of subordinate
to him was like, yeah, obviously. And actually, the idea that he should be, that he should be
constrained is, Holland argues, a very Christian idea. And, you know, I'm not Christian, I'm not
coming at this from a religious perspective. But it's worth pointing that out, you know, like,
this is not necessarily a normal thing to think.
The window of trad sort of shifts over time, right? Like, no one's actually going that far back. So
okay, so the sexual revolution happens, like, surely women have benefited with no more shame and
stigma around enjoying sex and stuff like that. Like, who benefited from the sexual revolution
overall?
Yeah, so the shame and stigma thing, I mean, yes, that is definitely one outcome. I mean, like, I
think that one of the, one of the things that I'm trying to push in this book, and that is shared
with, like, Mary Harrington and Nina Powell that you've had on the show before, they, that we, yeah,
we're on this, we're on the same page about this, like, challenging the idea of progress,
particularly from a feminist perspective, this idea that history has a shape, and everything is
always getting better and better. And the sexual revolution, you know, everything post-sexual
revolution is necessarily better than what came before. I just don't think it's true. I think
that's nonsense. Like, we're looking at a massive historical event, triggered primarily by
technology. Of course, there are going to be upsides and downsides. You know, the, yeah, so I
think it is absolutely the case that, that women now can be much more open about sexuality, and I'm
more able to enjoy sex in certain circumstances and stuff. That's true. But I also think that to
some extent, like, we're social animals, and we're very responsive to norms. And what I think has
happened is kind of the norms have just spun on a sixpence. And now, whereas previously, it would
have been the case that young women, for instance, were like protecting their virginity and their
reputation for being chased. And so it was considered very important socially. Now, if anything,
it's the opposite, or not quite the opposite, but that now the pressure actually is on for women to
be up for it. And to be just as like sexually adventurous as the guys. And you know, like,
there's, it's like a slightly painful, there's a contradiction within that, which is really hard
to navigate for young women. We're on the one hand, like, it's good to be sexually open, it's good
to sort of base your reputation on being really sexy. But also there is actually a penalty if your
body count is too high, which is quite, which is quite difficult. And I think a lot of young women
don't necessarily realize that as well, like they're actually treading a really difficult tightrope.
Which is why I think this idea of like, oh, well, people can do whatever they want now. Like, you
know, we're all, we're all free to behave as we want. Actually, I just don't think he's true.
Because we like every culture has expectations in relation to sex has norms in relation to sex. I
think that what we've done though, is that we had some quite deeply embedded norms, which were
thrown out the windows of consequence of such revolution. And now there's like a sort of
halting effort to maybe rebuild them. Sometimes they're, they're implicit. And it's kind of a
wild west out there, basically.
And I don't know.
Who's enforcing this, then? Where's this coming from? Are you suggesting that men are weaponizing
women to believe that they should have a particular type of sexual proclivity that then
plays into men's hands because they get more variety?
I don't think there's a conspiracy. I don't think that anyone is enforcing it. I think that it's
just everyone like, responding to incentives as individuals. And that knits together to create
the culture that we see before us. So that, yeah, it is, it is in the interests of, of men who
want to sleep around to encourage women to, to match them, you know, in that kind of behavior.
That's clearly going on at an individual level. But then in terms of like, women's magazines
encouraging their readers to do the same, I have some, I did a lot of digging through women's
magazines for this book. And like, there are some really grim articles out there.
What were your least favorite headlines?
I can't remember exactly the wording of it, but there's a whole genre of articles in women's
in women's media about encouraging women not to catch feelings. Or I mean, the way that it's
phrased is how anyone of any gender cannot catch feelings when they're having casual sex and how
to have casual sex in like a fun, feminist way, et cetera, et cetera. But like, we know that women
are much more likely to bond quickly with their sexual partners. We know that they just much
less likely to like casual sex. Something that's really interesting and really marked difference
between men and women on average in sexuality is women's sexual disgust threshold is a lot lower.
So women will get the ick much easier than men will. But if you're going to participate,
if you're going to have sex like a man, you have to overcome all of those instincts, right?
And so there's a whole, this whole genre of women's bags that will basically
like instruct their young readers in how to suppress their instincts and have sex that
actually they kind of know deep down they shouldn't be having, which I think is really bleak.
And yeah, and I think that just representing that as feminist in any way.
Interestingly, looking at it from a man's perspective, I agree that this is bad for women.
I don't think that it serves their interests. I think that the biological predisposition that
women have when it comes to sexual partners, trying to decouple having sex, first off,
having sex and making babies was decoupled. But then having sex and having emotions getting
attached was decoupled. And that second one, the pill for that is, I mean, you know, what is it?
It's 10 vodkas deep. Like, does that really help? You know, you wake up in the morning and you feel
but you use this analogy about the fact that Marilyn Monroe was a sort of very attractive
woman that was weaponized, commercialized, utilized by a society that wanted to sexualize women.
And this was at the benefit of Hughes, Hugh Hefner's the sort of high status man who was able
to sleep with lots of women and continue to do this. I agree. I think that you're right. It is
bad for women. But very few men are Hughes. And what you're seeing in the modern society is this
most women are probably dissatisfied with the way that their sexual
pursuits are going. Most men now the number of men reporting no sex between the ages of 18 and 30
is tripled to nearly 30% in the last 10 years. So the Matthew principle kicks off here. So I think
on average, it's bad for pretty much everybody. I think that the sort of amount of sexual satisfaction
has lowered for everybody. And you have this huge underclass of sexless men, which is where
incel, black pill, make towel, red, some parts of the red pill, the manasphere, men's rights,
all of these movements are, as far as I can see, they're big copes from men who are now in a sort
of sexual wasteland where they're really, really struggling to find connection. So I think that
I understand that from a feminist perspective, it is bad for women and that there are higher
costs that they pay. But being a listless, liminal space man with no desire from any
female that you give your attention to is not a good situation to be in either.
Yeah, I completely agree. Yeah, I'd add to that things like rates of erectile dysfunction among
young men are like insanely high, which is probably to do with porn, maybe also to do with
Easter eggs in the environment. I don't know. I was eating some edamame beans the other day,
and everyone at the table who's like big into health and fitness look disgusted. Apparently,
edamame beans have got tons of estrogen in. You can have a bit of soy, can't you?
Don't get into the soy argument. But yeah, few men are used, right? So they're the ones that are
losing. Yeah, no, this is completely true. And I think as well that there's this like
antagonism between feminists and let's say incels broadly, which does, I think, very much come down
to these innate differences to male and female sexuality and the fact that we don't really
talk about them enough, which means I think that you end up with the sex is really misunderstanding
each other, right? So like feminists will look at incels and like completely not understand
why it would be so frustrating to be a young man who can't get laid. Like, I think a lot of
women are like surprisingly clueless about male sexuality in all sorts of ways. Like,
definitely the dark side of male sexuality, but also just like its intensity. I think most women
cannot just can't like directly empathize at all. And similarly, incels, I think, would look at women
and be like, but you can walk out into the street and pick up half girls and guys, you know, within
five minutes, you must be living heaven on earth and women like, but I don't want that. And so you
end up with this, everyone thinks that like the other the other side has it easy, which has a lot
to do with the fact of just this like these quite fundamental biological differences, making it hard
for us to empathize with one another. And this is added to a culture in which like not only are
those sexuality differences routinely denied, but like the the existence of sexual dimorphism
is routinely denied. It's like, how can you possibly like successfully navigate the sexual
landscape if you don't even think many women exist? That's just quick categories.
Do you think that inventing the pill was an error then?
No, because I think
I mean, socially, no, like there are
Mary Harrington, we'll probably talk to you about the environmental consequences of the pill.
And yeah, we've just mentioned that's another story. Socially, I think no, I mean, I think it is,
I'm personally grateful for the fact that my life is not entirely dominated by childbearing,
which it would have been in a previous era. I'm not going to expect to have 10 children and
to spend my whole life either pregnant or postpartum. I think it's more that we haven't really
negotiated with the social consequences. And that's what I'm trying. That's the sort of conversation
I'm trying to initiate, because we, you know, we have we have the power to I'm not like a complete
and I, I have a sort of materialist analysis of all of this. And I think in the end, it does come
down to things like the pill, things like changes in the economy. You know, I think
so often you get the popular narrative of feminist history is basically sees it as being driven by
particularly inspiring feminists, who just kind of give really strong arguments and everyone's
persuaded and this is what you know, this is what gives us the vote, this is what gives us
access to professions, whatever. I don't think that's true. I mean, clearly, there have been
some very impressive feminists historically. But I think that the real story of the last century
is things like the washing machine. Yeah, you said the washing machine helped deliberate women
more than any feminist did. Yeah, I think Jordan Peterson has said the same thing. He's completely
right. He also mentions tampons. Yeah, there's all sorts of, all sorts of technologies which make
it possible for women to have lives outside of their home or more outside of their home than
previously. And also changes to the economy, which means that if you're in a knowledge economy or
a service economy, where male physical strength doesn't have anything like the economic importance
that it once did, women and men can participate basically as equals. There are obviously child
bearing makes a difference. But if you're on the pill, you're delaying child bearing,
you're working at a laptop, and you're operating in a very kind of gender neutral social sphere.
You might not even, you might not even like work out, you might have no recognition of the fact
that men and women are physically profoundly physically different in terms of things like
strength. Like from that perspective, it looks as if the whole world is gender neutral.
And so that's kind of, that's, that is the sort of social context in which this idea of the
difference between men and women being socially constructed or being trivial
makes sense. But actually, that's like a very, very superficial analysis of what's going on.
Like actually, I mean, one of the physical differences is still profound, but also
those psychological differences go really deep, because we're talking about
hundreds of thousands of years of evolutionary history, feeding into us having these really
distinct reproductive roles and that, and that leading to us having quite different
motor sexuality. Didn't you say that the USA women's football team was beaten by the Dallas
under 15s football team? Yeah, yeah. There are like several examples of this, yeah, of elite
women's teams being beaten by teenage boys. I think that the fastest woman in the 100 meters on the
planet gets beaten by about 100 or 200 under 17s in America, 200 under 17 men in America. I mean,
the whole like the discussion around male and female physical strength differences
are purely due to the fact that girls get told that they need to play with dolls and guys go and
lift little trucks and stuff. It feels like lapping to me. It feels like everybody is living
this sort of charade, and nobody can bear themselves to pull out of it. That's wild.
But when it comes to the psychological differences, there's a little bit more,
I guess, plausible room for manoeuvre there, because you can't see the manifest as much,
and when you've also got a discussion about people being able to transition from
different genders, the male brain and the female brain and traits that you put them on and take
them off like clothes. Yeah, and there are outliers. There are like less so physically.
I mean, you do sometimes get really strong women or whatever, but even then, I mean, I do,
my husband and I, both power lifters, and just I don't think that you can spend five minutes
in a power lifting gym and not be aware of the fact that men and women strength differences
are massive, even if there are obviously some really strong women. Do you pull conventional or
Sumo? Conventional. What about the husband? Also conventional. Good. It's a family of non-cheaters.
I'm adamant that Sumo's cheating. Yeah, I mean, and then I see, I've been, you know,
training at this for years, and then I see like novice men warming up with my one red max and then
it's just like the pure reality of it. But I mean, if people don't participate in those kind of
sports, also things like martial arts, if you don't participate in that, you wouldn't necessarily
know it. But on the psychological differences, yeah, there are more outliers. There are some
people who are really atypical for their sex and there clearly is like a lot of space for culture
to intervene. But it's so on an individual level, if you know what, if you know someone's sex, you
don't necessarily know anything really about their personality. It's more that at the population
level, when you're talking about millions of people, that's when you see it play out. And like
something that is really interesting and really makes clear that how profound these differences
are is you look at things like university campuses and look at their sex ratio. On campuses where
there are more women than men, so men are the rarer sex, there's more hookup culture, because the
rarer sex is able to set the terms more easily. And then on campuses where there are more men
than women, you have the inverses more monogamy. And that's the sort of thing where, yes, there
will be individual outliers, but you can't deny the differences when you see it playing out in
those kind of larger arenas. Well, that sex ratio hypothesis is kind of the basis as well for a
ton of hypergamy, that as you have an ever increasing group of high performing women and an ever
decreasing group of underperforming men that are dropping out of college, that aren't getting as
educated, women age 21 to 29 earn 1,111 pounds more on average than the equivalent man. So during
the period when women are seeking a mate, they're unable to find what fundamentally on average,
women want to find a mate that is more statusful, wealthier and better educated than they are.
Those are the cues typically that they were attracted to. But now women are able to gain
status, earn more and become better educated than men at higher rates than men, which is what's
causing this sort of upward tilt toward turbo chad at the top, sleeping with everybody, listless,
sexless men underclass down here, and then the wistful women and alpha widows that are in this
sort of world. I mean, this is the most interesting dynamic that I think there is at the moment when
it comes to dating. It's got downstream implications economically. It's got downstream implications
when you think about population growth, population decline, culture, crime. You don't want this huge
underclass of sexless men roaming the streets. When you get into a relationship as a man,
your testosterone goes down. When you have a child, your testosterone goes down again,
because it's advantageous, it's adaptive for you to not be going out doing reckless
shit when you've got a baby and a wife at home to look after. So all of this, I mean, this is just,
it is by far the most interesting dynamic I think that's happening in the world at the moment.
Yeah. And this is the subject of it. So my last chapter is called Marriage is Good.
And a lot of people who've just seen the contents page sort of assume that it's a
Christian argument or whatever. But actually, it's making exactly, it's like a very
rational secular argument for actually, if you look at what happens to a society when you get rid
of monogamous marriage, and you compare our society now as it was in the past, and also look at
societies where polygony is the norm. Like most society, I think it's about 80% of societies on
the anthropological record have had polygony as a socially acceptable thing. So you end up with
the, you know, the chads who are having multiple wives, and then you've got men who never marry
at all. And you do also have some monogamy in the middle, like it's normally not quite that extreme.
But that it seems is basically our natural state as a species. And because it's just it just
recurs again and again and again. And that that minority of cultures that have been monogamous,
including Western cultures, are unusual. But and it's not like it does sort of have to be imposed.
Like, you know, like a lot of elite men will cheat, for instance. And, you know, they take on
extra wives if they could, like people, monogamy is not really our natural state, it does have to
be socially enforced. But it also is like, amazingly successful. Anthropologists talk about the puzzle
of monogamous marriage, in that it is weird to see that a culture like ours would have developed it
in the first place, because it clearly doesn't suit the interests of elite men, you'd think that
the elite men would want would want to have multiple wives, which of course they do. But
the reason they think that it's become as successful as it has is because monogamous
societies do well. They're more stable, they're more stable, they're also more productive. So they
colonize other parts of the world, basically, because they're wealthy and, you know, striving
and successful. And then they impose their marriage norms elsewhere.
Think about it this way, I've only just thought about this.
The naturalistic fallacy gets used a lot with this, right? Look,
ancestrally, we maybe don't have tons of evidence that we're a monogamous species,
therefore, monogamy is not the strategy that we're supposed to go down.
If you accept the fact that non monogamous societies are more unstable and are going to exist for
less of an amount of time, that means that the living standards are going to be lower, that
means that mortality, all of the things that you care about, right, are going to be out of the
window. What if monogamy for the individual sometimes can be suboptimal, but on average
is optimal for the culture as a whole, in the same way as when seatbelts got introduced, people
didn't want to wear them. And a lot of the time, it's not just you that you're saving, it's also
other people in the car, because if you don't have your seatbelt on, you bounce around and you
smash up everybody else as well. Maybe a different way to frame monogamy is that it's kind of like
following the law a little bit. It's a small individual sacrifice that you make that does
perhaps make for some people suboptimal living standards, but only a little bit.
But the reason that you do that is to contribute to the entire stability of society.
Yeah, I've heard, I can't remember who came up with this, but I've heard monogamy refer to
sexual socialism. Basically that reason.
It's a redistribution strategy for sure.
Yeah, yeah. I mean, I mean, we mentioned Jordan Reese again, he got in trouble for saying
something along these lines. I can't remember exactly what it was.
Enforced monogamy. I brought it up with them at the start of the year.
Yeah, because it sounds really authoritarian, but I think what he was describing there is basically
a weird describing where it's like socially prescribed. It's not even necessarily legally
required. It's just considered to be the norm. Cheating is considered to be bad.
You can't have a second wife.
And yeah, there are also, I mean, there are other good outcomes also in terms of things
like child abuse and domestic violence, which obviously is something feminists are very interested
in. Like polygynous societies have much higher rates of both because the household with multiple
wives and their children are like full of conflict.
A hundred times more likely that a child is going to be killed if they're in the household with one
parent that isn't a biological parent. Yeah, a hundred times more likely.
Yeah, it's insane.
It's wild. Okay, so what's sexual disenchantment?
So, social disenchantment is basically, I took it from Max Weber, the sociologist, who wrote about
disenchantment of the natural world as part of the Enlightenment. So when people used to
really pre-enlightenment, the natural world was kind of possessed by spirits and had like agency
and specialness infused within it. And then we become more rational, whatever, post-enlightenment
and realize that actually it's all just like scientific forces of play. I think that it's
not my term. I borrowed it from Aaron Sabarian, he's an American writer.
Sexual disenchantment is what happens post-sexual revolution where you used to think of sex as
having this kind of specialness, I mean, within Christianity of being like a sacrament within
marriage. And then now it's stripped of all of that meaning. And it just becomes basically
any old social interaction, like it's just a means of having fun. Basically, it doesn't
necessarily mean anything. I mean, the point that I'm making in the book is actually basically no
one really believes in sexual disenchantment. People talk about it a lot. And particularly,
progressives and liberal feminists will talk about it as if it's an ideal. We should of
course get rid of all these stupid old fashioned ideas about sex, having some innate specialness.
But actually, people don't really behave as if that's true, because people behave almost always
as if actually sex does have a special status. And it's a special status you can't necessarily
define very easily, but people feel it. People care if they get cheated on, even in the polyamorous
community. If you go into any polyamorous subreddit or whatever, you will find people
really struggling with jealousy, as this intense instinctive thing that they're trying to override
and they can't quite do it. Sexual harassment in the workplace, I get really frustrated with
feminists who claim simultaneously that sex work is work, and that we should get rid of all these
hangups about selling sex, being any different from working at McDonald's or selling any other
kind of service. But then they also get so sensitive about any perceived section of propriety in
their workplace. What like? Like being touched by a boss, for instance, not even in a really
aggressive assaulting way, but just getting touched on the arm or something like that, or being asked
out in a context that you don't really feel comfortable, all that kind of me too stuff,
which is quite low level. If it's really the case that sex work is work, then what is the
problem with being asked by your boss to give them a blowjob? It's work, it's just a service,
it's like being asked to do it over time. Or make a coffee. Or make a coffee, yeah. And no one
actually thinks that it's just like making a coffee. So I think that the sexual disenchantment
idea is really just theoretical. It's a rhetorical kind of move, but actually doesn't really describe
reality and doesn't really describe how people feel. I mean, it's kind of just an inconvenient
fact that if you're trying to be super rational and you're trying to resist anything like remotely
traditional or religious or anything old fashioned, then the fact that people feel very
differently about sex and they do about other things is kind of inconvenient.
It's felt like an aberration, right? It's like, oh, this is just an analogy drawn with the
non monogamy community is so correct. One of my friends out here in Austin was telling me about
the first time that his wife brought somebody else back. And he was on the floor of the bathroom,
dry retching. But at the time, he's not married, at the time was adamant that this was just him
working through his ego. And this is in part of the process, this is part of the processing thing.
I'm like, dude, that's, you're not choosing to throw up. That's something way, way, way behind
conscious programming. That's innate. That's built in. But is it you that is this your quote
that says few liberal feminists are willing to draw the link between the culture of sexual
hedonism they promote and the anxieties of a campus rate that have emerged at the exact same time?
Yeah. Yeah, that's yeah. Yeah, because I think what's going I think what's going on a lot
with me too, is that what what meets what was described during me to and still is I guess I mean
it's still is still going on in different forms, right, was not always rape, right? Like some so
with like going back to Weinstein, for instance, some of what he did was like straightforwardly
illegal. And he was convicted a little bit therefore. But a lot of what is described is much more
somewhere in the middle, you know, much more open to interpretation. And often what women were talking
about was just like feeling creeped out or feeling like, like exactly this dry retching on the
bathroom floor feeling like your instincts are telling you something, even if you can't quite
rationalize it. And often this was, like, expressed in terms of consent, because in the liberal
feminist framework, the only thing you're really allowed to talk about is consent, because you
because all the old fashioned norms are out the window, you're not allowed to talk about
chivalry, you're not allowed to talk about like any kind of instinctive feeling of disgust or
discomfort that you have kind of has to be suppressed, but you are allowed to talk about
consent. And so everything had to be expressed in the form in like the language of consent. So I
talked about, for instance, the Aziz Ansari case, you might remember, I can't remember the name of
the grace, I think was her pseudonym, is women who went on a date with the actor Aziz Ansari,
went back to his house afterwards. And he kind of he didn't rape her and he didn't do anything
illegal. But he just kind of subtly pressured her into doing sex things that she didn't really
want to do. And then later she wrote a sort of firsthand account of this. And he got in trouble.
But it was one of those, it was it was a bit later on in me to it was one of those ones that
provoked a lot of discussion because it was because it was a borderline one, like he hadn't
had he done anything wrong, he definitely hadn't done anything illegal. The idea that he hadn't,
that he had violated her consent just didn't really stack up just based on her own story.
I think what's often going on here is it's to do with this pressure that women feel to have sex
like men and to try and have emotionless sex and to try and just like, you know, to do the sexual
disenchantment thing and just treat it like a like a leisure activity. But they can't actually
quite do it. And they feel like they feel sexual disgust, they feel shame, they feel like these
deep painful emotions. And the only person sometimes to blame is the man, even though he
actually might not have done anything wrong really, or he I mean, he probably wasn't behaving
like a gentleman, but he wasn't doing anything illegal and he wasn't doing anything really
wrong according to like the standards of the day. It's just that the standards of the day are not
actually very good for women. That's it. You've nailed it. You've absolutely nailed it there.
And you're right, the outlet for pushback and for distaste, the only one that is there is the
man and the only framing through which you can talk about this is consent, which is where false
allegations, I think, sometimes come in that perhaps you repurpose ick as guilt.
You must have done something criminal. Yeah. Now it's rape. Yeah.
And of course, the nature of it is that there are only two people there. They weren't any witnesses
and so it's everyone's like analysis of something that's gone in the past is just really difficult.
And to be fair to a lot of men, they're being raised in the same culture where you're told
that women love it. I mean, they haven't necessarily watched Sex and the City,
but it's the same milieu where having sex like a man is aspirational. And the idea is I write a
lot in the book about pop culture examples of women who are clearly aspirational fictional
characters who have loads of casual sex, love it, don't have any emotional connection to the men
that they use for sex. And this is aspirational. And young men are seeing this as well.
And they're also watching porn, which gives a completely unrealistic perspective on what women
like. And so they're clueless, basically. They're playing by the rules of the game as well,
or at least by the cultural influences of the game that they think are going on.
Another problem that you have here in the asymmetric warfare of the sexes is that men who
begin to get a little bit of resentment for women, let's say that they've had the heart
broken in the past, but that they are within the standard where they can keep having sex,
right? They're not one of the underclass that actually someone that can keep on doing it.
If they become aware of the fact that girls are trying to play this game of detached,
emotionless sex, if they fully become conscious of that, they go, oh, okay,
let's see who can win at this game the most, because it's not going to be you,
it's going to be me. And they can, you know, this isn't to say, again, on average,
this isn't to say that some men don't get attached after the first time they have sex.
So they go, some of my friends fall pretty hard. But if they can weaponize that,
they can do a ton of damage as well. And yeah, I don't know. There's maybe an argument that
everybody just needs to not be able to have sex until the age of 25. And then when they do,
they're like, look, I'm fully emotionally balanced. I've been through a bunch of breakups. I didn't
have sex during the relationship. I kind of know what I like, and what I don't like, blah, blah,
blah. I don't know. It's just so many of... We're describing marriage, Chris. That used to be what
it was. You weren't allowed to have sex before you got married, which gave men in particular
a massive incentive to get their shit together. Because if you can't get married until you've
say, achieved certain adult things, like you've got a job, you've got a house, you know, or
like you've got whatever the system is, like a certain amount of money that you can demonstrate
your sort of eligibility as a husband, if you have to get all of your ducks in a row before
you can have sex. I mean, you can potentially buy sex, but you can't have it like socially
illicit. Then that's a huge incentive to behave yourself and to do pro-social stuff. Whereas if
you have a scenario now where either you're attractive enough that you can get sex, casual
sex without having to do anything, really, except be moderately charming, or you can get sex
through... Or you have access to porn, which gives you some of the same feedback from your
environment as if you were actually having sex. This will get so much worse with sex robots
where all of a sudden you can basically bypass all of the effort that you might historically
have had to put in in order to access sex. You can just buy a sex robot and you can spend your
whole life playing video games, never going to gym, never showering, never having a job,
and you still get access to this thing that your ancestors fought tooth and nail to get access to.
Even without the sex robots, men are retreating, I think, from the dating market,
at terrifying rates. There's a quote that Rob Henderson came up with, which is a similar
sort of dynamic that we're talking about here. He says,
norms were loosened around being an absentee father, so more men took the option. But nobody
wants to admit it because it upsets people. Instead, we retreat to discussions of poverty
and economics because talking about family and parenting makes people feel weird and judgmental.
But young men will only do what's expected of them, and a lot did use to be expected.
There were social norms to work hard, provide, take care of loved ones, and so on. Today,
these norms have largely dissolved. Young men have responded accordingly.
Yeah, yeah, he's very, very smart for a person. He's completely right. Yeah, I mean, I think that
the line I have in the book about Debbie Dads is that when motherhood became a biological
choice for women, fatherhood became a social choice for men. What do you mean by that?
In that when contraception and legalized abortion became available,
I mean, that basically killed the shotgun marriage pretty much immediately because it no
longer served the same social purpose that it had before. But the nature of contraception
is such that nothing is 100% foolproof. And actually the pill, particularly in its earliest
incarnations, wasn't that great and still isn't that great because it depends a lot on the user
using it properly. So if you're using it properly, it's like 99% plus effective. But in reality,
it's more like 91%. So you can end up with a lot of unplanned pregnancies. And there will always
be some women who don't want to have a termination for whatever reason. But if you're in a social
context where there isn't necessarily considered to be a link between sex and reproduction and
getting pregnant is considered to be like this unwelcome aberration, rather than literally the
whole point, then it becomes much more socially acceptable for men to not stick around because
they say, well, you chose this, you're on your own. Which is, yeah, I mean, obviously there have
always been cases of people, I've had some critics point this out, they've always been cases of men
abandoning their wives or abandoning women that they made pregnant outside of marriage,
they've always been scandals, they've always been unwanted pregnancies, whatever, that's
absolutely true. But rates of out of wedlock births now are completely historically unprecedented.
Which is kind of weird, because you would think that giving women the technology that enables
them to control their fertility would reduce single motherhood based on the opposite. Because
humans are humans are complicated creatures. That's what I learned from Mary Harrington,
that you introduce the pill, single motherhood goes up. Like, who the fuck could have predicted
that? That's four degrees of detachment away. You know, it's so interesting, but also kind
of tragic. But it seems like women, it was a perfect storm, right? You had the decoupling
socially, then you had the decoupling biologically, but you haven't had the decoupling emotionally.
It's still that fundamentally, there will be some women that are able to have sex like a man,
and there will be some able there's a man, the men that are able to have sex like a man.
But on average, it used to be something that you work toward for a long time. It used to be the
sort of thing. And think about now, I was sent another article by Rob the other day where he
was talking about why is it that parents tend to select when when their daughter or son brings
home a new potential partner, they look at things like job title, earnings, family,
and he asked, why is that the case? Why is it that you look at these when, you know,
they're not looking at how hot they are, not looking at a detraction and stuff like that,
even kindness kind of takes a little bit of a backseat. And it's less falsifiable, basically.
The fact is, look, these are the things that are going to be the most likely to become
grandchild optimizing algorithms. Do you have status? Do you have money? Do you have
the right family behind you? If you've got those, I'm probably going to have grandchildren.
All of the other ones are wishy-washy and kind of easy to fake in a way.
Why is it then that loveless sex isn't empowering?
Yeah, I mean, because your animal brain, which none of us are completely in control of,
for women in particular, even if there are some allies, as you mentioned, I mean,
often the outliers are often women who don't get attached to sex, for instance,
have like a history of sexual trauma. There's often not a very healthy reason behind it,
but accepting the fact that there are outliers. Your animal brain thinks that this guy is going
to knock you up and you are going to become a profoundly vulnerable mother-baby dyad.
Human infants are insanely vulnerable. They need so much more care as far as I know any other
species young. Mothers are also extremely vulnerable in the later stages of pregnancy,
and during infancy, you have to put so much energy and sacrifice so much in order to raise
this child to adulthood. That, before like five minutes ago in our evolutionary history,
was what happened or was certainly what you risked happening if you had sex, had heterosexual
sex. Our brains are still primed for that, and that's the whole purpose behind
emotional attachment to your sexual partner, and also the whole purpose behind
choosing your sexual partner, and the fact that women do tend to be a lot choosier than men.
These quite funny studies that have been done several times where they get quite attractive
strangers to go up to men and women, I think on university campuses normally, and proposition
them. When the women proposition male strangers, they almost always say yes, or if they say no,
it's because they have a girlfriend or whatever, whereas when the men proposition a woman, they
always say no, because women, their filter is impregnable. There's a reason for that,
it's because you don't want to be knocked up by some bows. This is one of the reasons why
prostitution is as traumatic as it is. There are all of the physical risks involved in
prostitution, like rates of murder are insanely high. If we were to compare it to another profession,
it would be by far the most dangerous profession ever, like rates of PTSD are much higher than
in the military, for instance. One of the reasons why it's so profoundly distressing is that women
have this really, really strong instinct to vet their sexual partners and to only have sex with
men who seem like good prospects. Women also have a very low sexual disgust threshold, which means
that they get the ick very readily with a man that they don't fancy. What women in prostitution
are basically required to do is to override that and to suppress those instincts. If you talk to
women who've experienced it, they often talk about working really hard to dissociate from their
physical feelings. It is that retching on the bathroom floor thing. Actually, Rachel Moran,
who's a prostitution survivor and has written this amazing book called Paid for, it's a memoir
of her experiences, she talks about that, the fact that not vomiting is one of the most important
skills a prostitute can have, because your physical urge to run away and to cry into
vomit is that strong that you have to fight it down. I think that in much less extreme
circumstances, obviously, but when women are trying to play the masculine role and imitate
male sexuality and to enjoy sex in the way that they think they're supposed to, they are basically
obliged to suppress their instincts, which isn't, isn't at all psychologically healthy.
Has normalizing sex work like Onlyfans been a benefit for women?
I mean, there clearly are some women on Onlyfans who make a lot of money from it.
So there are some winners. I mean, they, they are very unusual. Most women on Onlyfans probably
make a loss in terms of the amount of time they have to spend, because the Pareto distribution
on Onlyfans is wild. And most of the women who do really well on it are already celebrities and
not already quite wealthy. So this idea that you can just be like, as long as you're sufficiently
pretty, you log on and you're making a fortune is not true. And I'm sure has been deliberately
whipped up that idea by Onlyfans, because they're the only people actually really profiting at the
end of the day. I mean, I think the Onlyfans is not like street prostitution or brothel,
like it's clearly not the same. I like, it's pretty gross. And the, and you will have men
asking you to do things that really turn your stomach. But it's clearly not like physically
dangerous. I think that the main risk of Onlyfans is your ability to have a long term relationship
afterwards. Because you end up putting your images out in the world, and you can't get
them back. That's an issue of the internet. And often Onlyfans creators get their images stolen.
And so they'll be shared and they don't even get any money from it. And the risk is in the
future that even though men don't always admit it, the sexual double standard is still actually
really alive and well. If you, so sexual double standard being when men are kind of permitted
to be a bit promiscuous, and that's okay socially, but women tend to be punished for promiscuity.
I think that Onlyfans goes beyond promiscuity. You know, the double standard didn't account,
it's not men wanking on camera and then trying to find a wife and them saying,
my friends shared something in a WhatsApp chat earlier on, and that kind of looks a little bit
like you. What about normalizing like love sex workers, like sex workers are you should be
completely fine with your partner doing Onlyfans or perhaps even escorting?
I mean, crazy, what kind of, yeah, I mean, either I think if I think if a man is really
comfortable with that, that's like a red flag to me. Honestly, again, it's an example of men
suppressing their instincts, because the the instinct towards jealousy is so strong. And again,
has such an obvious evolutionary origin to it. Because if you're putting loads of resources
into raising children that you've had with this woman, you want to know they yours,
like that's make guarding is what the biologists call it. And it's, it's so common that I think
it's considered to be a human universal. And yeah, like there are there are loads of
sort of unwelcome phenomena that come from that, you know, jealousy is often
the motive behind domestic violence, for instance. Like, you know, you mentioned the
naturalistic fallacy, like the fact that it's natural doesn't mean it's necessarily good.
But it does also mean that trying to completely override it is probably not going to work.
But you have to find a way of accommodating your instincts, you can't just try and suppress them
and try and like, like rewrite the human blueprint.
Well, that's where that's where I think the
it's not men that are encouraging women to do only fans. I don't see men on the internet saying
that you should go and you girl should ditch your job and go and do it. The only people online
saying sex work is real work seems to be women. Yes, men are the ones that are paying for their
images once they're in the game. But I think that's because once women cross that threshold
and become a sex worker or whatever, they're almost kind of not subhuman, but they're in
a different category, right? And it's like, Oh, well, they're doing it, I didn't get them into
it. So I'm just going to continue to fund them. But if you were to say to most men, I think,
would you advise that pretty girl to get into only fans so that you can see her nudes?
Most of them would say probably not, probably not, but almost every healthy man would say no,
right? They'd say, No, I'll try and go out with her or maybe she should just go and enjoy her
life or do whatever. But once they're in the game, that's what's going to happen. But you have this
this very bizarre sort of cartel. I don't know. It's like
self not self oppression, but like self capitalization from women of women encouraging
other women to go and do the game, despite the fact that the chances of you making money on
only fans is minuscule low when it comes to actually making the tens of thousands of dollars a day
that the the biggest creators make. And yeah, I mean, even even if you were able to have an
unbelievably secure only fans that was never able to leak your photos online, you have two choices
for the remainder of your life when you get into talking to a new partner, you can either tell them
the truth. And regardless of how comfortable that guy is with his sexuality, finding out that his
misses, forget body count, even if you've only slept with one other person. But that was something
that you did. You can't like left brain your way out of thinking that that is Oh God, well,
if she did that in the past, does this mean that she's maybe going to she's a risk for promiscuity
in the future? Like the cook radar is so hyper attuned for men, which is why we get more jealous.
Or the other one is to lie to him. Cut radar is interesting phrase. Good coinage game. Because
I have you because I have used the I've, I've, I have to write it in the book, but I like talked
about on Twitter, non radar, which I think that women have really strongly. I mean, I think men
do as well. But I think women in particular have a really strong like it's I think it's
certainly a sexual disgusting is that feeling of like, this guy is creepy. And I think that
it I think it's like female intuition, right? And I think it's coming. It's probably partly
coming from wanting to protect yourself is also partly wanting to protect your children. You've
got that like this guy's bad news. Yeah, if I'm going to sleep with him, what's he going to do to
the kids perhaps? I saw I got to tell you about this meme that I saw. So Carl Benjamin Sargon
of a cad, a guy who has incredibly conservative views about this stuff, but aligns completely
with what we're saying here. He posted a meme the other day, and it had a girl from Onlyfans in
like a bikini or lingerie or whatever sort of dancing away on one side and had Michael Scott
from the office on the other sort of looking strangely. And the text said, we call it female
empowerment, and they will dance naked for the price of a cheeseburger. Yeah. Yeah. I mean,
this question you raise about why women encouraging each other to do it, you're right. I mean,
one exception gives this idea of a friend who went on a date with a guy who said,
you're so hot, you should be on Onlyfans. And she did not go on a date with him again,
because it was just so obviously, I know, failing strategy, I think. Yeah. Because
the way that she interpreted it, and I think correctly was that he was, he was clearly not
regarding her as like wife material, right? And this is this is I think an error that women do
make sometimes where they don't have a good understanding of male sexuality, and they don't
it's really interesting. I don't know if you read David Busse's book, Bad Men.
Absolutely. Yeah, I brought him on for this. Fantastic book. Yeah. And he talks about the
fact that women tend to assess like short term partners and long term partners based on the same
qualities. They want the same things in all the men they have sex with. Men don't do that. They
have a much lower standard for their short term partners, and they do for long term partners.
And so they will be willing to have sex with a woman that they absolutely would not marry.
They would not even introduce to their friends. And I think a lot of women don't necessarily
know that. And so they will interpret sexual advances from men as flattering when actually
they can potentially like cheap, you know, this is the genesis of the alpha widow, right? Like,
this is what many girls that are liberated sexually and using Tinder and stuff like that
don't get. And I think that this is another, I'm actually not so convinced
about quite how big of an effect this is. I'd need to see Rob go and do some research about it.
But certainly, women are able to sleep with men that they wouldn't be able to get into a
relationship with. But the reverse isn't true. And there is an argument that the aftershock
of this means that those women are going to constantly pine after the nine out of 10 guy
that's worth half a million and all that. I'm not sure about how long that would last for
and the echoes of that and stuff like that. But I certainly think that what porn has done to men,
which is to teach them that women are to be objectified, is similar in part to what only
fans has done to women, which is to teach some women that men are commercial vehicles to be
exploited and that their sex is just a commodity. You can trade it like anything else.
Yeah. And it's not, I think as well, some women who already like posting a lot of
raunchy photos on Instagram don't necessarily feel like only fans is that biggest step. It's just
a bit more explicit and you get paid for it. So you can sort of see the reasoning and what some
women say, and I get it, is that yes, maybe that it means that some men in the future wouldn't
want to be in a relationship with me because I've got these photos out in the world, but I wouldn't
want to be in a relationship with a man like that anyway, if he's going to judge me sort of thing.
And the problem with that is that if you actually look at research on men, it's like,
that's basically all men. They might not say it because it's not really socially acceptable to
admit to, but actually it is basically all men. To the point that if a man isn't bothered, I'd
wonder if he had a cuckold fetish. And then that obviously brings complications to your
relationship. What did you learn about porn when you looked at that? For the book. I mean,
the thing with porn that I think a lot of people don't fully appreciate is that online porn is a
completely different beast from like Playboy of the 60s. I mean, I start the book by writing
about Playboy and writing about Hugh Hefner. And clearly, there was feminist writing at the time
about porn being really grim for women. There's this famous cover of an issue of Hustler,
I can't remember what year it was published in, probably the 70s, where a woman is being like
ground up in a meat grinder and her legs are just sticking out the top. It's really like
deliberately grotesque image and feminist got so upset about it at the time, I think rightly.
But like they had no idea what would happen with the internet. And I think that the thing that's
so sinister about online porn is that there's this quote I use in the book that the nature of
like technical capitalism is that we are all either above the algorithm or below the algorithm.
We're either creating these pieces of tech or we're being influenced by them because we're
using them or we're sexually interacting with people who are using them. And porn is such an
amazing example of this because it's just profit driven. That's the point of it. It's not interested
in the well-being of its consumers. I mean, whatever porn have have various like advertising
efforts to try and sanitize what they do. But the whole point of it is making money and they're
really good at it. And the way that they do it is by basically creating a super stimulus
which adults uses brains. And like they're incredibly adept at basically arousing the human
body, the human animal, like we can't really resist our animal instincts as quickly as possible. So
you log on to one of these platforms and you look at the front page and like everything is designed
to make you as horny as possible as quickly as possible. And the way the platforms are designed
is to like introduce you to the super stimulus and then introduce you to something even more
stimulating and even more stimulating even more stimulating. And so you end up and I mean,
so a lot of people are able to use porn casually. Quite a lot of people don't use it at all.
Like a surprising, including men's surprising proportion. Do you know how much that is?
So I read a survey that about a quarter of millennial men haven't used it in the last month.
Which quite a lot. But the there's a minority of users who are like helpless. Power users.
Yeah. Yeah. Like again, it's a Pareto is a play as well. Like there is a small
number of men who watch. I can't remember the figure I put in the book. It's something like
2% of users use it for like seven hours a week or more. It's a lot of porn. Do you know Mary
Harrington's law of fap entropy? Yes. Whatever you start out wanking to will get progressively
more disgusting over time and you'll be down in the depths of blueberry porn before you know it.
Well, yeah. Yeah, absolutely. Yeah. I mean, like just anecdotally, there are some
very strange things that compulsory porn users end up being turned on by and like to the point
where they can't even let erectile dysfunction being a huge problem. They can't actually have
sex with a real person. What's the name for that? It's not ground pounding. What's it called? It's
called something. Oh, death grip syndrome. Death ground pounding. Where the fuck did I pull that
from? Yeah, definitely more unpleasant. I mean, death grip syndrome isn't that nice either.
Yeah. And I told I write in the book about cultural death grip syndrome, which is where we've got
an incredibly pornified public life. You've got so much more like sex scenes on TV,
advertising billboards, whatever. I mean, like sex scenes on TV have wrapped up so
quickly just in my lifetime that used to be edgy. And now it's like,
you know, every drama has to have like super, super explicit sex scenes every five minutes,
whatever. So you've got that on the one hand. Well, I don't think we've ever had this much
explicit sex in public life. But then also people aren't actually having sex. You have
the sex recession, the sex depression, where you've got, as you were saying, you've got loads of
men who are virgins up into their 20s and so on. It's this really weird.
What's the word? It's this really weird contradiction. And it's one that the
feminists of the 70s who were so upset about porn didn't foresee. Interestingly,
like they were concerned that porn would inspire sexual violence. And like, it's complicated
because it probably does a bit like in some circumstances. So for instance, choking porn
has become so popular. And it's so mainstream in a way that it wasn't at all 20 years ago,
it used to be considered a really niche, bdism thing. And even actually in the BSN community
was considered a bit risky. Whereas now, like survey data is crazy for millennials and younger,
the proportion of young women who report being choked by their partners, sometimes asking for
it. And sometimes, sometimes non-consensually, but it's like just become insanely mainstream
really quickly. And the only mechanism that I can see for that is porn, that it's inspiring a change
in sexual culture. So sometimes, yeah, it's inspiring more aggressive behavior from its users.
But equally, actually, sometimes it's like basically neutering users that they become
actually incapable of having sex with a real person and even becoming capable of being
aroused by just normal porn, because they're so they'd like they go they go down the rabbit hole.
Laura Fapp entropy continues to. Yeah, yeah. What do what do most modern feminists think
about porn now then? Do they think that it's liberating women and allowing them to earn and
sex work is real work? It's complicated, because I think that the
like, most liberal feminists and sex positive feminists would definitely think that there's
nothing like inherently bad about porn, and would absolutely defend the right of women to
produce it and so on. But I think that there's increasingly a view that actually it's not
great. I did a debate at the Oxford Union earlier this year, and the proposition was
something like this House welcomes a new porn. It was mostly about the new fans,
but ended up being about porn in general. And I thought I'd be slaughtered because I thought that
the students were going to be so sex positive and so anti everything I had to say. And actually,
I won, surprisingly. I had some quite aggressive questions from the floor, but actually at the
end, our side one. Why do you think that was? Because I think actually this generation, I mean,
these 18 year olds, right, so they were a bit older. They they're the generation who had porn,
like on their private computers, on their phones, from adolescence onwards. I mean, I'm 30. So I
didn't actually have my own smartphone or whatever until teens and above. But these are the kids who
had it from like adolescence and would expect to be exposed to porn really young. And it was really
formative in their sexuality. And I think that it's hard not to not to recognize the like the
downsides of that. The thing that I see online, I don't know a single guy that is pro porn,
guys are either neutral porn or anti porn, like the ones that are anti porn are vehement about it.
Do they tend to be anti porn from like, the ethical women stuff, or because of the effect on
them, I can not from the effect on women stuff. No, I think that I actually think that the guys
that are behaviorally addicted to porn or have got friends that do or are scared that they're
going to become it. I actually think in part that they see the women that are a part of the
porn machine as part of the oppressor. I think that they think that they are creating the content
which is causing me to have to fap three or four times a day and feel disgusted with myself or
waste time or have this sort of super normal stimuli problem of not being able to get it up.
Yeah, I mean, it's another one of those things where everybody's losing, you know,
except the owners of Mind Geek, they're fine. Yeah, one of those went on a podcast a few years
ago. I remember hearing about how huge that Mind Geek empire is. It's like more than 50% of all
porn streaming on the internet goes through them. Remembering that porn is still the biggest traffic
source on the internet and they've got, it's wild. Yeah, aren't they British? One of the guys British
as well. Canadian, the guy who only fans is British. Yes, yeah. I was trying to get him on,
I was trying to bring him on because he seems like a very interesting guy and I was really
fascinated by their attempted move away from explicit content. It was obvious that they had,
I don't think that that came from altruistic means. I think that that came from probably
investor problems and shit to do with banks. So Chelsea Ferguson, if you know her, she owns
admiami.vip, which is another version of OnlyFans. She was on OnlyFans. She found out that
it was a problem. She's a friend. I've been friends with her for a very long time. She
was got a huge private Snapchat. She's been a stripper for a long time in Newcastle.
And she was telling me that she had to go to Germany. Germany was the only place that she
could get a bank that would process payments when they found out what she was doing. So
the back end of stuff, I think that that was the story about OnlyFans wasn't that they were
trying to clean up the image. It's that they were probably having investor problems and
operational shit on the back end. Yeah, interesting. Because that was one of the,
my memory of the timeline is that big New York Times piece about Pornhub and Mind Geek came out
and Visa in particular, possibly some other companies, I can't remember, got a cold feet
and thinking that they were inadvertently funding trial rape images. And so I guess that that,
I mean, OnlyFans has loads of kids on it realistically. And I know that they try,
they say that they try to make sure that it's only adults, but they can't realistically do that.
There are loads of stories anecdotally of girls, you know, 14, 15 year old girls or whatever,
putting their images up there. It is inevitable on any of these platforms. You can't really protect
against it. What do you mean when you say that people are not products? So that's, yeah, that's
the, when I mentioned at the beginning that I had that big Twitter storm about my
chapter titles. And that was kind of the most, all these like left-wing sex-positive people
absolutely outraged at me saying that people aren't products. I mean, it comes back to the
sexual disenchantment point that if you, if you really think that sex is meaningless, it's just
like making coffee, blah, blah, blah, that people can just like sell sexual access to themselves,
like they'd sell any other kind of service or any other kind of product. Like it's internally
consistent. And it's the sort of the, the phrase that I use in that chapter is that it's the logic
of the punter. I mean, that's what punters think that they can just, they don't really see prostitute
women as being properly human. I think, I mean, based on the way that they write about them,
that doesn't, that doesn't seem to be how they view them. There's like appalling review platforms
online where punters will review women that they've bought sex from. And there's like no
human feeling in there. Like there's like true psychopathy on display. So, so like that probably
is the only population who actually believe in sexual disenchantment.
The women they're buying sex from certainly don't. And, and like thinking
away from the more extreme end of it, in terms of prostitution as well, just thinking about
things like dating apps, which are also kind of designed, like they're also sort of
continuous with the logic of the punter in that they are designed to be like shopping apps.
That's how they feel. You don't feel using them that different from using like ASOS or eBay or
whatever, because you swipe, swipe, swipe and select your products. I mean, or not, of course,
if you're like an incel who doesn't get any matches, but for the high status men and for women,
that is how it, that's how it's experienced. And it's got a really, really consumerist kind of
energy, the cat, the whole like casual sex phenomenon, which ought to be the sort of thing
that the left are really opposed to. My colleagues at the New Statesmen, like this ought to be,
you know, we're talking about this multi-billion pound global empire of the porn industry.
We're talking about a really consumerist attitude towards other people's bodies and minds.
Like this, this, this isn't conservative or it shouldn't be like this should be
101 anti-capitalist critique coming from the left. But it isn't. And I think that that's because
a lot of people on the left have prioritized, like owning the comms, and are more interested
in tearing down bourgeois sexual norms and basically promoting free love at all costs
than they are in thinking about where this has actually led to a, led us to. And I think that this,
the last 60, 70 years post-sexual revolution period has been, has been a big experiment in what
happens if you disconnect sex from reproduction and you basically discard all of the like quite
finely tuned norms that used to exist, basically to keep young, horny people away from each other.
I mean, the way that this is interpreted, this history is interpreted by feminist often is this,
all those social norms exist to control female sexuality. And they did, but they also exist
to control male sexuality. And the purpose of it wasn't to oppress women, it wasn't motivated
by misogyny. It was motivated by the fact that if sex leads to reproduction, then that's everyone's
concern, like that matters to the community. Because if you've got people, young couples
producing illegitimate children, like that's, that matters to the family, that matters to the
community. It's essential in a world without contraception to control young people's sexuality.
And that's what those norms existed for. And we threw them out the window very rapidly. And
we've basically seen this play out over the last, however many decades. And I think that
the, the results are in and they're not really promising.
That's really, really good. I learned from Mary when she came on the show about the fact that
a lot of the rules and the norms that are set are by the elite. And they're usually not the ones
that suffer the impact. It's a luxury belief, right? To hold that men don't need to hold the
door open for you and that having chivalry and constraints on male behavior, that's not needed
by some upper middle class woman whose husband has got a postgraduate degree,
because there are maybe levels of education or, or norm enforcement that have occurred just
through his upbringing and her upbringing. That means that it doesn't matter. What you don't
think about is the, the underclass or the working class guy and girl who perhaps haven't had those
same sort of levels of norms enforced. And maybe they don't know that not hitting your wife is
that big of a deal. And then when the culture starts to erode and evaporate that away, you go, well,
the people that made the rules or that encouraged the norms to be dissolved are not the ones that
are suffering their dissolving. Yeah. Rob Henson, actually, I think he uses polyamory as his,
one of his examples is his original luxury beliefs essay, where if you're a high status
person, let's say in like the Bay Area, where everyone loves polyamory, like polyamory is really,
is just like cool. And you can, if it all falls in a heap, it doesn't matter because you've got
your money and your status and all of your stability to fall back on. And everyone will just
sort of think that you're a bit bohemian. Whereas if you're a working class, underclass woman who's
basically, you know, living polyamory, like having lots of different partners and lots of
different children by them, people one will think you're trash, but two, like your life becomes
so challenging, because you've got, you've got all these children to look after and you don't
have the reliable support of a partner. And like you're at risk of absolutely everything falling
apart. But this is, yeah, it is a luxury belief in the sense that saying that that's a good thing
and resisting the traditional norms that used to exist gives status to
rich people. Well, think about, I really like the idea that beating the other side was more
important than raising up the people of your political party. And I think that that's very
true. There was a study that I saw around about 2012 surveys of Democrats and Republicans,
the proportions twisted and they flipped from I vote for my party because I like my party to
I vote for my party because I dislike the other party. Pretty much more people were doing protest
votes because of a hatred of the other rather than a love of the similar. And you go, well,
how easily is that to be weaponized? You know, and how many perverse incentives are you going to
create there? You mentioned at the beginning about how my book will be received in America. And
not all but a lot of a lot of my friends who are also writing on similar things like Mary and Nina
and so on are British. And British feminism is much more it's much more permissible to say this
stuff than it is in the States in general. And I think the reason for that is that we don't really
have a Christian right in the UK. So there isn't really any like fearsome enemy that we all need
to be focused against and things like abortion rights are rock solid, pretty much like not in
Ireland, but in the mainland UK. Like that doesn't feel under threat. And I think that's what it is
that because I think American feminists are just so focused all the time on like often shadow
boxing against the Christian right in the sense that I think they overstate their influence in
their power and they're kind of stuck in the past a little bit. And there's this like underdog
mentality that we things like constantly having to reassert like oh you shouldn't be ashamed of
sex you should be. It's like we've won that fight. Come on. This is like look at any any newspaper
magazine TV channel or whatever like the idea that women are not allowed to say they enjoy sex
there's like 50 years out of date. Come on. So they're so focused on us like somewhat imaginary
enemy that they can't actually interrogate the coherence of their own views. Whereas I think
in the UK that isn't that isn't so much the case at all. And actually there's a lot more
things like trans politics or whatever which we haven't gone into in in this discussion but
is is much more cross party is not there isn't this like really fierce dichotomy
politically which I think gives more space for thinking critically. Like I feel like I can
write this book and I'm not going to get pegged as a crazy conservative. I might be wrong about that.
We'll wait and see how should people act then given all of this everything that we've gone through
how should people act? So I mean I I do basically make the case in the book for
for for being a bit more old fashioned on some stuff like I a lot of the a lot of that
section of it is directed more at women than at men. So like I think for instance it's a good
idea for women not to have sex on the first date or not even to have sex in the first three months
because that that gives you the opportunity to assess whether or not he considers you to be
good time only or if your wife material stuff like that which like you could basically read
in most agony answer from like the 1950s which is obviously what I get keys of in my reviews.
But also they like there was there was a reason for it. It wasn't it wasn't motivated by misogyny.
You know there was a there was like a proper principle behind it.
I mean similarly for men I mean I don't know what I don't know what advice I have to
fit in the cells to be honest. I think I'm probably not the right person to offer any kind of advice
because typically they don't like advice in any case. No from like a fish teaching a fisherman how
to fish type thing. Yeah it just it goes down badly. I had a nama Kate's on a couple of months
maybe six months ago and she's done tons of work tons of research like first hand research into it.
A lot of people were unhappy about the fact that she wasn't someone that could understand their plight.
So okay so for women don't have sex on the first day not having sex for three months. So
there's an interesting insight I learned from Jeffrey Miller evolutionary psychologist. So
his book mate that you wrote with Tucker Max which should have been so much bigger than it was.
It's such a shame that it didn't do like mental numbers because it's great.
He explained about how slut shaming is a sort of game theoretic enforcement mechanism to ensure
that the price of sex doesn't descend lower than women want it to which is why most women
are the enforcers of slut shaming not men. Men actually have an incentive for slut shaming to
go away. But one of the problems that you have here is you can kind of see ease of sex or speed
towards being accepting of having sex with a potential new partner as kind of being a price
right and as you start to extend that out the price that the man has to pay continues to go
up and up and up. So you really do need a bit of a God's eye view because if every woman tomorrow
said right no sex until three months that's fine that's the playing field. Maybe you would have
more men that would sort of duck out of the dating game but over time they would acclimatize right
because we acclimatize to no sex before marriage that was there. So yeah I think okay so what else
what else can people do? I mean yeah so on that point about yeah I mean strike breakers
everyone else the I think that one of the things I hope comes from the book is that
a lot of young women in particular because they've not yet learned through life experience are
phenomenally ignorant about the reality of male sexuality and the reality of sexual difference
and so don't realize for instance some of what we've spoken about the fact that like
the sexual double standard is alive and well and a lot of like men can have a motion of sex
in a way that women can't and all of this and so we'll interpret for instance
though they will misinterpret a lot of male behavior and end up making decisions that are
actually not in their best interest because they think that you know the guy who wants to sleep
with them must want something more from them afterwards and then and then I like you know
learn the hard way that that's not true and I think that actually if
if there was more knowledge widespread knowledge about the existence of these facts
I think actually that young women's behavior could change quite quickly because at the moment
for instance the like you go on TikTok or whatever and you get young women will do things like show
off their bruises that they've got from having rough sex with men who like obviously hate them
but there is it's a status symbol because it's a sign of being oh look I'm so attractive I'm
particularly things like choking a lot of women interpret choking as being a sign of like passionate
love like in like a 50 shades of gray way like I want you so much I'll do anything to have you
is the way that this is like interpreted in the romantic imagination that's not generally how
the men who are doing it interpret it at all so there's this like mutual miscomprehension
where each sex is doing something and they actually don't like realize how the other side is
interpreting it I think if more women realized that it would it would no longer be high status to
be showing off your bruises on TikTok because actually the like the truth of it is that basically
any moderately good-looking young women can get as many partners as she wants and can get them to do
you know if she if she asks them to choke her they will it's not a sign of being super attractive
but it's misinterpreted as being as such so I think that if there were more
I think there was a better understanding than some of the incentives would change
which would be a good thing for young women
Louise Perry ladies and gentlemen I really really enjoyed the book I think that the group of
women that we've got in the UK you Mary Nina we need to come up with a new net this can be
a public service announcement to the people that are still listening before we started we came up
with the name of based British women but then realized that the acronym of BBW can be problematic
so if you've got an alternative that the girls can use that would be great
but yeah I think that it's really great I really really like all of the work that you guys have
put out where should people go they want to read more of your stuff online where should they go
so there's a book obviously which is out already in the UK the case against sexual
revolution and it's out at the end of august in America and I write a weekly column for the
New Statesman you got a sub stack as well right no I don't actually I started one very briefly
but then I got off for the New Statesman job and I can't do two columns in one week so
take the money Louise I appreciate you thank you thank you so much what's happening people
thank you very much for tuning in if you enjoyed that episode then press here for a selection of
the best clips from the podcast over the last few weeks and don't forget to subscribe peace
