You've spent a lot of time studying history and writing about current events at the moment.
How would you rate your predictive ability given the current state of the world? Were
the things that you foresaw coming or things that you've been particularly surprised by?
Well, nobody gets to predict with 100% accuracy anything, because among other things, all the
time things happen that you could never have seen coming. I could never have seen COVID coming,
I just didn't. So whenever anyone boasts about their predictive capabilities, I always think
you have to do it with a certain amount of humility, because I mean, things happen all
the time you couldn't see. You can only see around the bend of the road you're coming to,
you can't see around the corner. Yeah, I mean, some things I've written about for years,
particularly in my book, The Strange Death of Europe that came out in 2017, which I think
are sadly coming to fruition, I say sadly, because people think that if you've predicted
something and got it right, you would feel any pleasure. And that would only be if the thing
you were predicting was something you looked forward to. And what I was predicting was something
I was dreading. And that was the transformation of our country of birth, and many other countries
in the West due to demographic change. And I mean, every day now, pretty much somebody says to me,
gosh, I used to think what you were saying in The Strange Death of Europe was a bit out there,
and now I realize you were right. But it gives me no pleasure for them to say that.
Because I always sort of think, well, if you'd have agreed back then, some things might not have
happened. But as Mark Stein said, demographics is destiny. So it's one of the things you can predict
with the most ease. Yeah. Did you have Victoria's Secrets plan to bring sexy back on your 2023
bingo card? Why Victoria's Secrets bringing sexy back? After experimenting with 300 pound mannequins,
plus size models, disabled models, trans models, a male model and a 38 year old football player,
Victoria's Secrets have made the controversial decision to switch strategy and start using
hot women to model their underwear again. It makes commercial sense to my mind.
Yeah, it is quite easy. I'm always amazed that advertising executives find it complex,
this stuff. I mean, all you need to do is stick sexy guys on stuff and stick sexy girls on stuff.
You can sell the merchandisers who pretty much writes itself.
Yeah, I'm not particularly surprised that if you stick Lizzo in a bikini, it's not as appealing as
a bit of sales merchandise. But you know, live and learn, I suppose. Liz and learn.
One of my friends owns a very big clothing company. And for a while, they tried
plus sized models, mostly for women. There's not much of a body positivity movement for men.
No, not like a beer gut. The skinny fat revolution. And he said, we've split tested
this into oblivion. Big girls don't sell clothes. So when you see that, when you see a company,
you know, and summers are making double plus sized dildos or whatever,
the company is actively hurting the top line and bottom line to be able to send the right message.
And that's all well and good. Up until some shareholder meeting, where some 70s year old
guy looks at the far right column of an Excel sheet and goes, what the fuck's this?
Yes. And they go, no, you don't understand. It's this really cool new movement. It's very
progressive. And he goes, I don't care. Right. I want more money than we had last year. And
this is less money than we had last year. Yeah. Yeah, they, I mean, I suppose it all starts off
from a good place like some or many things. But look, if you, you might agree that, you know,
it's not a good thing to sell anorexic looking models to young women. That's, yeah, okay,
let's all agree on that. But you can, you can stop somewhere before morbidly obese. You know,
that's where the whole thing goes wrong with body positivity thing. Plus there's a place where
the body positivity shouldn't occur. It should be, I mean, if somebody is so morbidly obese that
they're at significant risk of heart failure, you shouldn't celebrate them. You should say,
hang on a minute, steady on the donuts. But they don't say that they just did, they, they, they,
they run all the way. I wish you could just have sort of healthy looking women on the ads and just
draw the line there. But as, as ever, they sort of don't know where the line is until you just
say something wrenches them back. And I think wrenches them back is normally, as you say,
the bottom line. Yeah, I, I've been thinking about this sort of performative empathy point for a
while. Got this idea, I need to meme it better. But I think something like short term empathy or
the shallow pond of empathy, I've been thinking about what is most popular in culture at the
moment is something that optimizes for its immediacy to signal that you are a good guy or good girl.
Right. Even if that's at the expense of the ultimate outcome for the person. So let's say
you're able to do something, giving the child ice cream, it may be what it wants right now,
it may be bad for it long term. But if you're the ice cream promoter for the young children,
you will be seen as a good person. And if you're the person who's saying, hang on a second,
that's not what you want long term, maybe responsibility in Peterson language, maybe
not casual sex in Louise Perry language, maybe, you know, not as much food as you want in body
positivity language, you're seen as bigoted or judgmental or whatever.
Because there's no countervailing force in the culture. The unlimited empathy,
people have run a long way very fast, because as you say, there's a short term gain to be seen to
be being empathetic, you know, let's celebrate yourself. But ordinarily, you would have some
other counterforce in the society and different forces have provided that in history, including
a church. But if there is no counterforce to say, for instance, you know, long term gratification,
better than short term, or, you know, whatever, then, then yeah, and then that's a sort of
unappealing position in our society. Now, there's plenty of room for people to be in that space,
but it's still, you're still on the defensive. You know, we still live in a society where
effectively to own an ice cream truck, you know, in the sort of language of a child would seem to
be a great thing. Does it have the short term thing? Yeah, not many people want that role,
it's sort of uncool in some way. It might become cool at some point in the future when
more people realize that the short term gratification thing was leading to diabetes or
whatever. It's the same as one of the justifications, I think, for why people aren't having children,
that upfront children, you just see a very, very large cost on all of the joy and stuff.
Obviously, the economists put it as the child tax, the amount of money you have less if you have a
child, weird way around to look at the future of the species, isn't it? If only I died with more
money in my bank account, life of regret. Death of regret, perhaps. Yeah, well, you know, it's kind
of the, as well, the Mexican fisherman's story. Are you familiar with that, the parable of the
Mexican fisherman? No, I don't think I am. This is cool, you'll like this. So an American businessman
goes on holiday to Mexico, and while he's there, is it true story? It's a parable, though. Got it,
fucking hell. He goes on holiday, he gets taken out fishing by a local Mexican,
and he asks the Mexican how he spends his time. The Mexican says, I fish a little on the morning,
I catch enough for my family, we go back, we cook, we laugh around the fire, and I spend time with
my children, and the American businessman goes, that's stupid. Here's a better idea, what you
should do is actually spend most of your day fishing, and then with the surplus fish, you could sell
them at the market, and the Mexican fisherman says, and why would I do that? So, well, once you've got
the additional money, you could start to employ some of your friends, and they could come out
fishing with you too, and you could catch more fish, which you could sell at the market for more
money, so why would I do that? It says, well, once you've done that, you would be able to
incorporate in America, and you would maybe be able to start a canning factory so that you could
own the entire production process, and you could then sell the company for a lot of money.
He said, and why would I do that? He said, because once you've done that, you'd be able to fish a
little on the morning, and then go back and spend time with your children around the fire.
Very good.
And I often think about that as a much more direct route to happiness, you know.
Yeah. Well, that's the classic thing that the place you end up is the place you started from,
but yes. There are a lot of reasons why people aren't having children,
and a lot of them are simple economic things. I mean, all of the western countries that have
terrible replacement birth rate figures are because of very easy things to solve, like cost of
housing and things like that, and it's not hard to build affordable housing. We just proved to
be incapable of doing so. So, young people wanting to both get on the property ladder and start a
family think they have to do either or, and they're not entirely wrong, but that's something
that governments could have sorted out, and none of them do. They're so hopeless at it,
and they have even for years under consecutive governments. They never build enough housing,
so young people don't see a future, don't feel hopeless, and then don't have kids, and then
everyone wonders why there's a demographic crisis.
Intergenerational competition theory is something I learned about a couple of weeks ago. You're
familiar with this? Yeah. I didn't know about it before, but it makes complete sense. You know,
there was always this talk of millennials are the first generation to have done worse than their
parents. Well, they're not the first, first little while, first in two generations.
And it seems like millennials actually probably just about managed to get over on average. But
Gen Z, materially, difficulty in getting on the property ladder, the most common living arrangement
for men under 35 is still at home with their parents. And yeah, it bakes in this sort of
intergenerational competitiveness and a dissatisfaction when you look at where your parents
were in this, you know, felt sense that your parents got advantages that you never did.
Which is usually not true. I mean, they didn't suffer inflation at the same rate. They suffered
very high taxation in the post war period. We haven't had taxation as the levels it was at in
the 1960s and 70s, for instance, in the UK. There was a time when people were top rate
taxpayers were paying 99% tax. A friend who once in that period paid over 100% tax one year
for reasons he could still not. How's that possible? It will be back tax and that sort of thing. So,
I mean, there's a tendency, particularly among millennials and after, to think that their parents
had it very easy. My experience of people from that generation, the boomer generation,
it didn't feel easy at the time. And yeah, there were certain things getting on the property
housing ladder was a little bit easier than it is or significantly easier. Once you have,
what is it, five times average earnings being inadequate to get to the average property price,
you see the split go on. But you always have to factor. I mean, if you say, you know, millennial,
the first ones or Gen Z were the first ones and said, whoever to have a better standard of living,
you have to bake in things like, oh, yeah, well, they had a world war, you know. So,
that's quite a big PS. Well, there's a big footnote. So, yeah, everyone has their challenges. I just
don't see why once you've identified them know the way out of them, you don't do them. But
I was talking to mutual friend Eric Weinstein about this. I also spoke to Sam about this.
I've spoken to a bunch of people. Why in your opinion do you think
everybody struggles to agree on the truth now? Oh, that's quite straightforward. We can't agree on
what's happened. So, broadly speaking, an event happens now and some people believe it has happened
and other people think it hasn't. I mean, we've been through a number of deranging years since
we first spoke in which, for instance, you know, they say there's been a global pandemic, which
some people believe was something which killed millions and millions of people in their own
country and think they were just about saved from dying themselves. And other people think it was
a fake. And other people think we just massively overreacted. And other people think it was all
planned and nobody agrees what happened. That's just to take one example in America. You have
obviously the fact that nobody agrees who won an election. That's a problem. And so you just
have basic things nobody can agree on. It just happened. I always say in America, you know,
it would be nice if we could just agree that one thing that's just happened happened. But then
nobody wants to. It says you must be a WF shill if you believe that. So I think it is the problem.
And then obviously underneath that is just the problem, the fact that the treadmill of social
media has totally changed the way in which we communicate, the way in which we learn things,
absorb things. And we don't know what the consequences of that are. We're so early into it.
And it seems to me, among other things, it's allowed people to have their own version of
recent events, recent history, the past few days. And so when you sit down to talk to somebody,
you can fairly swiftly work out whether they're somebody who's open to the idea of things that
happened having happened or whether or not they will fight you all the way. And that just makes
everything much harder than it used to be. And that isn't to sort of particularly pine for the
era of a mononarrative, if that era ever particularly existed. And you read history,
not clear that it did. But it's just massively worse. And news is coming at us at such a pace
these days. And it's just like, you know, every day feels like, you know, a month's worth of news
in the past. Things just fly by you so fast that you don't even have time to absorb it before it's
happened. So I think that's part of the reason. And in any case, the whole concept of truth as
being a desirable thing in the society seems to have eroded from both the right and the left.
Well, truth, for instance, used to be the basis for a university
education and the basis of university inquiry, that you sought the truth wherever it led you.
That was the point of academia, for instance. Politics was different. Politics was always
about having to find a way around truth and deal with it and address convenience.
Yeah, address it where you could, but, you know, get round it if it was too awkward.
But inquiry used to be about seeking truth. And there'd been like that for a couple thousand
years or more, since the Greeks, certainly. And then it changed at some point relatively recently.
And truth is now not a desirable thing because truth hurts people. And it can be mean.
So it's not only that people have different opinions on things.
They don't agree that the thing we used to agree on is worth going for.
They have different facts as well.
Well, they have different facts. But they don't agree that the, I mean, they don't agree that
you should just follow truth wherever it takes you because other things are prioritized over truth.
I still prioritize truth over all things if I can and try to. And I think that's the interesting
thing about the world is finding out what is true and what is not. But other people don't seem to
have that same appetite anymore and would rather live in lies, which I think is very
dangerous for an individual and very dangerous for society. In fact, it's dangerous for an
individual and lethal in a society, I'd say. It's interesting to think about the motivations that
people have for not believing something which is already on an unshaky foundation of we can't agree
on the thing that we're not believing about. And Gwendo, one of my friends, has this idea that
if no amount of evidence would dissuade someone of what they believe, then they don't have a
rational belief. They have a religious ideology.
Yeah, yeah. That's what Jonathan Swift beautifully put it as.
You can't reason somebody out for a position they weren't reasoned into.
Yeah, of course. I'm your dealing with dogma with many people today. It's just they don't
know which faith they belong to, but it's dogma for sure. I just am not very interested in their
views because I think they can't defend them. And if you can't defend your views,
I'm not very interested in them because I don't find them persuasive.
I asked Sam this about whether or not, obviously, whatever, 10, 15 years ago,
who's a big part of the New Atheist movement. And I guess you were tangentially on there.
I was a little bit of a whipper snapper.
And ciliary.
I was a whipper snapper, New Atheist.
You were an orbiter. I was a short trousers, New Atheist.
Okay. But your book, The Madness of Crowds, talks about the collapse of grand narratives.
One of the biggest collapses of grand narratives was religion. So I asked Sam whether or not
looking back, he believed that his deconstruction of religion was on balance and net good or a net
negative. What did he say?
He managed to evade being too committal, either way, I think. But what do you think?
I think it's like a lot of things that you deconstruct.
You only know afterwards whether or not it's something you could have put back together.
It's like children with bicycles. Very fine at taking them apart. Very bad at putting them back
together. Not comparing Sam to a child. But I mean, I just, I think that is, it is something
you notice only once you've taken apart, once you can't reconstruct it, you'd realize what function
it might have performed. I said to Sam on stage a few years ago that I thought that it would all
be fine if most atheists were as rational and level headed as Sam. But it's not Sam Harris all
the way down. It's like Sam Harris followed by total mentalists and who just will not reason
or rationalize anything and are just screaming harpies of insanity. So that's a shame.
But yes, I mean, I think that that whole thing works for some people, but obviously doesn't
work for others. I mean, religion is, you know, Schopenhauer, among others, saw it was, religion
was philosophy for the masses. Absent religion completely. There's several lots of options
of what will happen. One is that the general public lose the overarching framework of their
lives and have nothing to replace it with. And another one is that they do replace it with
other things, you know, which are new religions which crop up all the time. We have the religion of
the body negativity movement, you know, we have the religion of trans, we have the religion of
gender, we have the religion of race and, you know, and all these things have just stepped
into this void. And they're all dogmatic things with their founding texts. They've all got their own
catechisms of a kind priests, their priests, they have excommunication rights. And I my only
observation really would be on that is that I preferred the old gods, you know, I preferred
the old priests would funnily enough, partly because we knew its flaws. And the sweet point
where you see the flaws of religious belief, but can still live through it is,
is one even I can why I can especially feel nostalgic for because I don't like the new
priesthood. I find them as corrupt as any priesthood in history with the negative
attribute that not everyone's woken up to them yet, you know, I mean, do we have do we have in
our culture an equivalent, for instance, of the meme of the pedophile priest? I don't think we do.
I mean, for instance, I would love it if the sort of adults who push, you know,
gender dysmorphia stuff on children were regarded as the equivalent of pedophile priests, I think
that'd be fine. But it doesn't come with that yet. It's like the Catholic church in Boston circa 1950.
The priests are still fiddling with the kids, but no one wants to talk about it.
So in other news, this episode is brought to you by Maui Nui, venison.
Maui Nui venison brings the healthiest red meat on the planet direct to your door. Not only is it
the most nutrient dense meat on the planet, they're the only 100% stress free, wild harvested venison
that you can get. Here's my super secret hack. If you are sick of buying meat that always goes off,
put it in the freezer from frozen, salt both sides of it, put it in an air fryer for 10 to
12 minutes each side, and you have a perfectly cooked steak from frozen that will never go off
because it's going from freezer to mouth in the space of 25 minutes. It's a complete game changer.
All of their cuts are spectacular and you can get them frozen, delivered to your door, but their
venison sticks are my favorite while I've been on the road. You can get the healthiest red meat on
the planet delivered directly to your door and get 20% off by going to the link in the description
below or heading to MauiNuiVenison.com slash modern wisdom and using the code modern wisdom at
checkout. That's M-A-U-I-N-U-I venison.com slash modern wisdom and modern wisdom at checkout.
It makes me think as we were talking earlier on about some of the ways in which lots of decisions
need to be made and you don't know how the outcomes are going to occur that there are no
solutions, only trade-offs. I keep coming back to that in my personal life as well,
but thinking about what people want to optimize for in their existence, there are no solutions
ultimately. You have to give up certain things. You don't have to give up everything.
Well, no, there's certainly better solutions, but the world is trying to maximize everything.
It goes back to the shallow pond of empathy that accepting the trade-off to an inevitability
doesn't fit into that paradigm. We will always optimize for what feels most pleasurable or
empathetic in the short term. I don't know. I don't feel that.
Well, that's how it plays out, I think. For a lot of people, if they have no character.
If they have no character in them.
Well, what do you optimize for?
I try to optimize for peace. That seems to be the thing that, for me, in my personal life,
I try to do. If the price is my sanity, the cost is too high no matter what it is.
And I continually throw that rule out of the window all the time. That's what I try and aim
for, right? My own rubric is-
I love the peace in your private life.
Reminds me of Lady Bracknell's line about the general at the end of the importance of being
earnest. As she says, the general was essentially a man of peace, except in his domestic life.
You're the other way around. You're a man of peace in your domestic life.
Except for my public life.
Maybe what I generally-
No, I don't think I am.
You're a highly agreeable person.
I'm fucking not.
Really?
I try as best I can to keep a lid on it. But yeah, this lack of meaning and people's desire there
absolutely fervent desire to try and fill that hole with as many things as they can.
Like Lizzo.
Like Lizzo, indeed. Did you see the stories that came out about Lizzo?
Oh, it was wonderful.
About her Amsterdam-
My favorite story of the year.
Yeah.
Not a long way.
For the people that don't know, Lizzo was on tour in Amsterdam, took her backup dances to
the Red Light District and made some of the backup dancers eat bananas out of the vaginas
of Amsterdamian strippers.
My view is what happened here was that Lizzo thought you could outsource the eating of your
five-fruit and veggie day.
To the vagina of the stripper or to the mouth of the-
She's so reluctant to eat healthfully, she even outsources the five-fruit and veggie day.
That's my view.
Well, it seems to me that both Lizzo, Ellen DeGeneres, Jimmy Kimmel, all of these people
who up-front-
Oh, isn't it wonderful? It's so great.
The Chardonnay's is always the nicest, not the Lizzo look nice, but the squeaky clean Ellen DeGeneres
thing, you know, just dance and you know, and of course they're horrible in real life.
There's people behind this.
Of course.
It's a sort of rule that by the way, actually, with public figures is that the ones who are
most, you know, sort of sweetie-sweetie in public tend to be the nastiest in private.
Sometimes the opposite can be true.
Some people who have thought to have a very hard edge in public can actually be lovely,
lovely people in private.
Margaret Thatcher was a good example.
Very, very nice to people around her, you know, but could make tough decisions.
Yeah, to me, it's a counter signal.
If I see someone doing the Lizzo thing of I am so body positivity,
it becomes their identity of how they're a flaming sword, card carrying,
paragon of whatever this thing is.
Well, it's also a bit like the Jimmy Savile, the hospital, what was it called?
It still goes, but there was a hospital for children that he raised money for all the time.
And whenever anyone would try to do an investigation, Savile would go,
you know, it's going to hurt the hospital for kids.
You know, are you sure you want to run that story?
Well, that's going to hurt the hospital.
So there are lots of people around our own age who have a thing like that.
They build like the equivalent of the Jimmy Savile Children's Hospital facade up
in order to protect themselves.
Right.
Are you saying that Lizzo's work with the body positivity movement is in a case to
try and effectively put a wall of large-
Yes, it creates some wall.
Bodied people in front of-
A very difficult wall to get over.
I think it's probably easy to get over.
Getting around it might be more difficult.
No, I don't get it.
I got into a car and it ran out of gas.
So I had this idea about why certain women are very pro body positivity movement.
And I was listening to Bill Burr do a live show and he said, ladies,
if you could only support the WNBA the way that you support a fat chick
who is gaining weight and no longer a threat to you,
that it would be doing more numbers than the NBA is.
And I realized that some non-zero number of women may deep down in their darker moments
realize that they don't discourage some of their friends from gaining weight.
Yes.
Because they can eat themselves out of their
intrasexual competition for potential partners.
Oh, it's all come on men are like that as well.
How do we play that game?
I mean, this is going to show a low side of my character,
but you can't say always that you're sad if somebody you're not very close to,
but you knew you knew and you see them after some years and then they've had.
I mean, you can't say there isn't a slight sort of, you'll never guess it's become fat.
There's different versions of that with men, I think.
And I think men can be complicit in that as well.
Yeah, you know, the thrill will offend balls early, you know.
I think that's very complicated.
Thrill, there'll be a German word for that.
Of course.
Like shard and frock, but specifically for the scalp.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Scalp and frock.
Yeah, I think lots of people do that.
But it's a pretty bad thing to encourage among people.
But yeah, I think it is part of the competition, taking out of the competition for sure.
I was thinking as well about how material conditions you were saying before
people's parents maybe had it better in some ways, but also would have had it way worse.
Yeah, of course.
Material conditions often don't impact people's demeanors in the way that they might have predicted.
Rich people can be bitter idiots, and poor people can be grateful heroes.
Although, as George Orwell said, by the age of 50, every man gets the face he deserves.
What do you mean by that?
I think that's actually true.
I think there's a certain age, it might not be 50 now,
but it's a certain age where you do show your life on your face.
Oh, yeah.
I mean, for instance, somebody who's very profoundly depressed for a long time,
it writes itself across the face.
It writes itself in their eyes, I think.
Particularly unhappiness writes itself on somebody's face.
Joy does as well.
If somebody smiles a lot, they have laugh lines.
Yes, there's a great truth in it.
We know that because we judge people by their faces.
By the way, they interact with us.
By the way, they look at us.
It's perfectly insensible.
I've found a quote the other day that said,
people with a low self-esteem will always find a way to be miserable.
And it made me think that material conditions a lot of the time are what?
Young people, but many people lay at the feet of their despondency,
or their nihilism, or their critical nature, or whatever it might be.
And I've seen enough of my friends
vacillate through varying levels of affluence, or relationship,
or singleton-ness, or whatever, and one of the things
would sometimes impact the way that they show up.
But many times, they are the common denominator
between all of those situations, and the material conditions
don't actually impact the way that they show up all that much.
Well, there's a problem of analyzing this,
which is that anyone who's successful inevitably looks at their own path
to success as being, to some extent, pre-ordained.
I mean, all my stuff.
I mean, if you just get there with some people with wild luck,
but most people, a lot of people, let me say, who are successful,
look back, and they think, well, I don't understand this person
who hasn't made it to the same rung of the ladder as I have.
Why didn't they work hard?
And so there's a sort of callousness, actually, that can creep in there.
But equally, people are, to a great extent, master their own fate,
and it's a very hard one to analyze that, as I said,
because the outriders skew the whole statistics.
I mean, the outrider who does very well,
not everyone can do what he or she has done,
but he or she is likely to think they could have done.
Well, you retroactively, lots of people that achieve success
look back at the route that was particularly designed by them,
for them, to achieve the very specific type of success
that they managed to get,
and then retrofit that as a universal law that anybody else could follow.
One of the things I've realized is I've spent more time
digging into personal growth and self-development and all of that stuff.
So much of it is post-hoc rationalization,
about one person's very idiosyncratic solution for this thing,
and they say, these are the universal principles of X, Y and Z,
and you go, no, they're not.
No, they weren't.
They're highly personal.
It's your personality just spun up and tuned up to 11.
Yeah, I mean, most successful people I've ever met
have some story of their own growth,
which is both inspiring and not replicable,
because they're unusual people.
Well, what's the alternative, as you said before?
Like, you have to lay the agency at your own feet,
because if you were to perhaps admit the truth,
which is I was in the right place at the right time.
Well, that can be the case.
Not many people say that, but some do.
Yeah, if you're in Britain in the 80s, for instance,
it's a good time to make money.
Easier, better than today.
Some people will say, yeah, it was a great place at the right time,
but most people do sort of vaguely think
that it was sort of preordained,
and I will do that to some extent.
I often describe myself as being lucky
and then need somebody to remind me of how hard I've worked.
I had a friend who joined Goldman Sachs in 1998,
and he said he had an absolute golden period for about 10 years.
Yeah, yeah, a little bit less.
He said he was already starting to wind down.
Before Lehman, brother.
Yeah, somehow that was to do with DEI,
a very early instantiation of DEI.
That's right.
Yes, there's several books that make that clear and subtext,
yeah, several books that make it clear
about some of the hiring processes going on.
Yeah, 2006, he was already seeing it,
but he told me he made a trade on 9-11.
He made a very particular trade,
and bypassed all of the security, the limits on everything,
and the pit boss or whatever.
He's just some young dude.
He's been there for two years, right,
out of whatever university or something.
What did his boss think of the trade?
Came over and said, like, what the fuck are you doing?
And he said, look at this, if this, then that,
if this, then that, ran it all the way down.
He said, this is the outcome.
This is what's going to happen.
And he's like, I don't know what,
so first off, he was concerned that it was going to go wrong,
and then he made the most ungodly amount of money
in the space of three hours,
and then all the markets shut for 10 days from September 12th.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
And the only organization that had spare capital
was Goldman because of this particular trade.
And he was basically told,
we may need to cut this, I'll check with him,
he was basically told, go home, don't tell anybody.
Yeah, of course.
That you made this.
He shorted the market.
Yeah, I mean, it was widely thought of 9-11,
that because the stock market tanked, of course, immediately,
and we didn't know if there's going to be a world war,
if this was a world war,
and it was regarded very swiftly as actually being
the duty of Wall Street to not do that.
But Bush came back,
and you remember he did that ground zero announcement,
and we will do that.
And that was as much for the stock market
as it was for the fucking popular.
Yeah, absolutely.
Well, yes, because I mean, the stock market collapses,
I mean, many, many more Americans,
I can't remember the percentage,
but are invested in the stock market than in Britain,
I mean, like three times more or something.
Americans are.
With 401Ks.
Yeah, more than 50% of the population
America has some investment in the stock market.
So it's different from in the UK,
where when the stock went,
when the pound was shorted in the 1990s by Soros and others,
they, a lot of British people are not that sympathetic
because they don't see themselves as being involved
in the stock market, which of course they are,
they just don't know it.
You mentioned George Orwell, the telegraph recently spoke about
his wife's biography or autobiography.
Oh, there's a new biography of Sonia Orwell.
George Orwell was sadistic, misogynistic,
homophobic and sometimes violent.
Biographer of the legendary writer's wife
says darkness that runs through 1984
is a reflection of his soul.
Should we unperson George?
Well, it would be the obvious end point to the full circle.
Full circle.
Yeah, this is just a way for the author to get publicity is
to repeat things everyone knew.
I mean, George Orwell held the views of his time
about gay men, for instance.
We know he was a little bit homophobic,
but it was the 1940s, you know,
Nancy Boyes and so on, as he would have called him.
We're not, you know, people weren't...
That sounds like a 1990s taxi driver's insult
that they've thrown over.
It was a sort of word that Orwell and people
from his generation would use, you know, fairies,
that sort of thing.
And he does in some of his letters and some of his articles.
But I mean, so fucking what?
I don't care.
I mean, was he sadistic, probably?
In some ways, sometimes.
Was could he be cruel and nasty, probably,
being a human being?
I just think that the absurdity of our age
of judging people and passing, well, you know,
just wait till people do that to you.
Yeah.
You know, wait till somebody weighs up your own
life in the balance and finds you wanting, you know.
I mean, I think it's preposterous.
Human beings are what we are.
Being amazed at us in the past,
there's always just an expression of our own vanity
and thinking we've got past all that.
It's like the way, if a friend of mine
was saying to me the other day when I was at Oxford,
if you want to get a grant to study these days,
say in English, and you were to choose Shakespeare
as your subject of study, which is sort of
unusual these days, you would, for instance,
have to find Shakespeare guilty of, you know,
racism, colonialist thinking, and so on.
And it doesn't seem to strike these people
that actually their job is not to judge Shakespeare.
Shakespeare judges us, and he might find us wanting.
How so?
Well, he gives us visions of the universe
and our place in it, which it would do us well
to listen to.
And that might include exposing human follies,
human weakness, human pride, human sin, human lust,
tendency to do evil in the name of doing good
or think you're doing good and do great harm.
So much more.
All of this is in Shakespeare's work and his characters
and the things he created in his mind and his work.
I think that if you look at a panoply of a vision like that,
you should think, I wonder what he's telling us.
Rather than I wonder how I can judge him.
What's the point of the latter?
It's so boring.
Human being from the past, inhuman being in the past, shocker.
Has it always been this way?
Has it always been people of the present
judging people of yesterday by the standards of today?
Well, most people didn't have time in the past to engage in that.
Too busy trying to put food on the table
or surviving past the age of 25, you know.
But what it is in our current society
is there's a very strange lack of respect for wisdom.
Henry Kissinger said this in the early years of the internet.
He said all the knowledge is there, but where's the wisdom?
People might not like me quoting Dr. Kissinger in that regard,
but again, he knows a lot more than most of his critics.
I do think that's a straight oddity of the age.
I think the oddity, the vanity of trying to judge everyone
from the past by our current standards is just absurd.
And you think you know more than Shakespeare.
You think you know more than all well.
These are minnows snapping giants.
I don't care for them.
One potentially unfortunate situation is that women's mental health
is in part down to misogynistic songs.
When BTS lead singer Jung Kook changed to a more misogynistic music,
a disturbing trend followed.
A psychiatrist's point of view on BTS' Jung Kook
and the messages of pop music.
Early in their teen career, BTS took a deliberate stance
to refrain from objectifying or sexualizing women.
Despite going against a music industry norm,
they achieved huge success.
Now, as part of his solo launch,
different imagery has surfaced in Jung Kook's songs.
They include a woman telling of her man
that she will be your fantasy and swallow your pride
to make him never think about cheating.
Lyrics that identify-
So what's the reason why you said swallow your pride
in a particularly suggestive way?
I did not at all.
I've got more to go here.
Lyrics that identify women as those hoes over there
and a male rapper telling his female partner,
I wanked before you came so that I can fuck you longer.
Of course, in reality, Jung Kook's songs
are par for the course or even tame.
Does that work, by the way, what you just described?
You've never increased your stamina by having a warm-up?
I thought the lyric more likely,
I did that before you gave me an eye,
just let you go to bed.
That's kind of like a lie-down.
I did that before you came and that's why I texted
saying I'm not so fussed about you.
Yeah, I don't have a quick dinner now, I'll get a bit.
One of my friends had a rubric for this
that was masturbate before you evaluate.
Oh, well, that's true.
Yeah, that can be sensible advice.
I'm not sure if I liked you or I was just horny.
Horny, yeah.
Yeah.
But no, girls, mental health.
You were reading out these charming lyrics, is that it?
Those hoes over there, I wanked before you came
so that I can fuck you longer.
Hmm, well, where to start?
Downstream from K-pop is a litany
of female mental health problems, that's what I'm saying.
There's a problem here, isn't there?
Because on the one hand, popular culture
does have a massive impact on the way we see the world.
I was at a gym recently where I actually asked
the gym staff to turn off the music
because it was a load of rap, a very unpleasant rap,
with repeated use of the N-word in it.
Obviously, it was a black rapper, or so I was assuming.
Right.
You didn't find yourself mouthing along to the lyrics
and all worried about it?
No, I didn't.
But actually, I didn't.
That's right.
What problem could possibly emerge from singing along?
Mate, just to interject there,
someone got cancelled on TikTok
for mouthing the N-word along to a song.
Right.
So it's no longer the sound of the word.
It's the mouth shape that that word engenders.
Well, we know that it's a magical word in our time,
which even the speaking of suddenly summons up
the demons of the past.
Lord Voldemort, yeah.
Very, very strange.
But, no, I just said to the gym staff,
I just don't want to hear it
because I just don't want it in the background of my life.
Was it that gym that we trained at?
We can discuss this another time, but anyway.
No, I just don't like it.
There are certain things I don't want on my ears,
and that's one, actually.
I have no interest in hearing the word
because it's a banned word.
So why would I want it in my mental background?
But anyway, the point is,
of course popular culture has a huge impact on people.
It has a huge impact on the way in which people see themselves.
It does.
It does.
But at the same time, you can overstate it.
Somebody is not generally unhappy
just because of the popular culture,
apart from anything else,
because you can easily step out of it,
as I try to do.
And be a part of your time,
but not be its creature, as Sheila says.
And so, no, I think it's a sort of weak excuse for unhappiness.
The popular culture happens not to be to your taste, or avoid it.
Get out.
Look up from the screen.
When is cancel culture going to come for rap lyrics?
Because it seems to me that, you know,
it's worth fighting against the misogyny
of air conditioning temperatures in offices
that are conditioned to the male body temperature
as opposed to the female body temperature, or...
I mean, the levity of the era is just astonishing to me.
You know, lots of people attribute to me this quote
that I was not quite right.
I don't think it's quite from me,
but that we'll be talking about gender pronouns
when the barbarians break in.
But I've said something like it quite a few times.
But, I mean, you know, gender norms and air conditioning,
it's the sort of thing that you would be discussing
just before you will get, you know, machetted.
I'm totally serious about this.
It's sometimes it's like...
One of the things that actually genuinely shocked me
in recent weeks, particularly of the Hamas massacre in Israel,
was, you know, and something which I do think at some point
when it's all died down a bit might be a moment of...
What do you've got?
I've got to say this carefully,
but a moment of seriousness, which is, you know,
take the music festival within a few miles of the Gaza border
that Hamas attacked.
All the young people there were at this sort of peace rave.
And this isn't in any way to victim blame.
These are people just wanting to dance
and dance into the early morning.
And I think it was called the peace rave,
the peace and love rave, something like that.
And then this hideous other world broke into them and to their lives
and ended the lives of hundreds of them.
There's something haunting about this, I find,
because it's especially haunting, because it sort of demonstrates
that your slogans and your attitudes only go so far.
And they can't keep out some of the things that are lurking at the edges.
And I think that when I hear people whining about minor things,
if you have any idea of the world out there,
if you had any idea of the things that was lurking,
you couldn't possibly be complaining about this.
Well, how do you think Gaze for Gaza will get on long-term?
Well, the joke at the moment is that there aren't enough tall buildings in Gaza
to throw Gaze for Gaza off.
But these people, I've said very often,
they're part of the same phenomenon as turkeys for Christmas and chickens for KFC.
I'm fed up with these fringe idiot cases.
I mean, they're so mentally defective, these people,
and incredibly narcissistic.
I can be queer and also celebrate panacea.
Now you fucking can't fuck off.
Just, you know, I can both argue for a two-state solution
and also celebrate queerness and also not let myself down.
No, you can't.
No, you can't.
You can't do all those things.
At some point, you've got to choose.
I've got a video to show you.
Let me show you this video.
Can someone please explain to me what this means?
What does reproductive justice mean for Palestine?
What is that even me?
Like, what does it mean?
I'm not pretty sure.
Abortions are illegal in Palestine unless it's like, you know,
a super medical emergency and the mother will die.
From what I understand, actually a lot of Palestinians have to go to Israel
to get the abortions they want.
So what does this mean?
What?
It's such a huge sign.
There's five people holding this thing.
It's massive.
That's very good.
That's Danny, the other half of Ryan, who wasn't there the day that you came.
Boy's cast, yeah.
Reproductive justice means free Palestine.
What do you think?
This is just incredibly ignorant young people in America
who have been taught this weird version of the world
where all oppressions interlink and interlock.
You're either the majority or minority for minority rights and issues
or for majority rights and issues and all minority rights and issues intersect
and overlap so that if you're queer somehow, you know, no, it's not even that.
These ignoramuses who couldn't point to the River Jordan
if you showed it to them on a map, walk along the streets of America,
shout, you know, from the river to the sea, Palestine will be free.
Because I think the Palestinians are the underdogs in this weird version
where they've mapped a very specific version of American racial politics
onto everything else in the world.
It's the same thing with people who talk about colonizers.
I mean, there's this language of colonizers, apartheid, all this stuff.
And they've just tried to map it everywhere.
Well, I say everywhere.
Actually, it's highly selectively, highly selectively.
I mean, the people who are talking about Israelis being colonizers.
When I saw that the other day on the streets of London,
I thought, yes, if only there was a name for large numbers of people
who came from outside to a country.
And if only we could identify what they might be called in Britain.
Oh, it would be immigrants, wouldn't it?
Do you want to call immigrants colonizers in Britain?
You sure you want to follow this logical conclusion?
They talk about indigenous peoples.
Oh, OK, great.
Anyway, you don't want to apply that.
Might there be a country or a continent say, oh, Europe,
where you don't want to start talking about the indigenous peoples?
I notice that people don't.
But if you do want to, welcome to hell.
So no, all that is happening is a very selective mapping
of a particular interpretation of the world that very dumb people
in America have tried to put on certain selective other cases.
And it doesn't work.
It just doesn't work.
But may they never find out how much it doesn't work?
May they never find out?
I wish them bliss in their ignorance,
because if their ignorance ever gets popped,
it will be as brutal a day as can be imagined.
I've been thinking for a good while about how hypocrisy
is a purpose-built tool for the internet to use.
It's like catnip for the internet.
It's the thing, because the reason it's so purpose-built,
it's like one of those, can you spot the difference competitions
on a touchscreen iPad?
This is what's on the left.
This is what's on the right.
And what you have is, here's something that someone once said
or a position that they used to hold,
and here is what they hold now,
or here is what they do in their real life, here is whatever.
And it's kind of what you're identifying here,
that you have a worldview which is self-contradictory.
You're just using different words for one thing
that is almost exactly the same for another thing,
and then complaining about this one,
saying, don't look over here.
Don't look over here, yeah.
Well, I mean, everyone is inconsistent to some extent.
And I don't think, by the way, that I mean,
on hypocrisy, for instance,
I can see a scenario where somebody might say,
oh, Douglas, you're hypocritical on this particular question.
I might say, well, there are some things I think
are even more important than not being a hypocrite,
such as, I don't know, surviving.
The worst thing about him is his hypocrisy.
And there's a weird, hypocrisy is the easiest one
to catch people on is the truth of that.
Correct, yes.
It's the easiest one to spot.
Yes, yes.
And they do it, as you say,
on this is what this person said 20 years ago,
this is what they say now.
I get, again, human being in growing up, shocker.
Yes, yeah.
People are allowed to evolve.
The change of minds, they grow up.
It'd be rather boring to say the same thing
and think the same thing only for 70 years.
But yeah, people find hypocrisy very easy to see.
And it's about the only vice
you can really catch somebody on, I think.
Which is, if you say one thing publicly
and do nothing privately,
it's about the only one that people are really confident on.
Or most other moral judgments are better or worse
of sort of ebbed away,
but people still are able to judge hypocrisy.
But I think, I mean, I think there are worse things.
I mean, I think not standing up for your loved ones,
not standing up for your country,
not standing up for yourselves in the face of
horrible opposition from within
without probably worse than hypocrisy.
I heard you say recently,
you don't have to agree with everyone's principle
to respect the principle they're sticking to.
Did I say that?
Yeah, sounds good.
Yeah, that's nice.
Okay, I didn't know I said that, but yeah.
You did.
But the reason that I like that is I think it shows
why the bravery conversation
or standing up for something that you believe in
is something that is a price.
At least then, if someone is prepared to stand up
for whatever their beliefs are,
that you can assume they're telling the truth,
especially if they pay a high price for it.
So one of the reasons why I have a good amount of faith
that Sam believes the things that he says.
Yeah.
But why would he not?
He pays an unbelievably high price
to continue to flip-flop from one tribe
to another tribe to another tribe.
I don't think it's an unbelievably high price,
but a price, let's say.
Relatively high price, yeah.
Yeah.
I mean, very early in some people's careers,
or when people first make it to public notice,
people say things like,
do you really believe what you say?
The answer to which for most people is or ought to be,
well, why would I say it if I didn't believe it?
There are people who obviously do say stuff for
lolls or clicks or monetary purpose,
but at a certain point,
I mean, you've got to accept that the person thinks
what they think and respect them for it
or at least do them the decency of believing
that they mean it.
And I think that even on people I disagree with wildly.
I mean, it's such a boring argument, that one.
Some people use it, particularly on the left,
is like, you know, I wonder if they actually even believe it.
I think they don't.
I think they're just doing it for money, okay?
Well, that's an easier way to try to ignore them
than actually trying to contend with the possibility
of what they're saying is something they mean and believe
and trying to work out if there's anything in it.
Much easier to say the person's only doing it
because they're paid or something.
Yeah, that's the shill, grifter accusation.
Very boring accusation.
I don't doubt there are some people
who that is the case with, but way fewer than...
Way fewer than people think.
Michael Malice has a hierarchy of different...
I think it's like the hierarchy of grifters.
Don't know why.
The moment you say Michael Malice,
my face immediately sort of starts to smile.
Yeah, it's terrible.
One of the...
It's like industry plant, paid opposition, controlled PSY op.
It goes all the way up.
And he said that he descended recently.
He's not quite at paid opposition,
but I think he's industry plant now.
I think Lex Friedman is paid opposition.
Paid is different from controlled opposition.
Maybe it's controlled opposition.
I don't fucking know.
Controlled opposition is...
These are such weird terms that have cropped up in our era.
I love it.
Again, I think there's sort of low resolution explanations,
really, really low resolution explanations for things.
Whenever I hear somebody describe things as that,
I always sort of know you're not dealing with somebody
who actually understands the world.
Do you find there's definitely a trend of conspiratorial thinking,
conspiracism, much stronger in our adopted homeland
than it is in the UK, I think?
Yes, that's true.
What do you think?
How conspiracy-pilled are you?
Do you see...
I mean, it's...
This is the moment when people say,
ah, controlled opposition.
You were splendid.
This is me allowing you to graduate from...
I think I talked about this on the boys' cast.
That's right.
Briefly, and various people wrote to me saying,
ah, there you go.
That's proof that you're paid.
You're glowing, as it's called.
You heard you're glowing?
No, I wasn't.
So tell me if I'm wrong with this, Mark.
You're the resident glow expert,
but you're glowing means you're like a...
planted person who's saying something that is outing their...
It's an intelligence operation that's breached the surface
and people can see it.
They comment on TikTok saying you're glowing.
Oh, it's like the people that alleged to be FBI
who are at certain protests or wearing chinos and t-shirts.
So you're a conspiratorial...
The thing with conspiracy theories is very difficult in our era
because some of the conspiracies are true, of course,
have come true, were known to be true.
Lab leak conspiracy theory, probably true.
They shouldn't have ever called...
Nobody should ever have called it a conspiracy theory
because it wasn't a conspiracy theory.
It was one of a set of hypotheticals
to explain what happened with COVID.
So a lot of things get called conspiracy which are not.
They're just hypotheses that should be allowed to remain on the table.
And that makes a certain type of person increasingly prone to believe
that everything that's called conspiracy theory is not a conspiracy theory.
And before you know it, you get sanish individuals
thinking that the moon landings were a conspiracy.
We didn't land on the moon.
The American didn't land on the moon.
I don't know whether the people who now claim that
believe that the Russians also faked it.
It's an interesting question to ask them.
Do you think that the Soviets were capable of getting to the moon
but the Americans were not?
The Americans set up like a blow fan and a flag
on a dodgy Papier-Mache set.
But the Soviets did make it?
Or did the Soviets and Americans both agree
to pretend to have gone to the moon but not really have gone?
None of it makes sense to my mind.
But there's this, but it's...
I have noticed and it's actually all the literature that demonstrates this
that there's certain types of mental problems that people have
that make them disproportionately likely to believe conspiracy theories
on mass.
And one of them is paranoia.
The more paranoid a person is, the more likely they're to believe that sort of thing.
And that's the observation in my own life.
I've known a number of people who've gone into the world of conspiracy
and not come out and they are all people who have suffered paranoid episodes in their lives.
So which adds up.
So fear and genders...
Yeah, and as I say, it's a sort of low resolution explanation for complex phenomena.
And I think it's also that...
See, conspiracy theories come about and are used by people who...
And this isn't an original point.
Many people have made it.
They're made...
The claims about them are made by and large by people who don't understand
how unbelievably chaotic the world actually is or can't face it.
So they can't face the fact that,
yeah, somebody you followed in the newspapers every day for all of your life
did actually just die in a freak car crash because the driver was drunk.
They can't bear the idea.
The world can't be that cruel.
It can't be that random.
You want a bed?
It's got to be coordination.
It can't be coincidence.
Exactly.
So people who can't cope with the wild frivolity of the roulette table of our lives
always go to the...
There must be somebody behind it.
There must be somebody who's controlling all this.
You're joking?
Nobody's controlling this.
If anyone's controlling the damn thing, I'd want to know by now.
But of course they're not.
It's a very unsatisfactory place to arrive at in your life.
And by the way, in my own observation, it's not very good for people personally
because they start to lose agency themselves.
Locusts of control gets externalized.
I'm at the mercy of the world.
Yeah.
And the real answer is the world doesn't care.
No.
It doesn't even know that you exist.
It is deaf to you.
The ability for people to hold two conflicting thoughts in their mind
at the same time is supposed to be the mark of sophisticated thinking.
But it does show up here, which is the government is both so useless
that they can't get anything right.
And so sophisticated that they're able to coordinate these.
Masses of versions.
The Arab world is filled with that.
The Muslim world is filled with that.
Things like...
I've noticed this repeatedly on my travels.
Things like 9-11 was an inside job of the Americans
to allow the Jews out of the World Trade Center.
And also...
Yay, 9-11!
Good for his arm of bin Laden.
They can do both.
There was a...
Somebody I knew interviewed the father of the main 9-11 hijacker.
His name's gone out of my mind.
I don't care.
He must...
He should be forgotten.
But interviewed the father in Jordan.
And he was simultaneously capable of holding in his head
that his son was a great Shahi Demater for Islam.
And that 9-11 was an inside job of the Americans.
What the fuck?
Like, Jews.
It's...
I mean, do you think your son was an agent of the FBI
and also a martyr?
Like, hey, people do this.
The Muslim world is particularly prone to conspiratorial thinking
because it's a source of flattery to itself
to explain why they have created so few successful societies.
And Bernard Lewis made this point many years ago
that the problem in the Muslim world is that they have to find explanations
because if you're given the revelations of Muhammad
and you're told it's the last revelation ever from God
and that you are the people who have received this revelation
and everything's going to go great for you
because you've got the revelation.
And then, like, the Jews...
You have one country and it does much better than any of your countries.
And, you know, you can't get the economy of most of your country
going at all and you can't provide for most of your citizenry.
Nobody's coming up the ladder and the economies in the dust and all this.
You've got to find an explanation for it because, like, what?
We were given the revelation and they're doing much better.
There's massive things like that that sit underneath the movements of our time,
which maybe billions of people on the planet believe.
And they believe them because it flatters themselves.
It flatters the governments who aspire to run these countries
or claim to run these countries.
Yeah, billions of people believe this shit.
I was thinking about the extremist worldview beliefs largely in the West,
but I guess everywhere.
And I was wondering whether we have finally moved beyond peak woke.
And a study came up recently that was kind of interesting.
Researchers from Change Research polled over a thousand registered U.S. voters
from 18 to 34.
A majority of both women and men consider far-rightism and far-leftism
to be red flags in a potential partner.
76% of women and 59% of men consider identifying as a MAGA Republican
to be a large turnoff.
64% of men and 55% of women say they'd also swipe left
on someone identifying as a communist.
55% of women...
64% of men, 55% of women swipe left on a communist, that's a no.
55% of men said that listening to Joe Rogan was a red flag.
41% of men said the same for a woman being into astrology.
Oh, that's that.
I'm with that one.
If somebody says, what's your start sign?
Date over.
There's a really famous meme where it's on iMessage and the text says,
mum, what time was I born at?
And the reply from mum says, stay the fuck away from that girl.
Yeah, it is.
The heart sinks when it comes up as a question.
I don't know.
For shame.
41...
33% of men said for Black Lives Matter, it was a red flag.
If they say Black Lives Matter, 14% of women.
53% of women said it was a red flag if they refused to see the Barbie movie.
31% of men, 58% of women, red flag.
If they say there are only two genders, 34% of men,
54% of women thought they identify as a conservative, 33% of men thought they
identify as a liberal.
So next time you're vibing with someone, maybe save the podcast recommendations
and daily horoscopes for the second date.
Wow.
55% of women say that listening to Joe Rogan was a red flag.
I wonder if the species has any future because they can't listen to Joe Rogan.
Well, not really.
All these people are wiping out very significant numbers of potential future partners.
How weird, and Joe turning up in that, that's amazing.
What happened to all the good old people who used to say,
I don't really have an opinion on that?
Well, what happened to those guys?
I got pulled in a good bit recently on the internet for not commenting on the recent
sociopolitical furor that's happening in the Middle East.
I quoted you, pseudonymously, and said, I'm trying to make a habit of something which
is very rare on the internet to not comment on something which I know nothing about.
It's a very good rule.
And yet, it's the rarest thing of all.
Why shouldn't I?
People care about my insights into health and fitness or my learnings about
social psychology.
Why shouldn't my fiscal advice be important?
Why shouldn't my views on immigration or...?
It's much to be avoided that.
I mean, in the end, you make much less of a dick of yourself if you don't start talking
about everything.
I mean, somebody recently sent me an article with a relatively well-known person,
sent me an article recently they wanted to publish about the Middle East.
And near the opening said, I don't really know much about the Middle East, but this is...
And I was just like, in that case, don't speak.
Don't speak and say, but if you don't know, just agree not to do it.
That's one reason why there's a lot of television these days in the UK
where you can be invited on to debate the total ignoramus who's only there for balance,
for off-comrelated balance.
And I just can't do that stuff anymore.
It's too demeaning that if there's a subject you know about, a war that you've covered
or covered many times, as in my case with the Israel Hamas wars and Israel Hezbollah wars.
I just can't be sitting there with somebody.
I hate to say this, and it's not mentioned in a misogynistic way, but there's a lot of
women who are currently invited on things for balance.
Firstly, because they're women.
Secondly, because they provide usually a left-wing perspective.
And that's needed if it's me that's on as well.
And you know, I just just so depressing to give your informed opinion about something
you've seen and reported on firsthand.
And then they go to the other person and they go, well, like I think it's,
I'm just saying, why don't I just at home, why I could be doing anything else?
And I've got to listen to somebody who doesn't know what they're talking about.
Whisk up an opinion live on air.
That's so depressing.
But masses of people are like that.
And it's just, yeah, if you don't know about it, don't talk about it.
It's a very good rule of thumb.
Or try it out in private with friends and mates and like try to learn something, read a book.
Are we morally obliged to have a take on everything?
No. No.
Most people's opinion doesn't matter.
I mean, it just doesn't.
And I also think that the people who spend their time online, broadly speaking,
trying to broadcast out their opinions on things should be told more often.
Doesn't matter.
Doesn't matter what you think.
I mean, one of my rules on any war is you should never as a writer try to give advice to a government.
This is what the Israelis must do.
This is what the Ukrainians must do.
They need to listen to you.
I mean, first of all, you don't live in the country.
Unless you live in a country, you're pretty damn sure you should be a bit humble
about telling other people about their lives.
And also, who made you the tactician du jour on everything?
Well, it was the same as COVID.
Everyone became a virology or epidemiology expert.
And then they became a withdrawal from Afghanistan expert.
And then they became a Ukraine expert.
And now they're all Middle East experts.
And I just think it should be regarded as a massive red flag that the person in question is.
Normally, what's happened is they've downloaded the set of opinions
they believe that their tribe should have.
Correct.
And that's why the morons marching in London and other cities,
you know, with the exception of the Muslims who just whipped up all the time
by the fact that the Jews do anything.
I mean, like, Muslims don't care about other Muslims.
Arabs don't care about other Arabs.
Nobody cares about the Palestinians.
Nobody cares about them.
Can't tell you how little they care about them.
Jordanians loathe them.
The Egyptians loathe them.
The Lebanese loathe them.
They've done nothing for the Palestinians for 70 years.
And yet, whenever the Israelis do anything,
the Muslims across the West come out on the streets because they hate the Jews.
And, you know, hundreds of thousands of people have been killed in Yemen,
not a peep on the streets of Britain and other places.
Certainly not big protests.
Bashar al-Assad has killed more Muslims in the last 10 years.
Then everybody on every side killed in every war involving Israel since 1948,
including the War of Independence.
Nobody cares.
The Muslims don't come out on the streets.
They don't care.
The only thing they care about is the hatred of the Jews.
And it motivates them like nothing else because it hits at the core of their self-esteem.
They can't bear it.
And so that one is very interesting to me.
But there are these fellow travelers who go along with them,
who have downloaded, as I say, a sort of pathetic American interpretation
of colonization, decolonization, racial justice, reproductive rights,
and try to map everything on.
My friend's got a theory called Gwinda's Theory of Bespoke Bullshit.
Many don't have an opinion until they're asked for it,
at which point they cobble together a viewpoint from women
half-remembered hearsay before deciding that this two-minute-old makeshift opinion
will be their new hell to die on.
That's very good.
My friend Freddie Gray at the Spectator tends to run very popular pieces
each time a new big thing emerges, which is the Bluffer's Guide to whatever.
And it's great.
And it usually involves, in foreign policy, it usually involves saying things like,
well, they better get this done before the brutal Afghan winter kicks in.
You go, who made you an expert on meteorology in Afghanistan?
Like, what?
Oh, no, the Ukrainians have got to make this advance
before the dreaded Ukrainian May.
And I just...
I mean, I try to...
Good Bluffer's Guide.
It's a very useful rule.
I try, for instance, never to write about any foreign policy issue
if it's about a country I've not visited, preferably visited multiple times.
I just...
I can't bring myself to do it.
I find it too embarrassing.
It's so interesting when you talk about knowing one opinion that a person holds
and from that one opinion being able to accurately predict everything else that they believe.
That mono-thinking just proves that you're not a serious thinker.
Well, I just think it's fairly obvious if, for instance, you say,
yeah, what's the problem with a big bearded guy winning women's weightlifting?
I go, okay, I know all of your other opinions as well.
And to be fair, that probably works the other way around as well, to a great extent.
The interesting thing with most people is where they're slightly out of sorts
with their own political side and so on.
Well, that's exactly the point that you...
If it's been a long time since you were surprised by the opinion
of your favorite thinker or writer or commentator or whatever it is,
that's probably a reliable signal that they're not really thinking for themselves.
If you're just permanently, oh, yeah, it's like an old leather pair of shoes.
Here we go again, the COVID things happened and I can already predict such and such's
opinion on it.
Every single time, all of the time, every single time,
you know the idiosyncrasies of this person's very, very particular worldview.
Well, that's because it's not theirs.
Yeah, of course.
It's everybody else's.
It's outsourced thinking.
And what's really sad about that is that it means that you're not really living your life.
I mean, you're living a pastiche of a prescribed set of opinions.
That's so sad.
I mean, it's so sad.
The wasted energies and wasted lives of people who've just downloaded a set of opinions
and they're just running them.
You know, well, that's not your life.
It's just someone else's life.
You're just replaying.
What was that quote you told me about being shunted to the side of the road of your own?
It's a Philip Larkin quote from a poem of his, yes,
it's a description of a couple.
And he says that something is pushing them to the side of their own lives.
It's a beautiful line, terrifying line, horrifying line.
It should make everyone judge for themselves.
What does it mean to you?
Oh, well, it means that there's a life that you hoped to live.
You saw yourself living and you got pushed to the side of it
and ended up not living that life.
I think a large number of people have that.
Almost all unhappy people I've met have that feeling to some extent.
And then you've got a choice of poisons,
one of which is to choose the poison of other people held me back.
Another is to face up to the fact that you are in some way a coward
or a victim of circumstance or something else.
But I think a lot, I mean, you know,
one thing that young people can be encouraged to do
is to set out the sort of life they would like to live.
Imagine the sort of life they would like to live and the name for it.
And working it out is sometimes difficult, sometimes not.
But if you do have that image of your life that you think it should be lived
and you end up not living it,
that is a particularly if you can feel yourself slowly being pushed away from it.
I think that's a terrible, terrible feeling.
It's like watching your own demise occur second by second.
Yeah. Fortunately, I've never felt it, but I definitely fear it.
Where do you go to find or to avoid cowardice or to find resilience or bravery?
Because a lot of the time the easier path is easier.
And it's the one that's got the least resistance.
Surround yourself with courageous people.
Surround yourself with brave people.
And that can be bravery of all sorts of different kinds.
And when I turned 40, I had a dinner, which I think you weren't invited to,
but it's only because you weren't in town, if I remember rightly.
But I did get a lot of my favorite people in the room at least.
And it was interesting that a friend made a speech in which he said it's striking.
I won't say the names of the people around the table,
but some of whom will be familiar to listeners.
But a friend of mine gave a very touching speech.
I was very moved by it, which he said how noticeable it was
that Douglas has surrounded himself with courageous people.
And it was a very wide array of bits of the world and different disciplines and so on.
And I was really touched by that because I hadn't particularly noticed that I'd done it.
But then I realized I sort of had that actually, yes, I must have subconsciously,
but maybe now consciously, wanted to be around courageous people.
Because I think that courage is something that rubs off on other people.
I think it's enormously to be desired to be around courageous people.
And that might be different types of courage, some of it physical,
some of it mental.
So that's one thing, you have to surround yourself with courageous people,
or at least not cowards, not cretins, not the sort of people who just
say the same things that everyone's meant to say and so on.
There's as many ways people can get out of this non-life that they are being shunted into.
One of my friends, it wasn't a friend at the time,
I'd just met him for the first time,
but someone that had been interested in for a good while.
I met in Austin a while ago, and he'd had an interesting story,
and he'd faced a cancellation over the last few years.
And he'd sort of told me the story, and he sat on some rooftop later tonight,
talking about this thing, and he was regaling me with the story.
And he said throughout my entire life, I thought I was a hard man.
I like to do man things and surround myself with masculine people,
and I was into guns, and shooting, and fitness, and friends with Navy Seals,
and all the rest of it.
He said, my entire life, I was scared that I was a coward.
It's terrified that I was a coward.
And he said, in my darker moments, I could always hear my better self
clearing his throat in the room next door.
Beautiful.
And then this cancellation thing came along.
And he said, even the people that do really hard things,
intellectual work, hard training work, hard physical work, all the rest of it,
there's a difference in the kind of difficulty that they do because it's elected.
You've chosen to do the hard workout, but when the entire world comes to bear on you
in a way that feels like chaos and catastrophe, whipped up into a whirlwind,
and he said, yeah, that was a genuine test.
And he was very grateful.
He said, my better self stopped his coughing and kicked the door in and came to help.
Good.
But just, yeah, I could always hear my better self clearing his throat in the room next door.
Well, the thing with that is the difference between situations you find yourself in
that are dangerous through choice and ones that you've been thrust into.
And you probably know that the consequence of being thrust into a dangerous situation
is much more likely to lead to PTSD and things like that than if you choose to.
And I've been fortunate in my life, the most dangerous situations I've been in have been
ones I've chosen to be in, and that's very different.
But yes, well, I'm glad he found out that he was more courageous than he feared.
But think about that.
What a beautiful line, to be more courageous than you feared you were, right?
Almost this war against yourself.
Yes, that's right.
This fear of your own nature.
It's perfectly sensible.
I mean, as a horrible example, I sometimes use, but I mean, if you're ever mugged for your wallet,
let alone you're mugged with somebody else, let alone if you're mugged with a girl that you were
with or looking after and you just handed it over, there's several reasons that it's worth
handing over the wallet for, one of which is why do I need to risk getting shot for like...
Stabbed.
Or stabbed for a hundred bucks and a few phone calls to the bank.
Yeah, so that's like the reason to hand over the wallet.
The reason not to hand over the wallet is, are you sure that you're not going to spend
the succeeding weeks dreaming dreams of pornographic violence against your attacker
and thinking of how you're going to, you would torture him if you could get your hands on him
and the brutal way in which you would have revenge if you ever find him.
It might be easy to just get your head kicked in a bit.
Yes.
And are you sure you can live with the version of yourself that is you handing over the wallet?
I said this recently in a piece in New York Post about the people on the New York subway
where there's this awful thing you've probably seen where people,
you know, like a woman will be being abused by some maniac, fentanyl-addled, you know, drug addict.
And people like either look into their phones, including men, or they will get their phones
up and like record. And I mean, somebody said Douglas is trying to get people killed,
and I wasn't obviously, but what I was saying was, where are the men?
Just like stand up and like confront the guy if he's got a woman by her hair and is parading
her around the carriage. And yeah, the backlash was like, what do you know, these people might
get killed if they step in. But yeah, but also maybe we'll have a more civil society
if people don't think they can go around and do this stuff without consequence.
I'd like to see far more standing up like that. I think it's a pathetic position,
particularly for men to be in to sit there like getting out their mobile phones.
But you know, it's everyone's choice. I don't exactly know what I would do in some of the
situations I've seen, you know, read about on the New York subway.
Didn't that guy do a thing and now is he in jail? Did he get jailed for it?
He's charged. He's coming up for trial. This is Daniel Needy, I think.
Former Marine, there was a guy on the subway who was clearly off his head on various drugs,
was very, very violent towards people in the carriage.
Some point tore off his top and was like, I'm going to kill you or something like this.
And this Marine at that point stepped in, got him into a chokehold.
It was clearly not meaning to do it, but the chokehold was too hard and he suffocated the guy
and he died at the scene. And that man, the ex-Marine is charged with I think murder,
if not, I think manslaughter. And he could face a very significant prison sentence.
There's a lot of discussion in New York as to whether or not a New York jury would actually
convict him. Where's he being convicted? In New York, right. Because you could say
that the guy, because there's a racial element, like with everything in America,
and because the former Marine was white and the guy off his head was black, there was an attempt,
of course, to put the racial lens on it. And we'll see if a New York jury, which will be comprised
half or so of women who have been on the subway and have probably had unpleasant interactions,
will convict this man for stepping in and genuinely think that he meant to kill the guy or just,
this was like a good Samaritan act gone wrong. But it's very salutary that sort of stuff.
There was a guy in London about 15 years ago, I remember, very much haunted me because the
fiance, the girlfriend, did a victim impact statement that was particularly harrowing,
that they were on the top of a bus in London. And a guy on the bus started throwing chips at
people's heads. And her fiance got up to say, look, mate, lay off. And the guy stabbed him,
he died. And in the wake of a story like that, a lot more people in the society will be craven
on the bus, because they'll have that example in their head. And my fear about this case in
the New York Marine case is that he, the Marine, by doing what he did and it going wrong, and the
publicity it got will stop other people doing good Samaritan.
Stepping in. Like 100% will have done while it's pending.
Whilst it's pending. Yeah.
So a lot rides off the verdict.
That's a lot of pressure.
It's a lot of pressure. And in America with a jury, when you're on one of these cases where
society could break out in rioting, I'm not sure it will for this guy, because the victim wasn't
enormously upstanding as a member of the community and had quite...
I don't think it was videoed, or at least they didn't see the video.
Quite a lot of it was videoed, but he'd also had previous things where he had done.
It's a whole litany, like a laundry list of times that he'd been arrested for violent
conduct. So he won't be that sympathetic a character, but then there are quite a lot of
unsympathetic characters who get dragged through the laundry of racial justice stuff in America
and become saints. I won't name any names.
Going back to that sort of where you go when you need more resilience thing and the bravery piece,
what was that C.S. Lewis quote about the times not being optimal?
Oh yeah.
What's that?
Oh, that's one of my favorite, one of my favorite sermons ever given was by C.S. Lewis University
church in Oxford in October, 1939. Yes, I love that. Lewis was a master of prose as well as
theological writing, and he gave this beautiful, beautiful sermon in which he said, yes, he said,
you know, the conditions are not optimal at the moment, the search for truth and beauty that our
species goes through, you know, is going through such a trial. But he says the point is the conditions
never were optimal, they never are. He says even those periods of history which seem to be
tranquil, like the 19th century, turn out on closer inspection to be filled with crises,
alarms, panics and all the rest of it. He says if humankind had put off the search for truth and
beauty until the conditions were optimal, the search would never have begun. And the main point
he makes is that there is something wonderful and unusual about human beings.
He says that the ants, for instance, have chosen their own route. They've chosen safety and the
security of the hive, and presumably they have their rewards. But as he says, he says men are
different. And he gets this beautiful list, I think I can remember it, he says they propound
mathematical theorems in the legal cells. They quote the latest poem whilst advancing on the
walls of Quebec, make jokes on scaffolds and comb their hair at the gates of Thermopylae.
This is not panache, he says, it is our nature.
Fuck, that's cool. It's true as well in my observation, absolutely true.
Well, because I've seen people in beleaguered cities many times,
cities under fire, cities under bombardment, cities that are being raised to the ground,
and human life goes on. It's an extraordinary thing. People continue their studies if they can.
People continue their family life if they can. They've realized that the conditions will never
be optimal. They can be better and they can be worse, but they're never perfect. And I think
that the real lesson of what Lewis is saying is, and I think it's an important lesson for
young people in our time, don't put off whatever it is you're meant to do until the situation is
optimal. Don't fail to pursue what it is you think you're meant to pursue in your life until
you have total tranquility, for instance, you know, that you have the house or the apartment
you would like until you have the relationship you would like until you have the, don't put it
off until then, or until the world is peaceful, which will never happen, never happen, never has
happened, never will happen. Don't put it off till then, because if you put it off till then,
it means you'll put it off forever. So do whatever you're meant to be doing now. Start now if you
haven't started already. And if you started already, don't go any slower, for God's sake.
And this is part of the, you know, the cost of our times. I've said this before, but
part of the cost of our times is the enormous expense of energy on idiotic things that you
can do nothing about. I think we should say to more people, don't howl at the moon.
Don't shake your fists to the skies. Get on with what you're meant to be doing.
And that'll be different for everybody. But I just, I'm very, well, I'm too irritable to
put up with going at the slow speed that a lot of people want to make us all go out these days. So
I want them out of my way. Yeah, I think a lot about the
arrival of victimhood culture. Yeah, it seems to me that like an existential crisis is actually
a luxurious position to be in, because the bottom levels of Maslow's hierarchy of needs have been
sorted. And victimhood culture is so rampant at the moment, because the human systems demand
for challenge is outstripping reality's ability to deliver it to it.
All of the problems, most of the problems that previously would have captured the front of our
attention have been moved out of the way. Yeah, absolutely. I mean,
our sensitivity to challenge has now been tuned up. Yeah, hunger and so on. Yeah, yeah.
I think that's true. By the way, I'm just amazed by that. I mean, I feel sometimes we're
increasingly like I'm just from a different world than the one we're now in.
It's only a different society. I'm sure it was the same with you when you were growing up, but
the Britain I grew up in was a place which liked resilience. I mean, we admired resilience.
We didn't admire people who whined and mulled. In fact, those are the people you avoided at all
costs. Oh, she's a whiner. God, he's a whiner. I mean, you know, and people said things like,
you know, mustn't grumble. It's one of my favorites. How are you, mustn't grumble?
Now I'd say, well, actually, I've got stage four cancer.
Not sure that's grumbling. I know, but we talked about it like that.
People from that generation still say things. I've offended that generation who's got cancer
at the moment. She's like, oh, so boring. Everyone I grew up with was like that. Now,
you might say there's something unhealthy about that, but there's actually something
healthy about it too. And there's something healthy about assuming that everyone has their
troubles. And so they don't need you to add yours to their list of things to worry about that day.
And, you know, and cheer people up and encourage them where you can and so on. I said,
they don't bring them down. Well, it's the weird sort of self-fulfilling prophecy of
pedestalizing victimhood that there is a limitless sky on how much victimhood you can claim.
Whereas if your status and your prestige is downstream from your accomplishments,
there is a limit on how much you can accomplish because you need to go out and fucking do it.
Yes. Right. Reality is going to constrain how much impressive stuff you can go and do,
but there is a ineffable universe of athletes' foot and my gluten intolerance and my chronic
flatulence and my, you know, whatever else. Those are things that you can just continue
to accumulate like trinkets. Yes. I just find those people boring. I just don't care for victimhood.
I think it's an undesirable emotion. It's a sign of a rather undesirable person.
But I don't know why we've given into this. I just, genuinely, particularly in Britain,
I'm just baffled by it because it wasn't the country we had. Well, maybe it's,
you know, how you said your solution for courage was to surround yourself with courageous people
if you kind of get this mimetic wave. Yes. Almost moving through where fewer courageous
people are around, which creates fewer courageous role models, which means to, you know...
Yeah, yeah, yeah. And you have the thing of men being persuaded to become cringing
eunuchs. It's not a good thing. Well, that's another reason why, you know,
this conversation around the guy in the subway is so interesting because is he really supposed to
stand up for the women or is that, is he mansplaining? What if he mansplains
while he stops a woman from being dragged around by her hair?
Well, of course, the answer to that is the era has to say, you know what, there's no
such thing as mansplaining, or at least it's not very important. Get on to something more important,
like women not being assaulted on the subway. You know, choose your priorities.
With the denial of sex differences would lead to the conclusion that that woman can...
Why shouldn't the women stand up? Why shouldn't they use their upper body weight?
Yes, yeah, to push this fentanyl fuel maniac off this lady.
Well, as I say, that's a luxury belief, that one. And it doesn't meet reality very well.
I'm not sure anyone would be very happy if the men in the carriage said to the women in the carriage,
go on, go on. Your turn.
Yeah. We've had our centuries of patriarchal hierarchy. What is it? There's one that got
my goat recently with them. Somebody was in the US? It always happens now,
whenever anything comes up about conflict. Hillary Clinton was one of the worst
culprits of doing this, but they always say this thing of, you know, one of the reasons you've
got to stop any war once it starts is, they say, you know, the first victims of war are women.
They're the fucking not. The men are men who do most of the fighting and the dying.
Hillary Clinton's point is, well, then they're widows and then,
ah, yeah, the poor widows of the men that are dead.
Yeah, there's a, actually, the British M.O.D. has a thing of,
there's a special section now dedicated, I think, thanks to the impressive insight of that military
expert, Angelina Jolie. They have a special bit of the M.O.D. dedicated to women in conflict,
the suffering of women in conflict. Why not have a suffering of men in conflict as well?
It's such weird priorities our age. It's totally unserious. This age is so unserious.
So why you can't help thinking that at some point, the maniacs, the barbarians,
will just break in because we've made ourselves so weak.
But it's so captivating, right? This is what I meant when I said,
you know, have we progressed beyond peak woke? Because it seems to me like
both the hyper woke and hyper anti woke thing is capturing so much of the attention.
I'm so bored of these people. They're so ridiculous. Can't spend any more of my life
listening to them. I don't want to listen to the slowest kid in the class. I don't want to go at
his or her speed. I don't want to talk to somebody so mentally impaired that they think that we are
a weirdly hermaphroditic species or that you can, that the clown fish is a useful species
to interpret behavior of human beings. We can't go at this speed. No. No. 20 years ago,
at the dawn of the internet age, we had hoped that we would get so much farther in the 21st
century. And here we are with this stupid society slowed down by maniacs debating the first thing
we knew boy or girl. Like no, not going at that speed.
Emma Radacanu did an advert for HSBC recently, which you may have missed. HSBC rewrote
three classic fairy tales. They're books called fairer tales. And it shows that women don't need
men at all. With financial attitudes shaped as early as five years old, the new book challenges
traditional gender stereotypes. The new book called fairer tales, princesses doing it for
themselves, reimagines Cinderella, Sleeping Beauty and Rapunzel as successful business women.
Prince Charming is a raised as the main character. Emma Radacanu read to them,
so in the end, the princesses didn't need a prince to save them. They set up their own
businesses, saved their money, and then spent it very wisely. Maybe one day you'll buy a tower
or set up your own shoe business. That's a quote, said the tennis player. That's the worst. I mean,
I read Meghan Markle's book, The Bench. And that's worse. That's worse. Wow. Yeah. What an inspiring
tale. Fairer tales. Princesses doing it for themselves. Have you seen the South Park episode
of where Cartman wakes up? He has a nightmare. You told me about this over lunch yesterday.
For the people that haven't seen it, what is it? Cartman has a nightmare. It turns out he is a
diverse black woman. His character is recast. And all of his friends, Kenny and everyone else,
are diverse female or trans-racial characters. And then Cartman wakes up from the night,
and his mother comes in. What is it? Are you having another dream where
once again, all my favorite characters in the cartoons have been replaced by
ethnically diverse women? It's okay, Cartman. It's okay. The CEO of Disney isn't hiding under
your bed. Would you check? Would you check? Would you check, mom? Okay, I checked. She's not there.
I'm worried that she's going to come out again, replace all my favorite characters with ethnically
diverse women. I love those guys. God, they keep doing it. Yeah, I mean, it's the same thing with
the there was that rather unappealing young woman who was meant to be placed is playing Snow White
and the New Disney Snow White. Rachel Ziegler. No, no, no. Somebody else. And she is. Is it? Yeah.
Rachel Ziegler, Ziegler. She said Prince Charming wasn't a prince. He was a stalker. Yeah. And
she didn't need Prince Charming to discover that she could be the woman she could be. I mean,
this is like Sub-Barrack Obama circa 2007. Like the princess is the person she's been waiting for
or something. Your sister's keeper. Why don't they invent new tales? That's what I can never
understand with that. Why don't they just invent new tales instead of screwing up every existing
tale that's loved? Well, make your boring movie about an inspirational tale of a woman who wants
to start a business and then does and has some success. I mean, okay, make that into a film.
Why do you have to go and ransack and rape all the pillage, all of the storehouse of stories
that people liked? Brett Cooper's playing Snow White for Daily Wire. Did you see that announcement?
What? You haven't seen this. Let me tell you. Jeremy Boring and Ben Shapiro are doing their
own live action remake of Snow White with Brett Cooper as Snow White. Because she's like West
End trained, right? So she's a very well trained, supposedly a very well trained actor who can sing
apparently. It's like the triple threat podcast act thing. Right. And they announced it the other
week. It's going to be coming out next year. God, I hope they'd slay Disney. There's a rumor
that Disney has had to reshoot a ton of scenes, including all of the dwarf scenes, because originally
the dwarves weren't dwarves. That's right. They were like a multi-racial just group of different
people. They were diverse ethnic women. It was the southern thing again. But apparently,
this is just a rumor, but apparently they've reshot it all of the scenes with the dwarves
to CGI actual dwarfs in. So they've gone full... Yeah, because I know that there was a revolt of
the dwarves, which is something you don't hear every day. There was a revolt of the dwarves,
because of course dwarf actors who have their equity cards are annoyed because there's not
many dead jobs. Yeah, you'd have presumed that there should have at least been seven.
Yeah, absolutely. Plus a stunt actor, stunt dwarf. One to do all seven stunts.
Well, you could have 14, I guess. It depends how demanding the acting is.
Yes, you want to spread around the dwarf actor community. But yeah, the point is that there
actually was apparently a rebellion about this, because these are some of the few
dead cert roles we've got. Well, is this not the same... The people who didn't cast that,
is that not the same group of people that would say we can only have a gay actor playing a gay man
and we can only have a black actor playing a black man and we can only have...
Those people are such... I won't use the word. Yeah, I mean, again, we haven't got time to go at the
pace of these people. Acting is pretending to be other people. People will be shocked that most
people who play Hamlet are not themselves members of the Danish royal family. Welcome to the world
of make-believe. A charity shop in Swansea asked people not to donate sex toys.
Barnardo's customers have been asked to refrain from donating used and unused marital aids,
as they aren't quite the sort of toys we're looking for.
When they say we want your old books, your old toys, they didn't mean sex toys.
I think that's a perfectly good policy for a secondhand shop.
Customers were reminded... Don't be caught rifling through the secondhand dildo then.
You don't... What have they got in here?
It's a redressing room. Yeah, hi.
Customers were also reminded that the branch had CCTV so that these items can be traced back to the
original owners. That means that you... What's he called that thing in Australia?
The boomerang. That's a boomerang effect. You try and give your dildo away and it keeps coming back
to you. Then it's back on your doorstep the next morning. God damn it. Why can't I get rid of this
thing? Put it over the hedge. But he keeps landing in Barnardo's. And then he brings it back.
It's a dildo that will never die. Yeah.
Well, thank you for that story. That was beautiful. Well, I've got another one.
Is there a lesson we can take from this?
I think just be careful where you put your dildos, really, is the matter.
There's a moral of the story. Yeah, yeah. Never leave your dildo in Barnardo's.
Yeah, definitely not in the bargain bin. School in Lafayette has refused to celebrate Halloween
because it isn't inclusive while going all out for LGBT plus history month.
Is there much history with LGBT plus gay history? I mean, there are lots of gay people in history
and there is that. But it's also what we used to call history.
There isn't much T history. There's B history. I mean, there are sort of, I'm a bit skeptical
about bisexuality, but there's a bit of bisexuality in history, of course.
But I mean, again, these people are such ignorant nurses, they never know anything.
I can't tell you, Chris. I mean, I have to deal with some of this shit. And
they just don't know anything. And they keep record, it's like the Orwell thing.
They keep reporting their so-called discoveries as if people didn't know them before.
Everybody knew most of the stuff that they are trying to bring out. And it's just very tedious.
And again, what's happened to the mainstream thing of it? Why aren't we concentrating on
big subjects, big authors, big historical issues, instead of this boring, slow pace?
We're here at ARC and we're going to be attending at some point this week.
I can't remember. The tagline is something about a better vision for the future, a more
positive vision for the future, I think. Yeah, better story. Better story for the future.
Sorry, Jordan. And what is your, how would, how do you think that we can begin to tell a more
positive story for the future? Because it seems to me that much of the proposals are quite easily
criticized and often rightly so. But does this is sort of zero some view of happiness and growth
that somebody else's happiness somehow detracts from mine? Well, that's a particularly British
view, of course. Very much. Yeah, yeah, yeah. That guy's got something is because I've not got
it. He's taking it from me. Taking it from me. Yeah, but what's a more positive vision of the
future? Well, one would be that we're not facing imminent apocalypse and catastrophe all the time
from every possible direction. And particularly not ones that people have whipped up a new
generation into a fervor over. I mean, I think the green apocalyptic thing is particularly
damaging to young people. I think it's very, very bad for their mental health. Very had,
very, very detrimental to their sense of how they build a future. And I think a lot of young
people have been lied to about the proximity of global climate catastrophe. I mean, every time
there isn't an actual catastrophe going on in the world, our leaders go straight back to the climate
catastrophe and the climate crisis they now call it. What is happening is not a crisis.
It may be a problem to be managed. But there's a luxury in calling such things a crisis. A crisis
is like, my shoes are on fire. That's a crisis. Not like it's possible that in 40 years, we'll need
more AC. I don't see that as a crisis. But so yes, but I think that in general, there are several
things that are big stories, big narratives of people being spun, which are incredibly
innovating. That is, they sap energy out of the society. You can feel it. The hopelessness,
if you tell young people they're not going to live into adulthood, because they're all going to burn
to death. The hopelessness of saying, you know, you can't change anything or that this is the
trajectory we're on. I think that one of the other ones in the green stuff is the hopelessness of
saying to people effectively, you shouldn't leave any footprint on the planet. Including children.
Including children. And just to put one thing out there about the hopelessness of that, I mean,
there's this new thing that many cities have signed up to, including London, which is a future in
which, among other things, we will not be allowed to move around very much. And we will be allowed
to flight perhaps every six years, I think it is. What's this? It's a city's, what's it called?
I'm blanking on the name. It's this new proposal for cities in 2030 or something.
The city car has signed up London to it. It's one of these carbon neutral
fantasies. No fun 2030. Yeah. And one of them is that you won't be allowed to fly more than once
every X number of years. And of course, none of it makes any sense, because among other things,
all that means is, part of the fact the airline industry is destroyed, is what it means is the
cost of an airline ticket will be like 40 times higher. But so they always assume you can do all
of these things and nothing will change. You know, amazingly, you'll be able to put a rule
like that in and you won't destroy the airline industry or whatever. But all of it is just so
anti-human. I mean, it is so anti-human that the aspiration of human beings should not be
to be born, fight against the patriarchy, leave no carbon footprint and die in the most ethically
fine manner, preferably taken out at a Swiss clinic, you know, and then like burnt in a
cardboard box. It's not a very heroic narrative, you know? And I think that actually we do orient
our lives around stories and around narratives. And we should not have the unique narrative that
I've just laid out. We should have heroic narratives. I mean, for instance, you know,
the narrative of the, of adventure, of life being an adventure, that you set out on a path and hope,
you know, hopefully you set yourself out on a heroic path, or at least an exciting path.
You know, I mean, the counterpoint of the one I laid out earlier of the one, you know,
you don't know, you know, sorry, the counterpart of the one I laid out earlier, which is the,
you know, everything that's going to happen if you go along this path of things other people
have persuaded you to say is, well, you know where you're going, you know everything to say,
and you know kind of what trajectory or life will be on. Oh, you know, I say, well, yeah,
there's another trajectory as well. And it's the one that I and I suspect you orient ourselves in
our life, which is I don't know exactly. I don't know with that certainty. I don't know what'll
happen. But if I put one foot fairly sure, footedly in front of the next, and, and tread well, and
orient myself by things like truth, sure, I don't have the certainty. But it's an adventure. And
it's my adventure, your adventure, you actually own it. And then fancy that you'll actually have
your life. You can feel proud of what you got to, right? Because you weren't being ventriloquized by
somebody else's, you didn't spend your life saying things you don't know or mean or believe or
just repeating like a parrot. In order to keep in with a group of people you shouldn't seek the
affirmation from, you will live your life. Remember that the outcomes that most people get are ones
that you don't want in any case. The average American is obese, divorced, and with less than
one K in the bank. So doing what everybody else does sounds like a very surefire strategy.
But the outcomes are ones that you don't want. Yeah, well, I mean, look, and that can be the
case with with financially successful people. I mean, it can be the case with people. I mean,
I often say that people who go into professions which they don't like. And again, it's interesting.
I mean, some of them are, there are ones that people apologize for as you talk to them, you
notice that there's certain normally these days, one of the biggest self deprecating professions
is lawyers, you say to somebody, what are you doing? I'm a lawyer. I think, why that?
You spent five years in full-time education, three years in developing to
And normally it's like they think, oh, well, it's not very interesting or something. But I think,
why wouldn't you do something where you went, I am a lawyer. It's fantastic. I love doing this.
That's British lawyers again for you. I bet that's...
Well, no, I've seen Americans do that as well. My point is, and they're financially well rewarded.
And there's rules you can follow on that. There are ones I don't understand.
If you are doing a job that pays you well and allows you to provide you for your loved ones,
that's worth doing. Even if it's not your optimal role.
Doing a role that you don't much care for and you're not providing for other people
and you don't see any particular purposes, that's probably not a good idea.
Or you could go, you know that there are other options and other routes open to you that would
allow you to also provide for the family you're providing for. The bravery narrative is definitely
one that I think is lacking. And this risk aversion that we have, this young people getting their
driver's licenses later than ever, most commonly living arrangement for men under the age of 35
is still living at home with their parents. It's just such an awful stat.
People going into full-time employment later than ever. And I think about when we were...
Actually, no, you are the worst person to talk about this. You told me you didn't get your driver's
license until some ungodly age. But most people... But I'm not risk a first.
Couldn't wait. They manifest similarly. Most people, 17 years old in the UK,
driver's license. I want to be free. I want to be liberated. I don't want to have to be
asking mom and dad for lifts and et cetera, et cetera. And yeah, there's not a narrative of adventure.
No. And I think that is important because I think that you... If you don't have a narrative
of adventure and success and an idea of what that looks like, you know, you are disproportionately
likely to live a more miserable life. I think probably both of us, to some extent, have worked
our way out as we've done it and trodden a path that's not completely clear. And if you said to
me, what are you going to do in 10 years time, Douglas? I couldn't particularly tell you. I'd
tell you roughly what I'd like to do, but it's not entirely clear. It might be if I was in a
corporate law firm and hoping to make partner or something like that. But yeah, I mean, the lack
of clarity on it should be energizing, I'd have thought. Well, that's what's exciting about it.
But also for the desire for certainty, which is also exactly where the conspiracism comes from.
Because it removes random chance from the world and makes everything coordinated
rather than coincidental. That desire for certainty really dissuades people from going
and doing something which has potentially outsized outcomes. Well, look at what happens,
the narrative of leaving home or leaving the village or leaving the town.
There's every reason not to go. Because if you go, you risk a lot of things. One of them is failing.
And if you go and you fail, then you have to go back to where you were from.
With your tail between your legs.
And then you can console yourself that you tried it, but it didn't work.
A lot of people will not even make the try because they think it won't work.
So they never leave. And other people go and they finally make it to the city. And I mean,
that's just as a story as old as our species, they finally make it to the city or the large
gathering place and they make it there. One of the reasons why New York is a thrilling city is
it's filled with people making it. I mean, plenty of people who will fail. And it's very harsh in a
way because the two are so close together. The millionaire's blocks will have a veteran with
a sign lying on the street outside. And then you get that simultaneous thing of success
and the mirror of it, of desperate failure. I don't mean that a judgmental way in the case
of the Vefa, but desperate life. Very close to each other. And I suspect that both of these
things fire up New Yorkers all the time. Yeah, well, you're getting to see how far you could
go and how far you could fall shown in front of you all the time. Yeah, there's an interesting
study by Candice Blake in Australia that looked at wealth inequality in local ecologies, positively
predicting self sexualization of women in online dating profiles. So I think I followed that. Yeah.
If there is high wealth inequality, women both see the sort of partner they could get in their
wildest dreams and did their worst nightmares. And it positively predicts more sexualized images
in online dating profiles and social media. And her argument was that it amps up a woman's
competitive edge in terms of finding a partner that they think would be able to
ensure they don't end up down at the bottom end of the inequality distribution. And instead,
they end up in the clouds where they've seen people's outcomes occurring.
Well, of course, there are also people who fake it. Well, that's the effective way to play the
game. I was once in India and had a guide I got talking to and I said, we're talking about how
easy or otherwise dating was in the outskirts of Delhi, which means the slums. And he said,
the trick is, and he did describe it as a trick, is if you meet a girl you like,
you go for a date with her, but you borrow your friend's shoes, for instance. There'll be a friend
who has a pair of trainers, sneakers that are nice, good. And you borrow his shoes for the date.
And then like another time you might borrow a friend's motorbike. So like the pool of men
helps like swap around. Right. Okay. And the idea is they have one good dating outfit and vehicle
between 10 people. Yes. And he said the idea was that you get the woman to say she loves you and
she'll marry you. And then you do the reveal, it was somebody else's shoes. Your shit shoes.
Yeah. Which I thought was both horrific, admirable, he told it to me like that and horribly
recognizable. Think of all the people who splash around money in restaurants and things, you
don't really have it or pretend to live above their means or do live above their means.
And it's all to try to entrap a mate, I think. People do a lot for sex. Yeah, I know. I've seen.
Douglas Murray, ladies and gentlemen. Douglas, I really appreciate you. What's coming up next?
What can people expect over the next few months? I don't know. I don't know what I expect over
the next few months. I'm going to a couple of war zones and we'll report back.
I appreciate you. Thank you, mate. Thank you. Thank you very much for tuning in. If you enjoyed
that episode with Douglas, you will love my full length over two hour long podcast
with Jordan Peterson. Go on. Give it a tap.
