So here's my Frieden STW-10 and today I wanted to respond to one of the most
frequent comments I get which is try to divide by zero is awesome and
dangerous if divide by zero does it catch fire try to divide by zero please
make a division by zero and then I ask a guy to try it by himself and say I only
do it on my piano which actually wouldn't help. I was kind of reluctant to do it
and I had to think for a while what would happen if I did it and I convinced
myself that no it wouldn't catch fire so it would be a very popular YouTube
video so let's try it let's divide by zero and see what happens so let me clear
everything and enter 3 5 5 as the dividend okay so we have a 3 5 5 out
there there you go 3 5 5 right here and now we are going to divide by zero so I
will do a keyboard clear plump there's nothing on the keyboard and I'll hit the
two buttons and we'll see what happens before that I will reset it other
direction reset it here because it's more spectacular and okay off we go so it's
a freedom you need to press two buttons to divide the right one and the left one
and what happens that it gets into an infinite loop and it will never stop and
I guess it heats up so eventually it would catch fire but guess what they
thought about it there's a button here it's called div stop and I guess that was
made specially for idiots making YouTube videos and they had lots of foresight
so this is what it does it just gets set in an infinite infinite loop but
let's understand why that is so let's clear everything and I'll do a regular
division though my favorite one which gives pi 3 5 5 and
dividends divided by 1 1 3 and again I'll try to do it from the edge here so
what happens is that in order to do divisions what it actually does is a
set successive subtractions and it does it as we do it in school is trial and
error so it will try to subtract what I just entered which is 1 1 3 from this
number and trying progressively know this time 10 500 times 1000 until it hits
over here and finally subtract enough of a chunk that it overflows and it tells
it that subtracted too much and then it starts to move it one to the left and
subtract and smaller amounts and that's how it does the division eventually so
let's see how that works
and eventually it divide in and it's the 3.141592 something it's the
approximation of pi
and
So what happens is that when you divide by zero, it's just subtract nothing.
And so it can never overflow and it gets stuck in an infinite loop.
So here you go.
You have it. Divide by zero on a Frieden STW10.
Let's do it again.
Cash clear.
Enter some kind of stupid number.
Enter the dividend.
All to the right.
Here the keyboard. Divide by zero.
And watch the smoke.
Okay, we'll do that forever. Good night.
A brilliant cast. Jack Lemon in a delightful role, which gives full reign to Jack's amazing versatility.
