the most shocking part of this book and the two year reporting project that went into it was the
aid section because everywhere I went, I saw that aid was not benefiting. Largely, there were small
parts of it that were benefiting the poor, but largely was benefiting the richest people in
the world, the corporations and the local elite. The second part of that is that this is not a
mistake. Originally, when I first started reporting, I was like, okay, well, they've obviously not
thought this out. But when you start looking at the history of it, and you look at how aid developed
out of all of formal colonialism, you realize this has been designed from the start.
Most people understand that corporations have a lot of power, too much power over all of our lives,
that often private business interests can subvert democracy and the kinds of governments
enacting the kinds of policies that people want. But that can often be a vague feeling, a suspicion.
Our guest today has some meat to put on the bones, however. Matt Kennard has been a journalist in
this field for more than a decade, looking at how private business often supersedes and undermines
the will of peoples around the world. Matt Kennard, welcome to Downstream.
Thank you for having me. Good to be with you.
We're very happy to have you back on Navarra after many years. We've got you back on to talk about
your new book, Newish Book, Silent Coup, how corporations over through democracy. That's
obviously the theme of a lot of the questions I'm going to ask today, really. What's happened to
democracy and what's the role of private sector? Before we go any further, tell our audience, our
listeners, a little bit about yourself. Why are you an authority on the Silent Coup?
Good question, because my day job is working for Declassified UK, and we focus on British foreign
policy. So this is a bit of a departure from that. But essentially, in 2014, I started as a
fellow at the Centre for Investigative Journalism in London. And at the same time, another journalist
called Claire Provost, who's the co-author of the book, she started as a fellow as well.
And she'd left the Guardian to take the fellowship. I'd recently left the Financial Times,
and we started talking because we had two years. The contract was two years, and the guy who gave
it to us said, you don't have to report to me. You do what you want, and you've got a travel
budget as well. So we started thinking big. We thought, what are the biggest issues of the
day in the world? Claire had been covering aid at the Guardian. I'd been covering sort of the
World Bank and other places in Washington when I was with the FT. And it was kind of a meeting
of minds, and we both kind of agreed that this is the biggest issue of the day, in my opinion,
and hers. And I think if you read the book, it's quite a persuasive argument that it should be
everyone's opinion, because what you've seen over the last, particularly since the Second World War,
but this is a battle that's been raging since for 400 years, because that's when the first
modern joint stock company was invented in England, actually. And what you've seen is corporations
have just gradually been trying to get as much power as they can from the state. Originally,
corporations were chartered by the Crown, so it was a privilege to create a corporation. It wasn't
a right. Then there was a civil rights battle, particularly in the 19th century, where lots
of legislation came into place that unleashed the corporation from the state in the UK, then later
the US. And then after the Second World War, this really went international. That was the age of
the multinational, pretty much in the context of the Bretton Woods institutions, which were created
in 1944. And that was the IMF and the World Bank principally, but also later on, the General
Agreement on Trade and Terrorist Gap, which became particularly important in sort of greasing the
entry of- Which is now the WTO. Exactly. In 1995, it became the WTO. It originally was going to be
a WTO, but it took a long time. The formation of Gap was a kind of stopgap, and what it became
were just rounds of talks. So you had a Kennedy round in the 60s, where all countries got together
and tried to reduce tariffs mutually. It wasn't that successful. Certain rounds were successful.
The Uruguay round led to the WTO in the 90s. But anyway, so that whole architecture allowed
corporations to really go international. And the other part of this story, which is really
opposite to the thesis, and I think understanding where we are today, is that
after the Second World War, formal empires were collapsing at quite a quick clip,
particularly in the 50s and 60s. And the people who had been in power for centuries,
the imperial powers and their financial sectors, were scared. They were thinking,
how are we going to maintain our control of the world where we don't have a formal empire,
where we can't position garrisons of troops in a foreign place that can just take out a leader
if they start nationalizing our assets or wherever it was. And there was quite a lot of conscious
policymaking at that time to try and create. And this sounds like tinfoil hat stuff,
but it's all there in black and white in the archives of places like the World Bank,
the IMF and other places. So essentially, they wanted to create a supranational system
whereby they could bypass rebellious peoples, bypass newly liberated countries, bypass
liberation movements in the developing world. So they set about that task. In the book,
it opens with what is called the Investor State Dispute Settlement System, and that is the first
project that we started at the Center for Investors. So that again, the Investor State Dispute
Settlement System is called ISDS. And the conspiracy theorist in me thinks that they give
these institutions these kind of hard to say names and long acronyms, so people just switch off.
And that is the first reaction you get when you discuss these things. But then you start explaining
what this is. You say, okay, well, this is a shadow legal system whereby multinational corporations
can sue states for enacting policies they don't like, which infringe on their quite unquiet
investor rights. And it happens all over the world. This system is enshrined in free trade
agreements, which are a bit of a misnomer because free trade agreement makes you think it's all
about mutual lowering of tariffs. But actually, embedded in these trade agreements are huge
amounts of legal mechanisms whereby corporations can enforce their will on the countries that are
part of that agreement. One of these is the ISDS system. So NAFTA has ISDS provisions in it, plenty
of other free trade agreements. So when the EU makes a trade agreement with the country in
Sub-Saharan Africa, it has ISDS in it? Exactly. And the other part of this is what are called
bilateral investment treaties or BITs. And they're all over the world, between two countries.
And they're an investment regime that both countries have to abide by,
but ISDS is enshrined in nearly all of those and is enforced. So in the case of a corporation
that wants to use a BIT, for example, you can just create a shell company in a country that
has a BIT with the country you want to sue and just sue them that way. That happens all the time.
So there's this whole web of treaties agreements which enshrine this ISDS system. And what it
means effectively, away from all the acronyms, all the boring stuff is that corporations can sue
some of the poorest countries in the world for huge amounts of money, billions of dollars often,
for enacting policies like not allowing the company an environmental permit to dig for gold.
For example, that was one case we looked in in El Salvador. There was one case in Egypt where
a French water company sued the Egyptian government for raising the minimum wage.
So anything that a corporation doesn't like that a government does, they can potentially sue for.
Now, you would think that that is a massive attack on democracy and it is because the second part of
it is it's not just the cases that get to court. Now, most of these cases are heard at a place
called the International Center for the Settlement of Investment Disputes, ICSID, which is a part
of the World Bank. Say that one again, Matt, because we're going to have lots of these.
The investor, oh, let me take ICSID, the International Center for the Settlement of
Investment Disputes, ICSID. It's an arm of the World Bank. It was created in 1966 at the height
of what I'm talking about, the height of decolonization and newly independent governments.
And what it is is the main venue where these cases are heard by it's also a kangaroo court.
There's so much to get out on this stuff, but it's also a kangaroo court because it's these
decisions are made by three arbitrators, one appointed by the company, one appointed by the
government and one agreed on by both. These arbitrators have to have no there's no threshold for
legal history or any kind of professional attainment. But we found that a lot of them have
come from US administrations. There are plenty that came from the Bush administration and other
and the Clinton administration. And it's hugely secretive. A lot of the documents you can't get
your hands on. But to go back to my point is that it's not just the cases that are heard at ICSID
and this wealth transferred to the corporations that is the major issue. Regulatory chill and
policy making chill is the major issue because if you have this huge infrastructure in place,
this huge web of economic arrangements whereby multinationals can sue you, it means that it
impacts on your thinking when you're devising policies in your countries. And this is we saw
this in a very specific way in places like Guatemala. For example, there was a case where we got
Freedom of Information Act documents from the Guatemalan government showing internal deliberations
about whether they should grant a multinational mining company an environmental permit next to
this community. And it was going to be affecting their community and their environment. You would
think when a government is delivering whether to grant an environmental permit, their main
priority would be what impact does this have on our people. But actually the internal deliberations
within the Guatemalan government were about are we going to get sued by that company if we
enact that policy. They eventually gave them the environmental permit. And that happens all over
the world, this chill, this policy making chill. And it's by design corporations want to have an
insurance mechanism where they can get their profits and get the policies they want in place
above the heads of national governments. You also use the example of South Africa,
which is incredible. So you have obviously post-apartheid South Africa. We've transitioned to
democracy. And in the mid 1990s, they're saying that companies which have mining rights in the
country, obviously, it's been a phenomenal producer of gold diamonds, et cetera, over the
years, South Africa, they're saying 26% of kind of management or ownership needs to be in the hands
of black South Africans. And this is pushed back by Italian investors. And so I think there's this
incredible moment where we're told in the West that on our South Africa has transitioned to
democratic government. But in fact, democratic elected government with an overwhelming mandate,
which is what the ANC has in the 1990s. And it's basically a one party state,
still is to an extent. But with democratic legitimacy, they can't do what they want
because of this regulatory chill you talk about. Can you talk about the example of South Africa
a little bit? Yeah, I mean, this was the craziest case we looked at, because we went to South
Africa to report on the ground on what happened in that case. And essentially, it's like you say,
after apartheid, black empowerment policies were brought in to make just the historical
injustices of apartheid. One of them was that all companies had to give a percentage of their
company to historically disadvantaged people. So black people. Now this Italian company didn't
like that. And they said, we're going to take you to Ixid. And essentially, the whole case was
kept really quiet by the South African government, because they didn't want to incentivize other
companies to do it. So it was really under the radar, not many people in South Africa knew about
this case. And what happened was, there was a settlement out of court, where the government
just wanted to keep it quiet. So they said, okay, well, you don't have to abide by this regulation.
So this Italian company didn't have to do it. But afterwards, the South African government
tried to escape from this system completely. And that in itself was interesting, because a lot of
what these systems are about is locking countries into these these systems and allowing no way out.
So one of the interesting parts of the bilateral investment treaties is that they have things
called or they often have things called sunset clauses, where even if you cancel them,
you can't that doesn't come in for 10 years, by which time that these these people are hoping
there'll be a different government that doesn't have the same predilection to get to get out.
It's interesting, it's what Thomas Freeman called the he called it the golden straight
jacket, but it's obviously not golden. But but the South Africans were trying,
interesting in Latin America, the liberation governments of Corea, Maduro, sorry,
Chattabes in Venezuela and Eva Moreles, they all tried to leave as well during the sort of first
pink tide in the 2000s. And they found it very difficult as well. And in fact, I went to interview
Eva Moreles at his house in Bolivia last year. And he was talking about this system, because he
nationalized a lot of companies, one of which was a British power company called Ruralek.
And Ruralek took Bolivia to one of these tribunals at this one was actually at the Hague, and won
tens of millions of pounds from the Bolivian government. So it's all over the world. It's
enshrined in these bilateral investment treaties. In the case of South Africa, another interesting
part of it is we were talking to people that have been in the government at that time at
post apartheid. And they'd said that actually, these bilateral investment treaties were just
presented as a bit of diplomatic goodwill. So Mandela would go to Belgium, and they'd say,
okay, welcome back into the fold, you're being reintegrated into into the global economy. Let's
just sign this nice bit of paper. This is what happened. And then 10, 15 years later, they're
getting hit with all these suits that they didn't even know were what it was possible to activate
through these agreements. And that's often how it how it's done. It's a hugely secretive and
quietly done system, which is why people like you who know you know about economics, you know
about these things, a lot of the people who I explain this to, they're sort of like, why do I
not know about this? And I think that's by design, they don't want people to talk about it. But if
you talk to governments that are trying to go against corporate rule within their own countries,
but also internationally, they all know about it. Yeah, so that that's why ever Morales was talking
about it when I was asking about corporate power, because for him, it was an extremely
powerful way that corporations could override his decisions. There are enforcement mechanisms
that it's not like you can just say, okay, we're not going to listen to you. If arbitration,
if they could if you're called to an arbitration, you don't recognize it, they can start taking
your assets internationally, they can, there's a lot of ways of enforcing this system on developing
countries. So it's not like somewhere, it's not like domestically, where you could just
used to be able to nationalize something, and then you could, you should pay compensation,
but you that would be negotiated. This is like this international court will decide and you
have to pay otherwise we'll start stripping you. So what what, I mean, you sort of,
you alluded to it there, but what would happen if they didn't pay? So let's say
Bolivia takes a mining company owned by the US away from them, court says no, you need to,
and they take it into public ownership and the court said this is quite reasonable one, right,
rather than the case of the Italians in South Africa, which is completely unacceptable, I think.
They say, no, you have to give it back to them. And they say, no, they find them a couple of
hundred million dollars. They say, well, we don't recognize this court, all this fine.
What happens then? Well, there's, there's, there's actual legal systems in place where they can,
they can take your assets internationally. So if you have any kind of government assets in foreign
countries, they can be taken if you have boats in international waters, they can be taken,
it becomes a legal matter. But also, you can be massively punished by the Bretton Woods institutions
themselves, because exit is part of the World Bank, but also so the IMF, they can, they can
do really punitive things that mean that you basically can't function. Your credit lines will
be pulled. You won't be able to get liquidity if you need it in the time of crisis. All these,
all these things that make someone like Evan Rowley, who, who you would not expect to abide by
a system that he doesn't think is just, he abided by it, and they did pay it. There were
negotiations, they, the, the, the company Rural Lake didn't get the fee that they, that they wanted,
but, but they got millions. And interestingly, for, while we were working on this, I actually
sent a freedom of information that requested the British government to, about the Rural Lake case,
to get emails between the embassy and London during this case. And it showed that the, the,
the embassy in Bolivia were lobbying on behalf of Rural Lake, which actually is, is unlawful,
because governments are not meant to be involved in these, in these investor state dispute settlement
systems. And there was one, there was one email that was headlined lobby on Rural Lake. That was
a British embassy email. Like all these things, nothing ever happened because they just ignored
our article. Well, so say this again, the British embassy in Bolivia was lobbying on the behalf
of a private company. Yeah. In, who was in a dispute with the Bolivian government. It's not,
it's, it's, it's not, it's not lawful. And it's the Ixid system and the investor state dispute
settlement system is meant to be outside of state control and outside of state influence. But
in this case, it wasn't. And it was extremely obvious. I mean, it was interesting that they
released that email to me, because I think they probably just didn't know that they weren't allowed
to lobby because a lot of their part of their job is to lobby for business. That's what the embassy
used to do. Most journalists don't cover this stuff, right? I mean, they probably,
A, they don't even know if it's legal or not. And even if it is illegal, who the hell is going to
talk about it? Exactly. Yeah. If it's not Matt Kennard or somebody at Navarra Media or, you know.
I mean, can I just say one more really messed up part of this, which is for me is kind of maybe
the most messed up part is that there's been a whole industry now created around this investor
state dispute settlement system called third party financing, which is whereby there are boutique
financial firms now, which their sole purpose is to lend money to corporations who are suing
states. And those those claims against states are the collateral that they give the loan to.
And they say, we'll give you millions to pay for the legal fees or whatever it is,
actually, it's not only just to pay for the cost of the case, it's to expand in the case of rural
elect, they were funded by a third party finance and the five party finance said we will help rural
elect expand. But what they what the deal is that if they if they if they win the case against the
state, these companies, these financial companies get a cut of that award. And we're talking about
sometimes billions, as I said, Occidental Petroleum, a case against Exidor, which was quite famous,
they got billions of dollars. There's a case now against Honduras, which whereby they denied a
company the right to build a special economic zone in Honduras, and they're getting sued for $11
billion Honduras, tiny little country in Central America. They're being sued because they won't
build a special economic zone. Yeah, by the company. I think I don't know the specifics,
but I think they've probably come to some agreement, or they've got a sign that $11 billion. Yeah.
But the other point of this is you said that, okay, maybe the rural elect case, there's a case for
getting compensation. Okay, that's true. But part of capitalism is rests on the fact that you take
a risk when you invest, right? Of course. And the higher the risk, the bigger the return. So if you
go to Congo, and you go in, you want to get a diamond mine or whatever it is, then you might get
you might get expropriated. But that's what part that's why you go there, because you the potential
for huge rewards. This ensures you against that is a massive insurance mechanism whereby corporations
are the risk the whole of capitalism. And it's totally against the capitalist model. And the
funny thing about the ISDS system is, you know, when you talk to people on the inside about all
these different systems that benefit corporate power around the world, most of them have quite
a sophisticated and persuasive ideology built up on top of them to justify them to the general
public, but also to the people working within them. In this case of the ISDS system, there's
barely anything like even talking to people that people say, the one thing they say is this is
about increasing investment to the developing world, because corporations are going to be much
less scared to go and invest in a developing world if they can be sure that they'll get compensated
if bad things happen to them. But that doesn't make that just doesn't hold up because Brazil
is one country which has never, which never signed up to exit. And there's never been hit with one
of these cases, because it doesn't include them in it in their different agreements. Has Brazil
ever had a problem with foreign direct investment? I don't think so. There's no colliery, colliery.
So it's a naked attempt to ensure companies against risk and a naked attempt to allow
corporations to go over the heads of national governments. And it's not a coincidence that
it was created in 1966, because the 60s was really the time when large parts of Africa,
Asia, were really becoming free of the imperial powers.
The winds of change, as Wilson said.
So and they thought, well, we can't have that. We've got to create a system whereby we can
maintain that imperial control and maintain the control of the investors, maintain the control
of the corporations without having to have formal garrisons of troops or whatever it is
in those countries. And they did it. It's successful. 2023, it has taken off, it's gone wild,
because what we saw, we sort of did analysis of how many cases there had been since it was
created in 1966. And it picked up massively after the end of the Cold War, because it was
resurgent rampant capitalism. There was no other poll for countries to organize around. So they
had to be integrated into the system. There was nowhere else they could go. And Eastern Europe,
ISDS was a massive part of all the agreements that they signed. So I mean, part of the rest of the
book is also about this system of the countries that come out of the cold are integrated into,
but this is a major part of it. I mean, we can go on to some of the others now as well.
You said about Honduras a moment ago, so I had to check Honduras as GDP.
Its GDP is $29 billion. So $11 billion is quite a lot. The UK GDP is about $3 trillion,
$2.8 trillion. So you're looking at almost half of their economic output in a year.
What you're describing with these agreements is, like you say, just a clarification on my part,
there's an insulation from any downside whatsoever. And like you say, normally there is risk with
capital. If you go and invest in an ISA or a pension, you will be told quite explicitly,
you're not guaranteed to return here, you may even lose your initial investment.
But what we have here is basically the equivalent of you can go and open a shop on the high street
and even if nobody turns up, even if you don't sell anything, you can't lose money.
Don't worry. And that isn't what capitalism is meant to be. I'm not defending capitalism,
we're attacking capitalism, but that's merely a description of this system here.
What you're describing really is a complete, and that obviously is thread runs throughout the book,
is really a complete subversion of democracy. And it is interesting for me in this country,
people have talked about taking back control. And it seems very obvious that for much of the
global South, and it should be said a lot of the global North too, I mean, you just mentioned
Eastern Europe, but other places as well, as we'll go on to discuss, democracy is a mirage,
it doesn't exist with this stuff. And often you would have heard over the last couple of decades,
particularly since early 2000s with the protests against WTO and so on, we have neocolonialism.
But it sounds to me you're just describing colonialism. So what is it? Is it neo-colonialism?
It doesn't sound like there's anything particularly neo about it.
Yeah, well, there's this whole school of thought called post-colonialism. I don't see it. I think
that it's the same dynamics, but altered for a new reality. So they had to abide by the newly
independent peoples and the new liberation movements, which took off after the Second
World War. They would have liked not to do that, but they had to adjust for a new reality. And they
did. And they did it undercover. I mean, no one knows about this ISDS system. No one knows about
the reality of aid, which is another major strand. We'll talk about that, yeah. Hold your fire there.
But literally, the left and the right, and the lefts may be worse than the right in terms of
misunderstanding what aid is. But they not only adjusted, they repackaged it as saying,
we're helping the developing world, and we're helping you to develop. And you see that across
the board. And what's quite interesting is, obviously, when you look at the archives,
which we did, and you look at the internal deliberations, it's the opposite. They're talking
quite consciously about enshrining and maintaining their control. It's just that the public posture
was about all these wonderful things that we wanted to give people. And this is a major,
another part of this corporate coup, is that it is a huge part of it, is about what is called
corporate social responsibility, which is propaganda. It's about presenting this corporate
system and its corporate colonialism as a wonderful benefit for the rest of humanity.
Now, I covered the mining industry at the Financial Times for a year,
and it was amazing. I went to one of the mining conferences in South Africa,
and there were all these presentations by mining companies. And you barely know that
these mining companies were digging for gold or anything. Nearly 90% of what they talked about
was all the wonderful things that they were bringing to the local communities. It would just
be slides of schools and hospitals and all this stuff. It sounds like I'm exaggerating,
but I'm not. It was literally like I was just in like an Oxfam International Conference or something.
But that was a really, really conscious decision by the corporate sector,
particularly in mining in the 90s because they were having trouble with what they called a social
license. It was operations on the ground were becoming more and more difficult because their
reputation was so bad and people didn't want to kick them out. So they thought we're going to have
to get that social license back. So they launched this huge corporate social responsibility thing.
That's also what happened after the Second World War with development, the word development. They
said that they started saying, well, we want the world to develop. We want poor people have to
develop. But what does development mean? It's export-orientated growth. It has to be that you
don't exist for these institutions if you're a subsistence farmer and you've been doing it for
a thousand years. It doesn't matter. You only exist if you are producing produce for the markets. So
they re-orientated all these economies in the name of development to benefit the global market
and to benefit these companies and this system. But yeah, it's a massive illusion that post-colonialism
ever happened. We live in the midst of it. So I think lots of people instinctively will,
they won't know all these facts and details and they'll go, wow, that's really interesting.
So that kind of tallies with what I suspected. Let's get into the nuts and bolts of this because
you say a lot of this happens in the crucible of the end of colonialism 1.0. Obviously,
the British Empire really is collapsing in the 50s and 60s, really after the mid-1950s.
And it's around this time we hear about a guy called Hermann Yosef Abbs, a German banker.
Can you explain who he is and why he's important?
Yeah, he's a very, I think, I don't know now in Germany, but at the time he was a very prominent
figure in Germany. And in 1957, he went to a conference of industrialists in San Francisco
and presented a proposal for what I'm talking about, what I talked about, which is this investor
state dispute settlement system. It wasn't called that then, but what he said was, we need to ensure
that essentially, this sounds over the top, but essentially people don't have control of their
own resources because it's a problem for us. And he referenced things like the coup in Iran
in 1953, the following year, which was done by MI6 and CIA because the Democratic Prime Minister
had nationalized the Anglo-Iranian oil company. Just for our audience, the man called Mossadak.
Mossadak, yeah, he was taken out in a joint CIA, MI6 coup. Iran's never been a democracy again.
He was a moderate. I mean, it was part of this Cold War thing of China.
He's probably centre-right, actually, you know, like, yeah.
But he was called National Front.
But the red line for these people was, you can't have used your resources for your own people.
He wanted to give a little, a higher percentage to the Iranian state, therefore the Iranian people
to the detriment of the British investors, not allowed. Following year, CIA takes out the
Social Democratic President of Guatemala in 1954 at the behest of the United Fruit Company,
because again, Arbenz, the president, had had the temerity to say that maybe we could
distribute a little bit of fallow land back to some peasants. No, not allowed. We'll take you out.
Suez crisis, 1956. NASA nationalizes the Suez Canal. UK, France, Israel, invade.
Again, so he's referencing all these things. He's saying, look, we don't want to have to
have a system where we have to go in hard like this. We need a system that works above these
people's heads. So it doesn't matter if these people get in power. They have no power anyway.
The investor-state dispute settlement system is a major part of that.
But another part of it is, we could move on to this, is aid and creating global economies
that rely and are based around attracting investment. Sorry. Shall I go on in a minute,
or do you want to come back on that? I like this style, you have. Sorry,
I don't need to say sorry, Matt. Well, I just want to stick with Hermann Yosef Abbs for a second,
because this is the world that we live in. We think of it as 21st century capitalism and so on.
But Yosef Abbs is working for Deutsche Bank in the late 1930s, under the Third Reich,
and that is the world that we still live in. Very much colonial powers, the idea of white
supremacy, European hegemony, markets, and us making profits here in Europe and North America,
matter far more than people in Africa and South America and Asia.
And I think it's really important to name names. I mean, you've got him,
there's a few others too, and I suppose we'll turn to those, but it's still very much their world.
And this idea of you write about a Magna Carta moment for global capitalism,
inherently tied to ideas of pre-war colonialism, like there's just such a clear continuation.
Let's talk about aid, because that is something that our audience probably thinks,
okay, it's got some downsides, but it's generally good. Why are you not such a fan of overseas
development aid? Well, put it like this, okay, this is what I always say to people, because I
think that there's no topic that the left gets more wrong than aid. David Cameron,
not known as a great advocate for the poor, is he? In 2010, the austerity government that he
that began then with George Osborne was what created one of the worst crises for the British
poor for generations. At the same time, he went on TV and was talking up how he was
dedicating 0.7% of GDP to aid. Now, how do you square those two things? Why does he,
why is he hammering the poor here to the point where I don't know, I can't remember what the
stat is, I think it's caught for a million people that they or 100,000 people that might have died
because of austerity. We think at least 150,000, at least 150,000. Yeah, excess deaths. Yeah,
excess deaths. But yeah, he's, while he's doing that and enacting those policies, he's, he's
promising that we'll give, maintain a certain level of GDP towards aid for foreigners. It's not
because he cares about the poor in the developing world, it's because aid is a massive subsidy to
his friends in the corporate sector and is a massive tool for geopolitical control as well.
That's the other thing because a lot of the work I do with the classified actually is about aid
programs. So for example, I've done, did one recently about how British aid had been used to
set up an anti-government coalition in Venezuela or about how aid had been used to try to persuade
Bolsonaro's Brazil to privatize oil and gas. Or it's just that there's one organization,
particularly called the Conflict Stability and Security Fund, which I'd say,
tell people to look into again, another acronym and another long name that sounds boring. But
again, it's just a massive slush fund for the state to enact its geopolitical control. But
that's one element of it. The other element of it is the subsidy to corporate corporations. And
you see this all across the board. There's one institution which we focus on, particularly
which is emblematic of this system, aid system, which is the International Finance Corporation.
Again, another arm of the World Bank, again created in this, in the context of these newly
independent countries in 1956, in this case. And the idea was to invest in private companies.
So the World Bank before had been, it was about transfer of capital to governments. And this was
about how in the name of development, and it's a stated goal of alleviating global poverty,
they would invest in private corporations, the argument being that they'd invest in
corporations that would otherwise not want to go to certain places. But I spent years looking at
the IFC eventually, and went to countless countries, and it's an absolute joke racket.
From Myanmar, also known as Burma, we went there to report on the IFC. I'll just give you this one
example. And the IFC had invested, this is one of the poorest countries I've ever been to,
Dirt Port. I think the fewest doctors per person in the world, maybe. And they'd poured capital
into this five-star hotel built by this Malaysian oligarch. And you sort of, so you went from the
street, we went to the hotel. Just poor people everywhere, real sort of destitution. And then
you'd walk through these doors, and it's just this air conditioned, beautiful hotel with like
huge buffet, all these men and women in suits, all these men in suits. And that is, that was
copied around the world. Wherever I went, I went to a diamond mine in Tanzania.
There's lots of good stories here, so slow down. The one that really caught my imagination was that
we, the British taxpayer, were paying for gated communities, which I just found so mad. We're
paying for social and economic apartheid in the third world, or developing countries,
in the name of development. And I found myself, this is the thing, Max, said the left is quite
bad on this. I read that, I read a few other things too. So it's all about several things here.
The World Bank and what it does, let's put a pin in that for a moment, and what the British
government does with its own overseas aid. I read that thing about the British overseas aid,
I felt my inner forage come out, you know, just scrap international aid. And I think if you tell
most people that our international aid is just a scam, to a significant extent, not all of it,
they sort of look at you rather strangely. But the reality is, of course, we should be spending
money on reproductive rights, contraception, clean drinking water, education programs, of course,
but that's not the majority of aid, is it? No. And like you say, there is a segment of it. And I
know people in the aid industry, and there's really good people that work in it. And the bit
that is really important is disaster relief. So for example, when I worked for the Financial Times,
they sent me to Haiti after the earthquake. And organizations like Oxfam, which was funded by
the UK government, and lots of other groups were doing vital work to keep people alive. You know,
this is like it was apocalypse there. But that's actually quite a small section of it. And the real
money is going towards subsidizing corporations. And it's a massive asset, a revenue stream for them.
So much money is being pumped into it. And barely anyone is covering it. The other part of this
as well is that I mentioned Oxfam, I should talk a bit about how corporations have colonized civil
society as well, particularly in aid. One example, which was pretty shocking for me,
at the time, I'm not shocked by this kind of stuff now, but we went to El Salvador in 2000,
I can't remember 2016, I think it was, and we, we did a story about this poor community that lived
on top of an aquifer. And they couldn't afford the water that they were sitting on, because the
prices were too high. But yet down the road, there were all these multinational bottling
drinks like Coke and Fanta that we drink here. So we did this story for the Guardian. So I contacted
Sab Miller, which is one of the companies that bottles Coke, and said, look, we've talked to
all these poor people, they're really struggling and you're getting, and you're bottling these
drinks down the road. And they said, they got really angry with me, one of the most aggressive PR
teams I've ever dealt with. And then they said, look, read this report that we that we authored
with Oxfam. So I sort of thought, okay, and then they sent me this report, which had the
Sab Miller and Oxfam's logo on the same thing, which was basically exculpating them of any,
any problems, any crimes in, in, in that area. So I kind of put up some resistance to it. But I
think most journalists receiving that would see the sort of logo of Oxfam and think, okay, well,
if Oxfam is saying they're all right, then they are right. But that's, but that happens all the
time. So why, why is Oxfam saying that? What, what Oxfam? Because most people in Oxfam don't
enter that game to provide a cloak fundamentally for multinationals destroying people's lives in
the global south. So how has that happened? Well, because of the budget problems. And also, it's
just a, it's a function of the same dynamic that we've talked about. Corporations have infested
every part of our society. There's basically zero parts of our society that have escaped
corporate power, because they have all the money. And they've used these corporations to,
to sort of a version of greenwashing, obviously, it's not, it's not about the environment,
although that also exists. But with aid organizations and humanitarian organizations,
it gives them the perfect foil to do whatever they want. And in the case of Oxfam, it gets worse
this story, by the way. So we, we published a story eventually. And it's quite a hard
hitting story goes on for the Guardian. So obviously, it goes under the Gates Foundation logo.
So then you see that that happens. And the Gates Foundation is not a benign institution,
it's part of this whole system. It's a, it's got a very particular way of looking at development,
which is, it's the God, it's the Godfather of this whole system. It's the don't call the only of
this whole system. But and then so, and then two days after that, there's an, there's an article
in the Guardian on the development side with the Bill Gates logo, which is a 900 word interview
with the Latin American division head of Sab Miller. Wow. Basically talking about our article,
not by not naming it, but, but defending Sab Miller's record in El Salvador. Oh, yeah. Well,
saying that water stress is what these corporations also always do. They say it's about corruption.
You know, these sort of words that they use to blame the victim rather than them. And then
one more thing. And so then I see, then I start doing a bit of research and I see that Sab Miller
funds part of the Guardian's website. So they, so I don't, I don't know if Sab Miller called up and
said, we found part of your website, but, but so we want to, we want to write a reply. But
well, so that was my question. Do you think, because obviously there is a right, there's,
but there's a right to editorial rights to giving somebody the right to reply. You should do that
if they've made your misgivings. It wasn't presented like that. But you don't think it was,
no, it was presented as just, it happened to be, they've happened to publish this interview. It
wasn't even, so it wasn't an advertorial. It wasn't a right of reply. It was just a,
we'll interview this person about water stress in Latin America. It happened to be two days after
we published this article. So, so they've infested the NGOs, they've infested the, the, the media
because obviously the progressive press, the progressive times are often worse. Like in terms
of, I don't know if you've seen recently, I saw some Navarra journalist tweeting about the new
statesmen and BAE systems. Yes. There's a whole section, but in some ways, the Guardian and the,
and the new statesmen are worse than the right wing media in terms of doing this, doing the bidding
of corporations. But yeah, so it's, it's a panorama where they've just taken over. It's very, very few
spaces now where you can have an independent, right, give an opinion, give an opinion, independent
of media power, whether, I'm sorry, of corporate power, whether that be in the media, universities,
whatever it is. Hold on. It's not an opinion even. You were reporting facts. That's true.
You're reporting facts. And if you report facts, all of a sudden,
Sam Miller can place an interview within 48 hours. I mean, that's mad.
I know. And also, if you think about that, what that means in reality, that is, the Guardian has
given the last word to one of the richest corporations in the world who are doing awful
things there over the voices of some of the poorest people in the world that were originally
platforms. And that was how it ended. And this happens all the time. The point is, I wasn't working
for the Guardian then. And also, I didn't really care about pissing them off by publicizing it.
So I did publicize it at the time. But I think most people just would, they wouldn't even,
of course, they wouldn't even look at it, or they wouldn't even realize it happened. They
wouldn't do the research to see all these different pressure points which had been activated.
Or if you did bring it up, Matt, frankly, it's career suicide.
Exactly. Let's be honest. There's a reason why
might sound like it's cope from me. But there's a reason why people like you and me appear,
don't really appear on the BBC. Definitely. Well, sky, generally. I mean, I go,
I only get a call from BBC or sky so they can attack me for something. So I mean,
I've got to defend somebody. But I don't say what's your view on XYZ. And there's a reason
for that. Because when you're honest about this stuff, it's not really good for, you know,
getting you up the greasy pole. You're saying about the media. Do you think it's got worse
with this stuff? Because I'm on the Guardian. I don't want to stick on the Guardian too much,
but it's really interesting because we don't have many progressive print publications in this
country. It's one of them. And it feels to me like 15, 20 years ago, it was substantially
better on this stuff. And now it's a lot worse. Do you think that's right?
I think it is. Across the board, it's not just corporations. It's also its
coverage of the security state, for example, which is what I covered day to day, that's just
been completely jettisoned any kind of critical coverage of the military or intelligence agencies.
It doubles up with the corporate corporations. But I think that you've seen
these interests really ramp up their attacks on independent spaces. So the Guardian, as you say,
20 years ago, was actually not bad. It wasn't perfect, far from it, but it had space for
maverick reporters, people doing truthful, independent reporting regularly. And that's
been completely lost. And I think that part of it is that in terms of the corporations, for example,
when they sign, I remember when it was sort of the advent of this corporate takeover of the Guardian,
the Guardian would always say when they started doing these sites in alliance with the corporations,
well, we signed contracts where the corporations say they have no say over our editorial line.
And I think that's probably true. But that's the direct relationship. But then 20 years later,
when you've got dozens of companies, just with their logo all over your website, it has an
effect on a sort of more general level. And it's not conscious. It's not like they're saying,
do this, do that. It's just because you know those logos are there, you work within a new framework.
So that power is felt in a much more insidious way. And I think that's how it's worked. I think
that's also how it worked with the security state as well. Because I mean, actually, in the case of
the security state with the Guardian, it's quite interesting. Like in the aftermath of the Snowden
revelations, we looked at the denotus committee meetings, which for viewers, the denotus committee
is this media censorship organization run by the Ministry of Defense, and they meet every six
months at the MOD with a small collection of journalists, and basically discuss about what
they can and can't publish. The Guardian... Which is very British, because it's self-censorship,
right? It's the media saying, yeah, we'll censor ourselves. It's not like, you know, Stalin,
whereas like you can't write this. Exactly. And America, I've talked to some American journalists
about it. They just think, I mean, American journalism is far from perfect, but they literally
can't understand how we put up with that. They say, you meet with the state and in this formal way,
like people do it, but behind closed doors, you know, it's kind of embarrassing. But anyway,
so those denotus committee meetings showed that during the Snowden revelations, they were the
intelligence apparatus, and the MOD were freaking out big time because they were ignoring denotuses,
which were being sent out. The Guardian were. And then they... To cut a long story short,
Russ Bridger, who was editor at the time, agreed to add the deputy editor, Paul Johnson,
to the denotus committee, and he joined. So that was about bringing them in house, you know,
about cultivating them. And then soon after that, the first ever interview of a sitting head of MI5
was granted to the Guardian. Soon after that, the first interview of the sitting head of MI6
was granted to the Guardian. So you can cut... We did it in the first article we did for declassified
myself and Mark Curtis. We kind of delineated how this had happened. And I think that it's the
same with corporations. Independent spaces are a real threat, especially ones with resources,
because the Guardian not only had the predilection to expose the security state and corporations,
but it also had the resources. It's a big newspaper, global newspaper with a good reputation.
When you've got those two things combined, it's a threat to these power's interests.
So they had to take them down. And essentially, as a critical sort of independent media outlet,
it doesn't exist anymore, in my opinion. They barely do stories that are of the caliber that
they used to do at all. And it's kind of just become a bit of a tabloid, uninteresting newspaper,
in my opinion. There's also a broader point here. Let's just stick with the media for a moment about
how for most of the last century, broadly anybody with capital, obviously, it tends to be wealthier
people. But it could be a trade union as well, right? Or the Scott Trust, in the case of the
Guardian. If you have lots of money, you can start a newspaper and it can wash its own face
through selling copies of that newspaper, if it can find a market. The market mechanism would pay
for news. Clearly, in the last couple of decades, that stopped because of the internet. Now,
it still applies to some things, monthly publications or weekly papers or whatever.
New York Times is doing great with its 10 million online subscribers. But generally speaking,
I do have a daily newspaper with the market mechanisms kind of disappeared. And what that
means now is that news outlets are generally owned by Dr. Rich, whether that's Bezos with
the Washington Post, you know, would they have done Watergate with Bezos in charge,
right? Or the Observer in the 1980s showing that actually the BBC, going back for decades,
had been vetting thousands of people to see their political connections fundamentally. If you were
going to be going to be anybody in the BBC, right the way from its beginning, right the way through
to the late 1980s, probably still what we don't know, you were basically vetted. And if you were,
you know, if you had strong left-wing connections, no, you wouldn't get senior jobs.
That was exposed by the Observer. You have the story about the Israeli nuclear weapons program.
Okay, the paper was owned by Murdoch. But the point was that these papers were trying to sell
news, they were trying to make money. And I think we're in a world now where I don't think
Legacy Journalism does that anymore. I genuinely think we're now in a moment where Legacy
Journalism does PR. I agree. And we're in a really new world.
But don't you think it's very strange that that dynamic has taken place at the same time
as the media has opened up and democratized? You would have thought the opposite pressure
would be. So the fact that Navarro exists or declassified, we couldn't have existed 20 years
ago. But so the media's been massively democratized by the internet, by social media. So you would
have thought that the pressure that would put on the Legacy Media was that they had to open up,
because otherwise they're going to get outflanked. But actually, they've become more and more closed
and more and more establishment friendly, while alternative media, what's called alternative
media, has blossomed. I can't get my head around why that is, but I totally agree with you. I think
that the mainstream media is something very insidious and sinister has happened to it in the
last 20 years. Because even if you remember during the war in Iraq, like what the media was like,
the mirror under Piers Morgan, who is a controversial figure, but it was incredible.
I remember that there were, I bought it every day during that build up to the war in Iraq,
where the headlines were made out of oil companies, logos, there were pictures of George Bush and Tony
Blow, blood all over their hands, stuff you would never, ever see now. I actually think that there
was a concerted effort by the state to make sure that never happened again, because it was the
media opposition and the mainstream media opposition to Iraq was a real problem for them
executing that war and probably stopped any movement on to Iran.
I was going to say the subsequent and people said, oh, well, the war happened anyway. Well,
yeah, but we never went to Iran in under a milliband labor, refused to bomb Syria, etc.
You can agree or disagree with those decisions. But the point is, they didn't happen. And I think
the trajectory was diverted because of, like you say, media intervention, I think hostility from
the public, which to an extent was reflected in the media and now it isn't. And it is weird now,
we're in the early 2020s, all the media talks about, and I know some of our viewers and our
listeners care about this stuff, it talks about cake, it talks about speeding fines,
like, and of course that stuff matters. Of course it matters. It doesn't matter half as much as the
stories you're talking about. And they're not being relayed in legacy media for a reason.
So let's put a pin in the media conversation, because we could talk about that all day.
People who are listening, watching, I remember about 20 minutes ago, I mentioned the fact that
the British overseas development aid budget was investing in gated communities, I believe in
El Salvador. I mean, this really underscores an important point, doesn't it, that we had NGOs,
people at the Guardian, quite and quite progressive saying, we have to spend 0.7% of GDP on overseas
aid. But it's about what you're spending, where and who benefits rather than the amount of money.
Like, I don't want to be giving money to gated communities in our server. I would rather that
number be lower. I would like it to be zero. Yeah, I mean, I think if people understood
where aid money was going, the whole budget would be stopped tomorrow, because the right,
the interesting thing about aid is that the right is very critical of it. And if you read
the Daily Mail, they've launched campaigns to get the aid budget down. But their perception of aid
and their analysis of aid is extremely thin. And the major arguments that I've been making that
should be made by the left are just non-existent. You can't hear them in the media at all,
partly because the place that you would normally hear them would be the Guardian or you'd expect
to hear them. But the whole of its development website is funded by the Gates Foundation.
So, to go back to the gated communities in El Salvador, one of the interesting facets of this
whole thing is that the system that is being erected around the world and has been erected,
which is corporate rule, has created an extremely divided society here, but also around the world.
Everywhere you go, there's huge levels of inequality. So, you now have a class of people
in all these places that need to fence themselves off from the rest of society to fence themselves
from the results of this system. So, El Salvador is an extremely poor country and we went there in
our reporting. But it's got little oases of huge wealth. And that's where the British money is
going because they think that there needs to be places for the rich to live because that's part
of their development model. For example, another example was Myanmar and the Five Star Hotel,
which they were funding. We talked to the head of the IFC, which is the private sector lending
arm of the World Bank when we were in Myanmar. And we said, you can at least justify why you're
spending aid money on a Five Star hotel. And he said, well, look, they're opening up to the rest
of the world. They need, when a businessman goes to Myanmar, he needs a place he's going to feel
comfortable to stay so he can go and negotiate with people to do business deals. And that's
their argument. And it makes sense, I guess, on some level, but when you look at a society like
Myanmar, the problems it has, the scale of the problems, the last thing that you would locate
as a thing that they needed was a Five Star hotel for rich people to go and invest. In fact,
what they need is a development model that does not rely solely on the vagaries of foreign
direct investment, which is what they're building. I mean, for me, the most shocking part of this
book and of the two year reporting project that went into it was the aid section, because
everywhere I went, I saw that aid was not benefiting. Largely, there were small parts
of it that were benefiting the poor, but largely was benefiting the richest people in the world,
the corporations, and the local elite. And secondly, the second part of that is that this
is not a mistake. Originally, when I first started reporting, I was like, okay, well,
they've obviously not thought this out. But when you start looking at the history of it,
and you look at how aid developed out of full of formal colonialism, you realize this has been
designed from the start. This is the plan. This is the plan. The IFC, for example, the institution
which I looked at most and which I've described, the Arm of the World Bank, which was created in
1956, we went to the World Bank archives in Washington, DC. And we looked at what the
discussions were about why they were creating the IFC. And it was explicitly talked about
as an arm of a tool in the Cold War. They wanted to expand capitalism
in places which could fall to communism. So the best way to do that is to make the private
sector as big as possible, right? So they'd say, we need this corporation to go in.
But now the IFC is an investment bank. We talked to people on the inside who
anonymously, and they said the IFC effectively functions as an investment bank and it's a
money earner for the World Bank Group as well. So it's been completely perverted from any kind of
development goal. A few points. So I think most people that when they hear the words
in international development, they think kids getting books at school, like I said,
clean drinking water, maybe an infrastructure project, right? A road. But they wouldn't hear
in their mind, yeah, five-star hotel where a businessman can have a cup of coffee and make
a businessman. It's fucking ridiculous, frankly. But like you say, A, it goes, I think, hand in hand
with an idea that the more privatization, the more inequality, the better. And I think
as an appendage to that, like the continuation with colonialism.
With regards to... Sorry, I'm back here. So I had a really interesting question for you.
So we're going to talk about the diamond mine. That's it. And I suppose as an outgrowth of that
as well. I mean, you said that a lot of this is based upon anti-communism and our position
of communism during the Cold War at the end of the 1950s. So you've got Mossadegh,
Arbenz and Guatemala, and Nasser in Egypt. And these guys weren't particularly left-wing, but
actually, Arbenz is basically just a social democrat. But the point is, social democracy
outside of the West wasn't allowed. But it wasn't just communism. There was very much a concern
that global South countries would have nationalism, right? This force, which is apparently so normal
in the West, you're allowed to be a nationalist in the UK or France, the US. But the minute you
have a nationalism from a third world country, it was just... We cannot have that. So I think for
an audience as well, just to... Because they might say, well, good anti-communism. Well, no,
this is fundamentally about creating obstacles to nationalism and to the idea of popular sovereignty.
And again, there's something actually I think the left's been very weak on. The left says,
oh, all nationalism is bad. Well, actually, nationalism has created an incredible
countervailing force against oppression, against imperialism, for the majority of the world over
the last 100 years. So maybe you don't phrase things like that. You mentioned the World Bank.
I mean, wow, some of the stories about the World Bank just... And this idea of it being an investment
fund. Can you touch upon one project in particular in Tanzania? Yeah, the other bizarre part of this
whole system is you would expect a diamond mine to... If it was owned by a major company like
The Beers, they would not need non-commercial loans at favorable rates from a development
institution to expand. You would have thought that they were integrated enough into the world of
finance that they could get the loans that they wanted. But essentially, in this case,
this diamond mine, which is now owned by Petro Diamonds, which is listed in London,
said that they hadn't made a profit in 10 or 15 years, which again, I was dubious of because
it's very nice to say that if you're in Tanzania, whose HMRC is probably like five or six guys in
a room. And you've got all these powerful accountants that can do interesting accounting to make sure
you don't get a profit that you have to pay a tax on. I'm not saying that's what they did, but
that is a massive power imbalance that you see around the world where you have the corporate
accountants and... It's not HMRC in this country, right? I don't think anybody would dispute that.
Tanzania's ability to collect tax is quite limited. Exactly. But anyway, they said they
hadn't, so they took money from the World Bank and the IFC to develop this diamond mine. And I
went along there. And again, it's like so much of this new corporate geography around the world
where you go to a place like Tanzania, which is not one of the poorest African countries,
but is pretty poor when you go there. And then you arrive at... So you're seeing all this sort of
poverty around, and then you arrive at this campus, this diamond mine. It's not just a mine,
it's got like a hospital and school. And you go through the metal gates, and it's just like
perfectly tarmac roads, hospital that works, school, people looking happy. And that's what...
So you go there, then you get taken by a PR person around, and they're telling you all the
wonderful things. But the funny thing is that when I interviewed the finance person at that
mine, he said to me, we didn't need the IFCs and non-commercial loans. We could have easily done
it without. But we liked having the imprimatur of the World Bank on our company. It was good for
our respectability, it was good for our legitimacy. Like we'd be exploiting people, the World Bank's
helping us. Exactly. And then so add that to the fact it's a diamond mine. So how does that
benefit development? It's a private diamond mine that hasn't paid tax in over a decade.
And the World Bank's argument is, well, it creates jobs and it develops the hamlets around the
campus. So part of the whole propaganda tour I was taken on was I was taken to a local school,
which had been built by company. It was like 50 kids packed into a little like brick school,
tiny brick school. And then I interviewed some of the teachers and they actually were quite
outspoken to me. They said, well, they might have built us this, but where's the money for the
central government? They were aware of what I'm talking about, which is that they avoid all this
paying any tax to the central government and then act like they're the saviors of the local
community by building these pretty threadbare schools. And that is kind of what we saw all
around the world, that the arguments are so thin for why they're investing in these
high-end capitalist endeavors like a diamond mine or a five-star hotel. It's all about
creating jobs for the local community. Why can't you create a job for the local community by
building something that's socially useful for poor people? But also if it's publicly owned.
Even if the state just has a 30% share, let's have a compromise here, like there's still the jobs.
Yeah, but this is a very important point that you bring up about the IFC because the IFC doesn't
just invest in private corporations to go into new markets. They have an advisory arm,
which is advising governments to privatize everything. And it's a famous case where they got
the main hospital in Lesotho to private. Oxfam did a whole report about this. The IFC
helped Lesotho privatize their main hospital. And then it started eating up huge amounts of their
health budget per year, extraordinary sums. And that is kind of replicated around the world.
They're advising governments to privatize certain things and then investing in companies
that might benefit from those privatizations. So it's a conflict of interest there.
Clearly, right. I mean, that's clear as day. As well with the World Bank, this was another one,
it just, my jaw dropped, right? And I'm quite, I'm sure people who are familiar with the
Voronah, I'm quite skeptical of many things, I'm a bit of a cynic even. But this idea that the
World Bank invests to an extraordinary extent in companies registered in tax domains where they'll
pay less tax. So for instance, companies which are operating in Africa, but they'll be domiciled and
somewhere like the Mauritius because it's really a tax haven. Now I'm not saying they're evading
tax, but it's legal tax avoidance. And I find it incredible that the World Bank's development
model would accept the possibility. We're helping a country develop by investing in a business which
is in tax haven. Can you explain that to me, at least? Well, we went to Mauritius actually,
because Mauritius is kind of an emblematic example of this whole system as well. Because
when it achieved independence, it was written off as kind of a basket case. It had no real resources
or obvious way to develop out of the poverty that it was in. And then it was the World Bank
promoted this whole idea of it becoming a tax haven. And now when you go there, there's like
there's a huge financial district, insurance companies, all these international companies
there. And we were looking at a company called Malawi Mangos, which is registered in Mauritius.
And we tried to get their accounts. You can't get their accounts in Mauritius because another part
of this is that tax havens are secrecy jurisdictions. So we couldn't get any, even when we were in
Mauritius, we went to their company's house and we couldn't get any details. But the IFC had invested
in Malawi Mangos. Which is meant to be dealing with Malawi, which is kind of... Yeah, exactly.
So but they're registered in Mauritius. And yeah, I mean, the World Bank, I mean, to be honest with
you, I think that the World Bank don't care because it's part of the whole model that they're
promoting. Like they are promoting a corporate agenda and their whole model is rests on the fact
that the only way the world can develop is by attracting foreign direct investment and attracting
foreign corporations to go and invest there. Now, if you believe that's the whole of the
riddle of development, then tax havens are a benefit because they help corporations and anything
that's good for corporations is good for development because there's no other way to develop. And I
think that's what they think. I mean, they wouldn't say that publicly. They would say, but they have
no regulations in place to stop investments in companies that are registered in tax havens.
For example, Malawi Mangos and there's plenty of others. So I mean... But that's correct. I mean,
that is really low hanging fruit, Matt. Like it's one thing having investments which don't find a
big social return. But the idea that, oh, we're going to help Malawi by helping a company registered
in the Mauritius, which doesn't even pay tax to Malawi. It's mad. Like the United States
government is very good on businesses which make profit in its jurisdiction, which basically
tax dodges much better than we are in this country, by the way. Or even US nationals who live abroad,
they find them and they get them to pay the money. But then the whole model of development,
which is really being pushed by the United States overseas, I mean,
heaven forbid, the US is being hypocritical, of course. But this just strikes me as like
utterly brazen. Like how can you have a developmental model which doesn't even involve
businesses which you want to grow if you believe in the private sector? Clearly those businesses
should be paying tax to pay for state services. Clearly. But that doesn't even seem to be included
there. No. I mean, I can't tell you. I mean, I agree with you. It's shocking. But then it's shocking
that an aid organization whose stated goal is to alleviate global poverty is investing in a diamond
mine in Tanzania. It makes no sense or a five-star hotel or a shopping center in El Salvador or a
gated community in El Salvador. Every country in the world, there's these bizarre projects and it goes
to the fact that it's an extremist point of view, extreme economic ideology that has proven to be
a disaster pretty much everywhere it's been practiced because you talk about nationalism,
right? And I agree with you that it's often, especially in the developing world, those kind
of economic nationalism is a good thing. Resource, I used to work 100%. When I worked at
the Financial Times, one of the funniest things about it was whenever any government talked about
using the resources for themselves, nationalizing a mining company or taxing those corporations
higher, they were, it was called resource nationalism. And that was a pejorative. The
idea, it was seen as, oh, no, that's a bad thing. You shouldn't be in control of your resources.
And that's how it goes around the world. In Latin America, in the 50s and 60s,
import substitution model was really successful, massive keeping out products so you could develop
your infant industries without flooding your own market with foreign goods. It's good. It's a good
thing and it helped develop domestic economies. That was completely destroyed in the 70s and 80s
by these eight institutions or the Bretton Woods institutions, which we're told were about
development. And that's what I think that a realization people need to understand is that
the word development is a very different thing if you work within these institutions. It's not
helping the poor develop. It's greasing the entry of corporations into the developing world. That is
the major role because they believe that's the only way that the developing world can develop.
And it's not a coincidence that they believe that. They believe that because essentially,
they're promoting an ideology which benefits the richest people in the world. That is,
they were set up by the US and the UK, essentially. I think most people say they're
skeptics of sort of trade and aid. They're skeptics, but they'll say, look, it's a mixed bag.
But from what you're describing, the existing trade and aid model, which we have with the World Bank,
with the IMF, with aid agencies, with various NGOs, it looks like, to me, a machine to generate
inequality. It's like an algorithm to create as much inequality as possible. And you compare
that to what's going on, for instance, in China, state led, hundreds of millions of people brought
out of poverty. Now, I'm not saying China's perfect, but you've got two quite different
paradigms there. And it's quite obvious which one works, right?
Yeah. I mean, another example of this is I always think what must be amazing working in the World
Bank and being an economist and trying to develop all these theories about how you get out of poverty.
And then looking at Evan Morales' Bolivia, that started in 2000, when he was elected in 2005,
their model was to nationalize. They nationalized huge amounts of companies straight away within
100 days. They were later praised by the World Bank and IMF for their economic success, growth
rates, high, massive poverty reduction program. That was all done with policies which were the
opposite of what the IMF and the World Bank tell you to do. And it's like you say, it's very,
very bizarre that people don't look at that and think, well, maybe we're promoting the wrong
policies. They do the opposite. They say, well, push it harder when countries come out of the cold.
So, for example, in Myanmar, we went an interesting time because it was a time when they thought
democracy was on a path towards democracy. And obviously, Myanmar's been out in the cold for
decades. And we were talking to all these institutions about what policies they were
instituting. And it was all the same ones I've been talking about. It was signed bilateral
investment treaties, inshrining ISDS, signed up for IFC loans to get foreign corporations to enter,
open an SEZ, Special Economic Zone, which we went to. There was one called Tilawa, which was
being set up actually by the Japanese aid agency. Because the other point is, we should come on
to Special Economic Zones, but they are often funded by aid organizations as well. Building
a Special Economic Zone is our aid money has been used for. All these things, the menu of policies
that the World Bank, IMF, Regional Development Banks push on countries when they come in being
reintegrated are all the ones that show, as you say, very, very little success in developing
countries. And the reason, I mean, I don't think it's a conspiracy to say the reason that they
hold to these quite extremist ideas that don't benefit the majority is because they're never
more meant to. They're meant to benefit corporate power. They're meant to benefit the 1%. That
was why they were set up in the first place. And I mean, sorry, I'll just finish with this.
The person that talks about this quite eloquently is Joseph Stiglitz, who was a chief economist at
the World Bank for a long time. And he wrote that famous book, Globalization and Its Discontents.
Now, he's kind of still thinks that there was an idealistic thread and it went wrong. But if you
read about the people that are in control now, he calls them extremists. They were people that
during his time, he saw that they were taking over the levers of power within the World Bank
particularly and pushing the extremist agenda, which is still in place and should be got rid of
because the other thing is development sounds boring when you set to people. But what it describes
is how the majority of humanity run their economies. It's extremely important what theories are being
promoted because it has a massive impact on billions of people. But it's like you said before,
the left, I don't think engage as much as they should on these issues because these were all
issues that exercise the left in the 90s at the end of the Cold War. And particularly you had
like Seattle, every WTO meeting was there were huge protests. And then that all stopped with
September 11th and the drive to war in Iraq, the left's attention moved away from what was
called the anti globalization movement, which was a misnomer, but it was a big movement globally
towards the anti war movement and the war on terror. And I think that maybe that's
dissipating a bit. But I think that the left needs to reengage with these issues because for me,
having written this book and having looked into this stuff, I think that there's no way you can
understand politics today here globally without seeing it through the lens of corporate power
and how they've taken over and cannibalize the state that created them.
Let's talk about Europe quickly, because there's a bank that's equivalent to the World Bank,
it's called the European Bank of Reconstruction and Development, the EBRD,
and it's funded by European Union member states, i.e. their taxpayers. So explain to me how Europe's
taxpayers, including British taxpayers, helped fund the expansion of little.
Yeah, well, so the EBRD is another interesting institution, which was set up at an interesting
time, it was set up in April 1991, at the end of the Cold War. And what it was about was essentially
the same as the World Bank, it was about integrating the World Bank after the Second World War,
it's about integrating Eastern Europe, former Soviet bloc, into the capitalist system.
And it was on the principle of the same as the IFC, we all invest in the private sector,
which might otherwise not want to go to these new markets. Now, like with the IFC, it's just
become a complete racket and joke. Like, they've spent a billion dollars
giving little money to expand into Eastern Europe. And this is a huge, massively rich
corporation, it does not need non-commercial loans to expand into different places,
anywhere. We say we, but again, just to be clear, this is taxpayer money coming from the
UK or France or Retali, and it's been giving to little this huge multinational to expand
and to make more money. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, yeah. And little has huge, the other part of this is
that a lot of the companies that are invested in have huge controversies about how they treat
workers, little particularly in Eastern Europe, we went to Poland and a couple of other places and
talked to workers who work for little and they said that the conditions were bad and that the
company was actually uniquely bad in comparison to other ones. So it's not just, it's aid money
that they don't need, taxpayer money to expand that they don't need. And the company itself is
particularly and uniquely bad treatment of its workers. So it makes no sense, but as I said,
sorry to go back to the same point, but it doesn't make sense if your understanding of aid
and development is the one that comes straight from the World Bank. If you believe that they're
telling the truth and that their aim is to alleviate global poverty, yeah, it doesn't make
sense. If you start looking into it and understanding that that's a lie, and it's about greasing the
entry of corporations into new markets, and it's also about enshrining capitalism as a system
all over the world, not just in Eastern Europe, but in Latin America, Africa and Asia,
then it makes sense. But not even capitalism, right? Because as you talk about in the book,
Liddell's growth meant that smaller retailers, you know, grosses, etc. closed down outdoor
food markets, which by the way, were selling produce at a cheaper rate. So it's not like
they were breaking up food cooperatives or something like there was a, there was a very
different kind. There was a particular kind of capitalism, I should say, which was being imposed
on Central and Eastern Europe. And it seems to me that basically the EBRD and the European Union,
the Big Wigs and Brussels and Strasbourg, and yes, I sound like Farage, sorry. Sometimes we
disagree with the right about something. They basically wants to European Walmart. So it's
like a status symbol. We have a single market, so we have to have like across the whole continent,
because we believe in this federal project of like a European Walmart, who's going to pay for it?
European taxpayer. Meanwhile, you've got, you know, Liddell execs making big, big bucks. And
it's insane, Matt, the idea that expansion is being funded by the taxpayer. Final question.
She spoke about it earlier, and obviously you're very passionate about it,
especially economic zones. Where do these fit? We associate them with China, but
clearly they're quite integrated with trade and aid.
Yeah, I mean, it's, it's all part of the same menu of policy prescriptions, which is offered by the
World Bank. Yeah, this was my most interesting part of the book for me personally to report,
because I just think it is kind of a parable for the whole story. Because what I'll just explain
what a special economic zone is, a special economic zone is a territory which is chiseled off from
the national territory in terms of tax regime, import, export tariffs, customs, all that, all
the stuff that a national government imposes on corporations when they, when they work in a country
is off, you know, those laws don't apply. So we call them in a book corporate utopias, and that's
essentially what they were, what they are. They were created actually, funnily enough, and this
was a really interesting part of the story, which was the first special economic zone ever,
or what so so called, it was in Shannon in Ireland, in West Ireland, and we went to Shannon to report
it. And this was a sort of really
mercurial entrepreneur called Brendan O'Regan, he's quite famous in, in Western Ireland. He had this
idea that Shannon needed to have a new development model after, because it was a, it's a famous airport,
and it was an airport that refueled airplanes that were transatlantic flights. And when, when
technology developed enough that an airplane could go further, they did, they were basically going to
be out of, out of any kind of work. So he said, well, what we should do is we should create this
little zone where corporations could do what they want. They don't have to pay the tax to the
government, they don't have to do all the import, export duties and customs. And they did it.
And that was in 1956. And it has absolutely exploded. And as you mentioned, China,
China's, it's basically the model which has propelled China to economic superpower status.
And they're quite aware of that. The funny thing was, when we were in Shannon, the head of the
Shannon Chamber of Commerce said that Chinese dignitaries often come. And Xi Jinping was there,
not that long ago. Yeah. And they said, I think it was Xi. They said that it was either him or a
previous leader made a request when they came that they wanted to stop in the taxi to the hotel
when he came to Shannon on what they, on Tully Glass Hill, which is this hill overlooking this,
I've been there is, it's, it's just a nondescript hill overlooking a gray industrial estate in
Western Ireland. And the second most powerful man in the world requested that the taxi could stop on
the way to the hotel so he could have a moment of pause for reflection to look at the Shannon
economic zone, especially economic zone, because the Chinese are like, this is where it all began.
But it's become a, it's become a, as I said, it's gone all over the world. And it's come to Britain.
Two years ago, Rishi Sunak, oh, sorry, it wasn't Rishi Sunak then, but the UK government
announced that we're going to have 13 free ports here, whereby that and it's the same
special economic zone idea you could corporations won't have to abide by national laws. And I think
that what you've seen with the development of the special economic zone is more and more pressure
to create a global economy and national laws in corporate interest, because
often policies which are trialed in special economic zones are then then become national
policies. And in fact, we use the term in the book, special economic world, we're living in a
special economic world now, the race to the bottom means that every the most successful
countries for attracting foreign direct investments are the ones that have bad labor laws, bad
environmental law regulations, all the stuff that we think of as the basis of a civilized society,
that's what you can't have if you want to attract foreign direct investment. And as I've said,
the World Bank IMF, that's the only way you can develop is to attract foreign direct investment.
So special economic zones are kind of for me the emblematic
case. And I'll just finish with this that I went to Cambodia. I think this was probably the most
profound reporting trip that I made during the but I went to Cambodia to report on from two
special economic zones in one in non pen and one in the place called Bavette, which is on the border
of Vietnam. And actually, they're often built on the borders because of trade. And Bavette actually
just because everyone's talking about Henry Kissinger at the moment, Bavette was one of the
places that he he destroyed an operation menu during the Vietnam War. But I actually, they
wouldn't let me in. And then I snuck it, the one in Bavette, they wouldn't let me in. And then I
snuck in and started interviewing workers within the special economic zone. And it was an incredible
experience because they basically said, like, we can't organize here. So part of the special
economic zone is about warehousing workers. And they they said, if we try and organize,
they will sack us or even we might be the victims of physical violence. And what I was told was
that often in places in special economic zones in Cambodia, but happens around the world, is that
workers will just erupt in violent outbreaks, because they're not allowed to organize,
you know, in a legitimate way. There's just constant violence, they'll start smashing up the
machines, they'll beat up their manager, whatever it is. And that happened all over Cambodia and the
world. And it really did show me the power of unions and how important they are to a civilized
society, because most of the unions in Cambodia, even the ones that did operate were called yellow
unions, they were coopted by the corporations or the state. And I did interview some independent
unions. And they were just working within extremely difficult conditions in terms of
repression from the state, repression from the corporations. And but but they were they were
winning, like the minimum wage when I was there was being raised. And it was it was a kind of
amazing experience in the in the context of all this corporate power and the context of working
within special economic zones, they were winning. So that was quite a hopeful way to end it. And
and I think that we haven't touched on this, but I want to just say before we end,
that a major part of this is not just corporations exerting their power. A major part of this is
states exerting power on behalf of corporations, because everywhere I went in the world,
whether it be peasants in Tanzania, poor people in Colombia being victimized by paramilitaries,
whatever it was, I'd say, Okay, well, look, you're being oppressed by this corporation,
because you're standing up for your rights. What's your government doing for you? And they
will say, Oh, don't be silly, the government works for the corporation, every single one.
That's how it works. The government is not working for the people. The government is working
to help the corporation enforce their rule in that person's country. And that's a very important
conceptual understanding to come to because it's the opposite of what we're told, which is that the
state and the corporation, the two adversarial power centers, and they they they duke it out,
but they don't. The corporation has has a super national system, which we talked about,
which operates above national governments, but even the national governments themselves have
become completely infested with corporate power. And in some ways, it's very explicit. For example,
in the UK, the Department of Trade and Industry has a whole taxpayer funded body called the Defense
and Security Organization, which is role is to promote arms companies around the world, private
arms companies, we pay for that, mainly BAE systems. But that that's a very explicit bit.
It operates on a much more implicit level across the board as well. So I think that
the left going forwards needs to understand that if we don't see the level of power that
corporations have accrued and understand how they're exerting it, then we're we're going to be
fighting the the wrong battles, because there's so the corporations want us to be talking,
want a certain discourse on the left. I think the discourse we have now, the culture war,
is a function of the corporate takeover of our whole discourse in that it's really conducive
to corporations just working in the background and not really talking about them and no one really
operating any kind of pressures on them to stop the cannibalization of all our resources.
Corporate, I'll say, corporate friendly identity politics has taken off and I don't think that's
a coincidence. I think it's very conducive to certain interests that we constantly talk about
culture war issues. And that's the left and the right. And we ignore bigger structural economic
issues at our peril. Matt Kennard, that was a great conversation. Thank you so much for joining us on
Downstream. We are.
