Why do we only take things seriously when it's about war?
And this is an important question today given that we have a terrible tragic war happening,
but look what happened even in Germany.
After months saying there was no money and there was a lot of pressure in government
having to cut its budget, 100 billion was found overnight for the war effort.
That happens all the time with war because we take it seriously.
What do management consultants do?
I think it's an important question because this is a global industry worth as much as a trillion
dollars and yet if you ask somebody like my dad, he drives a taxi for a living,
what does a management consultant, he wouldn't have the faintest idea.
Yet they play an increasingly prominent role in the public sector with extraordinarily large
public contracts, whether it's test and trace or delivering healthcare websites to the United States
and of course they're in business too.
A new book by Mariana Matzikato, The Big Con, makes some pretty provocative statements.
It says that actually consultants don't just undermine democracy,
they lead to less effective government.
Mariana Matzikato, welcome to Downstream.
Thank you, I'm very happy to be here.
How are you doing more generally at the moment?
Oh god, you really want to know?
Post-COVID, come on.
Oh my god, actually fine.
I'm thrilled because this week I got to speak a lot with the prime minister of Barbados.
Mia Motley, who I think is the hero of the 21st century.
That's true, she's in the UK at the moment, right?
Well actually, so I was just in Barbados, I was in Barbados two weeks ago working with her,
but she was supposed to be in London this week, but we ended up having her virtually.
She was at the first event we had for this book, the launch event at the RSA.
She was in dialogue with me about why we need not only financial space,
which is what her big global mission is about, but also the kind of fiscal space and state
capacity, which our new book kind of looks at why we don't have that.
And it was a great conversation.
So your new book, you have many books, they're all very good.
I have to say actually, this is one of my favorites, the big con.
But you're only halfway through, I can tell.
No, no, no, it's because I've made notes that no, no, no, I finished this last night.
And it's going to sound strange how a book about the consulting industry is quite riveting.
I think pretty people watching this probably won't believe me.
They think I might be trying to flatter you, but it is because there are so many amazing
stories. But let's start from the top. So what are consultants and what do they do?
So first of all, there's different types of consultants.
Some are more on the counting side, some are more on the strategy side.
So Deloitte versus McKinsey.
But there's also other types of consultants, which we talk about in the book, even though
we don't focus on them, which have been organizations like Circo and G4S, where
the government has actually decided to outsource a lot of its activities to those companies.
We kind of treat them differently, but they're all part of the same phenomena
of basically the decapacitation, if that's a word, I don't know,
that sounds more Italian than English of government.
So what do they do? They consult, they advise.
But we look at it as an industry. This is a very important point.
So there's many different types of consultants. You might have a head teacher of a school who
might consult. A nurse could consult. A doctor could consult. Academics, myself, we could consult.
But that's based on our expertise. It's not actually core to our lives. I might consult
based on 20 years of research in an area. Again, a head teacher might have great knowledge
about the schooling system. We look at a business model of the consulting industry
as a sector, which is making lots of money consulting and where that business model has
lots of different problems. It has conflicts of interest. It has lack of transparency and kind
of a veil of secrecy. And especially we look at its role in, even though it's not its fault,
because we look also at governments and we ask, why do you allow yourself to get captured in some
ways by consultants? So easily, we look at the co-evolution between consulting and some of
modern problems in capitalism today from financialization to outsourcing.
So you said there's a big sector. Some people watching this will be familiar with the names,
McKinsey, Deloitte, et cetera. How big is it? Close to a trillion per year.
And also it's rising. So the subtitle here turned it around so I can remember what our
subtitle is. The big con, how the consulting industry weakens our businesses and infantilizes
our governments and warps our economies. The infantilizes our governments, but came from
a quote by a Tory, so conservative Lord, Lord Agnew, who during COVID on the back of all the
contracts that he was witnessing that the government was using to bring in consultants,
you might remember that Deloitte was charged with the test and trace system, but also with Brexit,
lots of money went to consultants. He said, oh my God, we are infantilizing Whitehall.
In other words, if we keep outsourcing the role of government, we will stop learning. We will
actually become like babies who haven't learned yet. We won't be doing, so we're not learning by
doing. And this is actually something I've been talking about for decades. So I was very,
not surprised, but it was very interesting that it was actually coming from the conservative side
of government because it's not necessarily intuitive that that's where it would have come from.
The numbers here are really impressive in terms of the growth and it's something I'm pulling out
of the book. This isn't my own personal research. This is so memorable as a fact. When Margaret
Thatcher becomes Prime Minister in 1979, the British state is spending £6 million a year on
consultants. When she leaves in 1990, so we're talking 30 years plus, £246 million. So it's
gone up more than 40 times. And it's obviously gone up considerably more than then. This is
hardly shrinking the state, is it? Well, that's what's so interesting. First of all, you mentioned
Thatcher. So that's the bit that might be intuitive. You might think, okay, a government,
a Reaganite government, a Thatcherite government, which is, I don't want to say anti-state because
actually both of them spent a lot on things like war, right? I mean, actually what Reagan shrunk
was the welfare state. My first book, The Entrepreneurial State, I actually looked at
state investment in the U.S., also during the Reagan years, actually rising around,
whether it's the military industrial complex, but even the National Institutes of Health,
which in the United States spent billions just last year, £42 billion on drug innovation
that happened also under Ronald Reagan. So we should also just remember that that's
sort of been a propaganda that they put out, but didn't necessarily believe themselves.
There was lots of state investment in both of those governments. It was actually more
a war on the welfare state and really taking away a lot of the social fabric of society,
which we've also seen recently in the UK with austerity for the last 10 years,
all the cuts to very, very concrete areas, whether it's after school clubs, youth centers,
mental health, I'm talking about what I just noticed in my community, let alone the kind
of more macroeconomic figures, that's very different from just saying anti-state, right?
Because there was actually lots of investment that went elsewhere. Anyway, so what's interesting
is if you look at kind of a more conservative, in quotes, neoliberal government, you might
intuitively think they want to reduce state investment and bring in the private sector,
both through privatization, but also consultation of government. So that figure you just mentioned
from 6 to 246 million is part of that. But then there's two questions. One, the one you just said
that cost a lot of money. So in terms of actual expenditure by the state, it didn't necessarily
reduce it, but was that really the point of Thatcher's government? I would argue no. It was
actually to dismantle in some ways the ambition of the state or the structures of the state.
And by bringing in consultants, regardless of how much it costs and it costs a lot,
you are helping to render the state actually in some ways weaker, at least the structures you
might not necessarily care about, health, education, public transport, again, very different on the
military. And yet, one of the things we talk about in the book is how the real door opened to the
consultants actually under new labor. So if you don't really have a strong idea of what the state
is for, you want the state, so it's not the neoliberal idea of no state, you want the state,
but you want it to look efficient and responsible and business friendly, then ultimately, you bring
in business sector metrics into the state apparatus. So cost-benefit analysis, present value in the
whole idea in economics, which is that at best, the state should fix market failures. So all my
work has been saying that that's actually not very smart. What we actually need for all the problems
we have, whether it's climate, health, digital, is co-creating and co-shaping not just the market,
but the economy. Economic growth has not just a rate, but a direction. The sustainable development
goals are 17 of them. That's about directionality, whether it's about hunger, poverty, climate, the
digital divide, health. Is the UN sustainable development goals? Yeah, sorry, I always forget,
not everyone knows about SDGs. My kids actually went to state schools here in London where they
sung about the SDGs. Oh, wow, that's progress. So I think, actually, interestingly, young kids
probably know more about the sustainable development goals than you and me. But yeah, anyway, so the
17 sustainable development goals, very important. We've had them since 2015, not that long. They
require huge ambition. They require mission. They require collaboration, collective intelligence,
co-investment, so on and so forth. And what my work has been looking at since the entrepreneurial
state is how if we don't have kind of a proper understanding of the state as anything more than
fixing market failures, we will always be too little too late. We will always be just reacting.
We will at best be filling the gap so that literally even public space will be just the
space that you're allowed to fill up when private space is not there. Think of it even
architecturally in some ways, but really in terms of even public goods and economics,
the word public good sounds good. There's two words. One is good. If you actually look at the
framing of it in economics, it's fixing a market failure problem that occurs when we have positive
externalities. The new labor thing is really interesting for me because obviously they spent
a great deal of money on things like the NHS compared to the Tories, historic amounts of money,
they reduced child poverty, pensioner poverty, so people say, how could you say this? But actually,
when you go into the nuts and bolts of how they did government, so for instance, I find this
fascinating. You talk about this new delivery unit which is created under Tony Blair, which basically
seems to me to be saying tacitly that government should just be done by management consultancy,
or it should be a major part of the state's capacity. And it's not something which is just
bolted on or an afterthought. It's central to how new labor wants to run things.
Yeah. So one of the things I was just talking to Rosie about, she's my co-author, she's actually one
of my PhD students at the Institute for Innovation and Public Purpose, is that in some ways you could
sum up what you've just said as the fact that new labor had an idea of private public partnerships,
not public private partnerships. So a public private partnerships, I would argue, is what we
had with the moon landing. It was a public idea, there was strong public directionality,
but ultimately there was 400,000 people involved, so many different private sector industries from
nutrition, materials, electronics, software, it wasn't just aerospace. And what government had
to do was to redesign all its different tools at the time, especially not only procurement,
so government as purchaser, to catalyze as much bottom-up experimentation towards that goal.
And the goal was getting to the moon and back in a short amount of time. I would argue that what
new labor did was kind of forget, what's the actual mission, the moonshot around health,
around public education, around public transport. If you're going to bring in the private sector,
you better make sure you're very clear what the public goal is, so you're working together
to actually deliver on the moonshot, as opposed to just what we end up having, which is a lot of
private activity in areas that used to be publicly run. And it's not about saying that's wrong,
I think it's actually wrong to say it's about private or nationalization,
kind of in a Corbynite kind of way, I think that's where Corbyn went wrong. It's about
how do you actually organize that partnership, so it's truly about actually doing something good,
purpose-oriented for people.
Let's fast forward to Kirstama, because this morning he's talked about
missions rather than pledges. Now, a cynic would say, well, he's exhausted the rhetoric of pledges,
because of course he's broken so many from his leadership election. But for somebody like yourself,
actually, no, this is substantially different. This means something quite different.
But reading his missions, crime, decarbonization, they seem quite sort of ambiguous.
Is the point of a mission that is actually quite specific and measurable?
I've had the honor to, I don't want to say be responsible, but for having written about missions
and having actually seen it put into policy. So I first wrote about it, actually for a long time,
but when I first wrote about it where it became policy was 2017 for the European Commission.
I said, look, guys, you're just talking all this talk about climate, about inclusion,
it's not getting us any more inclusive or sustainable. So I said, what would a mission-oriented
approach look like? And I wrote two reports on the back of which the European Union now has five
missions and a large chunk of the Horizon program, which was 90 billion euros, is now targeted
through these missions instruments. So what's a mission, at least in my approach? As you begin
with the challenge, we talked about the sustainable development goals, but they're very broad, right?
Turning them into moonshots, so SDG Sustainable Development Goal 13,
you can turn it into something much more clear that you can actually answer yes or no,
did you achieve it? Similar to going to the moon and back in a short amount of time, very clear,
you can answer yes or no. So whether it's net zero in a particular region, whether it's getting all
the plastic out of the ocean if we're looking at SDG 14, but the main thing is to frame it so it
actually requires investment and innovation across multiple sectors of the economy. Because the old
industrial strategy in the UK was very similar to what we've seen globally, which is it was just a
list of sectors. So in the UK under Vince Cable, it was aerospace, automobiles, the financial sector,
the creative industry, and finance. Don't ask me how I remember that because I don't remember
what I did yesterday. Anyway, so the idea of a mission-oriented approach for industrial strategy
would be to say, why did you just make up those random five sectors? Did they just lobby their
way up? Why not think of actually challenges like clean growth, healthy aging, sustainable
mobility, and so on. And they get all your different sectors to work together towards
particular missions underneath that. And then again, change those tools on the ground to foster
that investment towards that. But that requires knowledge, capacity, implementation ability
to actually then change the current status of procurement, which is just money being given
from the public sector, the private sector, to be outcomes-oriented. Something, by the way,
that many countries rediscovered with COVID, outcomes-oriented procurement. It's often a
wartime tool, which is interesting. Wars, people want to win war, so they take them seriously.
If you look at the public-private partnership in a war, when I've learned this in the US,
when the Ministry of Defense, the Department of Defense, funds health, because sometimes they
do because soldiers get sick in the war, they don't get messed about by the pharmaceutical
industry because they want to win the war. They want the soldiers to have access to the medicines
that the Ministry of Defense funded. When it's the Ministry of Health, in normal times, somehow
we forget that the prices of the drugs should reflect that public contribution, that the intellectual
property rights should not be abused, to just become extraction tools by the sector, and so on.
So a missions approach has to lead to change. It should be a source of discomfort. I often tell
ministers and policy makers, if you're getting really cozy with this idea, and it's just kind
of a blah, blah, blah, you obviously don't understand it because it should actually
create change in how you work with the private sector. You need conditions attached, for example.
In France under COVID, the Finance Minister Bruno Le Maire put strong conditions on Renault
and Air France to get access to the COVID-19 bailout program. Why? Because they had a very
clear mission around, or challenge, actually around clean growth. They had to commit to
lowering their carbon emissions to get any public money. In this country, where we're not used to
having that conditionality, EasyJet got $600 million, no conditions attached. So Keir Starmer,
if he's interested in missions, has to then immediately talk about a new social contract
with business. Let me stick a pin in this. I actually got a question if you're about China
now you've said all that, but these are the missions from Keir Starmer. Secure the higher
sustained growth in the G7. I mean, at least that's measurable, right? But then build an NHS
fit for the future, make Britain's streets safe, break down the barriers to opportunity every stage,
make Britain a clean energy superpower. Those last four just seem so ambiguous and the line,
you can only manage what you measure. How do you measure progress in any of those things?
Or am I being unfair? Are those the kinds of things that you would call missions?
I would call those mission areas. So I think it's actually, well, first of all, we should
congratulate him for actually even having a strategy for basically looking at those areas as
ways that we would redirect an economy. Now we have a problem with growth, but in general,
the problem in the UK was not lack of growth. It was a problematic form of growth. It's a
form of growth that is led by consumption, not investment. That consumption is led by private
debt. Real incomes have not been rising very much in this country. So there's a lot of credit
and private debt in the system to the point that private debt to disposable income in the UK is
close to what it was just before the financial crisis. And that's what caused the financial
crisis. So you'd think people would be like, oh, problems. Very few people are talking about this.
Labour is not talking about it. Neither are the Tories. So the unsustainable level of private
debt, which is interesting if you think about it because we always talk about public debt.
So it's very important, I think, to have those mission areas as a way to talk about
the need to have investment-led growth because all those areas are going to require investment.
We've also had financialized growth in this country, where a lot of companies are making
profits, but not necessarily reinvesting those profits into the economy. So anyway,
so as soon as you talk about those bold areas, the question is, what does that then mean for
the design of policy? What does it mean for an industrial strategy? What does it mean for procurement
strategy? And I think the challenge is, so the first one I would say is not even a mission area,
that's just economic growth. And that's going to happen as a result, if you get the other stuff
right. If you have an innovation policy and an industrial strategy that catalyze and excite a
lot of different actors, that then invest, collaborate, do those moonshots across different
spaces, growth will hopefully result from that because they all require investment and innovation,
which can lead to productivity increases, for example. But the other ones could be mission
areas. But the question is, what are they? So keeping streets safe. I mean, this is something
that I think is incredibly important because I've seen how in London, and I just happen to live in
London, on the back of all the austerity that we had in this country, the social fabric at the
community level was really broken. And so the rise in knife crime, for example. So you could have a
mission at the city level, right? Because a lot of these missions might be talked about nationally,
but then they have to resonate with communities where you might have, you know, citizen assemblies,
you might have different types of democratic for also where people think about those missions.
I only say that because I've worked on missions also in Camden, where I live, and we have the
Camden Renewal Commission that I co-chair with Georgia Gould. And one of our missions that we
thought about for Camden actually did have to do with use safety. And the idea there would be,
how do we look at, for example, knife crime, not just from policing, right? So that's the kind of
result. But if knife crime is actually the symptom of lots of other problems, think of all the social
and economic determinants of crime, where a lot of the both victims, but also the perpetrators,
often come from broken homes, homes where there's a lot of problems. How can you really think of
that problem in a way that brings lots of different branches of government together
to think holistically with an all-of-government approach? That's a key factor in a mission-oriented
approach. As I just mentioned before, you know, going to the moon was not just aerospace, solving
climate is surely not just for the Department of Energy. Solving issues around well-being is
definitely not just for the Department of Health. So it's not just about intersectoral that I talked
about before. It's really that all-of-government approach. And that really then helps government
become more dynamic. And that comes back to the book, because what we say in the book is that we
don't have dynamic governments. We often have rigid, siloed governments, governments that have
stopped insourcing the capacity and capability they need to govern modern-day complex challenges
with other actors. And if you have consultified that capacity, if you're asking Deloitte to do
your test and trace where Deloitte had no expertise whatsoever on test and trace, so it's not surprising
it went belly up, then you have a problem, because you stop learning by doing. You've stopped the
doing. How do they get these jobs? Because like you say, Deloitte had no, I mean nobody had any
expertise in test and trace. Maybe a few countries in East Asia after the SARS epidemic, but so they've
got no technical expertise in whole swathes of what they make money from. So what's their pitch?
We've got no experience. Give us a multi-billion-pound contract.
Well, I'm going to answer that question, but just to almost play not devil's advocate,
but just to put another thing on the table. At the same time that Deloitte did test and trace,
we had, which went very badly in the UK, the NHS did the vaccine roll out through a
decentralized network of GP practices. And not only went well, it also became something
we talked about. The politicians talked about it successful.
So then the real question is, why didn't they invest more in this decentralized network of GP
practices? Why did we not actually wake up and say, wow, what a great success story, and let's
actually increase the investments within the NHS instead of doing what we're seeing today,
which is that the real investments are not only not increasing, but there's a lot of stress within
the system. We have junior doctors on strike, nurses on strike all over the UK. So this is also
a very interesting question, because it's the parallel of the question you've asked.
Now, what we look at is, why are we hiring? It's your question. Consultants in areas that they
have no expertise in. We saw this also in Australia, where they spent over six million
on McKinsey to do their climate strategy. And it was then reported to be a very faulty, problematic
climate strategy. And the question there that we posed in the book is, well, there was also
expertise within the government. It wasn't perfect expertise, but they have this organization called
CSIRO, which actually has a lot of climate capability. So what is this kind of almost
allergy to using not only your internal expertise, but not to actually invest in that
expertise and just need that rubber stamp? Because that's what ultimately it is, a rubber
stamp of McKinsey or Deloitte that makes both governments and businesses, one of the subtitles
is weakens our businesses. Why is that? And we look at two different issues. One is that this kind of
dismantling of state capacity has also led to gaps where sometimes literally even just
numbers of people don't exist. I experienced this with the COVID-19 recovery in Italy,
where the Treasury basically outsourced the recovery to, I keep talking about McKinsey,
but there's lots of these consulting companies. It's BCG, Bain, Pricewaterhouse, Cooper's and
so on. BCG's Boston Consulting Group. Yeah, Boston Consulting Group. And so one thing is that it's
a consequence of not just the austerity, but the dismantling of state capacity.
There often is the need to bring in others to help you out. But when those others don't have
the expertise, that's the real kind of interesting challenge. Because of course, there's lots of
expertise in universities, for example. And I'm not just saying this because I'm an academic,
but I know some top climate experts around the world, like at the Potsdam Institute in Germany,
they have amazing climate science. That would be a more natural place to go to for climate
expertise. But the rubber stamp of the consulting companies is something that is looked upon as
justifying as making good a government that is fearful, especially on the back of so much
kind of government bashing, that somehow there isn't that expertise inside government.
And also sometimes to make uncomfortable decisions. So this is also something that we
don't blame consultants. We say that both with businesses and government, sometimes
letting someone else not so much take the blame, but have their kind of brand on it allows you to
maybe do some controversial activities in the private sector. We look, for example, at the
downsizing trend, the financialization trend, by saying, oh, it was recommended by or rubber
stamped by a consulting company, it might go down the throat easier. And so in that case,
we say business is actually owned up to the decisions they're made, as opposed to just
requiring that rubber stamp of the consulting company. But also there's a risk averseness,
there's a fear of making mistakes. And what's interesting, I've talked about this in other
books, that whereas we celebrate risk taking and making mistakes in the private sector,
as soon as a civil servant makes a mistake, bang front page of the Daily Mail, in this country,
there's other, actually, there's not that many tabloids around the world, this country has a
tabloid industry. That's about it, right? Sorry. Built in Germany. Exactly. New York Post.
Yeah, I mean, there are, but it's just incredible here, just the power they have. We've learned
it in the recent Harry and Meghan discussions. But it's not just the tabloids, it's public
servants, civil servants are not allowed to make mistakes, which is a problem. This is something
we talk about. Trial and error and error, you would not learn how to ride a bike if you did not fall
off. So the fact that governments, part of the consequence of outsourcing, privatizing, of
consultifying is in fact what Lord Agnew, the conservative Lord who made this accusation,
that Whitehall was getting infantilized. Infantilized means you're becoming a baby,
you're not learning, you're not growing up, you're still an infant. And this was a Tory Lord saying
Whitehall was being infantilized. And so this is one of the biggest problems that even though
you might be doing it out of fear, because you'd prefer someone else to be taking the risk, so
you don't go blame when things go wrong, you ultimately will get addicted. You will require
that help constantly, right? Because you're not growing up, you're not building that capacity.
And this is one of the things we talk about. We say that the reason, the sector, because it's
the consulting industry that we kind of focus on, not just consultants, it's problematic is that the
business model itself kind of relies on that next contract following. Whereas if you're a really
good therapist, for example, you don't want your client to be in therapy their whole life, that
probably means you're a bad therapist. The principal agent problem. Exactly, exactly.
Could you explain this quickly, the principal agent problem? Well, it's just about incentives. I mean,
if you know, I mean, the principal agent problem can be applied to different types of problems.
But in this case, it's that if there is, we would call it asymmetric information in terms of a market
failure, then the agent that you are, if you want consulting for, doesn't necessarily have knowledge
about the contract in this case. And in fact, this is one of the things we talk about, which is that
there is a veil of secrecy and lack of transparency in the contract. So in South Africa, for example,
you might have, what we have had consultants who, the same consultant is advising SCOM,
which is a state-owned energy company. And it's also advising the Ministry of Finance,
which in theory is regulating SCOM, right? So you can't be on both sides of the street. And if you
are, that better be very transparent and known to the government. And so one of the, you know,
this kind of conflict of interest. Was that legal? Well, that's what's really striking,
actually, that it's legal. And we talk about all the different consultants who are both advising
the fossil fuel industry while at the same time advising on ESG metrics, right? As though it's
all fine and the same. Of course, it's not. You can't be helping and actually in some ways fostering
a fossil fuel industry to be increasingly successful in making record-level profits today
while, you know, on the other side of the street pretending that you're an expert around
environmental and social governance metrics, which is all about companies actually becoming
greener or more societal, you know, more good for society.
There's lots of amazing stories in the book. And like I said at the top, that's why it's
really riveting these case studies of failure. But one of the more dazzling ones is the story of
healthcare.gov, of course, tied up with Obamacare. Can you tell us a little bit about healthcare.gov,
why it failed and what that has to do with consultants?
Sure. I mean, it's actually part of a much bigger problem because one of the capabilities we say
that has been decimated within governments is actually their ability to govern digital platforms.
And one of the areas by consequence that is increasingly consultified, so consultants are
being brought into, has to do with precisely that area, the kind of, let's just call it,
the digital area of government. Now, this is not a small problem in 21st century, 22nd century
soon. Capitalism, if you don't know how to govern digital platforms, you won't be able
to have a climate strategy, a health strategy. Think of the infodemic side of COVID-19. In fact,
I did a report on which countries globally did better in COVID-19. It actually was countries
that actually had invested in areas including digital platforms because of that very important
information processing side of things, including, by the way, test and trace, which we touched on
before. So healthcare.gov, of course, is famous because the US government, as we know, doesn't
really have a public health program. A lot of people in the US die actually not because they're
sick, but because they can't afford healthcare. This is one of the reasons I'm very proud to live
in Europe. The NHS in the UK is very important in terms of giving everyone access to healthcare.
Now, the problem is that what was also called Obamacare, so Obama finally gets through a program,
which, by the way, Hillary Clinton had tried to get through when her husband was a president.
It had a web site where people could access in order to sign up for healthcare in the US from the
Obamacare program, and as soon as it opened up, it basically crashed and government was blamed,
but actually it wasn't government that had governed it. It had been outsourced. It had been
outsourced to private actors, and this is a huge problem, first of all, because it's central,
like how you actually govern the digital side of a program, whether it's health or climate,
is central. If you are outsourcing your core, that's a problem. If you're outsourcing something
that's peripheral, perhaps it doesn't matter, catering or something. This is actually not just
around health, as I just mentioned. If you look at the weakening of government, it's precisely
around those kind of areas, and so unless they're investing in their own digital capacity,
they won't be stronger, and they will become increasingly needing to have others to come in,
but in that particular case, also, those that had been brought in to do the digital side weren't
very capable. It costs $1.7 billion. $1.7 billion for a website is just extraordinary,
and on the first day of opening, six people could use it. People, like you say, blamed the state,
but they should have been blaming management consultancies.
That's again the irony, because I just mentioned before that part of the answer to why
governments are allowing consultants to have so much power is the risk, the worry of getting
things wrong and thinking that somehow management consultant will not only bring in maybe some
expertise, which as I just mentioned often, we don't have, but also get the blame if things
go wrong, and yet things continue to go wrong, and they're not actually held accountable,
so even how those contracts are designed, they've actually kind of become almost risk-free for the
consultants, and so it's not only costing government a lot of money. In theory, they're
sometimes pitching it as though it's going to help them cost less, so reduced deficits by letting
others undertake public programs, so we have kind of three different problems. It's costing a lot
of money. It's actually not delivering, and when things go belly up, the blame comes back to
government, so it's actually a toxic cocktail, and you'd think that it would be better known how
problematic this is, and I think one of the things we were kind of pleasantly surprised,
but not so surprised, is just how much the book has spoken to people both in the business community
and government communities at different level, city, local, regional, national, global,
precisely because it's almost scandalous at every level. I must say though that we're not there to
blame consultants. In fact, we spoke to many different consultants, especially young kind of
30-year-old consultants who go into the industry also wanting to do good. This isn't a book about
the bad guys trying to do terrible things around the world, and they are disillusioned when you
see that kind of operating on both sides of the street, or not hypocrisy, but that kind of treating
any of the latest trends, whether it's ESG and climate, or shareholder value maximization,
or kind of the other extreme in terms of problematic tendencies and modern-day corporate
governance is almost equally available places to kind of leach onto to provide your consulting
services, you start to lose faith that this is actually really about making the world a better
place. We do make some specific recommendations at the end because it's not enough just to
complain and to kind of denounce, and we talk about the need to make contracts much more transparent,
precisely on all the different types of areas that you're consulting in so you can see those
conflicts of interest, making contracts so they actually embed learning precisely so you don't
have those kind of repeat contracts so that you actually show that you're cumulatively adding value
so the organization in question ultimately shouldn't need you. That example I gave from
therapy before, if you have someone in therapy their entire life you're probably not doing your
job very well, and I think if you look at all the different problems we have globally they do
require lots of different actors where the consultants might have a role, but first of all we need to
make sure they actually have expertise in that area so we should definitely become much more aware
where those areas of expertise lie, but also how do we make sure the ecosystem between these
different actors is truly kind of a symbiotic mutualistic one and not a parasitic one?
Consultancy is one of those things where I mean I I'd obviously heard of it before I graduated,
I'll start that again. Consultancy is a strange one because I'd heard of the term before I
graduated, I graduated in 2007, bad luck, so it was a really interesting year because at the
start of the year as an undergraduate every you know all you could hear at University College
London where you teach, McKinsey, Deloitte, Macquarie, HSBC, Banco Santander, everybody had an internship
with a bank or a consultancy and then within a year it dropped like a lead balloon so it was
really fascinating to see that, but if I if I said to my dad as a graduate, oh I've got a job
as a consultant, he would say what the hell is that? What do you do? And I mean he thinks anyway
actually with Navarra Media, but it's one of those things where I had a pet theory which is
in particularly in Anglo-America since the late 1990s we have a massive overproduction of very
clever generalist graduate students, humanities in particular but also you know in the sciences
and they don't really know what they're going to do, they're sort of aimless but very ambitious,
very conscientious people and it seems to me lots of those people gravitated towards
consultancy as a job and it almost seems to me and obviously I don't think you've written that
in the book, it almost strikes me as a shame because having this concentration of people that
want to do problem solving, highly competent, it seems like a massive misallocation of human
resources basically. But we do talk about that in the book, we say wouldn't it be great if all this
you know desire to do good in the world actually also resulted in more of these young people going
into government and we also talk about this self-fulfilling prophecy that the more we've had
this kind of backlash against government, what Tony Jutt in his book, Il Ferris the Land,
calls a discursive battle like literally you know just talking about administration instead of kind
of like a ministry out there trying to do really difficult things or what I've talked about you
know market fixing, not market shaping, de-risking, not taking risks, simply enabling, redistributing
and regulating instead of being a true value creator. It's not actually a coincidence that it
becomes much more sexy to go into the McKinsey's, the Macquarie's even though I have a whole
theory about Macquarie anyway but the Goldman Sachs isn't the Google's right. So there is that
self-fulfilling prophecy and it's not a surprise I've actually you know taken the time to set up a
whole Institute for Innovation and Public Purpose at UCL which is all about rethinking the state,
bringing purpose to the center of policymaking but also really having a theory of value creation
with the state at the center not to say the state is more important than any other actor but it's
very, it's important in terms of leading at least in democratic, glee-elected societies and then
using all the tools that has to bring together that kind of stakeholder value, lots of different
actors to solve really complex problems, drive collective intelligence a sexy word but that
needs to be embedded in the contracts. You can't have collective intelligence if again intellectual
property rights are abused. They're currently too wide, too strong, too upstream and yet an
intellectual property right is a contract that for 17 years the state has given to the private
sector. So you need to govern that in the public interest and the capacity to do so I think has
withered away to govern those particular contracts but any contract whether it's a procurement contract
or an intellectual property right should have the public interest at the center because that's
that's the point of government it's not just to help companies make profits.
Do you think there's been a cultural shift as well which is the fault here so you know I'm a
materialist you have a materialist explanation for all this happening but as an ancillary point
you know in the if you're an ambitious young person in the 50s 60s and you want to change the
world you'd go work for a big government ministry and you would say I want to go work for the
department of x or I want to go work for NASA and after the 60s there's there's this idea that
actually particularly progressives thought oh if you want to change the world you need to be like
Jane Jacobs or you need to be like Ralph Nader you need to be on the outside right you see lobbying
you need to be lobbying and you need to be this active interest representation but not institutional
power do you think there was a kind of a big social error actually all of a sudden
tons of talented people stopped going into precisely institutions when we need them to be
I don't know I mean first of all I don't want to exaggerate the point about the people who are
working in government I mean I work with governments globally including in the UK and it's full of
incredibly not only smart but people really with ethics at the center they go into government
because they're interested in you know to put it simply making the world a better place I think
what's happened though is that there's so much backlash on government there's such a cartoon
image you know I talk about this in the entrepreneurial state like the kind of kaffee and
bureaucrat and then the cool you know Steve Jobs and Elon Musk today that actually what we've seen
is also a hemorrhaging of that talent I mean so in other words it's been a much more explicit
intentional problem than sort of what you just described also in the 1960s I learned this when
I was running Mission Economy the average age in the mission control room for Apollo was 26
so crazy very very young average age there was there was younger people and yet at that time
already a lot of this outsourcing was happening to the consultants literally actually to McKinsey
in that particular case McKinsey began in the mid 20s and the head of procurement for NASA this
guy Ernest Brackett said if we continue this we won't even you know not only won't we know how to
get to the moon but we won't even know how to write the contracts with the private sector because
they were working with lots of private sector companies and his quote was we will get captured
by brochuremanship it's endearing because they don't really have power points at the time that you
know that these consultants have today they had sexy brochures so the idea that you would get
captured by the brochure was not to say oh we don't want to work at the private sector it was
more like we won't know which private sector companies to work with and I would actually
argue that's what we have today we have um definitely if you look at the contracts we have
a very um unbalanced power in terms of even the legal expertise but the problem is not that there's
not enough public or private investment is that partnership is not it's not a dynamic one it's
not purpose oriented it's not fair it's not just there's often again socialization of risk
privatization of rewards and you can fix that in the contracts NASA actually had a clause in its
contracts no excess profits it's greater not no profits you don't get to the moon with philanthropy
charity of course you can make profits but not excess in excess of what of what you've done
right so as soon as you have a whole kind of narrative and discourse that all the values
getting created in the private sector and the state is just there to facilitate enable work on the
sides then it's much easier to get these very problematic contracts that socialize risks and
privatize rewards and allow excess profits to be earned by some who are doing good stuff but not
everything so somebody watching this from the left might think oh this is just social democracy very
vanilla I actually think you understate your radicalism I think it's very radical that's why
people don't like this by the way I got a lot of hate the whole thing about not private public
partnership but public private partnership and yeah you might not agree with this I think in
some ways is reminiscent of the better features of the Chinese system because there was a great
talk by Eric X Lee who talks about the Chinese party yeah and he made a point on a separate
interview and he said China has a market economy we have private firms that try and make profit
he says the point is the interest of those firms the interest of capital more generally to make
profits does not supersede political authority political authority always super and obviously
that has bad expressions of manifestations but the point is political authority always supersedes
the private interests of businesses or capital and that's basically what you're saying isn't it
this idea that political authority democratically accountable yeah because it's a democratically
accountable thing in terms of big difference not being a China yeah but the same theme is there right
that political authority with that accountability from from people and the mandate from people
sets the agenda around like you say particular missions yeah and that supersedes the interest
of capital that's hugely radical isn't it so I once gave an interview actually I can't remember
I think was to the Financial Times where I said that China is learning from the United States at
the same time that the United States is unlearning from itself so again everything that's you know
smart in our smartphones and not stupid was actually invested in by government mission-oriented
government the internet GPS touchscreen and Siri all fruits of government investments
in some cases with private sector collaboration but it was actually through a public sector problem
that was required so the internet came about because we needed the satellites to communicate
GPS the Navy invested in it to know where all the ships were in the seas so it's not actually I mean
today it feels more like maybe Chinese or kind of a you know top-down planning system but that's
actually how the United States developed they talk Jefferson but act Hamilton people should only
understand that because now the Hamilton musical but basically you know Hamilton was a very important
US politician who at the time advocated for an industrial strategy whereas Jefferson was more
free marketeer the US has always talked the talk of the free market but acted actually on a much
more visible hand not the invisible hand where I think so the work on missions coming back to
here is a speech this morning is all about that in other words or it should be about that I mean
he's using the word I'm very curious to you know know and and perhaps work with them on actually
making this real the how the how is harder than just the word it's all about actually having a
plan that's really difficult you know remember Kennedy said we're going to the moon because it's
hard not because it's easier so this isn't about one side facilitating a metallic facilitating
means making something easier for someone else like the word de-risking so it's not about making
it easier de-risking someone else it's about tackling those really difficult challenges
together now that requires a goal that's going to be the end goal but the how along the way
really matters how you design the financial institution with conditionality you're not
just giving out money it's conditional on change happening within different sectors
you don't do it top down and tell them what to do because that could hurt innovation
but you do it the strong direction that's that public private versus private public
bit that we talked about before it means learning how to do again outcomes oriented
budgeting so you're not just giving a bit of money here and there but you actually have
a goal where the budget itself even at the city level zero knife crime requires its own budget
you can't just give a bit of money here a bit of money there and then stir the soup and hope for the
best and and so I think what's interesting in China though is that they obviously have very
kind of clear targets at such high poverty that they really alleviated a lot of people out of
poverty they also are spending a huge amount on greening their entire manufacturing base because
they have a huge pollution problem so they don't have that myth of oh this is just going to happen
through the free market one of their problems though is they don't really have what I talk about
in the entrepreneurial state a decentralized network of different types of public actors they're
very large for example the Chinese Development Bank which gave huge amounts of money to Huawei
Huawei would not exist without a guaranteed loan that was over five billion from the Chinese
Development Bank by the way Elon Musk got over five billion from the U.S. government for his
different companies including in the early stage of Tesla was that it was a guaranteed loan from
government so but in China you have just these big chunks of kind of money from institutions
like the Chinese Development Bank in the U.S. they had DARPA they had the National Science
Foundation the Small Business Innovation Research Program the Venture Capital Arm of the CIA
Incutel but it has at least in the U.S. been more around their military industrial complex and what
I've been arguing for is why do we only take things seriously when it's about war and this is
important question today given that we have a terrible tragic war happening but look what happened
even in Germany after months saying there was no money and there was a lot of pressure in government
having to cut its budget 100 billion was found overnight for the war effort that happens all
the time with war because we take it seriously and I'm very anti-war at any war but isn't it
interesting that for war money comes out of the woodwork why doesn't it come out of the woodwork
when we have war on poverty when we want to strengthen our health systems when we want net
zero targets when we have these social problems in our streets so really it's what I've been talking
about for a long time is the need to create a mission-oriented economy around our social
challenges starting with the SDGs that we talked about and what this book the big con
talks about is that that requires capacity and if we continue to consultify that capacity you won't
know how to implement you won't know how to work with others and that's important because you know
I sometimes get accused as being just kind of you know folklorically loving the state I'm like no
I'm the state's kind of I don't want to say biggest enemy but biggest provocateur saying what are you
doing you you can't you know become agile flexible capable and creative unless you actually invest
internally in becoming a learning organization you said you have haters well who are they oh god
I find them very hard to believe if you're a woman if you are progressive if you're lucky enough to
actually get media attention but especially this is the big bit have impact so different governments
or even businesses start to implement some of your ideas are you dangerous if you're just
ranting and no one's listening you're less dangerous so I think when your ideas start to
have impact and I feel very honored because I'm not the only one you know who has some good ideas
I feel honored that I've had the opportunity to work with governments carefully because it's
not just about going to lecture doing a TED talk and then leaving again that's why I set up a whole
institute to take care have teams that help governments implement new policies but also
train because that's the main thing we do we have an educational program you are much more
dangerous to those who would love to see the state less able less not so much large because
I've never been about large versus small state but a more capable state a state that is truly
purpose-oriented a state that knows how to get a good deal in a contract is not great news for
those who are making either a lot of money or having a lot of power by having a weak state
so do you think that some of the people you take target on this book and I know you've said already
many good consultants and you can see the role for certain services not being with inside a firm or
inside a public agency Navarra media has an accountant we don't have an accountant inside
the organization that's something that somebody else does for instance but this trillion is
accounting your core business precisely right that's exactly yeah exactly is governing a digital
platform a core business of a government in order to make sure that the next pandemic it can
actually deal with the infodemic side of the crisis of course yeah this is a trillion dollar
industry though so like you say you putting this in in the crosshairs and you are an influential
person that must put a mark on on your back a little bit with some of these people I mean I've
write up in the financial times for instance perfectly civilized and polite but there was
clearly an undercurrent which is you know don't make too much noise about this industry oh really
I haven't read that have you not read it have they made threats they're gonna come and knock on the
door not threats but this huge this huge vested interest basically that's not having this conversation
yeah I thought that was actually quite funny to be honest I mean the comments that were so defensive
and then all you have to read was the comments that came afterwards by others I mean I almost
didn't have to reply I think the fact that we purposefully we say this several times in the book
that this is just as much a challenge to those that are hiring and that are and that have stopped
investing within their own capacity as it is to those that are making a lot of money by profiting
from those that don't have that capacity it's really a wake-up call to everyone because I truly
believe that in the long run we all will benefit you know the planet will benefit the sustainability
of the planet but also these problems we have around inequality will benefit if we actually
have more capable actors all around Mariana thank you so much for joining us this evening
thank you it's a great book thanks so much congratulations
