Governments like the UK's but also elsewhere in the world are granting new oil and gas
exploration licenses willy-nilly.
So of course the BP's and the Shells, having been talking quite a good game a few years
ago about transitioning, are now like, why did we bother with that?
Governments aren't serious about this at all.
Over recent decades, the price of energy coming from wind or solar has collapsed.
The same is also true, by the way, for energy storage with lithium batteries.
That's why increasingly we see things like electric vehicles, because the economics of
these things add up.
Now, for the optimists out there, they say that these falls in price for renewable technologies
are brilliant, they're all we need, and they are the panacea in terms of addressing the
climate crisis.
And yet, at the very same time, we have seen the percentage of energy coming from non-fossil
fuel sources remaining broadly the same.
So what explains this strange contradiction?
Falling prices and yet, we're not decarbonising particularly quickly.
Today's guest has a pretty interesting hypothesis regarding all of that.
He says we should not be focusing on prices, but profits and simply put, renewable energy
isn't that profitable.
Brett Christophers, welcome to Downstream.
Thanks for having me.
Well, thanks for having me back.
Well, I'm glad you said that, because I had a few colleagues in video.
They were a bit suspicious when I said we're going to talk to somebody about asset management.
It's going to do really well.
Everybody wants to hear about it, and they just didn't believe me, but it ended up getting
a quarter of a million views and counting.
Yeah, amazing.
Amazing.
Great book.
Thank you.
Asset management is also just something that I think people are picking up on.
They are.
Absolutely they are.
Yeah, it's more and more in the news, and it's not going to go away.
Sadly.
Exactly.
But we're talking about a different book today.
We are, but it's not unrelated.
It's not unrelated.
That's good.
That's unrelated.
It's a very technical book, I don't know if I'll put you off.
The price is wrong, why capitalism won't save the planet.
I find it interesting, because there's a bit of a distance between, like I say, a very
technical book, which is very good, because you're really getting to the heart of really
important arguments, as we will over the next hour as well.
But then that is like a very populist, broad, state-based book.
The statement, why capitalism won't save the planet, we will get onto that in a moment.
Good.
Because lots of people say it can.
But I want to start with the basics.
Yes.
Is net zero bullshit?
Wow, what a question to start with.
I don't know.
I think that we are heading in our kind of muddled, convoluted, messy, insufficient way
in that direction globally, albeit at very, very different rates in different places,
and with varying degrees of likelihood of getting somewhere close to it, eventually.
But we'll get close to it, if not there, eventually.
Of course, the question is, what is net zero?
What is, because net zero is not absolute zero, it means you reduce carbon and other
greenhouse gas emissions, but you do other stuff to compensate for that in various ways.
I think the best answer I have to that question is that, to me, the most interesting thing
about net zero is how we are consistently moving away from aspirations of real zero.
If you look, for example-
So real zero and net zero, not the same?
No, because real zero is no emissions, essentially.
Net zero is you still have emissions, but you do other things like sucking carbon out of
the atmosphere or whatever else it might be to offset that.
The thing is, if you look at the reports that get produced by the IPCC, the international
panel on climate change, over time, the reports they produce on their core scenarios of where
they think we are heading and hopefully should be heading, they have gradually gravitated
away from essentially real zero aspirations.
With each iteration, they basically say, if we're going to get to whatever it is plus
two degrees or whatever it's 1.5, 2.5, 15 years ago, they were saying, we'll get there
just by through wind and solar, for example, just by mitigating emissions.
With each new iteration, they say we'll get there mainly with solar and wind, but also
we'll have a bit of carbon capture and storage.
Next iteration, we'll have a bit more carbon capture and storage.
So I think the really important criticism is the criticism that comes from people like
Kevin Anderson, who are very outspoken on this, the climate scientist, who say we are
increasingly banking on the efficacy of technologies which do not yet exist at any significant
scale, rather than banking on technologies which we have and we know that they work.
We are increasing the degree of our bet on technologies that we don't yet have in any
meaningful shape or form at scale and affordability and so on.
And obviously, the next step will be geoengineering.
And as I understand it, that's the kind of, that as many viewers will know the work of
Andreas Maum and I think that's what his next book with Wim Carton is going to be focusing
on, is how we are heading towards a position of where we are essentially at default position
is going to be relying on geoengineering to get us out of the hole we're increasingly
digging.
So fossil fuel combustion stays with us, the emissions stay with us, but we, there are
these hail, Mary.
Do other shit to help us out of the hole.
And we're doing that already to an extent in so much as not geoengineering, but the carbon
sequestration doesn't need to be technology that's not already here because of course
you have this ridiculous phrase, I think, of quote unquote, nature-based solutions,
which is basically planting trees.
Essentially, yeah.
Often it's trees that aren't actually designed for the habitats where you're planting them.
There's not the kind of biodiversity you would associate with wild habitats.
It's the kind of trees you would plant for timber and whatnot.
They're effectively ecological dead zones.
Exactly.
But you've had a load of money flood into this.
People think they can make money off of it, so of course the good and the great are very
enthusiastic about it.
Love it.
They do love it.
Yeah, of course they do.
But you're not optimistic about nature-based solutions?
Well, I mean, I think that the reality is that I'm totally in agreement with the likes
of Kevin Anderson to just say, you know, minimize emissions.
Just focus on minimizing emissions.
You don't want the shit in the atmosphere.
That's what you just don't want, and anything that provides you with the kind of cover to
think that you can continue happily in that merry way with emissions is not a good thing.
So yes, we should be exploring those types of things, and yes, we should be exploring
carbon capture type technologies, but we shouldn't be allowing that to serve as cover for not
doing the things that we should be doing.
And then there are courses that the concern, which kind of fits in with the Jevons paradox
about, you know, the more efficient you are at doing something, the more you do it, rather
than the less you do it.
So for instance, Jevons notices this in the 19th century as an economist.
With regards to coal, you know, the more efficient steam engines became, the more coal you use.
Yep.
Now that's a point we can put a pin in, and that's very relevant for energy.
It is.
But also with regards to carbon sequestration, obviously if that becomes incredibly efficient,
and people say, well, you know, we can burn this shit forever, it doesn't matter.
Yeah, yeah.
And you know, and people living here in the UK, lovely, we can just carry on flying going
out and fantastic.
We'll offset that and we can do it and we can bomb our conscience and we don't have to worry
about it.
So what's wrong with that?
Because I mean, that will sound very appealing.
Oh, nothing can change, but we can bring down CO2, levels of CO2 in the atmosphere.
What's wrong with that?
Well, my understanding is that simply those technologies are very, very limited in their
capacity to do what we hope they can do at scale and in an affordable way.
And so we are, and when I say we, I mean, including here the IPCC forecast that I refer
to, we are trusting that they are going to be able to do much more for us than we know
that they can do.
Essentially, we are betting on something being able to happen and we have no proof of the
fact that it will be able to, whereas we do have technologies that we know work, but
we're just not doing enough of them and things like wind and so will be the classic examples
of that.
And I suppose there's also the argument that, you know, nature is a good in itself.
And if you look at things like biodiversity and the destruction of wild habitats, you
mentioned Andres Mal, you know, his, his perspective on COVID is amazing, which is that
actually this is an outgrowth of our change relationship to the other species.
Yeah, it's a great book, that one.
Great book.
Yeah.
What's it?
War Communism and the, the Corona.
Yeah.
What was it?
Coronavirus, climate emergency or something like that.
It's a good book.
Which is to say that, you know, look, all the pathogens that we presume as being here,
you know, in perpetuity are actually not.
They're all quite recent.
The pathogens are 300,000 years old.
We've had agriculture for 12,000 years and it's in that phase that we've had all of
these pathogens that we think was never to put on measles, you know, that's, that's all
stuff that's a result of species crossover.
Exactly.
Andres, his point is that the more we destroy the natural world, the more of these pathogens
are going to spill over into humans.
So there's a sort of holistic approach that I think underpins all that stuff anyway.
So let's just, let's say that's right.
And let's say that, like you say, the technologies are Hail Mary and it's a bad bet.
You would say let's electrify as much as possible now and let's get that from renewable energy.
So why, why is electrification so critical here?
Why do we want to electrify as much as we can?
Yeah.
So that's, so the way you put it, I think, I think I would phrase it differently.
I would say that the electrification is, is, is a, if not the principal strategy that
the world currently has for climate mitigation to the extent that it's not relying on those
other things.
So to the extent that, that we are attempting to mitigate existing emissions, electrification
is at the heart of it.
And it's really important to understand why electrification and why electricity are so,
and why electricity are so important.
So if we step back a set, because I think this is really useful for people to understand
and some of this is going to be really obvious to people, but they'll, some of it won't be
obvious, at least not to everyone.
So if we think about just greenhouse gas emissions in general, think about that.
The totality of greenhouse gas emissions, about 75% of that is carbon dioxide.
If you then focus just on carbon dioxide, about 75% of that, again, of that 75% is from
the combustion of fossil fuels, so oil, natural gas, and coal.
And so as everyone knows, the combustion of fossil fuels, that's why that we talk about
that because it's the heart of the problem of anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions,
focusing on that 75% of 75%, and the biggest part of it is the electricity sector.
So electricity generation is the biggest source of emissions from the burning of fossil
fuels, principally natural gas and coal.
So that's why decarbonising the power sector is so important.
That's why everyone talks about solar and wind and nuclear, which we can talk about,
because that's how you decarbonise the power sector, it's really important.
However, it's because of what you refer to as electrification, the electricity sector
is actually even more important than that.
Because the way the world is principally approaching this is to say, look, we have those electricity
sector emissions.
We also have emissions from things like transportation and industrial processes and things like that.
How are we going to decarbonise them?
And the way that we are typically thinking about doing that is to say, so take vehicle
transportation as an example, so cars and trucks, which historically run on internal
combustion engines by burning gasoline.
So in theory, you could do two different things.
You could either switch to a different non-carboniferous fuel, like a biofuel of something, ethanol,
something like that, or you switch to a motor which is basically a charged battery and charge
it through electricity.
And that's kind of what we're doing.
And it's the same thing with industrial processes and buildings as much as possible.
The strategy is basically run as much as we can off electricity and then generate that
electricity through low carbon or zero carbon sources.
So that makes the electricity sector even more important to the climate problem than
it already is because it's going to get much bigger because we're electrifying everything.
So electricity consumption is going to go to much higher levels than we currently have,
which makes it doubly important that we decarbonize it.
So electricity really is the kind of the heart of the problem because if we don't decarbonize
it, we're in even more trouble than we already are.
And I think the point here that I would make is that we're not doing anything.
You know, people will look at charts for renewable energy growth worldwide and they'll think,
this looks awesome.
The charts are, you know, sharply upwards, both in terms of the amount of new renewables
capacity that's being installed and the amount of electricity that we are generating from
renewable sources.
However, the problem is that because overall electricity consumption is going up so sharply,
that renewables growth is not proving enough.
So fossil fuel electricity generation is also still growing every year.
What I've been saying for a number of years now, it's going to peak this year, it's going
to peak this year, but it still hasn't peaked, it's still going up.
So our emissions from electricity generation are still going up, despite the fact that,
you know, we're two or three decades into the so-called renewables revolution.
So that's kind of a snapshot of why electricity is so important, I think.
I'm going to interrupt this interview with Brett Christopher's for just one moment.
I do hope you're enjoying it.
As you may know right now, we are in the middle of a general election here in the UK.
That will happen on July 4th, but of course there is a campaign before then.
My view is that Navarro Media is without peer.
When it comes to covering that election, the policies, the personalities, the politics,
we have no equivalent in my view.
That is from our daily coverage on Navarro Live, that's weekdays, it's 6pm, it's our
articles, our podcasts, our social first content, our news and comment, it's all there.
And my goodness for this general election, we're really ramping things up.
Imagine if you will, a Lamborghini Contash, the light is red, Ash Sarkar is at the wheel,
she's got her foot to the pedal, really getting it going, and that's what we need to do.
We need our supporters to help us get our acceleration right up, come right out of the
blocks, because as we've said, since this project first started, you cannot have a different
kind of politics without a different kind of media, new media for a different politics.
Now that won't arrive on July 5th, but we certainly think we're moving the dial left
on a ton of issues, and in elections that is especially true.
If you want to be a part of that, you know what to do.
Go to navarromedia.com forward slash support, the link is in the description below.
This is a momentous set of elections, and I think it's a huge opportunity to shift the
political conversation in this country into a much better direction.
Be a part of it.
Go to navarromedia.com forward slash support.
You got a statistic in the book, which basically says, you know, global consumption of fossil
fuels for electricity is actually quite stagnant over the last 10 years, primarily because
of India, China, and obviously demand going up.
And obviously, and it's something we don't talk about enough, is Africa.
You know, Africa's population is set to double between 9 and 2050.
That's going to have extraordinary consequences to the rest of the world, particularly because
the rest of the world is getting older and looking at population decline.
It's going to change our fundamental notion of humanity and the global community in really
powerful ways.
But in terms of energy, obviously, you're going to have more people in sub-Saharan Africa
and more people consuming more energy than they're presently do.
So we could be looking at maybe a doubling, or maybe just under, of energy globally between
now and say the mid 2050s, 2060.
Yeah.
I think the International Energy Agency, if I recall correctly, is somewhere between
two to three times where we are at at 2020 globally.
Yeah.
I mean, two times is the optimistic.
Yeah.
Exactly.
I mean, there's not much, much about what this is about, but in that context, basically,
I presume you would say, well, look, the next two decades are going to look like the last
two decades, which is, we'll decarbonise a ton of stuff, but we'll still be burning
more fossil fuels.
Yeah.
I think that's, if I had to guess, that that would be where we're going, and we can talk
more about this, because I think it's really, really important.
And the reason I'm, one of the main reasons I'm relatively pessimistic about this is that
it is simply stated, but it's quite complex to get one's head around.
And it's this, which is that the parts of the world, which is essentially the parts
of the world you've just been talking about, the parts of the world where the challenge
of decarbonising the electricity sector is economically greatest, are precisely the parts
of the world where it's most urgent, that decarbonisation proceeds rapidly.
Which is to say, it's those parts of the world where investment will have a disproportionately
important effect.
So, and what I mean by that, and it's important to spell this out, is that the reality is
that kind of what happens in Europe and North America is obviously important.
But in terms of future global greenhouse gas emissions trajectories, it's way more important
what happens in China and India and Africa and Vietnam than what happens here.
And that's for two reasons.
One of which you said is because that's where energy demand growth is concentrated.
So if you've got energy demand growing, then obviously if you're still fossil fuel intensive,
that's much more damaging than if your fossil fuel intensive in energy demand is not growing.
So that's one thing.
And then the other thing is that for very understandable reasons, it tends to be in
those parts of the world that the electricity sectors are still most fossil fuels intensive.
So here are some figures that will just put a complexion on this that I think is important.
So I live in Sweden, it's almost fully decarbonised, it's power sector.
Something like 90% of electricity now is generated from non-carbon sources.
I think it's like roughly 30, 30, 30 nuclear wind hydro, about 10% is natural gas.
So Sweden's almost there on the power sector, at least.
UK, Germany, US, quite a way behind that.
Germany's pretty awful, lots of coal burning still.
US, lots of coal and natural gas.
UK, lots of natural gas.
Scotland, very good though.
Yeah, we'll talk about Scotland because it's a big part of the story.
So they're a way behind, but they're still a long way ahead of other parts of the world.
China, 65% of electricity generation is coal, India 75%, South Africa 90%, other countries 95% to 98%.
And so it's most urgent that investment in decarbonisation happens there.
A, because they're fossil fuel intensive, very fossil fuel intensive.
B, that's where energy demand growth is going to be concentrated.
But that's where the challenge is greatest economically for reasons that we can talk about.
And that's the real problem as I see it.
So let's take an, again, an optimistic slant on this.
Firstly, on China.
I mean, China, again, we've got some great statistics.
I'm sure you can bring it off the top of your head.
For most of the last six, seven years, about 50% of sort of additional solar capacity being added worldwide is in China.
It's a similar story with wind.
Yep.
It's blowing the United States out of the water.
100%.
Blowing the EU as well, but not quite as much.
I mean, it's making it, you know, the US is a clown show compared to China.
But obviously you have increasing demand.
CO2 emissions per person is still going up.
Yes.
But the optimistic story is this.
CO2 emissions per person in China may reach a peak.
Well, the plan was for 2030.
Yep.
But it's looking actually like the next couple of years potentially.
Yep.
According to Xi.
So that's one, one positive thing.
Absolutely.
Secondly, and this is probably where you're going to say that's completely wrong.
There's this optimistic account of Africa, which is like, well, they didn't have landline connections,
but they just, they skipped that bit and they did the mobile telephony.
And they're going to do the same with energy.
They're going to skip, you know, national grids with fossil fuels.
They're going to go straight to distributed solar.
And on the one hand, that sounds absurd.
But on the other hand, actually within the tropics,
you do have an extraordinary amount of exposure to solar energy.
Absolutely.
It's a brilliant place to have it.
Yeah.
So what's wrong with that account?
And that optimistic account of actually things are far better than the picture you're painting.
Yeah.
I mean, I think, I think that both of those parts of the story have a strong degree of truth,
actually.
I think that China is a, you know, China is hugely paradoxical and for all sorts of different
reasons and, and, and it, and it, and it's, and right now it's, it's obviously the,
the good news story on renewables, but it's also the bad news story on kind of new coal
fire plants as well, which is, which is simply due to the fact simply is probably the wrong word,
but it's due to the fact that the energy demand is growing still so strongly there,
both from, you know, residential, commercial, industrial and so on.
And, and, and so renewables in and of themselves are not proving sufficient for that, which is,
which is partly just a scale issue, but it's also partly about the different nature of the energy
source. But, but China is important to talk about. And what's, what I think is important is to
understand the political economy of what's, how it's doing things very differently to how
we're doing it in the West. There's some, there's some commonalities, but there's some big
important differences as well. I think on the, I think on Africa, I think that is the big hope,
actually. And, and, you know, I see conflict, conflicting accounts about how credible that
story is about the extent to which it will be possible to build out a clean energy future there
that does kind of leapfrog the kind of historical problems that we've, that are kind of almost
a sunk cost here in, in, in the West, where we have a very kind of centralized grid based
energy system, which locks us into a certain kind of future that may not be necessary in Africa,
as you say, if it moves towards more distributed energy resources, then maybe it's possible to
do that. I mean, I think there are, there are reasons to think, to think both positively and
negatively about that story. I think right now it's too early to tell which direction it's,
which direction it's going. But, but possibly that's true, possibly that's true.
And, and, and I think that will be, that will be very, very important. And let's not forget that,
you know, just, I mean, I think there's a connection between those two stories, right,
that we just talked about. So if you look at what China did in 2023, when it was, you know, set all
kinds of records for new renewable installation, something like 30% of that renew renewable
installation in China was rooftop solar. So it wasn't commercial, large-scale industrial
power plants, wind and solar farms, it was rooftop domestic solar, 30%, huge, all sorts of state
subsidy necessary for that, but that's fine. So part of the China story is precisely that
distributed energy story, which is, which one would hope would be replicated in Africa as well.
And Vietnam as well, right? This extraordinary, again, it's one of these stories in Europe,
in the West, we don't really hear, like there is a heroic effort going into solar right now in
Vietnam. There is. And it's not on our radar. I mean, I think in Europe, we're doing everything.
And you know, we've got the, you go in Germany or Italy, you might see some solar cells.
Great. But in, in, in, in Vietnam, they're doing what those countries did in 20 years,
they're doing it in three or four years. Yeah, absolutely. And, and obviously the read, I mean,
to take, to take, I mean, China is the best example of this, but the, the reason that China can and
is doing things that are a much more rapid clip and on a much, much greater scale than is happening
in the West is simply because it's essentially a state project, right? I mean, to take wind,
something like 95% of the, the wind deployment sector, by which I mean the entities that are
involved, not on the manufacturing side, building the turbines and, and, and building the cells
and modules, although it's not hugely dissimilar there, but on the deployment side, by which I
mean developing the wind and solar farms, owning and operating them and selling the electricity
that they generate, something like 95% of that is state owned enterprises. They are
being financed by state owned banks who are themselves having their debt subsidized by
the state owned central bank. And all of these entities are, at least if, if my understanding
of this is correct, and it's a second hand understanding based on kind of the work of
China experts, you know, heck of a lot more about it than I do, all of these entities are only,
what's the best word to use, modestly being driven by profit motives of one kind or another.
They are to one degree or another working at the behest of prevent provincial and or
central government in China. They are being directed very substantially in terms of what
they're doing now. And if you have the, if you have the willpower and if you have the resources
and you have the determination and the political intent to do that sort of thing on a huge scale
and quickly, well, you can do that. But in the West, where we are essentially relying on the
private sector to do this, and we're relying on the kind of quote unquote, coordinating
mechanisms of markets to do this, it's an entirely different project. You're expecting,
you know, the independent decisions of thousands of different entities to kind of add up
to this very complicated thing that we call a transition. And not surprisingly, it's not
really happening in the same way that it is where you have a top down approach to this that can be
very, very coordinated and very, very joined up because you have one entity that is overseeing
all of it. I mean, we had this debate recently on of our live, Michael and I, and he was saying
China is a capitalist society. And I said, it's not a capitalist society, it's a market society.
But there's a huge difference between that and a capitalist society.
I mean, I totally agree. And even then, is it a market society? I mean, even this is the
back, I mean, if you look at what's going on in the energy sector, I would be quite reticent to
call the mechanisms whereby and the context within which electricity is bought and sold,
markets in anything like the shape of which we're using.
The firms that are building, you know, the firms that are making the PV cells,
that's true, which would take over the world if we weren't imposing tariffs on them. That is all
being done by private actors and competition. And I think this is something that Michael and I
really discreet on. And I said, it's a market society. But the point is, it's not capitalist
because Eric E. Lee is a political scientist, Chinese political scientists, he said, we're
not a capitalist society because yes, we have markets, but capital does not determine how our
society allocates resources. The interests of capital and not some of us with the interests
of the ruling class. Our ruling class has national political priorities, which sometimes-
100%. Which is odds with capital. And I think for people in the West, that's a really hard thing
to engage with. It is. You have markets, but you don't allow capital to determine political
priorities. So I was on a panel recently, and there was a sociologist, a Chinese sociologist
who works in the US called Karl Chan, who's been doing a really interesting research
about Chinese state-owned enterprises. And I think the concept he uses to try to capture
what it is they do, I think he calls it managed competition. What's the chap's name?
Karl Chan, C-H-A-N. And it's a really evocative and useful way of thinking about this, that it's
just not competition in the way we think about it. It's a managed process towards a particular end
to which competition is being mobilized in some way, but only in a very limited capacity to
make sure that these things are happening. It was quite interesting hearing basically Chinese
automotive manufacturers, they were being asked, are you gunning for the US? Are you gunning for
Tesla? And they're like, we have enough problems with our own people back home, like BYD are terrified
of the next four or five companies beneath them. And of course, if you look at that from a sort of
classical, a neoclassical sort of political economy perspective, you'd be like, well,
those are exactly the sorts of incentives which are meant to be driving firms and
industrialists. And it's so strange that China and its firms are talking in that language,
and yet the US is talking in a very protectionist language. It is interesting.
National champions. China is not talking about national champions. No, no, no, no, no, no.
No, because they've already, they're already the champions. They're the international champions.
Yeah, this is another one. This is a bit of an aside, but again, you're going to be a lot more
familiar with the reality of this because you do all these academic panels and whatnot. But
we have a friend here at Navarro who sometimes works with us on sort of helping us out, kind of
like a consultant guy. And they were recently in, I think, Vietnam. And they kept on seeing
all these brands they just never heard of. And then they were like, what's that? Google that,
Google that, Google that. And then they said, look, after a while, I realized that like the
world's number one, two, three producer for dozens of, you know, commodities, which they've
granted, they're all East Asian, right? You know, they're Chinese or if they're not Chinese,
they'll be Japanese or Taiwanese. And I was like, yeah, we do live in a little closeted world in
some respects. But I think Europeans don't realize. No, of course they don't. No, absolutely not.
Very stretch. So you're optimistic, but also in a way pessimistic about China. I suppose one good
way of looking at China is we would be really screwed if they weren't doing all the things.
They would be. I mean, the way, I mean, not least in terms of, I mean, there's, for one thing,
there's the fact that they are making progress domestically on renewables rollout. Fantastic.
But there's also the fact that let's not forget that it's unimaginable that in places like Europe
that to the extent that it's happened so far, that the energy transition, the decarbonization of
power sector would have gone as far, as fast, and at such a low, relatively low cost as it has,
were it not from the fact that it's China that drove down the cost of the technologies, right?
I mean, there's no, there's no way it would have gone as far as fast or at such low cost without
China doing what it's done. We've, we collectively have been benefiting environmentally and economically
from what China's been doing for the last 15 to 20 years.
That is such a good point. So people are saying, and we'll talk about, obviously,
that the fallen price for renewables, how it's competitive with fossil fuels, and a big part
of that, that disinflationary pressure is the fact that stuff is being manufactured in China.
Almost all about China. And that's very rarely in the conversation.
No, no, no, no. Because we talk about energy security, but we can have, we can have our cake
and eat it. It can be cheap and it can be energy secure. Hold on a second. It's cheap because it's
not made here. It's actually made outside of the planet.
Yeah, absolutely. And obviously, what's going on in the US right now, and again,
there's a bit of a tangent, but it's important is, is that the Biden administration is trying to
thread the needle between not wanting to, not wanting to entirely give up those economic gains
that have been delivered and continued to be delivered by China, while at the same time benefiting
domestic industry. So they're trying to play this delicate game where they're like saying
to the renewable energy developers, look, if you, if you source your technology locally,
rather than from China, from local manufacturers, you get an extra 10% credit on your, on your
renewables development. And, but I, you know, based on the conversations I've had with,
with people in the US, it's still entirely unclear whether that incremental benefit
is proving sufficient to persuade them to source locally or whether it still makes
economic sense for them to source from China. Yeah, they don't know yet.
Well, because you had these recent tariffs announced by Biden, right?
Yeah, that was, that was a lot. They've changed it. They've introduced some new tariffs last week.
So 100% on automotive, you know, so electric vehicles will have 100% tariffs. So if I'm
buying a BYD car and it's $30,000 in China, I'm gonna have to pay $30,000 tariff on it.
Yep, exactly. And I still think that car might be competitive.
Yeah, it could well be. Which is the terrifying thing for the US car industry.
Yeah, no, absolutely. Yeah. So they're, they're playing a very challenging game over there.
Which, which, which, I mean, I understand that game politically. I mean, it makes,
it makes, it's easy to understand where they're coming from.
Politically, yes. But then you can't say climate change is very economically
environmentally. No, you can't say climate change is existential, but then put 50% tariffs on PV
cells because you don't believe that then, do you? But then, but then the whole, I mean,
let's be honest about this, but the whole, the whole climate policy thing in the US perspective
is entirely contradictory. By which I mean, you know, I think the Inflation Reduction Act
is actually pretty good policy for the most part. And I think that given the, given the political
conditions under which Biden has been operating, it was probably about as good as, as he could have
got through at the time. And yet, you know, one day Biden will be extolling the benefits of
the Inflation Reduction Act. And yet the very next day, he'll be like calling out OPEC
for introducing new production quotas to dampen oil and gas production because Biden is concerned
that that constraint in global oil and gas supply will have, you know,
will put the price of gasoline up 3 cents. And it means that he won't, he won't get voted into
power. So he's telling OPEC to open the pumps. So it's just like, it's the most contradictory
thing imaginable. And, and, and that's the thing I think we have to grapple with is that the whole
kind of US political, economic, ecological complex is fundamentally written with contradiction.
And you compare that to Europe, which for the most part has proportional representation.
At least you can build in a consensus around a certain policy direction.
That's true. Whereas in the US, you have like, I mean, it's crazy, you have Biden saying,
I'm a green champion. And then, and then, but then, and it's, and you understand why,
they'll be saying, look, if inflation is 5% in November, we're out, we're gone.
100%. Right. And they know that. And so you have these wildly diverging policies, messages.
And we, we in the West, but especially in America live very carbon intensive lifestyles.
And so inflation is, is a carboniferous phenomenon in the US more than anywhere else.
And it's really important to remember that. So the inflation discussion is a significant part
of carbon discussion in the US. And it's very, very important to remember that politically,
as well as economically. Going back to Europe, you mentioned the Inflation Reduction Act,
the IRA Act, IRA Act. I can't say that without, yeah, having memories of growing up in Croydon
in the 1970s. Yeah. And I've, you know, Biden's, Biden's famous Irish heritage. I do, I'm sure
he probably finds it quite, you know, you know, interesting. Yes. You've got the IRA Act, you've
got the CHIPS Act, that's not really related. And at the same time as the IRA Act, which is this,
you know, huge amount of money basically going into re-sure lots of manufacturing in the UK,
but also it's ostensibly about decarbonisation agenda. At the same time, you have obviously
Russia, Ukraine. And what you're seeing right now is that sort of amazing statistic in the
FT recently, I think it's like 45% of German manufacturing companies are looking at setting
up shop in the US, because energy in the, in Germany compared to the US is six times more
expensive. Six times more. Wow. I hadn't seen that statistic. Yeah. Industrial energy. I think
it was five to six times more. Wow. But then on top of that, you have the IRA, you know, subsidies
or whatever, tax, you know, breaks and whatnot. All of a sudden, you know, these industrial firms
that have been in Germany for like 800 years thinking, oh my God, a Texas, you know. Germany
really isn't heading in a good direction in any sense, in any shape or form right now, is it?
So yeah. Okay. So explain that. So what, and where does US policies fit on this? So is that,
is that an intentional effort by the United States government to basically say, you know what,
we're going to reindustrialize on the back of deindustrialization in Germany,
or is it not that deep? Am I being too conspiratorial? I'm not sure. I'm not sure it's that deep,
but certainly on the manufacturing side, US policymakers have been, have been making an
active effort to woo European companies, for sure. And not just on the manufacturing side,
but also on the renewable energy development side. They've, you know, they've been trying to get
the Iberdrohlers and the Aarstedts and so on much more interested in the US as a place for
investment in new, in new wind and solar power, as well as the manufacturing side of the business.
But I'm not sure it's, I'm not sure it's that deep. But you know, the EU, sorry, has been through,
you know, a very difficult few years on the energy front in a way that the US largely avoided.
And I think there are, there are still lingering effects from that. And it's important to think
about what's going on in Germany in relation to what happened in 2021 to 2022, which, which didn't
really happen in the US. The energy crisis was a, was a phenomenon that was, it wasn't limited to
the EU, but to the extent that it was significant outside the EU, it was, it was significant more
to the East, not least in China than it was in the US. So the, the EU occupies this kind of strange
sort of third provisional position in the kind of game between China and the US. The EU is in this
uncertain position where it seems to be neither one thing or the other. It doesn't seem to be in
a position to, to be calling any shots, but it's also not reacting as far as I can tell in the
kind of deeply protectionist way that the US is reacting. Yeah. So it's interesting.
There was a great quote a year or two ago, basically saying that the energy crisis of,
you know, 2022, 2023, was it 2022, 2022?
21-22.
21-22. It's, you know, post COVID, but also, you know, in relation to Germany in particular,
post Ukraine war. And they said, look, the last several years have basically brought into focus
that there are two kinds of countries, those with energy and those without. Yeah. And China
strategy is, you know, go massive on nuclear renewables, coal, the US is where we have tons of
energy anyway. And Europe doesn't have any energy, but it's not adopted a sort of strategy like you
say. No, I mean, Germany was the most extreme example of sort of essentially relying on Russia
for energy. And that was true to a lesser extent, but also not to an insignificant extent in other
parts of Europe as well. I mean, it just, I mean, it's, in that context, it is worth going back to
China and the question of trying to understand its investment, that kind of hybrid state
capitalist investment, that it's been undertaking in its renewables industry,
both the manufacturing side and the deployment side in the last couple of decades,
and to think, well, what kind of strategy is that? And it's kind of a three-fold strategy,
by which I mean it's been partly a strategy that is about environmentalism. It's been partly a
strategy which is an industrial strategy, trying to build global champions, global leadership in a
particular sector. But it's also been a strategy about energy security. And by my understanding,
it's the reverse order, actually, that the energy security has been was the kind of the main strategy,
and arguably still is the main strategy, then industrial strategy, and that the environmental
part of it, I mean, it's become more important. You know, 20 years ago, it wasn't a significant
part of the strategy. But even today, my suspicion is it's still not the first of those three, and
maybe not even the second of those three. And it's been about energy security. And so, you know,
what happened in Europe, it's a different slant on the same question. But what happened in 2022
was there was, you know, a bit of a fillip in renewables investment in Europe. And a lot of
people were saying, oh, you know, this is further evidence of the fact that renewables are forging
ahead because they're very, very cheap and they're economically competitive. And no, not that wasn't
really what happened. It was about energy security, right? If you have renewable and solar power,
you're not reliant on importing fuel from overseas, you're not reliant on a rush or whoever else it
might be. So I think it was an energy security issue that was driving that investment.
What you just said is the crux of the book. And we'll get to that in a moment about
We haven't really got to the book yet.
No, it's critical because it's not about prices. We're getting to a point of price parity with
regards to fossil fuels and renewables. But that's not the point. But particularly on Europe.
Yes. I mean, that was the, you know, what we saw in 2022, 2023 was 101 think pieces about
finally Europe is on the stage. Not only was it meant to remilitarize, okay, what's happening there.
It was meant to be rebuilding its domestic industry. It's doing the opposite, actually.
It was also meant to be getting serious about renewals and nuclear energy.
Yes. Not just upticks. And there has been much progress made. And there is progress
is being made. But it's not decarbonizing as quickly as we were told. And why is that?
Because like you said, Russia, Russia's gone for the near future. And Germany's industrial
prowess was literally, well, not entirely based on, but it was significantly based on
cheap Russian energy. That's now gone. But there doesn't seem to be the political leadership
in places like Germany to say, you know what, we now need to build a ton of wind, solar, nuclear.
And you've got a green, red coalition there. You think, well, this, this should be the perfect
set of circumstances for Germany to become a world leader in renewable energy. So it's not
happening. No, it's not. Why? So the, the, the, the narrative that you will typically hear about this
across the board actually politically and almost analytically as well, but certainly
from both left and right is that, is that the problem is found in the realm of for want of a
better kind of label politics and planning and bureaucracy. So you'll see, you'll have, you'll
have seen a thousand think pieces saying, look, the problem is that there's all this money waiting
to go into renewables, but it's being held up by, you know, obstructionist local planning
authorities. It's being held up by slow processes to get planning permission. It's being held up by
long queues to get grid connections. It's being held up by Nimbism. And you know what, it is held
up by all of those things. Absolutely. However, the other crucial part of that key of that main
dominant narrative about this says what it's not being held up by is the economics. The economics
has been solved because the price of generating electricity from solar and wind has come down
sharply historically and it has over time to a point of where, where as you said it's as
cheap or often in many places even cheaper to generate solar and wind power from than it is
to generate than it is by burning natural gas or coal. So that's the key narrative is that
it's all these other things. It's not the economics. My argument in the book is that,
yes, it's all those other things, but it's also the economics. And, and, and the argument there
is that the, the thinking specifically on the question of generating price, which is what all,
all those think pieces do and they reproduce the same charts showing the same cost curves coming
down over time is the wrong prism to, through which to think about it. And that we, we can
understand much more about the industry and about why things are going too slowly if we focus on the
question of profitability rather than price. So that's, that's the argument I made. And so
it's a complex, as you said, right at the outset, there's a lot of detail in it. It's quite wonky,
it's quite complex, but the actual main argument is really straightforward, which is, which is this,
it's like in profitability terms, renewables deployment is actually quite a problematic
proposition. And I'll explain what I mean by that in a second. And that's a problem because we're
relying on the profit on the private sector and the private sector is driven above all else by
profitability expectations. If, if its expectations are on profitability are not adequate, it will
not invest or it will not invest on the, on the sufficient sale. So my argument is like, we are,
you need to understand that a, we are relying mainly on solar and wind. So yes, there are
countries in which there's much more of a role being given to nuclear. And even in some countries,
geothermal and hydro and so on. But for the most part, the world is kind of betting the house on
solar and wind to a significant extent. And second, the world is banking on the private sector,
not China, but elsewhere in the world, government policy is not to do it itself. It's to say,
we expect you the private sector to do it, we will not do in the right direction through various
incentives and all other and subsidy mechanisms and so on, where you're not doing it quickly enough.
We'll provide you that help, but we're not going to do it. You're going to do it. We're expecting
you to do it. That's fine if the private sector consistently sees sufficient profitability in
that proposition to do it quickly and at scale, but it, but it doesn't. And you talk to people
in the industry and they're like, no, of course not. But policymakers are completely deaf to
this. And I think it, for all sorts of reasons, but partly because they've been persuaded by those
simplistic arguments about falling prices. And to them, it's like, well, surely if the prices
have fallen, the profits must be there, the profits must be going up. But it's just not true.
So it's a problematic industry in terms of profitability expectations. And that's the
kind of core of the book as to why that is. And it is a bit of a wonky book.
We like wonky books. Oh, yeah. Well, yeah, I hope so.
We love wonky books. I mean, don't let that put you off. I think particularly, look, for anybody
who wants to know the subject well, and the point is, let you say, the core proposition at the heart
of the book is a very important one. And, you know, it's like, I think it's really important.
Yeah. Well, it's, it's like the, the arrow that goes through, you know, Harold Goodwin's
desire, Hastings, you know, it's, it's, that's it. It's game over for that worldview of, well,
actually private firms, the private sector with the profit motive can solve the climate crisis.
Exactly. They can't. It's not about costs. It's about, it's not about prices or other.
It's about profit. Yeah. And obviously, and obviously, profitability shaped by
generating prices. That's part of the equation, but it's not the totality of it. That's the issue.
Yeah. And I actually feel, feel like there are some similarities here with the debates I've had
recently with people in regards to, you know, privatised utilities of things like mail, rail,
water, and they're arguing for, you know, the private sector should control these. And I go,
look, best case scenario, best case scenario, they're very low margin. You want it to be very
competitive. They're very physically hard to administer. They're not very exciting. No.
Like, why do you want the private sector here? Like what, and they're also equally very important.
Go. 100%. Go make like shirts. I mean, it's true, right?
Or glasses or mobile phones or coffee machine or like a scalable social network where you can
10X your, knock yourself out. Where you can do something different and better.
Yes. What water can't do that. No. And I feel like renewables are in a similar situation.
100%. It's just, it's just electrons. Yeah. Just leave it alone.
I know. I know. Yeah. It's bizarre. And the thing is right.
I think the other thing that, you know, one of the ways I think it's useful to think about this
is that governments for very understandable reasons, going back to what we were talking
about inflation, they want electricity to be affordable. They want to be cheap. Rightly so.
Well, in general, doing stuff at rock bottom prices to consumers isn't normally a recipe for
massive, for massive profitability. I mean, I know that's a generalization, but it's worth
keeping in mind. And so what's happened is that governments have designed electricity markets
and they have designed the support mechanisms that they provide to renewables operators
precisely in such a way as to maximize the likelihood that the economic gains associated
with kind of falling production costs thanks to China are not captured by nasty capitalist firms,
but they're passed on, they're passed on to consumers. So does that. So what does that mean
in terms of capitalist incentives to invest in those things? Well, if they're not able to capture
it, because then of course they're not going to do it at the scale we want, because, because
they're being passed on to consumers, which is what we want. But I mean, there's politicians that
don't stay honestly, and it's something I just, my mind is blown every time I think about it,
but it's particularly a problem on the center left. But it's a problem in the center,
is they genuinely seem to think that private enterprises do things out of the goodness of
their heart. I mean, it's, it's just wild. They want to make lots of money and they want to make as
much money as possible. And here's the other thing, right? As quickly as possible. They do.
And the other, the other point I would make before we get, before if we want to get into the meat of
it is this, which is that profitability, economic returns are always a relative phenomenon rather
than an absolute phenomenon. And what I mean by that is that for any capitalist actor, there is
always a kind of palette of different investment opportunities available to them. And so it's
much more, so I give some figures in the book around kind of the average profitability of,
of renewables deployment, which of course varies across time and space. But most studies point
to somewhere in a region of kind of five to eight percent returns. Now, in isolation, that number
doesn't really mean anything. It only really means anything if you think about the, the alternative
returns that are available to the relevant actors from doing different things. Now, and I want to
just give, give two sort of comparators that I think are really valuable to think about. The first
of those is this, which is to say that five to eight percent look pretty good when interest rates
were zero. But when interest rates are like five percent, and you can get five, six, even seven
percent returns from sticking your money in the bank or investing it in US risk-free US government
bonds, why on earth would you go to the hassle of building a wind farm with the major risk that
investment entails when there are risk-free opportunities available to make essentially
the same returns? That's the first comparator, really important to think about. And that's one
of the reasons why the industry is really struggling right now is because of the macroeconomic
environment has changed fundamentally in the last couple of years with the uptick in inflation in
interest rates. So that's the first comparison. Second comparison is to focus on, you know,
perhaps the key constituency that governments in their wisdom, let me use, use that word
advisedly have been kind of assuming would take the lead on the renewable transition,
which is the big oil and gas companies. So they've been hoping that the BP's and the
shells and the exons would kind of, you know, magically transition away from oil and gas to
offshore wind. You know, they know how things work offshore. They'll switch their rigs for
offshore wind farms. Well, over the last 10 years or so, those companies have not got out of bed for
oil and gas projects that deliver anything less than 15% returns. That's what they expect and
that's what they get. And the idea that companies that are used to 15% plus returns in their core
business are somehow going to make the decision to switch to businesses with returns like a third
of that level is absurd. It's economically madness to think that that's going to happen.
And here's the kicker. As long as they think that those above average returns are going to
continue to be available, right? If they thought that those 15% returns are going to disappear
because of, for example, meaningful government action on things like carbon taxes,
then of course they would think about alternative investment options. But everything that's
happened in the last five years or so has shown those companies that governments are not serious
about clamping down on their traditional business. In fact, the opposite governments like the UK's
but also elsewhere in the world are granting new oil and gas exploration licenses willy-nilly.
So of course the BPs and the Shells, having been talking quite a good game a few years ago
about transitioning and now are like, why did we bother with that? Governments aren't serious
about this at all. They have no intention of stranding our oil and gas assets anytime in the
next 20 or 30 years. So we're just going to carry on as we can because we know those returns are
going to continue to be available. And it's not just why would they adopt a lower rate of return.
It's why would they spend a hell of a lot of money? Why would they invest in a whole different
cadre of employee? Why would they dump a whole bunch of human capital value with regards to like
engineering know-how and whatnot, get rid of all that so we can earn less money? Nobody's going to
do that. And again, it goes back to some core ideological presumptions of our political class
and our media class, which is that businesses always write, markets always work, and they
literally cannot get their heads around businesses do things for profit. If it's not profitable,
it's not going to work. And something that's, it's not there in the book. It's kind of implicit,
or maybe it is, maybe I didn't see it. It's something I thought about a lot, although it's in my book
when I talk about, for the automated luxury communism, when I talk about energy, is that you
have with wind, with solar, with storage, permanent price declines. So you have deflation. And again,
if you want to make a profit, that's a real problem. Permanently falling prices is a really
bad thing. If you want to make money, it's great for the consumer. But again,
there's this tension isn't really obvious to people who are making the policies.
No, no. And you listen to, you listen to the, you know, the Labour government in waiting,
talking about this. And they're, and it's a really strange thing. They're kind of like, well,
we'll develop a new renewable energy generator, great British energy. And the whole idea behind
it as they seem to be articulating it is like, because the renewables business is swimming in
profits, and so we'll have this public entity that will capture those profits while delivering
really cheap energy. And it's like, what are you talking about? So it's not swimming in profits?
No, no, it's absolutely not. And that's why the investment isn't happening.
And actually, one thing that you mentioned just now is one of the important explanations for why
that is. And so let's talk about that. So you were saying, look, the prices have been consistently
coming down. And, and they have that chart, that chart I talked about in terms of the cost of
generating electricity from wind and solar shows consistent price declines. And so you would think,
so let's imagine you are a wind energy generator, and you've been in business for like 20 years.
And as your, as your costs go down, your generating costs go down over time,
simple economics would say, well, my costs are going down the cost of genera of actually
generating the power. So my profits are going to be going up accordingly, fine, you know,
lovely jubbly. But that assumes that you have the capacity to capture and privatize those growing
economic efficiencies. Now, the reality of the, of the electricity sector is that you now in many,
in many, if not most parts of the world, but certainly in the UK, the electricity generation
sector, which is largely a self standing sector, it's been cleaved off from transmission and
distribution and retail. And in particular, the renewable energy generation sector is incredibly
competitive. There are thousands of entities in that market, they compete purely on price
selling into really, really competitive wholesale markets. So what happens when price, when, when
costs decline, well, they compete those cost gains away. And those cost gains get passed downstream
to transmission and distribution entities and retailers and in large part, all the way to
consumers, precisely in the way governments hope they do. But if generators can't capture and privatize
the upsides of those growing cost efficiencies, why would they invest in the technologies in the
first place? Because they know that because of that competition, we Marx called it the coercive
law of competition, right? They're coerced to engage in this activity, but competition forces them
to pass those things downstream. And, and we have, you know, in the UK, many people will have heard
of the subsidy scheme that exists for wind, for offshore wind, in particular in the UK,
which is the contracts for different scheme. And as I said earlier, you have this kind of,
you have this intensification of competition, which is built into that system. So it's worth just
talking a little bit about how that happens. So if the government says, okay, we're going to award
these new offshore wind licenses off for new renewables development. What happens is that
different generating companies will will, there's an auction process, where effectively what happened
is they bid against each other for this contract, where the government will say, the government or
a government backed entity says, we will, we, we enter this contract to buy the electricity that
you generate at a fixed price, essentially fixed price for the next 12 years or so. And so one
company will bid for, will bid and say, well, we'll bid, we'll, we'll enter that contract with you
at 50 pounds per megawatt hour for the next 12 years. Another company will say 49. Next one will
say 48. And essentially what happens is they bid it down until it gets to the point where no one
can bid any lower because they won't make any money out of it. So that's what I mean is that this
price based competition is baked into the pro is baked into the process for good reasons on the
consumer side, because that's what you want as a government is keeping electricity prices down.
But the profit, the potential profitability for generators just gets, gets competed away.
I mean, what you're talking about there with regards to the auctions as well, I mean,
it applies to outsourcing companies too. I mean, the reason why Carillion,
blast from the past, you know, they collapsed because they kept on basically taking contracts,
they couldn't make money. 100%. They were taking all these jobs. Everybody else was like,
wouldn't touch them with a barge. You're gonna bust if you carry on like that. And guess what
happens? They go bust and the people that are on the hook with the taxpayer, and you don't have to
go bust for that to be a problem, whether it's Sodexo, Circa, Capita, whatever, G4S,
they're getting these outsourced contracts with local councils. And the price is so low,
they can only make money if they do an absolutely, guess what, shit job. Exactly.
And if they destroy people's labour conditions, that's the only way they're going to make money.
But you have the political class going, this is how we get value for money for the taxpayer.
Well, no, it means they do a crap job. People are laid off. The firm might even go bankrupt and
you socialise the risk anyway. Yeah. And in the renewable sector, again, you have to do something
kind of clever to make profits. And so it becomes a question of like financial engineering,
you know, what can you do with on the debt side in terms of securitising it and that sort of thing.
And they kind of get forced into that because you can't make money just out of the,
you can't make good money out of the contract because the competition is so intense.
It was so interesting. It's massively interesting.
Just how neoliberalism with regards to these low margin industries is just so stupid,
so destructive, so deeply destructive. Yeah. I mean, the other way I like to put,
that I like to put it is that, and it's like in a one sentence is like, there's no OPEC in the
electricity sector. So, I mean, OPEC in oil and gas exists in significant part to have price control,
to keep prices and profitability up. So if there's the danger of a kind of supply glut,
they tell the members of OPEC, you know, close the taps for a bit to keep prices and therefore
profits up. Well, there's nothing like that in the electricity sector, which is again,
kind of good from a consumer perspective, but in terms of incentivising investment
is a different question entirely. The thing about, we were talking with regards to,
you know, the falling costs of solar, I think it's called Swanson's law, isn't it? Something like that.
Something like that, yeah. And this is an all outgrowth of what's called the experience curve.
If you double the production of something, then the price of manufacturing falls by like 15.
Yeah, and solar has come down a huge amount, massive amount.
And so that trend is going to carry on. I mean, that's kind of inarguable,
it might slow down, but it's going to get cheaper.
I think it has slowed down a lot, but it should continue.
Yeah. And just for people watching, it's not the same as Moore's law, which is,
you know, exponential. We're not talking about exponential price falls, we're talking about,
you know, dramatic falls, but not as dramatic as something like Moore's law, you know,
the halving or, you know, the halving costs every 18 months or the doubling of processing
speed per dollar every 18 months. No, but it's still pretty impressive.
So we've talked about Europe, we've talked about the US, we've talked about the failure of markets
to deliver with this stuff. So what is the proposal then? Because
you've argued that competition makes sense from the perspective of the consumer,
but then you've also said that competition and falling prices are odds with profitability.
And if we're having a private market system for this, then you need to have profits.
So how do we administer electricity or energy, which is cheap?
Yeah, it's a great question.
But from renewable sources too.
Yeah, it's a great question. And I think that, you know, I'll be completely honest about this
and say that I don't have the answer. I think I have a perspective on the range of answers that
exists, if that makes sense. And so I think what's useful potentially for viewers is to
understand the kind of range of main answers that are out there. And then to judge for themselves
based on some commentary that I make on each of those answers. And so there are essentially
three main answers out there. But I'll caveat this or preface it by saying
all of what I'm going to talk about here are answers that are kind of on the supply side,
by which I mean, they're all answers that are oriented towards boosting investment
in solar and wind capacity on the assumption that you continue to need to do that,
because there are those existing profitability constraints. And of course, there are other
answers out there, you know, people who are of a kind of degrowth persuasion would say,
actually, we need to be thinking about the demand side as well, and curbing energy consumption.
And I think that there's a lot of truth in that argument as well. But I'm not going to go there
today. But clearly any answer that is going to be even close to sufficient is going to have to
address the supply side and the demand side. Also, you know, the other argument will be,
hang on a second, we historically globally, not just in the West, but globally,
in order to try to make renewables more competitive, the way we have typically
done that is by working on the renewable side, offering subsidy mechanisms, support mechanisms
on, rather than taxing the dirty side. You know, that's essentially what we've done. We've thought,
okay, we'll do that. And so economists, mainstream economists will say, well, actually, the answer
is that, you know, the externalities associated with fossil fuels are not being properly priced.
And so the answer is to price those external externalities properly. And again, I think that,
like, I understand that argument. But obviously, that's a politically very difficult argument
because we live such carbon intensive lifestyle. So if you start taxing that, it really hurts
consumers in terms of inflation. And that's, I think that's the main reason why we haven't gone
there is that politicians are very, very, very concerned about that. They don't want consumers
to be hurt through higher inflation because of the carnivorous nature of the consumer
baskets that we all have in our lifestyles. So with that said, the three main solutions that
are out there in terms of boosting the speed of the energy transition on the renewable side
and not surprising they're associated with three different kind of interest groups for
want of a better term. So the and they're all interesting and they all have their merits as
well as their drawbacks, I think. So the first answer is the one that you hear from sort of
mainstream energy economists. So economists who are trained in orthodox economics and they're
focused on energy markets, great people to talk to you because they they at least,
unlike, unlike a lot of my colleagues on the left, know they know the energy markets, they,
you know, they really know what they're talking about there, although they look at them through
certain in certain blinked ways, I would argue. So they what they argue is look, the problem is
not that we're relying on the private sector and the profit motive and markets to do this,
of course, they wouldn't they don't say that that's fine. What they argue is that the problem is that
the market design is not right. So what they would say is that is that and I have some sympathy
with this argument because they're right when they say that electricity markets as they exist
worldwide today are market mechanisms that were designed essentially in a fossil fuel world.
And they they haven't really been changed in the last 2030. And that's true. They haven't. They're
pretty much the way they've always been. And they argue and I can and it's understandable. They say,
look, we just need to redesign those market mechanisms, rethink the way we price electricity
and wholesale and retail markets. And then everything will fall magically into place.
But of course, economists always say that that's all that's the answers every problem,
which is that the problem with markets is not that we have markets, the problem is that we
haven't got them right yet, we haven't perfected them, we haven't optimized them.
And also there are so there are lots of recommendations out there,
circulating in different forums for how you might do that. But all of them have
distinctive drawbacks as well as percent potential advantages associated with them.
So that's that's that answer. And as I said, I have some sympathy with argument,
but I'm definitely not convinced by it. The second answer is, again, is very,
very interesting. And that's the answer you typically hear from from the energy industry
itself. And so what they say, obviously, they agree with economists that the problem is not
that we're relying on the private sector markets, but where they disagree largely with economists
is they is they they don't think the problem is in market design. They say, no, that's fine as well,
just keep existing markets as they are. The problem is that the subsidies to renewables aren't
big enough. So they basically say, look, keep everything as it is, but just like double the
support mechanisms may provide more of it and make them more attractive. And that's what the
inflation reduction act was in the renewable sector. You know, industry had been saying to the US
government, you have been attenuating the subsidies you provide us with lowering the level of tax
credit. Investment is stagnating. That's what you get. If you do that, lift it back up. And so
that's what the that's what the government did. We get to see whether that will have the desired
impact. But that was, in my view, was all about reinflating profitability in a renewables industry
to reattract investment into that sector. Very, very, very, very straightforward, actually.
And I have some sympathy with that as well, because if if the totality of our options is
the private sector, what else are you going to do? That would work is what you're saying.
Well, in your opinion, I think it probably would if you essentially guarantee profits.
And if those profits are attractive in relative terms, according to the different alternatives
are out there, then yeah, money, money will flow in. Absolutely. I mean, it'd be really costly
for the consumer and all the taxpayer in some combination. But I think it would work if the
government did that enough. But obviously, there's huge reluctance to do that for all sorts of reasons.
You know, not not just the cost to consume, but you don't want to see it be seen to be lining the
pockets of nasty big capital. That's the second option. The third option is the one that those
on the left will typically say, which is to say, the problem is that we're relying on the private
sector and markets to do this. It doesn't work. We've been doing it for 30 years. Still isn't
working still going much too slowly. Let's try something different by which they normally mean
or we if I count myself in this in this group normally mean mass public sector ownership
and investment in renewable energy. And the argument being that it the private sector
and markets isn't working, isn't being shown not to be working, you know, even though that
all these subsidies continue to be available worldwide. And that's a really, in many ways,
at least on the face of things, a very attractive option. If you think about it like this,
so go back to what I was saying earlier about five to 8% returns. Well, if five to 8% returns are not
sufficiently attractive to draw in mass private sector investment on a significant scale,
you would imagine that returns of five to 8% would be perfectly attractive for the public sector.
I mean, presumably if you are a government, you would just be happy with an investment that kind
of covers the cost of capital. And if it doesn't do any more than fine, I mean, why would you need
any more than that? So in principle, I see I think that that is a very attractive option.
But of course, there are obstacles of all sorts of different nature of an ideological nature,
clearly, you know, the fact that the idea that private the private sector can't or shouldn't do
this is anathema to the political class in large parts of in large parts, not just of the west,
but of the world more generally. You know, governments around the world, including in
in in what by global standards are rich countries, have persuaded themselves or allowed themselves
to be persuaded that they don't have the fiscal capacity to carry out that type of investment,
they need to be fiscally conservative. It's all about tightening belts, you can't grow the public
balance sheet, even if it is to invest in revenue generating assets. And I don't really buy those
arguments, but those arguments are very, very powerful. And, and, and it seems right now,
at least that very few mainstream parties at least are even willing to count on any departure from
that kind of economic orthodoxy. So while I think that, you know, it's a credible proposition for
rich countries, it doesn't seem very likely that it's going to be happening anytime soon.
Any talk of public sector ownership of energy in places like the UK is any propositions along
those lines are very, very limited, very, very small scale. Stam has killed it, right?
Basically. Yeah. I mean, he's overtly saying, absolutely. This will be the market. Yeah. You
know, exactly. We're not the Tories, but it will be the market. Which, which, which means that,
as we were talking about earlier, great British energy such as it is or such as it might be,
like, what's the point? It's going to be a bit part player in a private market that is completely
unchanged. So it will just be like another private sector player, basically, and it probably won't
even do it as well as those in the private sector. Like, what's the point of doing it on a small scale
if you're not doing something fundamentally different? There's no point, in my view, there's
literally no point in public sector ownership, unless you are enabling and incentivizing that
actor to do something fundamentally differently from a private sector. Otherwise, there's no
point just letting the private sector do it. It's going to be a private sector actor which
pays shit wages to people. And does a shit job. Yeah, that's what's going to happen. Of course.
Best case scenario, it will be mediocre market actor and it will be privatized by the Tories
in 15 years. That's what's going to be our best case scenario. 100%. Yeah. There's no point.
Unless you're going to do it on a large scale with the ambition to do something fundamentally
differently, there's no point in doing it in my view. The only argument for doing it would be
that it's like a wedge in the door and that then you can build on it potentially. Maybe that's the
grand plan that's not being talked about, but I'm doubtful. Anyway, but the other thing about
public sector ownership, I think, the only other thing I would like to say about that is that
even if it is theoretically, to my mind, quite credible and possible in the relatively rich
parts of the world, it's a different matter entirely in going back to where we started our
conversation in those parts of the world where investment is most vital. If you're talking
about those countries in the global south that we were talking about, the idea that governments
in those parts of the world, which are struggling under infinitely more severe fiscal constraints
than the governments of the US or Germany or the UK, are going to borrow cheaply on the capital
markets for investment in public ownership of renewables, ain't going to happen.
I mean, you could say we're going to recalibrate the provider of the World Bank and...
Absolutely.
So it's not implausible, but it's not going to happen right now.
No, it's definitely not going to happen right now. But you would need,
insofar as the fact that, for example, many of those countries are staggering under
huge existing debt servicing obligations from the past, those would have to just be written off,
essentially, in order to enable that kind of new investment to take place.
So it's a big ask politically as well as economically.
Speaking of the austerity arrangements, and I find this quite funny, it's a bit of a tangent,
but you have in Europe with the eurozone and European monetary integration,
you've had since 1999, since there's been the euro as a currency, the stability and growth pact,
which all the members of the European Union actually, I think, have to adhere to,
one of the major parts of that is to not run deficits of more than 3%.
Now, of course, if your economy is growing at 3%, 4%, and you've got inflation of 3%,
a deficit of 3% forever is absolutely fine, actually. But what's really interesting is
they suspended it in 2020. I don't know if you saw the story. They suspended it in 2020,
and it's only going to come back now. I think it was 2020-2023. And over that time frame,
Italy's GDP per capita grew as quickly as the United States, because there was
loads of public sector investment in really important infrastructure. And now the European
Union is saying to Italy, you saw it, you can't run deficits anymore, and if you don't,
more sanction you. And you think, they've just literally been growing at their best clip in
25 years, but their stupid little brains can't get around it. On the point you said about
public ownership, and again, it's like an ideological default now, which people do not
understand. The idea of public ownership making money. Absolutely. They think it's only going
to be us sinking money, losing money. You're talking about investing in revenue generating
assets. What's the problem with that? I mean, if you look at, for instance, where I live,
Portsmouth, I've been asked about this recently, you've got Portsmouth International Port,
which was built in the early 1970s. The idea of a city, a medium-sized city like Portsmouth,
building infrastructure like that today in partnership with the private sector is just
like implausible. So they built Portsmouth International Port. I think it adds a couple
hundred million to the national economy. It employs 5,000 people. Last year, it made
8 million pound profit. It's publicly owned, right? And basically, since it's been built,
and it's not been privatized, that has basically meant hundreds of millions of pounds going to
local people in Portsmouth. It means lower council tax, and it's paid for a ton of services.
Up there in Southampton, where their port's privatized, guess what? The city's busts.
But people were spending too much, or maybe actually it's about ownership,
and you're not owning the things that make cash. 100%. And there are two things I would add to that.
One of them is you mentioned parenthetically, which is, you said it's built by the public
sector in collaboration with the private sector. So lots of people, when you talk about public
sector ownership of energy, they say, well, the public sector can't do that. Public sector doesn't
have the capacity and the expertise. You don't have to build it yourself. You just give a contract
to someone to the private sector to build it. It's the ownership that matters. You don't have
to build it. So capacity. And then the second thing is, they're like, well, then the public
sector will fuck up the operation. Well, a wind and solar farm doesn't take much operation.
Once they're built, you don't have to do anything. Occasionally a rotor will stop
turning and you have to send an engineer out with a screwdriver to get it going again.
But that's about it. It doesn't take like a rocket scientist to run a wind or solar farm.
So the idea that the public sector can't do this is preposterous.
Hmm. And I think about Southampton up the road. Like I say, they're bust. They're
literally having to, they've dimmed lights, street lights in Southampton, like 20%.
They're going off an hour earlier and you think you've got the country's
second biggest commercial port after Felix, though, and it's in private hands and you're
turning off the fucking lights an hour earlier. Like this is a madhouse. Many people in Pompey
would say Southampton's a madhouse, but for very different reasons. They're probably
losing to their football team next year as well. Well, so Southampton might get promoted.
Oh yeah, they're in the final. Good point. They might get promoted. I don't want them to get
promoted for people who aren't aware, but Portsmouth has just been promoted to the championship and
thanks for that league as well. So I mean, that to me is interesting. The idea of
public ownership or something, which is going to make money, which, you know, again, a lot of
the public doesn't understand that. It's not because the public are daft. It's because literally no
politician, other than Jeremy Corbyn, has actually even made tried to make the argument for 30 years.
But it seems to me like you're saying... And Bernie Sanders in the US made the exact same
argument. We can have public ownership with a decent rate of return, really good social
externalities as they be called. Yeah. Yeah. Decarbonizing. What's the problem?
So what is the problem? Well, I think it's ideological. I mean, I think that's what it is.
But there's no special interest groups stopping them from doing that.
In the globe. No, I don't think, I mean, except for the fact that, of course, behind the scenes,
the energy sector, the asset managers and so on, are telling them that they can't do it
for all those reasons that we've touched on already. So it's not just... I mean, ideology is
kind of created by interest groups to a significant extent. But I don't think there are substantive
economic arguments against it in certain countries of the world. I mean, I think that
it's much more challenging in parts of the world where absent really significant
transformations, but certainly in a place like the UK, it's completely, completely credible.
But my point is, okay, so it's public ownership, but it's public ownership without conflict.
It's not like you're saying, right, we're going to bring this stuff into public ownership. It's
literally saying, okay, well, we're going to build new capacity in the state. It's going to do it,
and the state will own it. Yeah. You're not saying, okay, well, these water companies,
they're screwing up, they've failed, screw them, because of course, their council
arguments while your bills are going to go up, right? So it seems like a very low
cost form of public ownership. I think so. Yeah, no, I think so. So I mean, I think that
that's where the kind of really interesting arguments are coming from. And there are some
initiatives in that direction, not in the UK, but in New York State, many people might have heard
there was a build public renewables act that was passed last year, I think it was,
which at least on paper looks like it could be quite significant in terms of public ownership
of electricity generation, renewable electricity generation in New York State remains to be seen
whether it will actually be actioned in significant part. The degree to,
you know, just because it's there on paper doesn't necessarily mean it's actually going to happen
on the ground. There are lots of potential obstacles in the way of a political nature.
But things are happening on that front. So there is reason for hope, I think, on that front.
But, you know, I think that of the three kind of options I outlined, that seems to me at least
to be the one with the most potential to get things going more quickly than they currently
are. And that's the thing, that's the thing, right? It's like every year matters on this,
because, you know, every year with emissions that are higher than they need to be means that extra
little bit of carbon in the atmosphere or extra large bit of carbon in the atmosphere.
I just want to go back to something we were talking about earlier on. I mentioned Scotland,
which actually in terms of the percentage of electricity coming from renewables is
really impressive. Yes. And you said you want to talk about Scotland more.
Yes. Let's go ahead. Good point. I'd forgotten about that, but very, very good point.
So here's the interesting thing. And this point about the geography of renewables,
which is what I'm going to talk about, bears directly on that question of profitability
we were talking about earlier, this kind of paradox of why renewables deployment is not
as profitable as people think it might be. And part of the answer is the geography of this.
So in the UK, but not just in the UK, pretty much anywhere in the world you look,
it's the same in Sweden where I live, it's the same in China, it's the same in India and Germany and
the US. The recurring geographical feature that you see about renewables is that wind and solar
facilities tend to be located at the opposite ends of the countries of where most people live and
most industry is located. So in Sweden, for example, the population is disproportionately
located in the south and all the wind power is up in the north, exactly the same in the UK.
Now, there are two important things to understand about that. Firstly is why that happens. And then
the second thing is what the implications are there of that for the profitability of renewables
generators. So why it happens, it happens for all sorts of different reasons. And in the UK case
there are certain physical reasons about wind speeds and stuff like that. But the main reason
happens everywhere is precisely because that's where people don't live. And if you are developing
a wind or solar farm, one of your biggest costs is likely to be land costs. Unlike conventional
power plants, wind and solar facilities take up a huge amount of land if you're going to be
generating a lot of power. It's a huge amount of land. And so all other things being equal,
developers of renewables projects always will try to cite their facilities where land is cheapest.
So take the US case, for example, the cost of land in the northwest in Montana or something
like that is like 1% of the cost in the east coast. So of course you're going to put your
facility there because your land cost is cheaper. And land costs, the cost of leasing or buy it,
a part of that generating cost we talked about earlier, that's factored into that generating
cost. So those generating costs that come down so much, that includes land costs. So that's why
you get this geographical pattern. Now what does that mean in terms of profitability? Well,
the thing is is that if your facilities are located a very, very far away on average from
where the demand for that electricity is concentrated, then your facility is
exerting a disproportionate burden on the grid, on the transmission and distribution grid.
Because it's much more, you are basically, it's much more expensive to maintain a grid over
long distances, obviously, than over short distances. And the way that this works is that
grid operators, those that run the grid in any case other than the national grid in the UK,
for the cost, for all the costs of maintaining that grid and upgrading it and improving it and
adding to it, those costs are borne by everyone who's part of the system, both on the consumption
side and on the demand side. So on the consumption side, you at home when you pay your electricity
bill, you are paying for electricity to be generated, but you're also paying for it to be
transported. So your share of the grid costs essentially to where you live. But generators
are also charged for that. And while they're not necessarily charged perfectly based on where
they are based, but in general, they are charged much more the further they are away from where
demand for electricity is located. So renewables developers are essentially, because they're much
more further away on average in conventional power plants from where their electricity demand
is located, they have much higher transportation costs. So the thing is, when those people focus
on, when the analysts focus on generating costs, low cost of renewables, it's actually a completely
artificial cost because it excludes those transportation costs. And you can even say it
better than that, you can say the generating costs are only low because the transportation costs are
high. Do you see what I mean? It's like, you only have low generating costs because you have low
land costs, and you only have low land costs, because you're a million miles away from where
the demand is located. So you're going to have a huge burden on their transmission system and
high transmission charges. So you may think that you're going to be really profitable because
your generating costs are very low, but your transportation costs, which no one ever talks
about are really, really high. So the geography of this, the economic geography of electricity
is unbelievably important. That seems to have big implications for things like municipally owned
renewable capacity. So if I'm Andy Burnham, and I'm the mayor of Greater Manchester,
great Andy Burnham, great guy, he loves public ownership, he does now anyway. He's all in favour
of it, but obviously the land values of Manchester are relatively high, they're going up. And so
all of a sudden, actually, it doesn't really make sense for him to be saying, I'm going to use X
amount of square kilometres to build solar or wind. Two things to say about that. So one is,
and so a lot of the kind of hope that people have is for kind of distributed renewable energy
generation that is not sort of one large scale facility that requires lots of land, but is kind
of rooftop solar, things like that that is attached to households because it doesn't have those land
costs associated. And so I think that that, as I was mentioning earlier, like 30% of the Chinese
additions in 2023 were rooftop solar that don't have those land implications attached in. But in
so far as you do need those large scale renewables facilities to kind of really bend the curve on
emissions, land is obviously a big issue, precisely as you say. And so there are countries in the
world where precisely one of the things that state authorities are doing in terms of enabling
private sector renewables development is exactly on the land question, is, for example, aggregating
land ownership through powers of expropriation, for example, to enable renewables developers to
get their hands on the land more readily and more cheaply than might otherwise be possible. So I think
that that's the way to think about it in the UK context would be that that's the sort of thing
that municipal authorities would have to be thinking about. And of course, 40 years ago,
it would be much easier because the state owned much more land than but it's privatised all of it.
But also, I suppose if you're a big manufacturing region, so if you're, you know, that belt in
Germany where you've got so much heavy industry or historically in this country, you might say the
West Midlands, you want, you've got these big factories, you want to make lots of stuff and
you want really cheap energy inputs, you're not going to want, you know, a wind turbine next to
Birmingham, or a set of solar cells in Solihull, you're going to want the wind coming from the
outer Hebrides, maybe the sun coming from further to the south. So that kind of quite progressive,
it sounds lovely, we all love community ownership and, you know, small scale distributed fine.
And sometimes it's great, you know, my mother-in-law shares solar cells on her
house that their energy was a collapse. But actually in terms of if you want to have a
vibrant industrial sector, you want to manufacture stuff, so that's a big deal.
It is. Yeah, absolutely. No, you're absolutely right. And I think that, and I think that, you know,
where big commercial consumers of electricity, the Amazons and the Microsofts and so on,
investing in supporting the development of large, large renewable facilities, it tends to be a
long, long way away from where people are living. So they're building data centers in parts of
Norway, for example, where you can have these huge server farms because land is precisely because
land is relatively cheap, and they can build these huge renewables facilities at, can be built at
relatively low cost. And that's obviously very, very different in manufacturing regions of the
world. You mentioned Amazon. Yes. Microsoft. Yes. We're seeing, apparently, something of a revival
of nuclear in the United States. Yeah, I've been reading about that. Precisely because Big Tech,
Amazon, Meta as well, potentially, if they go into AI, are saying, look, we need lots of cheap
energy and we've done the numbers and we think nuclear makes the most sense actually. And I think
exactly part of that is the land cost. You know, nuclear takes much less land than wind and solar.
And again, it says partly it's the land cost issue, partly it's the nature of the energy
resources they want. So wind and solar are intermittent renewable sources. And so they can
do certain things, but you also, whether you're a company or a country, you also want a source of
kind of what's often called base load power, which is the source of power that you can always turn
on when you need to. And nuclear is a very, very consistent, reliable,
carbon-free source of base load power. Should we have nuclear in the UK? I mean,
it's kind of implicit at the start of the book because you talk about the percentage of energy
globally, which is coming from carbon and non-carbon sources, energy coming from non-carbon sources
when solar has gone up, but at the same time, it's gone down from nuclear and hydroelectricity. So
actually the shares about the same. Yeah. I mean, I think that, you know, my view, I don't have a
very strong view on nuclear one way or another. You know, I think that, what do I think? I think
that governments, unless they're going to build this, all of this stuff themselves, which I think
they should be, to a significant extent, but if they're not, they should be doing everything they
can to incentivize the private sector development of as much carbon-free stuff as possible.
And I think nuclear should absolutely be a significant part of that, as well as solar wind,
not instead of it, but as well as it. Brett, such an informative conversation.
As ever, our first conversation was brilliant. So was this. Maybe we'll get you back on
again sometime soon. I hope so. I'd love to do that. Thanks for having me again.
Hugely enlightening. Thank you. Awesome. Thanks for having me.
