What they cannot and will never understand is that what they and other liberals call populism
is the political blowback, is political blowback against the social disruption that their policies
have produced. They can't understand the connection between what they've done and populism.
Today's guest is very much an original thinker. He's independently minded. Of course,
everyone likes to think they're independently minded, but over the course of his career,
he's pissed off just about everyone. He first shot to the forefront of the national conversation
about 25 years ago, writing a trenchant critique of globalization and being entirely skeptical,
pessimistic even, about the possibility of a successful war of occupation in either
Afghanistan or Iraq. On both counts, he was proven right. Now he's turned his attention to the West.
He says that the pieties of recent decades, cultural, social and economic, are over that the status
quo can't carry on that we're very much at a crossroads. So what next? He thinks the future
will in many ways resemble the past. Perhaps things like religion, ultra nationalism,
maybe even feudalism might be on their way back. Big questions and different answers to what you'd
hear elsewhere. But that's what we like here on downstream. John Gray, thanks for joining us.
Very pleased to be here, Erin. Very pleased to be talking to you today. We're very happy to have you.
I just wanted to start by saying I first read you around 2001, Fullstone, and thereafter,
Straw Dogs. But Fullstone, I think, was the first time I'd read you. I was 17. For me,
that put you on the map. Obviously, you existed well before then, and we'll talk about that as
well. What was the response to that book? Because it was a very provocative thesis at the time,
namely that globalization, ever larger swathes of the planet falling under the guise of liberal
market capitalism, isn't necessarily going to happen. And maybe it has some big downsides.
Some people didn't quite agree with your conclusions, did they?
Well, it was considered off the wall because it was published at a time
when globalization, as a mood and an idea and a profitable project, was at a tight.
So if I'd been calculating the time to do it, I wouldn't have done it then.
And the reviews it got were, with one exception, I think a friend took pity on me halfway through
the process, but were all extremely negative. I mean, normally my books polarize people in
a Marmite-like way. This didn't. Everyone hated it. And I thought at the time that, and I think I
still think this, it simply went against the mood. The Cold War had ended. It was supposed to have
ended in victory. Although even 10 years before I published False Dawn, I'd written in a conservative
magazine, a piece on Fukuyama's essay before he wrote the book, the essay came out in the fall of
1989, before the wall came down, but very close to the time when it came down. I had written
then that the coming collapse of communism, which I thought was going to happen,
would be the resumption of history on very traditional lines. It would not be the end
of history at all. I mean, I think I later joked it was rather like one of Beckett's stories,
where he, which contains the line, the end again. It wasn't the end of anything. It was the resumption
of history because the Cold War was a rather anomalous period in which global politics,
not completely because there were the non-aligned movements and so on and so forth, but was
organized in a binary opposition between two Enlightenment ideologies. And that was very
liberalism and communism. They both spring from the Enlightenment as a broad family of ideas.
And liberalism appeared two of one, but I never thought that it had one because it was liberal.
I knew some of the people in Poland who were and other East European countries who were
working against the Soviet control of their countries. And some were intellectuals,
but many were religious intellectuals. Some were Catholics. Many were nationalists. I mean,
what brought down communism was not intellectual dissent, and it wasn't economic inefficiency.
It was solidarity, the Roman Catholic Church and Baltic nationalism.
Even before it happened, my interpretation of the weakness, the fragility and the ultimate
collapse of the Soviet project was completely different from that of Western liberals. My
interpretation of it was that what was happening, it was that these regimes were becoming illegitimate,
even in Russia, ultimately. But before that, in communist Europe and in the Baltic states,
it were becoming more and more illegitimate and hollow, even among their servants, even the elites
were less and less willing to use force to rule. And that this was not because liberalism was
spreading as a universal ideology. It was because in nationalist and religious and other traditions,
particular traditions and particular forms of life and thinking in these different countries
were reasserting themselves. So I never expected that it would turn into a universal liberal
hegemony, not for a single moment. So when I 10 years later published A False Dawn, I wasn't
surprised either. I was surprised by the intensity and the consistency and the near uniformity of
the negative reaction. But then I reasoned. That's because we're at the height of this project now.
It'll take a while. And it took a long time, actually, it took almost till now that the
globalizing project would fragment partly for the, it partly fragmented because of things I
didn't anticipate, like the pandemic. Although I do say in Straw Dog, someone reminded me,
I'd forgotten that if you have long term plans, don't ask your financial advisor,
ask an epidemiologist. Because even then, 2001 or 2002, when it appeared,
I'd been reading about the way plagues had had an impact on various junctures in history.
So I hope it's a rather digressive answer to your question. But I think these thoughts then
were so antagonistic to the ruling worldview at the time, and the ruling mood at the time,
which was one of boosterism. Remember, one thing I've learned is this is that if you have a view
which everyone accepts as being the truth, and it promises good things and is also profitable,
which so if you talk to banks on those days, which I did a bit and you say to them,
as I did, China will not become a liberal state, will not happen. Why will it not happen? Because
first of all, this is in the 90s, they looked at what happened in the Soviet Union, they're not
going to repeat it. Secondly, it's a Leninist state and the judicial system and the courts
are all subject to the party, it's not going to change. Thirdly, every enterprise that
will have any significance and generally big enterprise has party categories implanted in
which we have to be consulted at every point. They're not going to permit a revolution and
a liberal state could only come about in China by a revolution. So it's not going to happen.
No one believed me. First of all, because it meant that the ruling worldview was false, which
while worldviews last, which is sometimes not very long, they're very contagious.
Groupthink, herd thinking comes in. And secondly, it would have made them doubtful about the
profits they were going to make. So when you have a conjunction of groupthink with the prospect of
serious money being made, it's irresistible. So it goes on for as long as the profits seem to
come in or as long as the underlying geopolitical tensions don't become too obvious, which they
now have. So now we're almost into a position where de-globalization has become a cliché.
We're almost in a position in which everybody accepts that globalization at all, which it is
in many important respects, but not all. Does that answer your question? It answers my question
very well. I think for younger listeners and viewers, people younger than, say, 25,
they will find it almost impossible to believe quite how distinctive and
sincerely held the ideology you just said was. If you said to somebody,
no, I don't think China will actually get more liberal. They would say, well, of course,
they will have rising GDP. They'll be falling birthright. The bourgeoisie will emerge. Pardon?
A bourgeoisie. And the bourgeoisie, they would say, they could do with a bit of Marxism on this.
It has always been liberal. It hasn't always been liberal. The bourgeoisie in Europe in the
mid-20th century backed fascism, not liberalism. It's a complete historical myth.
Well, yeah. Or you look at the rise of anarchism at the turn of the 20th century, late 19th century,
the guy that killed McKinley. These were basically small business owners. They were radicalized
members of the petty bourgeois. They were attracted to anarchism. The idea that they
would fall in behind some sort of stolid progressive bourgeois ideology. Anyway.
The funniest point for me was in about 1989, 1990, when I would say, what's going to happen
is that history will go on as usual. And people said, you're an apocalyptic pessimist.
So if you say things are going to go on as normal as they've always done,
you're an apocalyptic pessimist. If you say they're going to change completely from what
they've ever been, you're a realist. Now, when I was in Washington in the 89, 90,
one of the things that happened then is that some of the big foundations that were backing
foreign policy programs, these ones I knew were mostly on the right, pulled most or all
of their money out. So was this like the Atlantic Council people? I can't remember now.
But that ballpark. I think that heritage, all of those people,
yeah, we're getting them. They either cut it down or cut it off because they said,
it's not needed, we won. And we haven't just won for five years or 10 years or even a
generation. We've won forever. So the idea that, I mean, this was what Fukuyama calls
capital letter history, capital letter history, Hegelian history, Koyevian history. These were,
that's to say, a certain idea, a certain conception of what it means to be recognized,
to be seen as a human being, had become universal, always in the process of becoming universal
or near universal. And nothing could stop that. But it could be accelerated so that
what I didn't anticipate until it began to be clear around about 2001, 2002, I suppose,
is that the people who believed this would want to accelerate this inevitable process
by regime change. That's to say, you could say the whole world is
changing on these lines. There might be a few holdouts, there might be a few Taliban,
there might be a few nationalists here and there, but basically the whole world is accepting this
idea, this big capital letter. But that's the way it's going to be. But if it's somewhat slower
than we imagined, by then, more than 10 years after the fall of the wall, it was become,
we can accelerate it by not just one, but a succession of wars of choice. Now, by the way,
I don't say they were the only reasons or the only people who were pushing for these wars. There were
military bureaucrats in the Pentagon, some of them. There were supposedly hard
men and women thinkers and so on and tough guys of various kinds who, for their own reasons,
wanted the war. But I don't think it would have happened. I was there a lot in those days. I
don't think it would have happened without the neoconservatives. They created the background.
There were other people who supported. It was a coalition of supporters of the war with different
views. What changed, though, with all this? Because are you a fan of science fiction?
Yes. So you look at people like the Foundation series or you look at Dune,
published in the 50s in the United States. Now a movie. Yeah, two movies.
Yeah, great. It was just a great book and it has such a firm grasp on the long span of history.
Empires and enmity and all these primal things you're talking about, nations, religion. Not
only that, but Dune is much more interesting to me than Asimov or Star Wars because it's
neo-feudal. Well, precisely. But it's in the distant distant distant. Yeah, but it's the feudal future.
Yeah. And one of the things about this. It makes it a very modern book, right?
Yes. Well, a very 20th century or a very 21st century or late 20th century book.
Because one of the things about one of the features of the worldview, and this was common,
I think, to Marxism as well as liberalism, but certainly of that worldview was the idea of
irreversible phases in history. If you'd gone through feudalism and into liberal capitalism,
you could never go back. You can go back. Not exactly to feudalism because that was, of course,
an agrarian economy based on land, but you can go back to a set of social relations
and political structures which are very like feudalism. They're not quite feudalism. As you
know, in my book, I discussed the arguments of some people in America who say, we've got feudalism.
It's not quite feudalism. In some ways, it's worse than feudalism because in feudalism,
tremendous corruption, wars of religion, so on and so forth, power of the church,
censoring ideas and so on. They're all those kind of features, but you couldn't actually easily,
not many people until the early modern period when feudalism began to free. Not large numbers
of people didn't fall out of the system altogether into freefall, which has happened in America.
That's to say, you've got large numbers of people, hundreds of thousands or even millions
who are basically, apart from some bits of public welfare and charity and crime,
have no position in society at all. That didn't happen. But in other respects,
you can have, and according to some American critics of their own type of society,
you do have neo-futile relations. I think what's interesting about science fiction or the science
fiction writers who did not accept an Asimov-like or a Star Wars-like view that these liberal ideas
would spread not only all over the world, but all over the galaxy, all over the years,
they thought that previous social affordance involving things like, I mean, loyalty is a big
thing in Dune, is it not? Hierarchy. People are told what they can do and not do. Religion,
or at least obligation of and shamanism of various kinds is there. Divination is there.
Roman practice, they've reinvented. Even pre-futile has Roman elements as well in which
divination and other practices were important. So I think there are, I think science fiction,
I mean, I knew J.G. Ballard who had one point in his life, was a science fiction writer who wrote
other genres as well, of course. But I think science fiction of the best sort is a good lens
to view the present. The great thing with the foundation series is, and like you say, there's
almost two competing visions of how history works, Foundation and Dune, is that it offers an
amazing snapshot at how people thought this thing called, we now call it in reflection,
the great acceleration, permanently rising populations, ever great. Go on forever.
Yeah. Because he talks about the population of this ginormous empire. So that would be too big
for the planet. In the tens of billions and billions of billions of people, when in reality,
what we know is in the 21st century, this planet's population, probably about 10 billion,
and then start to fall. But like you say, they were making inferences from the early 1800s.
It'll go from 10 billion to 100. Yeah, this will go on forever. But there were two reasons
they were wrong. I mean, the big expansion of population in human history was over 200,
300 years, not 200,000 years, let alone 30,000 years. It happened as a byproduct, I think,
of hydrocarbons of industrialization. So it's quite brief, 300 years.
Well, you know my grandmother, my grandmother, she died at 98. She was born in a world where
there were 2 billion people. She died this year. She died in a world where there are 8 billion
people. So that is incredible, right? The planet's population quadruples in the span of a person's
life. Wow. So their idea was that that two or 300 years was a template for universal history
forever after. Now, back to nature, things like that never happen in nature. You never have
in the natural order of things. It all turns on the view that on the belief which liberals have,
but never admit to, I never believe about that. Liberals generally nowadays don't admit to ever
having any of the beliefs they really do have or that they've had in the past. It turns on the idea
which not only liberals, but some Marxists as well, have that the human animal can humanize
nature or transcend nature. They might say, well, this might have been true in the days of Malthus.
It might have been true in the days of Roman Empire. Plagues might have been important in
ancient Rome and so on, but one in a completely different perspective. What they didn't bring
out was a feature I'd argued in rather rudimentary form, perhaps, in False Dome, which is that the
more integrated a global economy and a global civilization was, the more fragile it would be.
I mean, until, I suppose, the start of the 20th century when you had a world
flu epidemic, plagues weren't global because most of the human beings in the world lived in economies
that were separate from each other. You didn't touch each other very much and it's no accident
that when you had big plagues in the ancient world, they were in Rome, which was an early
experiment, if you like, in globalization and closely interconnected by trade.
They didn't take on board that either in history, in earlier periods of history, like the Roman period,
or in the natural, in the systems of nature, natural systems,
growth of this exponential kind is never full stop, never permanent. It always comes to some
kind of stop. I want to pick up on something you said, because this is really fascinating,
and it was one of those two or three insights in the book, which just really hit me.
One was this idea that, and we've said it many times on this show, we're reverting to a genre
of capitalism, a kind of political economy, which in some ways resembles feudalism,
but gains in productivity only go to the top 1%, increasingly profits and revenues generated
through asset ownership, renterism, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera. This is not new.
Arbitrage, not production.
Yeah, exactly. Value, capture, not creation, blah, blah, blah. People have been saying this for
like 15 years. What you say is that actually in some ways, the system we have now is worse
than feudalism. Can you explain why? Because I think obviously most people would disagree with that.
Well, in one reason is the one I've already given you, but it's connected with the one reason is
that large parts of the formerly productive population in Western countries, particularly
United States, have no productive role in the society. Since their identities, their communities,
but also their medical care and their incomes depend on their role in the economy. They have
nothing basically. One of the things they don't have is what people had in the feudal period.
Of course, if you're a Marxist or a certain kind of liberal rationalist, you say that this is just
an illusion that pacified them. Even though they knew the society around them was thoroughly
corrupt, they still actually, I think, believed. I mean, the evidence is they believed that in
the rationales of society, which was that it was an afterlife in which injustices would be corrected.
It might also be hierarchical afterlife, but it would be much better. By the way, the reason we
know they believe this is that there were also radical and revolutionary millenarian movements
in the Middle Ages, which said, we do believe this, but we don't accept the society.
So the millenarians in the proto-communists, if you like, in the late medieval, early modern
period were not atheists ever. They were eschatological Christians. That's to say, they believed
that they believed these legitimating. Now, the difference now is that I think, and this is new,
but something that young people can, I think, understand. No one really expects now. Certainly,
no one's confident. Certainly, no one thinks it's inevitable, but actually, hardly anyone really expects
the rest of their lives or their children's, if they have children or their children's
children's lives to be better than theirs. That's a fundamental change. It's a fundamentally,
really profound change because the mealuristic ideology of increasing material well-being
interlocked with the progressive ideology that each stage of emancipation society built on the
previous one. So women get the vote. They're partially emancipated, still very unequal,
but that can be remedied. Once that's happened, prisoners can get basic rights, ethnic groups
to struggle against, colonialism. It was a kind of, it was a stadial theory. It was a theory of
stages, and the assumption was that each stage that had been reached in the past would remain fixed,
would remain there. Now, one of the features of the 20th century is that that was disproved in
Europe, because Europe, in the interwar period, saw tremendous conflicts of ideologies and
ethnicities and so forth. And when the Nazis then came, they swept away, not only, I mean,
they achieved, it isn't that they went from some kind of level of staircase three back to
staircase two, they went to minus 20, sweeping away enormous amounts of what had been achieved
before, sweeping away even the good bits of the bourgeois civilization were swept away.
But this is happening now as a common experience and not in the context of catastrophic wars,
necessarily. The common experience now is that there'll be many young people who will say to you,
I'll never be able to afford to own a house. I can't even afford to rent in London. If one room
in London is now over a thousand pounds a month, one room, I just can't do it. And that, and they
don't see a point in the future where that will be different. So it's most acute though. I mean,
if you have some kind of a job, if you have some kind of education, if you have some, if you live
in a country where there are, however semi-collapsed till some welfare institutions and NHS and with
all of its problems and others, then people can sink into a mood of resigned hedonism,
which I think is a common response. But if you're in, if you have nothing at all,
if you live in a semi-collapsed of state of nature in a post-industrial
part of the United States, where there is epidemic drug use, then you'll have what is now in
fact happening, which is huge levels of early death, falling longevity. I think longevity in
Mississippi is roughly that of Bangladesh. Just building on what you said there, there's a great
line in the book, which, you know, basically says religion historically was the opium of the masses
and now they're just being offered opium, fentanyl, oxycontin. But before they were offered
fentanyl, they were offered the future. Precisely. So this is the typology I sort of just want to
quickly offer. So like you say, feudalism, you have eschatological afterlife,
modernity, you have, like you said, the future will temporarily embarrass millionaires,
the sort of American ideology. And now, like you say, we don't even have that. There is no future.
So you have high inequality potentially under all of these scenarios, personal income deprivation,
suffering. But like you say, there are two big amelioratives in those first two categories,
feudalism, pre, you know, 21st century capitalism, or let's say, mid 20th century capitalism.
And then now we have something quite distinct. And you also see this, I think, in the built
environment. The built environment across much of the UK and the United States is just collapsing.
It is collapsing. Literally in many cases. Yeah, it's a visible expression of giving up on both
faith and the future. We have buildings now built for 30, 40 years, which look like crap,
don't really serve any purpose. And nobody thinks they'll be there, you know, three or
four decades. And not only that, but they're becoming either toxic or fragile. Yeah,
with the cladding and the rack concrete. Let's think of a period, though, in our history, one
which I'm old enough to remember even, in which this was not the case. There was a period after
the Second World War in not just in Britain, but in other Western countries, European countries in
America, when the state assumed certain responsibilities for moderating inequality,
mitigating suffering, and reinforcing social cohesion, they weren't, in other words, old labor
weren't anti-capitalists, but they wanted to restrain capitalism. And they thought it was
necessary to do so. Why did they think that? Because many of them had lived through the 1930s.
They were from a generation that had not only fought in the Second World War, so they knew
what could happen when a social system had melted down. But even some of them were old enough to
remember the tremendous meltdown of capitalism, which had triggered Nazism, which had triggered
various fascist movements, or at least energised them. And so then in the after the Second World
War, for maybe up to a generation, 30 years perhaps, mid-70s, there was a system in many
European countries, which was called social democracy, and I think had many achievements
to its name. And so that was the kind of, it depended on an environment which began to change
even as early as the late 70s, I would say. But an environment in which there were relatively
closed economies, in which there wasn't much globalization, it only really began to get going
in China and elsewhere, the market reforms began to get going in late 70s. But for 30 years,
there was a more restrained form of capitalism based on what? Based on the perception, the
experience, not just the theory that capitalist economies can go badly wrong. When they go
badly wrong, they can be really badly wrong, and that can have terrible political repercussions,
including fascism. That was common sense, and it was well founded common sense among the old
Labour people. That was then, that insight was then lost in the 80s and after the 80s. Well,
let me give you again, maybe an anecdote. I came from a northeastern working class background,
and in the first part of my life in the 50s, Britain was still poor after the Second World War.
It was still a poor country. And yet, NHS doctors came out if you had a cold, a flu.
I remember them coming to my house, unthinkable now, even before the pandemic, that anyone would
come out for anything short of a major emergency. And yet, well, we are richer even now. You might
be getting poorer now, actually, but we have been richer. What changed? What changed was the global
environment of capitalism and the dominant beliefs about the state and about what the state should
do and not do. And this is produced in Britain. A tremendous confusion. So part of the confusion
was that when Brexit became an issue, most of the Brexiteers in the run-up to 2016
thought that Brexit was a window to further globalization, to an even smaller state.
Most of the people who voted for it did not share that. Of course not.
Yeah. But that's created, I mean, that's one of the reasons why the Brexite
project has been aborted and botched.
Let's return to Brexit in a second, but I just want to stick on this. So you say that...
There was a period.
There was a period. And these people weren't anti-capitalist. So what I would say to that is,
and that's obviously correct, is that those people today would be classified as anti-capitalist.
So if you say, and this is, you know, there's a great talk by Eric X. Lee about the Chinese
Communist Party, and he's, it's a TED talk, and he said elsewhere that we still believe in markets
in China. We still think, you know, there's still money making money, ergo capital. The big difference
is that those who make political decisions don't view the interests of capital as superseding
the national interest of the public good. That's what he says. So the interests of capital aren't
the sort of political sum on bonds.
Although let's never forget that the power of workers to resist capital in China is even
less than it is in China.
Absolutely.
Absolutely.
Much less.
Yeah. But it's a really interesting...
Much less.
It's a really interesting stuff.
Are no trade unions for us.
Absolutely. I'm not, I mean, I'm not a sort of...
Yeah. No, I'm not.
Yeah. But it's a really interesting insight, which is to say that, okay, well, China has
markets, China is deeply embedded in global sort of production, commodity chains, yada, yada, yada.
What is different? Because clearly there are differences in terms of the sort of political
decisions.
Well, the difference I say in the book is, and this is maybe...
Because I'm rustic with this.
Yeah.
Because I think what he's saying about the public good, about certain values taking
priority over the interests of capital, I think that broadly applied to European
social democracies from 45 until the late 1970s.
And so I think...
And even earlier, because in that article you wrote about boots.
Yeah. Yeah. Exactly.
But if you say, but if you said that now...
The capitalists themselves accepted limitations on what they could do.
But if you're a politician now and you say that, you say there should be limits on what
capital can do, where it can go, what it can buy, that is viewed by...
As anti-capitalists.
Yes. Yes.
So Ernest Bevan would be an anti-capitalist for the lobbyists and news people in 2023,
even though he obviously never was.
Yeah. Yeah. And Peter Shaw would be anti-capitalist.
And Hugh Gateskill would be anti-capitalist.
Quite.
Well, this is one of the absurdities of presentism, that one of the features of
intellectual and public life now is that what went before even 20 years before.
Sooner it'll be five years, maybe it'll be five minutes, is just vanished.
It's just erased.
So if you say, well, you know, you can go to a library.
There are still libraries.
You can look up on the internet.
You can buy books on Amazon.
They're still there and A-books and so on, written by these people, where they criticize
many aspects of capitalism and that would now lead them to be viewed as almost revolutionaries,
anti-capitalists, but within normal, moderate opinion.
So we get all this utter nonsense about centrism.
Centrism means a kind of a collation of policies,
none of which are popular, many of which are radically rejected by most of the population,
but they're attenuated and triangulated to the point in which it's thought that they can be
put over on the population.
That's what centrism is.
Most of the centrist ideas, most of the central are extremely unpopular,
rejected by large parts of the population.
Most of the British population, for example, favours, as I do, but I think it's not going
to happen.
It's not possible, favours nationalization, taking back to some form of public ownership.
Most of the utilities, obviously water, large parts of energy, maybe parts of the banks,
railways and so on.
That would be a very good move.
And if you check even conservative voters, well over a half, sometimes 67% here, very
good idea.
Why don't we do it?
It's an extremist idea now.
Well, then you've got to, it's represented as an extremist idea.
Now, there are reasons why it might not be possible, including some I've talked about
and some of my reasons.
It might not be possible because Britain is very highly exposed to international capital flows.
So if these policies were done in a way which the markets perceived to be
dangerous to the financial system, the markets would veto it.
So it might be that it is impossible.
But there's nothing extreme about them.
They were the common bread and butter of British politics, at least from the Second World War
before that, of course, as well.
But from the 45, the government of 1945 up to, even I would say periods of statureism,
because as I mentioned in my book, she had these rather charming inconsistencies.
We can never privatise the post office because the Queen's head is on the steps.
Now, that was actually a deep thing.
She didn't grasp the way in which liberated markets dissolved the culture around them,
including the national culture.
She strongly opposed, I think, BA as British Airways changed the logo on the back of the
plane and took the flag off as strongly opposed.
Couldn't understand that BA was now a global capitalist entity.
She should have read some marks about how markets can dissolve previous traditions.
There's all in the communist manifesto.
Absolutely.
Whether that was where Marx was right.
It was prophetic.
But she wouldn't have done that.
But in her favour, she also, and this is in false dawn,
she responded to an account of Fukuyama's idea thing, end of history, beginning of nonsense.
Didn't believe any of that rubbish.
She saw the kind of bourgeois society, basically an idealised model of the 1950s,
actually, or even the 30s.
She saw that as something that required political struggle.
She thought it could be revived.
The paradox was, and this is what she was sort of skewed on this paradox,
and the deepest paradoxes are the ones that the people involved in them never,
never understand, was that what she did in the economy destroyed all possibility and
even then all memory of the society she wanted to rebuild.
That's the deep paradox of thatcherism, which I began to understand myself,
maybe from about 87 to 88 and onwards.
And that was when I adopted a slightly bookardist role of making cryptic
criticisms of all this, very unwelcome criticism.
I didn't end up in a camp or something or a cell like Bukaran, but they were very,
very unwelcoming.
And when she was still in power, although she never embraced Fukuyama's theory,
her own view of the world and that of many thatcherites had become a form of universal
triumphalism, a kind of upside down Marxism.
And what I'd object to in Marxism, you might not take this view,
but is what I object to in all radical progressive ideologies,
which is the contempt they display for the casualties of progress.
Say, well, but four million, 10 million Russian peasants died.
Well, they were peasants.
People, what cultivated did they have degrees?
Were they graduates?
The left response would be, well, precisely all this happens with regards to the formation of
markets in the whole world, right?
Or, you know, the Irish famine, the Irish famine, for instance, is the exact same phenomenon.
So I suppose a reasonable, I hope, left response would be, that's absolutely correct.
The point is that market ideologues don't understand they did the exact same thing.
No, they don't.
And but that, I mean, when there had been moderate forms of capitalism, that was understandable.
But when a more radical form of capitalism was reinvented or invented a new form even,
actually, because it was more global than it had ever been before,
even in the colonial period, it was more global than that.
There was this, to me, very repellent, morally repellent, even aesthetically repellent,
view that if there are groups that can't fit into this well, let them go.
So they would go by living in broken down cities.
They'd gradually, some would leave, some would die, some would have short lives.
And this is on a bigger scale happening in America, where, of course,
as we've discussed earlier in our conversation today are, and there are these really large numbers
of deaths from, from drugs.
I mean, of course, that's, I mean, you can look at it another way.
You could say, you know, drugs are the hyper capitalist commodity.
It's interesting, but if you, many of the big series in television and series in the last
few years coming out of America have been about ordinary people, middle-class people,
and other people entering the drug economy, breaking bad.
But lots of them have been like that.
Ozark, great TV.
But it also tells you something, which is that the only way for many people to either
live a normal life, which in breaking bad men, funding cancer care,
or to accumulate substantial capital is the drug economy.
I mean, large parts of America are now such that the living parts of the economy or the
drug economy and its various extensions, because, of course, it then funds
legitimate businesses and gains hold of them.
So that's a very interesting feature, I think, of, and that connects with our earlier discussion
of feudalism.
I mean, I think however much one criticizes the feudal lords and aristocrats, which I would,
myself in many ways, they weren't as cruel or as anarchical as Mexican or Colombian
or Russian cartels.
I mean, they're extraordinarily cruel.
They're extraordinarily violent and kill enormous numbers of people.
And yet, there are large parts of Latin America and other countries that have fallen into that
that condition.
And that connects, by the way, with another feature of my book, which is very much
resisted and might even be resisted by my Hobbes, if he could be brought back, which is that
one of the ways in which I represent Hobbes as a liberal rationalist and a liberal optimist
is that he did think that his ideas were, which he are in some respects universal,
but he did think that they could be applied to get societies that and fall into what he
called a state of nature.
That's warring groups, warring over position and power and resources.
They could get out of that by inventing a sovereign by sort of contract.
I don't think history supports that.
I think there are lots of periods in history which show that states of nature in society,
state of nature is not something in Hobbes before society is formed.
It's something, it's a condition that societies can fall into at any time.
They last for ages, centuries even.
It's very hard to get out of a situation like that.
And that was something also, by the way, which the liberals of the Iraq war and of the
Libyan regime change didn't understand, which is that it's comparatively easy to destroy a state.
It's extremely difficult to recreate it in Libya, for example.
I mean, one of the features of current life now is that Libya doesn't just have two governments,
which in practice means it hasn't got any government.
But it's also one of the really principal gateways of illegal migration into Europe.
So that problem was, or that reality, that flow was created by or magnified by
the regime change that Cameron and the French imposed on Libya.
I mean, when people say, you've got to stamp down on the gangs and you've got to repress
the people's traffickers, that might be possible to do in Europe where there are still
relatively strong states.
You can't do it in Libya because there is, in fact, there is no state.
So it just can't be done in there.
And that's connected.
On how many occasions have you watched reports about Lampedusa or other migration flows,
big libations?
How many times when they mentioned that some of them have come from Libya,
how often has it been mentioned that the Libyan state was destroyed by Western intervention?
I would say practically never.
And that's not deliberate, by the way.
It's not a conspiracy, which we're not going to mention this.
First of all, they never heard that too young or that too, they don't know anything about it.
And they don't care.
The business, the rapid business of generating news doesn't permit that kind of reflection.
It just isn't in the range of thoughts and experiences and histories that people know.
I mean, this to me seems like a core small sea conservative insight as somebody who's a socialist
that agrees with this insight, which is, like you say, it's very, very easy comparatively
to destroy a state, state infrastructure.
It's very hard to build it.
And Libya is really the great example here, because I tweeted this, I think earlier on
the week with regards to these floods, you know, tens of thousands of people dying,
open air slave markets, like you say, this is absolutely astonishing stuff.
And I say clearly Qaddafi was better, clearly human development index.
I think in 2010, they were like 55th in the world, number one in Africa.
Now there are 115th, you know, just human development index is literally
And some of this is measurable.
Exactly.
Yeah, exactly.
So clearly, clearly, you know, you'd want to, you'd probably want to go back in time
if you could if you were Libyan.
And then some people said, yeah, but he was going to get Benghazi.
He said Benghazi is now right round by basically a form of the Taliban.
I don't think they recognize quite what they've unleashed.
Well, there's a reason for that, though.
It's part of the liberal, a liberal worldview, which is that nothing can be worse than tyranny.
But lots of things are worse than tyranny.
I mean, some tyrannies, tyrannies differ.
There can be tyrannies that are limited in their goals to enriching a few people.
Though that might be terrible and it can be less humanly costly than tyrannies,
which want to change the whole society according to some model, which could be
communist or fascist.
So there can be different kinds of tyrannies.
But it simply isn't true that on any reasonable ethical or empirical assessment,
that tyrannies are always the worst thing.
Where do you think it ends?
Because, you know, we've seen so many of these mistakes, like I say with Libya, Afghanistan.
After it was said by nearly everybody, this will never happen again.
Yeah, but people still defend it.
That's the thing.
That's what I find really, really interesting.
Well, they say that it's because they say tyranny is the worst thing.
They still believe that.
And they don't see the necessity.
Well, there's maybe an even deeper reason which wouldn't fit in easily the most aspects of
left-wing thought, which is that much of political life as of much of ethical life
is a choice in which involves options and choices in which whatever is done involves
irreparable loss or even wrong, even injustice.
And that's a very sort of, in other words, if you think that, then not just a choice between
evils, because you could say, well, choice between evils, we will maximize the good and
minimize the evil, which is a kind of utilitarian way of thinking.
So in a sense, the evils don't matter.
If you get the maximum out of it, the evils don't matter.
But I don't think that's true to human experience.
Human experience is of choosing between options, recurring options, options that don't go away.
They keep recurring in different forms in which whatever is done involves
what those who have acted or failed to act recognize to be irreparable.
Losses, I'll tell you an example from that in the Second World War, which was told me by,
I said, I have a lin, which was that a government officer, government official,
appeared or a minister, even I can't remember now, appeared before his typing pool and said,
we're going to sack every single person in the typing pool, which would be a great injustice to
all but one of you, because not only will you be sacked, you'll never get a job again,
and there'll be a black mark over your security, because you're sacked for security reasons.
One of you is leaking, but we don't know who that is, and we haven't got time to find out.
And in the meantime, brave men and women are being dropped into parts of the
inventory and dying terrible deaths, terrible deaths.
So we're sacking a lot of you, and he sacked them all.
Now, the interesting thing about that is, to me, is that he recognized that what he was doing
involved injustice and wrong, not just a utilitarian calculation.
He didn't turn into utilities and said, it'll be more utiles, it'll be more
pleasure and less pain in the world. It was a deep injustice to those who suffered it.
Their lives were effectively, their productive lives were ruined, permanently and irreparably
ruined. Even after the war, they'd never get a job again.
For the sake of a goal, winning the war and also
protecting these people who are going out there to be tortured to death and so on and
portrayed. Now, a basic question for ethics and political theories, will there ever be a point
in the human world where this is to be true? Now, if you're a certain kind of progressive,
a certain kind of Marxist and certain kind of, there will be, there won't be in my view,
there won't be, it'll always be like this. Why it'll be like this? Because that's what human
beings are like. We are conflicting needs, conflicting impulses, conflicting. Even if we
had material abundance, it would appear in these kinds of ways. But that's something which many
people are extremely resistant. It's an idea which to them is deeply pessimistic. Although,
you can turn around and you can say that in times of tragic choices, they also are periods of
context where people can display extraordinary nobility. They can take on the
irreparable loss to themselves even. I agree with what you've just said there. I say this when
you wrote a book about moving to society beyond capitalism and of a kind of abundance we're not
really familiar with. I agree with what you've just said. And I would say in response that
human frailties and all the kinds of discontent you've just talked about will never go away.
And in fact, some people have already lived under conditions of comparative posterity
and abundance. We call them the aristocracy. And if you read the sort of novels like La Classe
and these kinds of people. How they lived. Yeah, how they live. They're often very sad, very tragic.
So there's big parts of their lives which don't, you know, the human experience which won't
dissipate. And competitive. Yeah, or quite. But then I suppose the question is, what's a bigger
problem? People are getting upset about love affairs or, you know, the paradox of choice,
or not being able to feed themselves or dying from diphtheria. But I'm making an extreme comparison
there. But I think you're absolutely right about certain aspects of these things never.
But for many people, it's a hard choice to, it's a hard truth, I would say. I would say it's a fact.
It's a fact of ethical life. There are these recurring situations. And even in, you see,
the paradox emerges for revolutionaries in that, in an attempt to create a world in which these
tragic choices don't need to be made or they're, or they only occur in personal life with love affairs
and friendships and so on. The revolutionaries find themselves with precise, having to make the
decisions and the choices that they want to polish. So one of the things that's not understood,
as you know, a lot of my book is about Russia. And I don't deal with this part in Russia. One of the
reasons that a post-Saharist Russia turned into a Bolshevik state, and one of the reasons that was
highly repressive was partly Western intervention and partly to struggle with the whites. But one of
the things that happens in all revolutionary situations is that the revolutionaries struggle
among themselves. And the ones that are the least ruthless, like the Russian anarchists,
are the ones that are eliminated, exterminated either physically or politically marginalized.
So that the paradox of revolutionary action, and of all political action in my view, even, you know,
conventional political action, is that if it's motivated by these grandiose ideas of getting
to a world in which tragic choices don't exist, it will find itself making these choices
in order to achieve the world in which they don't exist. So perpetuating the world in which it is.
And I think that's, you see, this is maybe an irreconcilable, I mean, left-wing thinkers
and conservative thinkers agree on more than real left-wing thinkers and real conservative
thinkers. I don't mean neoliberals on either side, agree on more than either, usually realize.
But there's a fundamental difference between the view that I take and many people on the left take.
And even on the right, of course, the neoliberal right, if you would say to them, they would say
exactly in a way what use they say. Well, we may get it to a world where the people have to make
choices among ethnic cuisines. They may get to a world in which I don't know how it could be tragic
to choose between Indian and Chinese. But anyway, we may have a world in which people have unhappy
love affairs. They do have unhappy love affairs. And we may have a world in which people suddenly
die of new diseases and so on. So that might be, that might be, but we won't have a world in which
the structures of power are such that they impose these choices, tragic choices on large
numbers of people. So I suppose there's two, there's two, having read your corpus, read this book,
there's probably two points of disagreement or interesting conflict and tension. So the first
is you've got a quite justified and understandable contempt, critique of utopianism. I would say
the major problem for the West in the 21st century is anti-utopianism. Because what it does, and you
sort of talk about this a little bit in the book, because you don't explicitly, you know, is that,
well, okay, living standards have been flat for a long time, productivity flat 15 years, yet we
really can't get a handle on any one of about a dozen social challenges that working and middle
class people really care about. You know what? You're not a peasant living in 15th century France.
So stop complaining. So I think, so I think there is a real, there's a toolkit for intellectuals
and politicians, which I think was very well suited to problems the 20th century. But I think
this aversion, skepticism, hostility to utopianism is increasingly constraining the ability of the
West to solve its basic problems. No, I would think it's slightly different than that. I mean,
the difference is that liberal capitalists don't understand the respects in which they view as
utopian. They don't understand the respects in which it can't be made global or universal.
The more it extends itself, the more fragile it becomes. And they think of it as permanent when
there can be a boom, of course, a boom period. There have been many boom periods in history.
That could last for a while. But they have the seeds in them of their own destruction.
So they, when they say, I mean, this is the, if you like, the problem with
what's come to be called capitalist realism, which is it assumes the situation, assumes the system can
be indefinitely malleable and indefinitely managed. So this is a form of the end of history.
Capitalist realism is a form of the end of history. So you could say, well,
what about the great Wall Street cash? Well, that will never be allowed to happen again.
What about the rise of fascism in the 30s? Well, that's not going to happen. It is happening,
actually, under various forms now. But so by the way, we can, we can be sure it's possible if it's
actually happening. One little piece of logic you can get out of philosophy is if something's
actually happening, there's definitely possible. But they say, no, we can, we can, we can manage
the system. We can keep it going. We can. Now, that might not always be a bad position to take
if the alternatives are very much worse. So if you were, if you're saying to me, if supposing
I was in Weimar Germany and before I was born and there was a program, someone came up with a
program that would somehow have stabilized Weimar Germany, difficult given what was happening in
the world and so on. And given the conflicts in central Europe and other impossible, probably
actually, but would I support it? Yes, I would have supported. It could be, it could even be
thought of as a conservative program or a conservative program. I would have because
if I'd had any insight at that time, which some people I think did actually think how bad it
could be, they didn't quite anticipate the full horrors of Nazism, but they thought it could be
pretty bad, including people on the left. If you could say, well, if this, if this is the, if
would I support a, so to speak, a conservative strategy, then yes, definitely. But the argument
then would be, well, no, that's too, it's too, I mean, in fact, maybe I'm putting these arguments
into your mouth, but you could say, but that assumes there's no alternative at all other,
all of the alternatives are disastrous, there could be better alternatives. That's what, that's
what it is. Well, I think, so for instance, you said that you support public ownership of,
let's say something really uncontroversial, rail, because the franchises and it's very easy to
water is even less controversial. Yeah, very, these are all quite moderately easy to execute,
right? And I think for some people, that would be viewed as utopian. And I think what this feeds
into is the anti utopianism as the default. It might, I don't think you see, they don't,
they don't recognize the premise of politics. So for instance, well, they would say, well,
the shareholders are not, no, they won't have that and the banks and there's,
and that's what they didn't get about Brexit is the premise of politics. If you have a social
majority wanting something very passionately in a system where people in order to be reelected
have to broadly do what people tell them to do, then that's, there's a difference here. That's
the direction in terms of the outcome. There's a difference. Something can be utopian,
in the sense that it includes, it involves a system that has never existed or has never been,
never worked. No, we live in a world where people think that public ownership of rail
is utopian. That's what these people think. We're not in a world where it's like
St. Simon and Fourier, the C's, St. Lemonade, they think public ownership of energy is utopian.
Now, yes, but it may be impossible without being utopian. Again, we know it's not utopian
in the sense of being impossible because it did exist. Yeah. It's a reputation where I said,
if something did exist, it's not impossible. Again, so their argument against it is by
deploying anti-utopianism. Well, if we do that, then we don't know where all that,
any politics which is. The really hard truth is that what I would prefer in regard to public
utilities is desirable and certainly possible because it existed before, but may well not
be possible for any British government of any complexion as long as it remains as dependent
on capital markets as it is. That's probably right. Yeah. That's the hard truth. In other words,
it is desirable. It is possible. It did occur before. It could in principle occur again,
just not utopian in that sense, not utopian, but it's also impossible for the foreseeable future.
As long as we're as exposed, as long as I've argued, perhaps, it was not entirely frivolous
when I compared Britain in a piece I did in my column to Argentina. One of the richest
countries in the world, top 10 rich countries 100 years ago, went from being in that position
in the 30s and then later to becoming a basket case, such that now the various
products of the Argentine political culture include radical anti-anarchal capitalists by
their own description who want to burn down the central bank, they want to abolish the national
currency and replace it by a mixture of dollars and crypto. They want free markets in sex and also
human organs, but they're strongly anti-abortion. I haven't quite worked out how that works,
but anyway, that's what some of them are. Millet, the front-runner for the presidency,
who could, by the way, I think there's a non-trivial chance that he could be elected,
could become. What would he do then? That'd be the interesting thing,
but probably, I mean, I have been to Argentina. It was a long time ago, so I don't know what
it's like now, but the hard truth is that certain social and political systems
get themselves into a historical cul-de-sac from which it's very difficult to get out,
because their own politicians are thoroughly corrupt, thoroughly irresponsible, and the global
capital markets won't, will veto anything that could be done anyway, probably. So the really
bad prospect for Britain, which I think is not at all unrealistic, I don't say it's inevitable,
but it's not at all, is that we're actually either already entering that position.
This takes us on to Brexit because, of course, what people say, well, we wouldn't be as isolated
if we're in the magnificent colossus of Europe. That eternal thing, by the way. I mean, one of the
odd things about the EU is that it's almost like a line from Eliot to S. Eliot. He talks about the
still point of an eternal turning world in one of his mystical poems. That's what the EU is for,
the remainder of mind. I don't mean all of those people who voted remain. Lots of my friends voted.
By the way, the best argument against Brexit I've heard was one put to me by a friend who said,
why are you voting Romania? He said, because the British political class simply isn't up to
making Brexit, they're just hopeless. It's a very good, very good argument. Very powerful argument.
That's the best, I think, the best argument. It has proved to be true. They weren't up to it,
and they didn't want to, and the political class didn't want to do it. It was handed to them,
and they didn't do it. They tried to overturn it for several years, then they accepted it,
but even now they didn't accept it. Basically, they still want to reverse it, as has been seen
recently in Stammer's revelation of the fact that he does have one belief, one feature he has the
belief in. Europe, in the EU, the still point in the, in the, if we're in there, nothing bad can
happen to us. Nothing bad can happen to Europe. Well, one thing's already bad, this is Ukraine,
that's kind of pretty bad. But also, many European countries now, for various reasons,
partly connected with immigration, partly connected with climate policy and other factors,
have seen a continuing trend, not just a blip of the emergence of far-right parties. So we're not
that way far off a situation in which the EU will be predominantly a far-right bloc. Now, you would
think, wouldn't you, if the attitude of British Remainers to Europe was empirical and not mystical.
You would think that they would take note of this and say, well, do we really want to be
part of a, we rejoin or in some looser relationship, but still much closer than we are now,
to a bloc in which many governments are dependent on far-right support, in which we're probably
including 20% of the vote in Germany is far-right. Over 40% of, I think, if I remember my figures
right, of the French electorate in the last presidential election vote for Le Pen. Do we want
to be a part of that? No, they don't say that. They never discuss the matter because, as we,
you and I, I think, they're not really interested in Europe. Brexit for them was a fetid intratory
dispute where they wanted to, they're not into nothing about Europe and they don't care about
Europe, but it does embody a kind of semi-mystical ideal for them in which we can escape the problems
which are singular to Britain by merging with this other entity, which has all the virtues
that we lack. And it forms, and this is the crucial thing about their resistance to empirical
thinking, which is that this is part of a worldview of those, which is that all of the
experiences since 2006-16 are departures from the normal course of history. What they cannot,
and will never understand, is that what they and other liberals call populism is the political
blowback, is political blowback against the social disruption that their policies have produced.
They can't understand the connection between what they've done and populism. Populism comes from
nowhere or from very evil people. What they come up with in the end is a theory of evil. Well,
there are these evil demagogues who've been lying around for a long time and they suddenly emerge
and they deceive the gullible masses, the uneducated, the uneducated. That's what,
that's what it is. It's a theory of evil. It's odd from those who say there isn't such a thing as
evil. There's only error. The human beings aren't definitely improvable by getting there, but they've
come up with a theory that explains it. But whatever the explanation they might come up with, 2016
onwards, or even before that, is an anomaly in the normal course of human history. The normal
course of human history would have seen Hillary Clinton reelected. Why didn't that happen,
the Russians? It's usually something exogenous to society or some mistake that could easily have
been altered, but wasn't. Remember at the time they said, well, Trump hasn't got a majority.
They never said that about, but previously, I mean, he had a majority. It's an entire worldview
which is on the line for them. And it's on the line for them partly, of course, because they are
the vanguard of the normal course of history. I mean, the normal course of history was that it
would be, which was dislocated or derailed from 2016 onwards. It would be that a transnational,
potentially global, but at least European state, which wasn't an empire, but wasn't a nation state
either. It's not an empire, but it isn't a nation. It's some new, completely new.
And it wants to go all the way to Georgia, but it's definitely not an empire.
Yeah. But also, it hasn't got most of the, it's where I disagree with some of the Brexit. They
say it's an incipient super state. It isn't an incipient super state. It hasn't got fiscal union.
It hasn't got armed forces. At the moment, some people on the right of European politics asking
that a naval blockade be put around Lampedusa. It hasn't got a navy, small problem. So it isn't
a state. It's not going to become a state, in my view. There is an argument, I mean, some kind of
ultra-sophisticated ex-Brexiteers now say, well, by leaving it, we've made them more likely. Some
remainers say there's two people. We've made it more likely for Europe to become a dangerous super
absolute nonsense. There are too many conflicts within Europe and too many problems that Europe
can't resolve. There are conflicts between Poland and Hungary on the one hand and even
between them, but on the one hand and the Germany and France on the other. Then there's the Baltic
states. Then there's Scandinavia, Sweden. These all have different interests and different
trajectories, but also, in many of the states, as I mentioned earlier, the far right which is
emerging is not a pan-European far right. These are not the fascists and Nazis of the 30s who
wanted to abolish nations. Actually, some of them did. Some of them were pan-European. They
fell up with these small ones, get rid of them, kill them all, enslave them. They're not this.
They're nationalists. Actually, the strong, the emerging far right groups, they may or may not be
proposing to leave the EU, which Le Pen doesn't anymore because actually the obstacles to leaving,
if you're in the Euro, are huge. We were able to leave when we did leave just because we weren't
in the Euro, but if you're in, it's a revolutionary act and a revolution of that kind which would
probably involve in Italy and in France, for example, a devaluation of savings of those who had them
20, 30, 40%. You're not going to get bourgeois support for that. The only people who will want
it will be impoverished young people. Another feature, by the way, of this is that these
right-wing movements in Europe are very often youth movements. Very much lost on English speakers.
They don't understand that. They think that young people are all liberals and not in Europe and not
in America now. I mean, the conversion rate into far-right positions is high, very high,
among young people. The cohort below Gen Z is particularly concerning. What's interesting
is if you look at, I think, people now entering college, 18 to 21-year-olds, there is this
extraordinary divergence in political sympathies by gender in the US, which is just, obviously,
that's always existed to some extent. That's a difference. But now it's just blown up in the
last five years. It's partly for a reason, which I write about in the book, which is back in the
early 90s, when I first got the idea that America might come a cropper because of its internal
divisions. Can we say a cropper? What do you mean, civil war? Not civil war. No, it could be civil
warfare, which is chronic sort of low-level violence and disruption of institutions, but
was partly because of abortion. America's different, not different from everywhere.
There's also been conflicts in Poland and some European countries, but America is because of
its religious composition and others, and that spills over into a gender politics. It's one of the
reasons that DeSantis, I think, never really had a chance because unlike Trump, who could flirt with
the pro-life wife, who doesn't believe any of it, and everybody knows he doesn't believe any of it,
DeSantis really did. So he really would have pushed, I think, and I think that would have killed
Republican support among many Republican women, killed at Stone Dead. They don't want to lose
this freedom. Why should they? They may not find the present situation satisfactory in many ways,
and because one of the reasons I argued this back in the 1890s is that turning all
people, turning values into rights works when the values are broadly and generally accepted
in society, so you can have a right against torture, you can have a right, various rights of
free speech and so on, though defining them is not always easy. But if a position is turned,
if a value position is turned into a right, which is deeply controversial in the society,
which is deeply disputed and conflicted, as abortion always has been in America,
then in the long run, and it may take, as it did take 30 years for this to happen, back then what
I wrote was the inevitable result is that the constitutional, the Supreme Constitutional Authority
will become an object of political capture. If it constitutionalizes rights to activities that
a third or a quarter of the population or regard is basically wrong, in the long run,
which has taken a generation, there will be a pushback by the conservatives, and that was achieved
under Trump that would appoint these conservative judges who had various complex constitutional
arguments why abortion should never have been turned into a right, but all of those are irrelevant
to me, they're just local American fetishes about constitutionalism. The real reason is that
rights cannot insulate from politics, culture, and other conflicts, which are deep-seated.
If you try to do that, you eventually threaten the regime.
But this is very relevant to UK context, because we of course now have a Supreme Court,
which is very alien to the American imposition, and that was Blair.
Yeah, well, I love talking to conservatives about this, because I say, look, if we had
Lord Derrierev and the courts wouldn't be in this mess, sentencing wouldn't be like,
the police would not be anything like this. I think there's probably something to that.
But what's interesting with Blair is, when he introduces the Supreme Court,
I don't think he realizes the gravity of what he's doing.
No, you didn't. You didn't.
You've changed the complexion of the democracy quite fundamentally.
Well, I agree with that 100% Erin, because what it's done is
it's produced a kind of, I mean, the American system has produced its pathologies,
which is that everything is litigated.
It's part of...
If you capture this one body, you control everything.
But everything is litigated, and politics becomes,
law becomes a surrogate for politics. But when law becomes a surrogate for politics,
law becomes politicized, and eventually that politics becomes Schmidian politics.
The politics of enemies, which has happened now in America.
That's one endpoint of that.
Now, we are in a kind of halfway house here, which is that
lawfare was promoted by the Romanes.
But it now covers vast swathes of government activity to the point at which
it's even questionable whether we have a government, actually,
because you could say, well, we should do this.
You say, well, yes, but you'll have to.
I mean, this would be a good thing to do.
There might even be agreement, but it'll be litigated.
Stop for years.
We should build more houses.
I'm not saying whether we should or we shouldn't, but build more houses.
We can't do that, because it'll be endlessly litigated through the courts by the Nimbis.
And in that circumstance, what it produces in Britain is not yet,
or not so much the Schmidian politics of enmity.
But paralysis, in which nothing can actually be done on a wide range of issues,
unless you're ready to get out of the European Convention of Human Rights,
a few conservatives and others are.
Anything that's done about immigration will be litigated,
whether you agree with it or not, anything.
And many other issues, I mean, issues of town planning and of building,
and so it applies to them all.
So what we've got in Britain is a kind of paralyzing version of lawfare,
and it does, I think, emerge primarily, or at least the starting point of it,
was Blair's creation.
I mean, the very name tells you what he was doing.
He was trying to sort of superimpose on a fundamentally different system
of parliamentary sovereignty.
Then we go, history of ideas.
I used to be a historian of ideas, and I spent 20 years
working and reading about John Stuart Mill.
When John Stuart Mill writes about liberty,
his background idea is not a court.
There wasn't a Supreme Court.
There was parliamentary sovereignty, which was pretty well absolute.
By the way, it was absolute, up to and including Thatcher.
She could do whatever she wanted.
I was-
I mean, feasibly, it's still here, right?
They could scrap the Supreme Court.
If there was an act of Parliament to get rid of the Supreme Court.
Legally, it could all still be scrapped,
but there's not the political will there, and there won't be.
Well, I think I'm sort of surprised that Tories never talk about that.
Oh, they have been talking about the European Convention.
I mean, the Supreme Court, because that's lower hanging fruit, right?
It would be semi-revolutionary.
I mean, in a sense, again, look what's happening in Israel.
Similar, in some respects, to us, that there isn't a fixed constitution.
There isn't a written constitution.
The attempt by Netanyahu to limit, even just limit,
not abolish the Supreme Court produced profound internal divisions.
I also followed, and I even went there on some occasions.
I followed the evolution of political development in New Zealand.
Now, New Zealand was interesting because its original constitution
was an extreme version of the British constitution,
which is that there were no set rights, there was no Supreme Court.
When I went in the early 90s, late 80s, there was no second chamber.
It was a billiard hall, at least, when I visited them.
And I think the second chamber was abolished there in the 1950s.
So there was one parliament which could do anything.
And that was why, by the way, that was the reason,
the fundamental, the basic fundamental constitutional political reason,
why neoliberalism there was more radical than anywhere else.
It's the only country of which I'm aware in which farming was marketized.
Radically marketized.
They usually power, you can do all sorts of things about farming,
but you actually just defund them completely, which they did.
Almost unthinkable.
And it all happened rather quickly.
There were local reasons for that, which is that their labor party
was taken over by someone with strong neoliberal views,
but somewhat left-wing foreign policy.
And that led the left to think that none of this was going to happen.
Or it's obvious to me that it was going to happen.
But it was also obvious to me that it would melt down for various reasons
because they started talking about changing the electoral system,
which they did.
And then the party, the constellation of parties all changed.
So most of what had been done was kept,
but some of the more extreme entries for their thatcherism
were sort of made a bit more bearable.
But you're absolutely right about this.
I think Blair didn't grasp what a fundamental change was,
or maybe he did, but he thought it would be coherent.
He didn't understand that underneath there'd still be parliament.
There'd still be local authorities, and they would be political bodies.
And then you superimpose this structure of law going up to the Supreme Court.
But the Supreme Court still can't overrule parliament
if parliament comes up with a decision which is what it wants.
But the political will is absent.
In practice, what that means is my political hope,
insofar as I still have any, is for a hung parliament,
which may not happen either.
There may not be a hung parliament because of what's happened in Scotland.
The meltdown of the SNP may give Labour a working majority,
in which case there will not be proportional representation.
I've now come to the view which I have posed for many, many, many years.
But I pride myself on being something of an empiricist,
so I've come to this view from observations and evidence.
That electoral reform is a precondition of any kind of
emergence of better political ideas and better political coalitions in Britain.
And the reason I came to that is that the principal argument
against proportional representation is that it doesn't produce strong government,
but we've had governments with massive majorities that have been weak.
Very weak, have been locked in internal, 80 majority,
produced chaos and anarchy and various kinds of internal party conflict and division,
and achieved nothing basically.
So having that experience and seeing all the parties converging on the non-existent centre,
that strange confluence of watered down policies,
all of which are opposed by the British majority.
The only way that can be broken up is by changing the electoral system.
And I think that is possible. There may yet be a hung parliament.
And if there isn't a hung parliament this time, there may be after that.
Because one thing I would confidently make a prediction.
Many other things. It's not clear who's going to win the American elections.
It's not clear whether Biden will be around.
It's not clear what's going to happen.
But in Britain, I'm pretty confident Labour will be overwhelmed quite quickly
if it becomes the government.
Because it has nothing essentially.
Its only policies are a green agenda which is not affordable
and which imposes disproportionate costs on working people.
So it will be rejected by the trade unions and already is being to some extent.
And a pro-European policy which is anachronistic, a nostalgist.
It won't occur, probably something like that.
Probably won't occur.
Because it will be difficult to legitimate democratically in Britain.
Any really transformative re-engagement with Europe.
So it's a cul-de-sac that they're moving into.
That will break down and then something else will happen.
It's interesting about the parliamentary sovereignty bit.
Because Ramsey McDonald said this in the early 20th century,
which is we don't need to do what the Bolsheviks have done in Russia.
We have a sovereign parliament which gives the person with the largest number of seats
and then an extraordinary amount of power.
I want to finish this.
But that's one of my, I'm not a socialist.
It's one of my objections to the EU.
It's constructed to make socialism impossible.
Yeah, well it's moderate social democracy.
No, I mean it's constructed to make social democracy impossible.
I mean if it achieved all its goals, it would have done that.
It would have been a vast neoliberal market of capital and labour.
That's what it explicitly is.
So what I find puzzling among on the left, moderate or radical left,
is that they hold out these hopes and illusions about the EU.
It's very explicit what the EU wants.
They want a neoliberal continent.
Last question.
You talk about the rise of hyper-liberal ideology and the woke religion of surplus elites.
So I'm going to read this quote here.
Hyper-liberal ideology plays a number of roles.
It operates as a rationale for a failing variety of capitalism and a vehicle
through which surplus elites struggle to secure a position of power in society.
And so far as it expresses a coherent system of ideas,
it is the anti-western creed of an antinomian intelligentsia that is ineffably western.
So this is fascinating.
There's a lot of packed into this.
Yeah, that's fascinating.
So this idea that hyper-liberalism, woke movement, etc.
is drawing upon the intellectual reservoirs of Western liberalism
in order to attack Western liberalism.
And you see really strong parallels between that and sort of late Tsarist Russia.
I do see some parallels, but the interesting point I would make now,
I mean, there wouldn't have been the Russian Revolution
if there hadn't been the First World War.
Of course, there could be a bigger war than we've had so far.
It could be that the United States would get into a war.
I think it's quite unlikely actually, but with China,
and it's very unclear who would prevail or who would lose the most from that war.
So there can be more than one comparison.
But the key thing about the hyper-liberals is,
I think the key contradiction or paradox in them is on the one hand,
they're tremendously anti-West, claimed to be the anti-colonial.
They think Western societies are incurably wrong.
And Western civilization was a blot on the planet and on human history.
And on the other hand, their ideological goals of deconstructing the self
of radical autonomy are all hyperbolic versions of Western ideals.
And not only that, they think that all the countries in the world
will have to go through this process.
They think that the Taliban must become liberal.
I don't mean anything's wrong with the Taliban, in my view at least,
but is there only one alternative deconstructionist radical hyperliberalism?
They're not going to become like that.
Most of the world isn't like that.
Indeed, the hyperliberalism of America is strongest in the Anglesphere.
Beyond that, it's weak in Eastern post-communist Europe.
It's very weak in India.
It's weak in China.
It's very weak.
It's regarded in most of the world with a mixture of
gleeful, chadenoid, and pity and contempt.
Nobody admires it.
And yet, it's very strong in the Anglesphere in many parts of the world.
So America's in this strange paradoxical position now,
when hyperliberals are that, America has no soft power in the world.
I mean, there's no country in the world where there are strong majorities
which see America as an ideal to be adopted.
There are some people that emigrate to America from Latin America, Haiti,
China to some extent, India, but it has no soft power.
And yet, this parochial, peculiar American ideology
which universalizes certain American dilemmas and problems,
certain features of racism and colonialism.
Some of which are universal, but what that universe is,
their own peculiar parochial history has spread in many other parts of the world.
So it's a projection of a hyperbolic projection of certain Western ideals
and forms of thinking, Christianity to some extent,
which is a cult of the victim.
The Enlightenment, which is part of a cult of human autonomy,
are radicalized to an extreme point.
And then the idea is the whole world is going to become like that.
Five or 10 years from now, certainly 20 years from now,
the situation in Britain and Europe and in America will be unrecognizably different
because this is not, I don't know what it'll be,
it'll be quite different from now,
but it won't be one in which this is stable hyperliberal elite running everything.
So there are huge movements of discontent,
some of them very unpleasant movements,
some of them horrifying movements in Europe and elsewhere,
but they're vast movements.
For example, in the song Rich Men North of Richmond in America,
you heard about that?
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
How many views did it get?
Now, the left is furious about that and the liberals are furious about this.
I'm writing about this shortly.
I've written about it in the United States,
but they're furious about this.
They say, well, it's not really a critique of capitalism,
it's racism.
Richmond was the capital of the Confederate regime and so on in the Civil War.
It's all terrible stuff, but why has it got so many listeners?
One of the reasons is surely that the marginalization and the suffering
and the loss of a productive role of millions and millions of Americans,
along with the stagnant incomes of millions and millions more,
in other words, the rise of extreme inequality and so on.
It's being either ignored or very inadequately treated by the mainstream parties.
That's the reason.
So there's no way that.
There's no way out of this situation and put it into a very simple thing.
Whoever wins the next presidential election in America
will not be accepted as legitimate by at least a third of the population.
So they've entered what Marxists used to call a legitimation crisis.
They're already in it and it will become acute after the next election.
Whoever wins, because whoever wins is not going to win by a sweeping majority.
Worse than that, there'll be a large block, 20, 30, 40 percent maybe,
who regarded as not just a Trumpist.
What if Trump wins?
He regarded as illegitimate by liberals and Democrats.
It's entered an irreversible period of legitimation crisis.
It doesn't mean the state's going to collapse.
It doesn't mean there's going to be anarchy.
It doesn't mean there's going to be civil war like in the 1860s,
but it does mean that it'll be a dysfunctional state which is semi-failed
and probably will withdraw if there isn't an accidental big war before then.
Probably will withdraw for some of its major commitments abroad to begin with Ukraine
and possibly even its support for Taiwan.
In other words, turn into a more, there might be a goal of an autocracy kind of economy,
which America could achieve if anyone can, probably in the United States,
mixed with a willingness to trade on negotiators with anybody, including China.
So it could be that this whole anti-Chinese,
it's more deeply rooted than the support for Ukraine,
but it could be that this whole anti-Chinese,
by the way, I'm strongly critical of many aspects of the Chinese regime,
and I also regard it as a threat, espionage and other things, absolutely real.
They're not made up by conspiracy theories, they're real, real threats.
But America's not ready for war, it's not prepared for war,
and not convinced to fight a war, and that the economic interests of many sectors
of American society wouldn't benefit from, because a lot of companies,
I mean America, it's unlike the Cold War, fundamental point.
The relationship between America and China is completely unlike the Cold War,
because they co-dependent economically, which the Soviet Union and the West was not
in the course of fundamentally different situations.
So it'll be something different will happen now.
War could happen by accident, but if it doesn't happen by accident,
I think the most likely outcome is that America will fall in on itself,
introvert, become even more introverted than it is really actually now.
And that would fundamentally change the whole world geopolitical situation,
including in Europe, because America's never been stronger in Europe than it is now.
If the rug is pulled on that, what happens in Europe?
Not just in Ukraine, but in other parts of what happens to the EU, for example.
So I think we are approaching an historical juncture in which certain options,
which have been options, will cease to be options,
and other options will be sort of embedded for some time.
And that's not a deterministic or a fatalistic view,
but it's one which accepts the irreversibility of historical changes,
even neofutilism isn't feudalism, and also accepts that
the situation that we're in now, politically speaking, is in some respect a tragic one.
John Gray, thanks so much for joining us.
No, thank you for your questions, and thank you for the very interesting conversation
in which you've put counterarguments from which I've learned.
I'm very glad to hear it. My pleasure.
Thank you.
