Individualism is hampering our ability to demand any kind of changes, because it's
hampering our ability to organize collectively. Firstly, it's the foundation of this idea that
society can be divided into people who rule and everyone else. Secondly, it's the problem
we have with people kind of projecting their political agency onto someone else and saying,
I need this person to save me, which you see massively on the right today, by the way, very,
very angry people thinking, I have no power, Donald Trump's going to come in and screw everyone else
and it's also the foundation of our powerlessness, right? A lot of people believe that they are
powerless within this like, you know, immensely complex world economic system. And the extent
to which that is true hinges on the extent to which we actually believe that we are powerless.
We're told we live in a free market system, free markets, free people,
freedom. Who could disagree? By implication, therefore, if you want to perhaps achieve
certain progressive ends, maybe bring some things into public ownership, you will create less freedom
and that's bad. Alongside that is the claim that socialist economies or even social democracies
are characterized by central planning, command and control. And at the same time, free market
economies devolve power, they give it away. But what if this dichotomy wasn't quite right? Well,
with me today to discuss all of that is the one known to Grace Blakely. She's the author of a
new book, Vulture Capitalism, Corporate Crimes, Backdoor Bailouts and the Death of Freeda. Grace
Blakely, welcome again to Downstream. Thanks for having me. So happy to have you back on.
It's great to be here. You were on very recently. Yeah, not that long ago. It feels like a while
ago. Something's changed. I've got glasses. No. Something else. I've published a book. You've
published a book. That too. I like the glasses by the way. Where are they from? They're just from
Speck Savers. I don't believe you. They are. Are you going into politics? Is this something like
normal me? No, I'm going into academia. So I want people to think I'm smart. That is a joke. I'm
definitely not doing that either. I'm staying exactly what I'm doing, which is writing books
and talking about them. You've won glasses for a long time. I can confirm that. They're just new
glasses. Good on you for not going to like, I love Q-Bits classes. If I had some money, that's
what I'd get. You've got a book out. I have. I'm enjoying the book. Good. It's very fun. It's
somewhat different to what I expected. Oh really? Yes. Because it's very mature. Interesting. It's
sort of book. I'd expect like a 50 year old to write because it's got so many anecdotes. Yeah,
okay. Which is incredibly like to have this compilation of like off the shelf and this and
this and this. It's one of the better things about getting older as you start to develop that. That's
true. And also reading the FT Everyday helps, I suppose. As does having an exceptionally good
editor. So I think I have, for this book, I have to thank all of the editors I've ever had
for forcing me out of, I think, what my default position is, which is kind of
heavily theoretical and abstract, into a much more kind of relatable mode of writing and
presenting my ideas, which does rely on anecdotes. And it actually makes the theoretical arguments
stronger and far easier to understand when you can apply them. So yeah. Yeah. Show don't tell.
Exactly. The book itself, as I've already said, the vulture capitalism, corporate crimes,
backdoor bailouts and the death of freedom. That's that final bit, the death of freedom,
which I think most people will be kind of perplexed at if they're not familiar with your work or
all the ideas in it. You start in the introduction with a great quote, which really sums up actually
the central idea of the book. You write this, life under capitalism means living under a planned
economy while being told you're free. What does that mean? So the idea for this book came about
in that kind of crazy time at the start of the pandemic. And the markets were crashing and
governments were kind of like rushing around trying to think about what to do. And we had all
these kind of big bailout programs that were initially coordinated by the big central banks,
aimed at kind of bailing out large corporations, and then expanded to kind of the rest of the
state propping up pretty much everyone to kind of stave off the economic impact of lockdowns.
And I remember going on TV a lot at the time and being asked, this was just after the 2019
election defeat for Labour, being asked things like, well, the government's spending loads of
money in the economy now. So isn't this exactly what you always wanted? Aren't we by default now
getting socialism because of the pandemic? And in the book, I kind of illustrate all of these
examples of magazines and the business press saying, we've got socialism now because we've
got all this government spending. And it really annoyed me, obviously, being asked those questions.
But it also intrigued me because it suggested that there was this pretty profound misunderstanding
as to how capitalism actually works. And coming as I was from a Marxist perspective,
I kind of went back to Marx and started reading through Capital again to see what kind of relevant
lessons I could apply to this. And I also started looking and reading a lot of Marxist theory on
the state as well. So if you're like Gramsci, Ralph Miliband, Palanças. And I kind of had the
light bulb moment of realizing that the reason there was this misunderstanding of capitalism was
because people had in their minds for whatever reason, whether it was the legacy of the Cold War,
you know, the way we organize our political systems, this dichotomy between centrally
planned status societies on the one hand, and free market capitalist societies on the other hand.
And what you realize as a Marxist is actually that the state is not this separate entity that
sits outside of capitalist social relations. It's fundamentally imbricated in those social relations.
And so I kind of had this idea of framing this argument in terms of it's not free markets versus
planning, because you know, this often becomes quite a emotive argument for people on the right.
It's like free markets preserve freedom, and that's why we need to, you know, make sure we uphold them.
And instead I thought, well, it's very obvious that within capitalist societies we have a huge
amount of basically centralized planning, whether that's centralized planning that's taking place
within the state, within massive corporations, financial institutions, whatever. So this
distinction that people have in their heads between free markets, you know, capitalist
societies and centrally planned social societies is not applicable to reality. And instead we have
these centrally planned capitalist societies, which rest on the kind of massive inequalities of power
that you might expect to see in, you know, the kind of theoretical ideal of a planned society
versus the theoretical ideal of a free market society, which is supposed to be all decentralized.
Instead capitalism is this kind of hybrid system where because of the inequalities of power
that emerge as the system develops, you basically get a number of actors that are able to
basically make decisions about, you know, production, about, you know, the like the rules
to which we're all subjected, about, you know, distribution of resources, and about many, many
other things. And the average person is forced to live in a world in which those choices have
already been made for them by someone else, except there's no real democratic accountability,
because this planning is all invisible, it's all taking place behind the scenes. And it's kind of,
you know, we're told it doesn't really happen, that it doesn't really exist. So I think there's
that, that sense of disempowerment and anger that comes from being told that you live in a
free society, and you're free to go and do whatever you want, consume whatever you want,
work whatever you want. And the reality of living under capitalism, which is this system
has a huge amount of centralized planning taking place within it.
Yeah, I think about social media within the same context, you know, if you talk about regulating
social media, you know, the conservatives recently had this idea of under 16s can't buy smartphones,
I think that's probably not enforceable, but you could probably ban them from schools,
things like this. And the response you often get is, that sounds like 1984, big brother. And it's
like, we already have that, we already have that, we already have massive surveillance of our every
action and almost thought in a way with children, they are entering into contracts whereby these
private companies can use their data to make money. Children, we're already in that world,
the point is, can the state be balanced against that? Like the idea that, oh,
the state is the source of authoritarianism and the market isn't is obviously something that
the left's been around talking around for a long time. This idea of the command economy,
like the chivalrous of state command economy, less state free market capitalism, like this
binary, where does it come from? Because it's something you'd be taught in school, you'd be
taught that GCSE, A level, is this kind of like post Cold War propaganda or? I think it comes from
a couple of different sources. So firstly, yes, there is the legacy of the Cold War, which, you
know, it aided I think both parties to construct this really clear ideological divide between,
you know, rational centralized planning, which nonetheless comes at the expense of the individual
freedom of the average person. And then the kind of free market systems that are maybe less
rational, they have more financial crises or whatever, but they protect and promote individual
freedom and are ultimately more efficient over the long term. That was always the divide. And
it was largely taken as given that those were the terms of the debate, right? And actually,
you can see that same sort of debate play out on a more limited scale within our own democracies
and the debate between kind of Hayekians and Keynesians. So, you know, you had Keynes kind of
writing in the wake of the Wall Street crash about the irrationalities of capitalism and how
all societies needed a certain amount of centralized planning by the state to tame
the ups and downs of the market that had to do with, you know, investors, animal spirits,
and which ultimately undermined the kind of rational functioning of the economy. And that kind
of became just the norm in most advanced economies during the social democratic era. And then Hayek
comes along, and I talk about this in the book and says, this is the road to serfdom. If you have
any level of centralized planning within an economy, you're basically pulling the economy
towards the Soviet system where individuals don't have any freedom. And so that kind of
dichotomy became really embedded within our politics, basically, because both sides of the
debate, Keynesians and social democrats and Hayekians, the kind of neoliberals, took it as
given that that was the issue. We were debating more or less state because we were debating
whether or not planning could work in basically a system as complex as an economy. And I start the
book by basically saying, well, what if we took Hayek seriously, because Hayek's whole view,
he looks at economies and societies as these kind of very complex systems that you can't really
model, you can't really kind of, you know, you can't really fully understand all the links
between all the different nodes within this system, and you can't fully understand all of
their behaviors. It's something that you couldn't fully model, even if you put it into a really,
really powerful machine, just because there's too many variables at play. So trying to kind of
centralize all of that power within an institution like the state, for example,
that doesn't, that isn't able to kind of manage that, that the scale and the complexity of that
data means that you're going to get inefficiencies, and you're also going to get, you know, corruption,
you know, ways to make decisions that aren't about promoting, you know, the way the economy
works, but instead about promoting the interests of, you know, the people at the very top.
So I kind of say, like, why don't we take this argument seriously, right? Like, complexity
and really rigid centralized planning don't go together. They create all of these problems
and perverse incentives. But Hayek stopped short of applying this argument to capitalist
societies themselves, particularly to kind of corporations and financial institutions.
He actually says that he would rather, something along the lines of, you know, he would rather
submit to like the power of the state than give his control over some sort of organized
monopoly, give control to an organized monopoly over his life. Yet he doesn't really analyze
the extent to which his arguments about planning and complexity could be applied
to a big monopolistic corporation or a big monopolistic financial institution.
And to the extent that he does, he just says, well, it's up to the state to make sure that
markets function as effectively as they can and to kind of enforce competition. There was a big
kind of debate within the neoliberal movement between people who thought the state should take
a more or a less stringent approach to enforcing competition, which kind of divided Europe and
the US. And ultimately, and again, this is kind of the argument I make in the book,
the way that that argument played out came to hinge much more on class power and its influence
on ideology than it did on the merits of either case. So we got this system where you had, you
know, neoliberals talking about free markets. And yet because of the kind of inherent tendencies
of capitalist systems towards concentration and centralization, massive monopolistic
corporations, massive financial institutions on a scale that, you know, is hard to imagine
throughout most of human history, the kind of the size of these institutions and the amount of power
that they wield. And what I look at in the book is how that undermines high ex-arguments because,
you know, these firms and financial institutions are doing what he said the state couldn't and
shouldn't do, which is making complex decisions in the context of massive uncertainty on the
basis of power and authority, mainly their power and authority over their workers, but also their
firm's power and authority within the market context, without any democratic accountability,
and without, crucially, the kind of correcting force that the market is supposed to impose upon
decision makers within these firms because they're so big and powerful. And even when the market does
come knocking, because the separation between politics and economics that neoliberals rely on
in their arguments doesn't apply in reality, these firms can then just say, Oh, well, the state will
bail us out if anything goes wrong. So what you see in place of this kind of divide between free
market, capitalist systems and centrally planned socialist systems is this kind of fusion of public
and private power in service of vested interests at the top of society.
You know, I love to think about the high street a lot. I always talk about the high street.
And I think the reason why I do is because for most people, it's their understanding of how a
market economy works, even though, of course, it's not in many ways. And actually, smaller
medium-sized enterprises employ the overwhelming number of people that like to think in terms of
multinationals and whatnot, but actually smaller businesses, whether several people working there
or sole traders, they tend to be the backbone of the economy. And if you walk through a high
street in the UK, in particular, same in the US, many parts of the world, but I think it's
worst of all in the Anglo-American economies, it's a mess. And we were told this line of creative
destruction from Shampater, you saw him in the book, another economist, and we're not looking
at creative destruction. We're looking at destructive destruction. It's just destruction.
There's nothing creative about it. On this point as well about monopolies and how the
status quo right now is so at odds with, basically, well, let's be honest, 300,000 years of human
history, but very much the last 12,000 years too since agriculture, it's going to get significantly
worse as well, isn't it? Because if you look at what Big Tech's done in the last 25 years,
it's created companies worth more than a trillion dollars. If you add AI into the mix,
Mark Cuban was joking about it, creating the world's first trillionaire in 2017, but I mean,
it could. And at which point, I mean, we're talking about arguably unprecedented concentrations of
economic power amongst the ultra rich, amongst certain corporations.
Yeah. And this trend towards monopoly is really important. And it's something that
you see talked about a lot in kind of progressive economic circles, right? The idea that we just
need to kind of break up the Big Tech companies and restore market competition. But I think the
really important point to note here is that the mechanisms through which, like basically
anyone within the kind of liberal political tradition, the mechanisms that they believe
exist to kind of tame the power of big businesses all rely upon the state. And the big argument
involved capitalism is that you cannot see, as I've said, the state as separate from capitalist
social relations, it is deeply embedded. Capitalist social provisions really determine
the exercise that will shape the exercise of state power. So, you know, to someone who's like,
oh, we need the state to break up Big Tech, that is a position that really fails to understand
the ways in which what goes on within the state reflects the balance of power within society,
a balance of power, which is dominated by the firms that are supposed to be kind of regulated
by the state. And the example that I often use here, because it happens to be very
topical at the moment as well, is the example of Boeing. So Boeing has gone through several years
of just abhorrent safety scandals. So a few years ago, there was the 737 MAX disasters when you had
two Boeing planes basically plummeting out of the sky. Initially, Boeing tried to
blame pilot error, but eventually it became clear that there was a problem with the planes
themselves. I talk about it in detail in the book if people are interested in that. And it turned
out that Boeing had known about those problems with the plane. This is a technical problem
with the manufacturing. Exactly, yeah. That basically caused the plane to kind of nose dive
out of the sky and there was nothing the pilots could do to stop it. It turned out that Boeing
executives had known about this problem. Eventually, they were charged with a criminal conspiracy to
cover up this failing. And not only that, but the FAA had basically been completely asleep at the
wheel. So Boeing was being regulated by the FAA, but this was subject to this idea of self-regulations.
So ultimately, the people who were supposed to be regulating Boeing were actually sat within a
unit inside Boeing, completely unable to act objectively. There were whistle blowers that
were coming out, but they weren't being listened to until these big crises took place.
That was followed obviously by massive bailouts that Boeing received during the pandemic because
its share price suffered and then you had the pandemic and the American government came to
the rescue. It was the recipient of a massive amount of corporate welfare and it was already
before that one of the biggest recipients of corporate welfare in the US. So this kind of
shows, right? You expect, okay, this company that exists allegedly in a competitive market,
firstly, it's not a competitive market, it's duopoly where basically you have Boeing supported
by the American state and Airbus supported by Europe kind of competing basically not really
overpriced, sorry, not really overpriced, sorry, but over different components to the production
of their plane. So over costs, over the extent to which they can kind of push down their costs
of their employees by kind of taking on labor unions, the extent to which they can kind of capture
regulatory agencies to reduce the costs of compliance, the extent to which they can extract
tax breaks from their governments, which of course, Boeing was very effective at doing.
And when the market does eventually come knocking into this kind of dual ballistic
market structure when Boeing's share price collapses because it's been the subject of
all of these scandals, the American state just rides in and saves it because there is this deep
relationship between this firm, which is a really central part of the American kind of
military industrial complex, which has loads of government contracts, which has personal
relationships to politicians and various different kind of apparatchicks within the
American state, and which is seen as a kind of strategic priority to protect.
It's just absurd to suggest that this massive multinational firm is subject to some sort of
market discipline. Of course it isn't, it's absurd to suggest that this is an entity that exists
somehow kind of separate to what goes on within the American state, what goes on with
them Boeing and what goes on within the American state are intimately linked, not least because
there's a massive amount of lobbying, there's contracts going the other way. So this separation
that exists in the neoliberal brain between the state and the market or indeed actually within
the liberal brain in general, because you see this in progressive circles as well with people
saying, oh, we just need the government to kind of break up big tech companies. It just doesn't
apply in reality. Instead you have, as I've said, this kind of toxic fusion of public and private
power in service of the interest of the wealthiest and most powerful. And that kind of sounds a bit
depressing, I guess, but I spend the rest of the book talking about what we can expect to exist or
to emerge as a kind of break on this power if we cannot just rely on the idea that the state's
going to fix everything for us. I'll push back against that because it's not quite the rest
of the book. There are other great examples, hence my point about the anecdotes. I think Boeing is
a brilliant one. You know, if you were to say the Chinese system doesn't work because of political
nepotism, favours, patronage networks, and it means that, like you say, private firms aren't
responsive to competition, the price mechanism, you would expect something exactly like Boeing.
That's exactly what you would expect. People getting away with massive manufacturing issues,
lying, I mean, there's even been certain whistleblowers have died, like it's all very macabre.
And yet this is meant to be in the home of the free market, the United States,
an iconic American brand. Who is, speaking of Boeing, Harry Stonesifer?
So, Stonesifer is the former CEO of Boeing, who was probably one of the people most responsible
for the transformation of Boeing's corporate culture. And there's a really interesting kind
of genealogy of the transformation of Boeing as a firm that goes back to its merger with another
firm called McDonnell Douglas. And this was a firm that supplied, you know, it was really
important in the military industrial complex. It had a lot of government contracts, and it was kind
of, you know, nearly went under basically. And as a result of that, the American state kind of
engineered a merger between McDonnell Douglas and Boeing. And at the time, Boeing was this company
that was really, you know, prized for its focus. It had this pilot-first philosophy. So the idea
was that the pilot was always going to be, you know, really in charge and in control over what
was happening in the plane. There wasn't going to be any kind of, you know, software stuff that
was going on behind the scenes that the pilot couldn't understand or control. And it really
prized engineering expertise. It had kind of strong unions that were whose, you know, the
opinions of their workers were often escalated up the internal corporate hierarchy, which gave it
this reputation for kind of engineering excellence, basically. And McDonnell Douglas had the kind of
opposite of that. It didn't have the same kind of reputation. And it also had this reputation for
kind of basically being a bit of a cash cow and, you know, cutting costs and all those sorts of
things. And there's a really interesting article, actually, by a journalist, and the article is
called Crash Course. And I cite it in the book. And this journalist looks back through the
transformation of Boeing that takes place during this merger with McDonnell Douglas that's engineered
by the American state. And basically says, under stone cypher's leadership, he kind of engineered
this transition. Rather than the Boeing culture of engineering excellence being kind of pulled into
McDonnell Douglas, instead, the cost cutting, corner cutting of McDonnell Douglas was became
the norm within Boeing. And this, of course, coincided with the shareholder value revolution
of the 1980s. So the whole, you know, the thing that all shareholders were demanding at the time,
the thing that the market was talking about was this idea of maximizing shareholder value.
And often that involved kind of slashing costs within production in order to increase margins
and distribute more to shareholders. So stone cypher became this guy who was basically renowned
for delivering massive amounts of shareholder value to Boeing shareholders by pushing through
this culture change that disempowered engineers resulted in a lot of confrontation with workers
and with unions and kind of lionized middle management, basically, which was put in charge
of, you know, putting in place all of these cost cuts. And he delivered this ultimatum to his
organization saying, you have to develop this plane at a very, very low cost, basically. And
that was part of really the kind of cultural transition that ended up leading up to the 737
max disasters. And of course, stone cypher walked away with, with quite a substantial amount of
money, as did the most recent CEO of Boeing. He's still alive. Yes, he is. Wow. Maybe we can do
a Navara expose one day. So he's, he's this gentleman, Harry Stone cypher. I mean, he's kind of
emblematic of what's gone wrong with American corporate management governance. So the last
several decades, Jack Welch at General Electric, of course, being the, being the paradigm there.
And we're still told to swallow hole this idea that these are the corporate titans, the captains
of industry. They're so clever. They're so smart. Actually, what's happened over the last 30, 40
years is they have destroyed iconic American and British companies. Also, they've destroyed a bedrock
of engineering expertise, which took decades in some cases, centuries and more than a century
to accumulate. So we've talked about stone cypher. Tell me about Henry Ford.
Yeah. So this is a big, a big chapter in the book where I talk about, about Ford and the Ford
Motor Company, because, you know, I've spent a lot of time, like over the course of this interview
so far, and at the start of the book, talking about neoliberals, right? And the neoliberal
revolution takes place in the 1980s. And so there's an argument to say that all of these problems
really emerge in the 1980s when you get the shelled value revolution, you know, kind of
in inverted commas free market capitalism, which isn't really free. But my argument in the book is
that this kind of balance between centralized planning and the kind of discipline of the market
is something that characterizes all capitalist systems throughout the whole of human history,
was pervasive during the post-war period. It was pervasive during the kind of laissez-faire era,
even before then, it was pervasive, you know, all the way back, I talked about the East India
Company, all the way back at the very origins of kind of commercial capitalism, this fusion between
between public and private power. And Ford kind of exemplifies this, right?
Because Ford is a company that emerges in this kind of laissez-faire of American capitalism
when, you know, the government is not really doing, well, allegedly is not really doing as much
active intervention in the economy. And the Keynesian revolution takes place after the Wall
Street Crash, which, you know, then says, oh, the government needs to take a much more active
approach and we get kind of social democracy. And Ford lives through this period. The Ford Motor
Company survives this period and then survives into the neoliberal period all the way up to today.
And what I argue is that by looking at the development of this company, which throughout
this period remains, you know, a substantial, it retains a substantial amount of market power,
you're able to see the way that planning has changed. You're able to see that, you know,
a semblance of planning has existed or a type of planning, a form of planning has existed
with all of these different types of systems, because it is a central part of the way that
capitalism works. You're able to see this fusion of public and private power and how that changes
over time. And you're also able to see how the nature of the planning process changes. And I
think that's really critical because, you know, the idea that capitalism requires a certain amount
of centralized planning to function is true throughout the course of history. But the way
that planning operates changes quite substantially. So Ford kind of emerges, it becomes, you know,
a really powerful basic monopoly, because it's, you know, the only firm making cars, basically.
And Ford is this bizarre figure who is, you know, hardcore Christian, he's deeply antisemitic.
And there's loads of examples in the book of him, you know, his antisemitic activities,
promoting like the protocols of the Elders of Zion. There was, you know, examples of Ford
actually supporting the German war effort in the run up to the Second World War. This was
obviously a bit later. And at the same time, kind of, you know, claiming to be supporting the American
war effort as well. There are, he was, I think, awarded a medal by, like, by Hitler himself,
which is crazy, that's written about in the book. And so he was this, you know, weird guy,
very hardcore antisemite, and also very authoritarian, which again, not that surprising. So he hated
unions, he hated any attempt amongst his workers trying to organize themselves.
And he was really obsessive about controlling the day to day lives of his workers. So people
often talk about the $5 day, right, which was a kind of, you know, allegedly a big shift.
It was actually composed of a $2.50 wage and then a $2.50 bonus, which was contingent upon
things like your wife isn't allowed to work outside the home, you're not allowed to drink.
Ford was like really keen on basically trying to control the lives of his workers. He had this
immense amount of power to plan what was going on within his organization. He also had this kind
of imperial power, which corporations often exercise, and I talk about in the chapter on empire,
and he used that to buy up a big chunk of land in the Brazilian Amazon with support from the
Brazilian government and the US government as well, and created his own rubber plantation
because he was kind of annoyed at having to go through the British empire, basically,
to get rubber. So he tried to create his own rubber plantation, built a town that was,
there was this American town that had like a golf course, like swimming pools, like little,
you know, picket fence American houses, shipped all these American managers out there. A lot of
them died obviously on the way from illnesses and diseases, and then employed loads of local
workers to then actually go and harvest the rubber. Now the managers had no idea how to
harvest the rubber. The workers were really annoyed at the controls that Ford had attempted to kind
of impose upon them, and the whole thing ended in failure after, you know, him sinking tons and
tons of money into it, and then a synthetic alternative to rubber was found anyway. But
this experiment, it shows the extent of Ford's kind of imperial ambitions, the extent of his
desire to plan and to control everything that was going on, as well as, you know, the relationship
that he had with his workers. And what was interesting is that before the Second World War,
this power is largely unimpeded. So, you know, the state falls in line generally behind whatever
Ford wants to do. He doesn't have much resistance from his workers because they're not as strongly
organized. And he's able to plan without any challenges really coming from anywhere else.
What's interesting about the shift that you see after the Second World War is not that planning
recedes in importance. It's not that, you know, Ford's power is reduced, or it's not that the power
of the state kind of, you know, becomes much, much more significant. It's more that the interests
that are involved in the planning process start to shift. So rather than Ford being on his own,
basically be able to do whatever he wants and supported uncritically by the state,
because you see the growth of organized labor for lots of different reasons, you know, the
imperatives of full employment, like the efforts of organizing that are taking place within the UAW,
the automotive workers union. Yes, yes, yes. You know, the US economy merges from the Second
World War with a much stronger labor movement. And that labor movement is able to make demands
of Ford that previously, of the Ford Motor Company that previously it wouldn't have been able to do.
And because the power of organized labor is kind of broader and deeper within the whole of society,
you see a shift within the state to this kind of corporatist model, whereby the state kind of
mediates between labor and capital between bosses and workers in an attempt to create this kind of
system of like organized planning, which is not just Ford goes out and does whatever he wants,
and the American States falls in line, it's everyone gets to have their say as to what is
happening within the economy as to what the, you know, the policies of the company are as to what
the policies of the government are. And then there's this broader discussion as to whose interests
ultimately went out. And there's an example in the book of this experiment in kind of corporatist
planning called the tripartite committee, which the Kennedy administration sets up,
and it's supposed to literally mediate between bosses and workers. So bosses get representatives
on this, including Henry Ford Unionists get representatives on it, and there are politicians
on it as well. And their task is to basically manage the relationship between workers and bosses
to maintain America's competitiveness to kind of retain jobs, and to think about longer term
questions like how are we going to manage the process of automation, how are we going to kind
of manage investment, all those sorts of things. What's interesting about this experiment,
it doesn't last very long, and ultimately breaks down over this question of automation,
because workers start to say, we don't want to just bargain with you over wages. We actually want
to say in the investment decisions of this firm, we don't want to be participating in a
governance structure that's going to see us lose our jobs over the long run. And that's when Ford
starts to, the Ford company, it's obviously no longer the same Henry Ford, starts to say,
absolutely, no, we're not having any any truck with this, because this attempt by workers to
have a say within what should be in a capitalist economy, the tightly guarded prerogative of managers
and shareholders, which is decisions over investment, over what technologies the company
is investing in, that was under threat, because of this shift in the balance of power, because
workers were saying, we want to actually have some say in how the economy is being run. And that's
scared businesses greatly. And my argument in the book is that the shift towards neoliberalism,
it was couched in terms of this language around planning, right, about freeing the free market
and cutting down the power of the state. But what you see shift from the 70s through the 80s,
isn't the size or power of the state, particularly in the US, it is actually who gets to participate
in the planning decisions that are still taking place. So, you know, in the laissez faire period,
Ford gets to do whatever he wants, the state just does what he says. In the post war period,
Ford has to manage this relationship with workers, he has to manage this relationship with the state
and all of three of these parties kind of come together and try to decide what happens next.
What changes in the neoliberal period, again, is not that the state gets smaller or less powerful
or less strong, it's that the decision making power is basically returned solely to capitalists
and their allies within the state. So workers are cut out of this planning process. You know,
there's an assault on the unions, there's, you know, a shift in the like structure of the economy,
which disempowers workers quite substantially, you obviously have, you know, the imposition of
capital mobility, so businesses can say, well, if you don't do what we want, we'll just leave
all of this sort of stuff that massively disempowers workers and means that they lose
their seats at the bargaining table. And once again, the power to plan is restored to capitalists,
but also to their allies within the state that are increasingly minded to kind of
not necessarily fall in line behind the interests of capital, but certainly to negotiate,
you know, quite substantially with bosses, with capitalists, with businesses,
as to the direction of policy in the way that they aren't minded to negotiate with workers or
really any other social groups. So if we're looking at the fundamental ideas within the book,
like I say, life under capitalism means living under a planned economy while being told you're
free. If we're looking at that through the prism of Henry Ford, Fordism, the Ford Motor Company,
there is planning before 1945, significant amounts of it, as there are always in firms.
They have the most, you know, planned infrastructures, management hierarchies,
objectives, KPIs, and if you want a successful company, you have to be relatively organized.
And that's something that, you know, you draw on from the Republic of Walmart great book,
but it's something, you know, Marx, David Harvey, they've always talked about this,
about the firm, COS as, you know, distilling huge amounts of organization of the non-market forms
and processes. So there's the planning there pre-1945. There's the planning there post-1945,
as you just talked about. And then there's the planning in a very different way, even under
neoliberalism. So the planning is always there. I suppose somebody who disagrees with maybe some of
the ideas put forward in your book, as they would say, okay, well, that's fine. Maybe Henry Ford
was an anti-Semite. Maybe he was a bad person. But I prefer the planning pre-1945 for XYZ reasons.
It did create a high level of innovation. He was a smart person, right? He was a, you know,
unlike most captains of industry today, he did create something of genuine value to the market
in a way that firms generally speaking don't anymore. Some do.
People make the same arguments about like Elon Musk type figures today, don't they?
Well, the thing is, so that's absolutely the case. And it's actually why I think the things
you're talking about, when I was reading the Fordlandia story about Brazil and how Ford,
this was a crazy stat, 50% of the B24 planes were built by Ford in the US. And one third of the
trucks in the German army were built by Ford. Just such an insane statistic. And I thought,
that's what a multipolar world looks like. And that's kind of the world we're going back
towards now. You do have private firms in the US thinking, we do kind of like the Chinese market.
You know, you've got Elon Musk or Tim Cook going out of China being like, we do kind of like it
guys. And then you've got this completely different like political signaling coming from
Washington saying, they're the enemy. Well, the capitalist class aren't quite so sure. And it's
very similar to Ford. And also at that point of Musk, it does feel like we're returning to a world
more like the early 20th century than the 60s or the 70s or the 80s. So I think that's really
interesting. But like I say, somebody on the right who disagrees would say, but Ford was creating
genuine innovation. You know, when he was asked about, you know, building the Ford Model T, he
said, if I gave the consumer what they wanted, I would have given them a faster, yeah, horse and
car. I didn't, I gave them a car. Do you think there's anything to that? This is the argument
that is made for not necessarily just capitalism, but for the existence of hierarchical societies.
And this is actually the real argument that I want to take apart in the book, because it
basically hinges on the idea that some people are better, smarter, more capable, more brilliant,
more innovative, and they deserve to be in charge, even if that means they get to exercise authority
over everyone else. And even if that makes everyone else less free. And that is... Hold on,
those are separate points, aren't they? In what way? Well, so, I mean, you probably do agree that
there are some people who are smarter than others. The question is, does that mean they're
therefore get more political power? Does that mean that other people should be unfree?
What I believe is that... I couldn't build a multi, I couldn't build a multi trillion dollar company
that's like fabulous in terms of standardized manufacturing process and so on. Other people
can. What I believe is that that kind of... The creation of that dichotomy between the smart,
brilliant entrepreneur and everyone else is a lie. And we see this all the time because workers
are able to organize and do things that entrepreneurs are supposed to only be able to do
very frequently. In fact, they're able to manage themselves in a way that we're told they're not.
You know, this again, this idea that you have to have entrepreneurs that are brilliant and
exercise authority over everyone else because everyone else is lazy and stupid and won't do
what they're told. So they need to be tightly controlled and manage. Maybe they need to be
managed kind of algorithmically now, which again, is very limiting on their freedom.
You can respond to that argument by saying, oh, well, you know, it limits their freedom,
but it's good for the rest of society. But actually, that's not true because you see
throughout the history of kind of experiments in democratic planning, in moments where workers
have come together to actually take control of the infrastructure of the corporations in which
they work, they have come up with brilliant, fantastic ideas that are, if anything, better for
society than the kind of visions of billionaires who want to go build societies on Mars and leave
the rest of us to... And I want to use an example quickly, which is the example of the Lucas Plan,
which I write about in the book, where a bunch of workers in Lucas Aerospace,
another aerospace company came together and their firm was kind of on the brink of collapse.
They went to the labor government and asked for nationalization. Labor responded, no,
but Tony Benn came back to them and said, you can put together a plan to kind of determine how to
save yourselves, basically. And they came up with the Lucas Plan, which was this incredible
document. It not only contained all of these ideas to transform Lucas Aerospace from
this manufacturer of predominantly weapons to manufacturing, you know, climate technology,
kidney dialysis machines, all of these socially useful technologies that would have been better
for society than just producing weapons. It also contained all of the mechanisms through which
the transfer would take place, like how it would be managed, how the workers would organize
themselves, all of this sort of stuff, just knowledge and expertise that workers aren't
supposed to have, that we're told that they don't have because they need to be managed really,
really tightly. And that spawned this movement for kind of democratic planning that took root
in the GLC and other parts of the country, and which Thatcher crushed. Now, she crushed that
because she was terrified of it, because that like human power, the collective organizing of
people who work all day every day on the coal face of these institutions, their power to kind of
come together and say, we want to reorganize society, we want to take control of the way we
work. That is the biggest threat to a system based on hierarchy and domination and control.
So a few things, and you're right about this very lucidly as well. It's not just Lucas,
the Lucas plan, which I'd heard about before, but also you talk about the people's plan center
with regards to the docklands being remade and actually, you know, the Greater London
Authority, Greater London Council at the time wanted to, with a great deal of input from local
people, wants a different kind of development there, co-ops, different kind of infrastructure.
And in a way, I'm reading that, I'm thinking this isn't even especially radical. This is just kind
of what they would have done. They just would have done this in Sweden. It's not like nobody's
done this before. It's just a very different kind of way of things, but it's still very legible to
us today. And I think that's absolutely true. And I think Lucas Aerospace is a great way to look at
this. You know, I was, I'm late. I was late here today. I left you waiting. And I was late because
the signal system doesn't work properly. They constantly break down for trains. It's the number
one reason why trains are delayed in this country. We're talking about traffic lights. We're talking
about traffic lights for trains. How do they keep breaking? Now, BAE Systems employs more engineers
than any other company on the 3250. I'm sure if you went into 100 engineers at BAE Systems, fix this.
Yeah. It would take them three months, right? It would take, it wouldn't even, it probably would
take them a week. You know, and we saw that with the Moderna vaccine with COVID, like something
happened. Okay, how quickly, okay, sequence the genome, create the vaccine. It took literally days
because there was necessity there, right? And, and like you say, right now we don't operate with
necessity in terms of social value, social use, people, the necessity is shareholder value, profit
maximization. But I agree with all that. But with Lucas, you're talking, you're still talking about
engineers. So do I think that engineers are very capable at problem solving more than the average
person going back to my point originally that we're not all the same in terms of solving problems?
I'm, I'm a terrible engineer. I can just about do basic DIY. Yeah. So like in terms of the
processes that you'd want to build management standards protocol systems for an organization
of several thousand people, I couldn't do it. Could an engineer do it? I'm not saying we're all
engineers or we're all medics. No, but my point is, there are certain parts of the labor market
where what you're saying absolutely applies. But then there are other parts where I think
I'm not so sure. Well, luckily I have a bunch of other examples in the book as well.
So I think, yeah, I, as I said, I'm not saying that we're all engineers or we're all medics or
whatever. What I am saying is that workers within a sector who have expertise in that sector
do not need to be managed. They can manage themselves. And actually, if they are given
democratic control over the means of production, they will make decisions democratically and
collectively with obviously input from the rest of society through other democratic measures.
It's not like you just give the workers within one company that has an immense amount of strategic
importance, complete control over that, there have to be other democratic oversight. But largely
speaking, if we delegated power to the people on the cold face of these organizations who understand
it, then they would make decisions that would be much more in the collective interest than the
ones that are being made by shareholders purely for the purposes of extracting profit. And you
can apply this, yes, to the aerospace industry, to engineers. You can also apply it to healthcare.
We're constantly being told that we need to see efficiencies in the NHS. And that always equates
to new layers of management. Managers and managers and managers and managers, right?
Actually, the people who know the system and understand the system and whose feedback could
make the system work better are the people on the front lines of the healthcare service.
You saw a kind of an attempt to democratize and decentralize the provision of healthcare in
a slightly different context in Chile under Allende. His approach to democratic socialism was
based on this idea that you hand power to the people who are working, to the workers, basically,
to the people who are working within these organizations. And at the same time, you hand
power to communities, to patients, to people. And you allow them to come together within democratic
fora and make decisions about the structures of society that predominantly affect them.
So his approach was to decentralize and democratize the healthcare system. He relied on not just
frontline healthcare workers, but also local community organizations, particularly women,
particularly strongly represented in those. And those kind of took over a lot of the control
over prevention and community healthcare within the first years of this program.
And a lot of other examples in the book rest on this idea that most people, if you give them power
and if you give them the resources that they need to come together and make decisions and act
cooperatively, will come up with brilliant ideas, brilliant solutions to problems, and the mechanisms
to implement them. And that probably sounds, the reason it sounds so mad is because every single
element of our society is geared to telling us that the opposite is true, that we need to be
controlled, that we need to be ruled, we need to be governed by people that are infinitely more
intelligent than us, that are just better than us. That is, I would say, the fundamental
legitimizing ideology that underpins capitalism, but also like most other social systems that are
all based on hierarchy and domination and control. And when you look at experiments in
participatory budgeting, for example, when local people come together and say, this is how we want
our municipal budget spent, who shows up to the meetings, it's women, it's working class people,
and they say, we want more money in healthcare, we want more money in education. If you look at,
you know, the example that I love in this book, which is of Blaenau-Vestiniog, which is this small
village in North Wales, this was one of these left behind towns, a former slate mining community,
really high rates of poor poverty because all the roofs are made of slate,
and one of those places that the government basically kind of, as class as this kind of left
behind area. And instead of just taking that on the chin, a bunch of people in that local area
said, we're going to start setting up community enterprises. And as those community enterprises
were set up, the rest of the community was like, well, if they can do it, then we can do it. So
all these community enterprises blossom, they have this community energy company now
that uses hydroelectric power to provide cheaper energy to the rest of the community.
It's become the place in Wales with the most social enterprises per capita. And it really
exemplifies this model of like bottom up community wealth building so much so that the
Welsh government's now come in and trying to provide a lot of support to see how that model
can be spread. And this is all just people looking at the problems in their local area.
And rather than saying, oh, someone else who's smarter than me and better than me will fix it,
just working together to fix it themselves. I actually think this is a pathology that we
have on the left as well. It's the alienation of our political agency to people that we think
are going to come and save us. And my excitement and my optimism for the future comes from knowing
that actually the best and most exciting political movements come from people not kind of surrendering
their political agency to someone and saying they're going to do things for us, but people
actually organizing on the ground fighting back against individualism and building alternatives.
I agree with everything you've said about public services. I agree with 90% of what you're saying.
So for instance, I spoke recently to a former local authority child protection lawyer. She is
immeasurably more qualified or local social workers, immeasurably more qualified to work at
how to spend child protection budgets than these bureaucrats who head up these organizations. I
read this the other day. It's incredible. The second highest earning individual for the authority
in Bournemouth, Bournemouth Christchurch, Paul Council, I think it's a unique authority.
He's on 193,000 pounds a year. He's the head of child protection services.
And you have social workers who literally have to work in six minute blocks. And that's why
kids fall through the net. So I agree. He should have less power. They should have more power.
I agree with all of that. But then I look at a company say like Xiaomi, this Chinese company
just developed this new car. They've developed a car that looks like a Porsche.
It's starting price is like, I think it's like $30,000. I think it's about 23,000 pounds.
It's got a 700 kilometer range. It's an EV obviously. And that to me is like a stunning feat.
They've clearly stolen a hell of a lot of American IP, but whatever. It's a stunning
feat of engineering excellence. And I suppose it's something that I thought about a lot.
And I think the left doesn't often think about is that management is a skill.
Now, doesn't anybody can be a manager? Anybody can be a manager. I'm not suggesting otherwise.
And of course, there should be massive input from workers from the shop floor
into outcomes. They might even lead those outcomes. But management is the thing.
And I think you're talking about like the left. I think one of the problems, mistakes the left
has made over the last 30 years is to think it's not and that everything can be flat.
So I look at so many organizations as I get older. I won't name names, certain trade unions.
And I look at the staff there. If it was down to the staff, that trade union would collapse in
six months, right? It would. They would award themselves infinity pay rises and they would
all work from home for five days a week. Now, I know I sound like somebody from the Daily Mail,
but that's not in the interests of their members, because actually the interests of their members
aren't aligned with the interests of the permanent bureaucracy who are meant to represent the members.
And so when you have work representation, which I support, something similar can happen.
All of a sudden the representatives are looking to maximize their own interests,
status, pay, whatever, which is an anarcho-syndicalist critique of trade unions historically.
And that can lead to very poor management outcomes. Some people would say that's why
trade unions, with regards to UK manufacturing in the 70s, didn't have the same outcomes as, say,
in Germany. I don't buy that, but that's one argument. So does management matter?
Is it real? Does the left neglect it? So I think there are a couple of different points there.
The first one comes down to the nature of innovation and technological development
under capitalism, right? Which, as Marx talks about in the Green Research,
it becomes like an industry in and of itself. And that is something that's unique about capitalism
in the history of all social systems is the centrality of innovation and how innovation,
for innovation's sake, because it can have all of these applications that ultimately
lead to significant profits, as well as often kind of supporting the development of society
and fixing social problems, that that technological development takes pride of place within a
capitalist economy. And Marx was wrote in kind of glowing terms about the kind of innovations
that he sees taking place within capitalist societies and how incredible and amazing these
are. Now, the question, which is as yet kind of unsolved, I suppose, is whether or not you would
be able to continue to see that kind of innovation within a socialist society. Now, there are a couple
of different arguments about this. Firstly, the Marianna Mazzicato argument, which is that a lot
of the innovations that do take place actually are undertaken within these like centrally-planned
systems that don't have the same profit-based incentives that are allegedly supposed to be
behind the generation of this like, you know, incredible technology that is supposed to,
you know, be taking the world by storm. The second thing is like the direction of technological
innovation, right? Because it's not like the direction of technological innovation is neutral.
We see, you know, you talked about the EV that looks like a Porsche, like arguably,
what Tesla is doing at the moment, right? Pouring all this money into a Cybertruck,
when actually what it needs to do is develop like a cheap affordable electric vehicle.
And it's doing that because Elon Musk has all this power and he's able to basically say,
this is where technological innovation is going to go, rather than necessarily allowing it to be
in the interests of everyone. So I would say that even outside of a capitalist economy,
there are still, you know, plenty of incentives for innovation, largely because
the systems of innovation that do exist within our societies, the ones that are most successful
are generally often the ones that are most insulated from the imperatives of profit-making,
because, you know, it's the scientific ethos. It's like the ethos of research and development,
is to just produce and develop and come up with new ideas and new applications just for
their own sake. And I don't think that's going away anytime soon. That's just an inherent part of
humanity. And arguably, we need to fund it more and support it much, much more to have general
and, you know, socially useful applications, rather than just outsourcing these decisions
about the future of technology to a bunch of billionaires that are saying, let's build a Cybertruck
or let's, you know, build a, you know, territory on Mars or whatever. And the second question is
this question about management and the extent to which, you know, you could build with this model
of kind of democratic self-management, lots of little fiefdoms, basically, where everyone's
looking after their own interests. I agree with you that this is a problem. And I think it hinges
on the design of these systems. So how do you build a democratic society? Is it that you just say,
work is within the corporations that they're already working, take all the control over
those corporations, and then they just do whatever they want. And that's how we imagine the system.
I don't think that's quite right. I think we need to balance different layers and levels and
mechanisms of implementing and deepening democracy at, you know, the community level,
at the organizational level, and actually at the state level and at the international level.
So at the end of the book, I have all of these chapters on how we democratize the state, democratize
the firm, democratize financial institutions, and democratize international organizations.
And when viewed as that kind of, you know, widespread project, it's not just saying,
the workers in this firm get to take control of everything and they decide what's what,
it's about the kind of the creation of much broader and deeper democratic institutions.
For example, like I wrote in my first book about this idea of a people's asset manager
or a people's investment bank. Yeah. So you have kind of unionists and democratic elected
citizens and all different kind of stakeholders sitting on the board of this thing saying,
what are our priorities for the development of technology and having input from all different
areas of society in order to, you know, push our resources into developing the things that we
actually need. You know, combine that with like, you know, devolving power within state institutions
to frontline service providers, for example, balanced with obviously frontline service users.
It's also about, you know, subsidiarity and promoting experiments in kind of community
wealth building and all those sorts of things. There's some interesting ideas as to how you
kind of democratize the international economy as well, which is, I think the, the area, we haven't
really talked about it that much, but the area, this area of kind of imperialism where you see
just the brute raw power of capital exerted most effectively. So I think, you know, we have to see
democratization as this broad and deep project, but crucially, and I think this is the main point,
we're talking about like policy shifts here, and it all hinges on our capacity to just demand
something different and organize to shift society. Because if you think about the arguments I've
been making here, it's basically that all the major changes that we've seen over the past century
in the nature of kind of political economy are reflected by shifts in the balance of class power.
So you have capital getting to plan on its own, then capital having to share some power with workers
and with the state, and then capital and the state kind of fusing to just, to just plan together.
And that all comes about because of these shifts in the ability of people to organize collectively.
And one of the biggest things that come out of this, that's come out of this book, and I spoke
about it the last time I was here, is the extent to which individualism is hampering our ability
to demand any kind of changes, because it's hampering our ability to organize collectively.
And I think this is related to a lot of different things we've talked about here.
Firstly, it's the foundation of this idea that society can be divided into people who rule
and everyone else. Secondly, it's the problem that we have with people kind of projecting their
political agency onto someone else and saying, I need this person to save me, which you see
massively on the right today, by the way, very, very angry people thinking,
I have no power, Donald Trump's going to come in and screw everyone else over.
And it's also the foundation of our powerlessness, right? A lot of people believe that they are
powerless within this like, you know, immensely complex world economic system. And the extent
to which that is true hinges on the extent to which we actually believe that we are powerless.
And I think the thing I really wanted to do with this book is to show people that, yes,
you know, there is this concentrated, centralized forms of power that are exercised,
you know, throughout the economy and society and really impact your freedom on like a daily basis.
But they rely on legitimacy, they rely on the fact that we are going to kind of obey,
that people aren't going to rebel, they're not going to start pushing back and fighting back.
And that again, relies on the fact that we all see ourselves, these isolated atomized
individuals who are up against this big powerful system that nobody can control,
rather than members of groups that can build things and can change things and can start
to demand something different. You know, I love this. And it goes back to what I was saying
with regards to engineering. And I think also it speaks about the death of a certain mindset
in the West. If you watch Bridge over the River Kwai, great film, great film. And it's about these,
you know, this one mad Englishman who basically wants to build a great bridge to show the world
that, you know, we know what we're doing, we can do this. And it came at a moment, the Alam
Minerva, when, you know, Britain had literally was exiting that moment of being this imperial
technological superpower. And we're not that anymore. My worry is with this stuff, when we
look at Elon Musk and American corporate culture, like, of course, they're mad, of course, they're
crazy. It's a completely decadent, ridiculous, I think, I think probably dying culture in a way,
I think it has so many internal contradictions. But then I look at China. And I think that's
probably the thing that we should be, you should be looking to critique in like interesting ways.
You know, again, another cultural reference point, before I go to the final question,
the three body problem, have you read this book? No, but it's the show on Netflix at the
moment, isn't it? The book is so good. And the book is about really people engineering solutions to
deal with existential challenge to humanity. And you watch it on Netflix, and it's transposed to a
UK context, you've got the Royal Navy. And you think, the British state doesn't work like this.
It's outlandish. And it's so interesting for me how it's a real interesting snapshot of a belief
in engineering excellence, human problems of humanistic culture, a belief in the state to solve
problems. And then the UK, you know, this is not how Britain would respond to this kind of crisis.
Anyway, I thought that was, I wanted to talk about Bridge over the River Quine,
Chinese sci-fi, both very good. I've got two questions for you at the end. You've mentioned
the word unfreedom multiple times. So what is unfreedom? And then finally, do you have any
faith in Kierstarmer solving any of the problems you've highlighted today? Right. So freedom and
unfreedom, freedom is often presented to us in this kind of, you know, fairly black and white way,
either you're free to do something or you're not free to do something. If someone's standing in
your way or legislating against you or regulating you or whatever, then you're not free to do that
thing, which makes you less free. And I suppose what I look at in the book is firstly, you know,
we're told that we're free. And actually, we're not even free on that kind of very narrow definition
of freedom of people not standing in our way. You know, we've got ridiculous laws against protest,
obviously, you know, the small neoliberal state attacks minors in full force. There's loads of
constraints on our own autonomy that come from basically, you know, the state enforcing the
interests of capital. But there's also this wider understanding of freedom, right, which is your
agency within the world around you. And I think this is where people feel really, really disempowered,
because, you know, we're told you're free, you can go and work wherever you want, consume whatever
you want. And yet you look at the world and you think there are so many problems, there are so
many issues that seem completely beyond my control and yet which are constraining my freedom every
day. So things like I have to pay rent, which is really high, you know, I have to get a job in this,
you know, really hierarchical organization that's controlling me using some sort of AI machine or
whatever. And because of those constraints that exist outside of your control, you feel this sense
of unfreedom, right, that you're autonomous, you retain the capacity to respond to the situations
that you're in. But there are all of these kind of weird institutions that exist around you that
hem you in. And I suppose what I'm talking about in the book, I kind of harken back to this Marxist
socialist idea of freedom, which looks at yes, individual freedom and autonomy, but also your
freedom as a member of a group to shape the conditions that affect your life and your existence.
So to have democratic control over your housing situation, over how your government works,
over how your community works, and that being a much more expansive and more human understanding
of what freedom is, than the one that's presented by either the kind of social democratic left,
the kind of Keynesian left, which is your free when you kind of submit to a state that has
your interests in mind, or the neoliberal view of freedom, which is just your free when you live
in a free market, basically. And do I think, what do I think about about labor? You know,
I'm not particularly optimistic about a labor government, because it seems as though even if
they do kind of make any real macro, macroeconomic changes, which it doesn't seem like they will.
I was reading an article the other day, which cited an interview with Andrew Balls, Ed Balls's
brother, chief investment officer at PIMCO, this massive bond bond fund. Obviously, they're looking
at, you know, government bonds, a government debt. So they're very interested in the kind of policy
situations in different countries. And he was basically saying, we've just basically priced
in the idea that there's not going to be any difference in macroeconomic policy between a
labor government and the conservative government. So those kind of big levers of power that the
state has to all the way the economy works, labor's highly likely just to keep their hands
off them, right? So we can't expect, I don't think, much radical change. But to the extent to which
we can, I think it's going to be of this kind of like centralizing, bureaucratizing, top down,
kind of Keynesian Fabian tradition, right, maybe, which basically says people are, people can't
really be trusted to make decisions on their own behalf. The state has to step in as a class of
kind of enlightened bureaucrats to basically tell them what to do. And you can trust us, you can
alienate your political agency to us because we're the good guys. And this is often how social
Democrats have, the worst social Democrats have presented themselves throughout the course of
human history. And my concern about that is firstly, people aren't going to be noticing much
change in their daily lives, you know, because there aren't going to be these substantial changes
in people's living standards. And then there's also going to be this resentment that comes from the
feeling of giving up power to someone, a politician who says, I'm going to fix things for you, I'm
going to save things for you. And then them lying, and you feeling like, well, I can't do anything
about that. And you just come away from the whole experience thinking politicians are all the same,
democracy is pointless. And often that pushes people towards the far right, right, where they
say, I'm going to vote for this person who is going to give a kicking to all of these elites,
even if it means deepening this authoritarianism. And it comes from, again, this frustration
with this idea of unfreedom, the fact that, you know, the biggest and most important factors that
affect the way that most of us live our lives are not decided by us, they're decided by someone
else out there. I think people resent even more when those people come to you with this offer of
I'm going to make your life better. Trust me. And then fail to do that. Then they do voting for a
far right populist politician who doesn't even say that they just say, I'm going to burn the whole
system down. But hold on. And I agree with all that. But if you're, let's say I'm a right-winger
watching this, I'm a Brexit party voter, I want immigration, I'm not completely mad. I want
immigration 100,000, 100,000 people a year, maybe early 90s levels. I'm not saying like zero, but
very, very harsh immigration policy. I might not support Rwanda or whatever. I might just say,
look, I don't want present levels of immigration. They might say, Grace Plakley, I love what you're
saying. Yes, I feel unfree because I've voted consistently to have lower immigration year after
year for 20 years, and it keeps going up. And I suppose, and I'm using that figure to
gesture a point which is ending the unfreedom of some people will lead to policy outcomes you're
not particularly fond of. I'm not sure that I agree about that because I think that I suppose
my dear of democracy in its ideal form, this decentralized form of decision making that
allows people to have input over decisions that affect their lives, generally on a relatively
local scale. I suppose, and you can critique this, comes back to this Habermasian ideal of how people
talk to one another when they are in these democratic settings and there are stakes and
they have to make decisions within a group. And I think, when you look at, there have been lots
and lots of experiments of bringing lots of people together and saying, discuss this policy
outcome. And you expect it's going to be crazy, right wingers and crazy left wingers gouging
each other's eyes out and then coming up with these insane policy ideas. Generally speaking,
they converge around a norm that is vastly more progressive than anything that you see within
the public sphere at the moment. And I'm not saying that's going to take place all the time
and everywhere, but I am saying I have faith in that process. And I'm also saying, and this is
why I think people can disagree with me, that giving people freedom is a good in itself,
that giving people the capacity to have decisions, to make decisions over their own lives and over
the structure of society is a good within itself. I mean, actually on the immigration point, I actually
entirely agree with you. I think if you had, you probably would end up with something like,
yes, we need immigration for the care system and for healthcare. Some people with asylum,
yes, we need students, yes, if it helps the economy, but you'd still probably end up with
significantly higher immigration. But at least they would feel some investment into that
conversation. Grace, one sentence answer. Are you optimistic about the future of this country?
Where are we going to be in 2030? I am optimistic because I'm optimistic about people for all of
the reasons that I've just told you. You know, part three of the book looks at loads of different
experiments in kind of democratic planning all over the world, you know, across time and space.
And the thing I keep coming back to is when people believe that they have the power to change things,
and when they feel connected to others around them rather than isolated, they do extraordinary
things. So that's kind of what I feel like my mission is at the moment. It's like going
out to as wide a audience as possible and saying, you do have power, you just need to take it.
Manifest socialism. Yes, I like that. I like that.
This has been a wonderful conversation. Thanks so much. And it is a brilliant book,
so much, so much in there. I hope it does very, very well. Thanks for joining us here on downstream.
Thank you.
