The horror itself Heinrich Heidrich the father of Holocaust in 35. He wrote there are two types of Jews
Zionist Jews who want to move to Palestine and
Assimilation Jews assimilation Jews. We killed them. They don't Zionist Jews
They're potentially our friends and partners. We should know my idea is that
It will sound so naive, but I
Like Jews here
Not that they shouldn't move somewhere if they want Jews are for me an extremely important part of our culture
Today's guest needs no introduction simply put
He's one of the world's most famous philosophers
Slavoj Zizek has written three books coming out this year. This is one of them and
It asks a pretty critical but simple question. Namely, are we humanity heading towards catastrophe and what can we do about it?
But before we have that discussion, I want to give you an update here at Navarra
We're looking to gain 5,000 new paying supporters before the end of 2023 and good news
We've just passed the 2000 mark
So if you like our work here at Navarra and if you want to help build people powered media from our daily show on YouTube to our articles
Podcasts and downstream as well
Then support our work by heading to a Navarra me.com forward slash support
The link is in the description below
We ask that you pay as much or as little as you can it can be just one pound a month
But that monthly payment really helps because we can build and plan and coordinate
With an eye towards the future and helping create people powered media
So without any further ado, I hope you enjoy this conversation with Slavoj Zizek
So this is a video
Second thing so that I don't make a mistake. Don't be afraid. I will stop my joke. Just like this is okay closer
Will you move a lot or do you think you'll stay long? No, no, no. I will not do the Fred Astaire
While saying dancing
You know that I'm such a horror. I'm a nightmare through Stalin's never in my life
Did I dance?
Sing in public smoke a cigarette
Got drunk and taste any even the softest drugs. You never you never got drunk
Really, you know why I'm really a Stalinist not superficial. You know, what's my idea?
Place the world is a dangerous place
If you get drunk, you want to embrace people you get kind and then you don't recognize the attack
You cannot defend itself. No, we must stay sober
Paranoia to see where the attack is coming. That's my really that's my spontaneous stance, you know, like the paranoid style
The paranoid of zizek. Absolutely. Absolutely
The problem is that I don't live up
To my own standards the way I almost screwed up ruined my two sons
There, of course, it's another story. You cannot even imagine
Being such a liberal as I was in the education
You know, like I remember this story once I returned home 20 years ago
My son was doing homework towards the evening. You notice my reaction
How dare you do this? You are doing homework. What about the horror movie on the tv? It will watch itself by itself
Sorry losing time any other orders to what style are you used here? Like I
Interrupting lively conversation more
No, don't say this to amendment like the last
Yeah, yeah, yeah the last the last you already know it. Sorry. I will tell you one in the united states
I was signing books and a guy told me
Please I like your your obscene
dirty jokes
Please write a dedication to my book as dirty as you can imagine. I looked at him and said, listen
You are talking to a madman who takes things literally you will really get it
And he said yes, please. Yes
Then he was a fan because I wrote
Imagine I'm screwing your mother up her ass in a dirty toilet up to her knees in in urine
And then he was mad and I told I warned you you're talking to a madman
Okay, stop. Do you want to give me any precise instructions? Well, the questions are as specific as possible
So because then you can go as general as you like because obviously if we ask a general question then you go
That's a general. That's very that's very good because usually my
No, you should I give you the full right in advance too
You know, it's good that you have black dress. It would be better to have been later with a whip a domino
No, sorry seriously in the sense that but if I escape too much into and get lost
Please feel
Interact with me and so on because you know my old joke, but it's true people call me fidel not because I
I my god one of my tasteless jokes for which I was prohibited in cuba is you know
when I was in cuba
I encountered a guy probably he was a spy following me although I was privately there
And I felt his heroism how he's he showed me all the poverty he's shown me
But this point was you see
In spite of all this economic ruin poverty, we are still faithful to our cause. No
and then
I said, oh, that's why your leader is called fidel castro fidelity to castration like if even if we are
Castrating ourselves. We are faithful to it. No, it's horrible. I really didn't like this in cuba this
Very perverted pride in look our misery and poverty is the proof of our
Greatness, you know, that's one type of a left that I well, that's christianity, right? You're describing you're describing christianity
You do you think
What's that really? Oh, I think christianity is such a mess. So, okay, let's not let's not lose time
We're rolling
Right, okay, whatever you can you know what the most evil thing the last I cannot resist it
You know what you should do come on. You should use these clips but manipulate them
so that you
Use this as my answer to a totally different question. We do that all the time. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah to to make me appear an idiot
No, sorry
I what I you know what I what I give you what I call when I do a video interview
Pornography, I call it a pornography consent that they can use clips
Which means with this how we discord these deep facts. Sorry deep facts. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah
That you take a couple of shots of me you put it on a hardcore and
I'm half dead screwing a lady. I give you
For
Just if you said this sells well, you should give me a small percentage. We'll give you a royalty. Yeah
Slavoj Zizek, welcome to downstream. I'm proud to be here. I mean it seriously because we live in
Everybody knows this but one has to emphasize we live in dangerous times and precisely in such times
Thinking is needed
People are totally wrong who think now times are quiet
No, then you are too lazy to think in
in
The situations of urgency, which is today's situation at different levels
I think
This is what makes many traditional marxist hate me. I think
The time is to turn around marxist theories
11 it's not philosophers have only interpreted the world we have to change it
It's maybe in the 20th century. We tried to change the world too fast without really understanding it
The time is to
interpret understand
The world so that's why I am glad to be here. Even if I will not maybe
Convince many people. I hope I will make them reflect
Think
Is that why after the arab spring and all the uprisings of the early 2010s
You went away and wrote a thousand page book on hagel because it was precisely then that you had to do the hard thinking about
About the world because this is a very different book. That was very abstract. I loved it by the way
And this is obviously very concrete
So what kinds of thinking do you mean?
I also mean that
Very concrete situations
Need also very abstract thinking not to go into that
Arab spring
The lesson of arab arab spring. It's a very sad and interesting one
It's the same lesson as that of seriesa, which was a miracle, but it went wrong and so on
Here I am hagelian hagel is not this stupid absolute idealist good thing at the end everything will be
Everything will turn out well blah blah
hagel is on the contrary
Obsessed if you really read hagel's historical analysis with one thing
Which is needed more than ever today. How?
something that was originally a good idea
Almost with a kind of a necessity as a rule turns wrong. You have french revolution freedom bloop
terror you get
october revolution
in spite of all
problematic things that Lenin did at the beginning
No, it was not just as some people think a bolshevik coup d'etat. It was a white popular
movement
10 years on you get comrade Stalin nightmare
Embodied, you know, don't we need a lot this today this not simply pessimist spirit, but what I
without shame call
Moderate conservative
Spirit by this I mean I'm still a communist, but you can use this I repeat it all the time a moderately conservative communist
Yes, communist which means for me
Obviously we're in deep crisis radical measures will be needed
But at the same time, this is what I admire with intelligent moderate conservatives
Think well how things can turn wrong and for me
The arab spring was one of the effects of this even that's why it may surprise you
I never fall when I was young my god. I'm old like earth. I was already there 68
the big revolution
What was the actual result of it all its goals
turned
wrong
This was the first it was the attack against alienated factories this
The serial work is less work in line automatically they were against this
Nice, what do we get are we getting today precarious work total uncertainty and so on it's even worse. They were against alienated
This oppression of women and so on we get today's promiscuous sexuality
Which in a way objectifies women and others even more
Education against alienated universities. Yes, and now
We have we are justified to have a nostalgia
Towards this big alienated university. You can just quick
Specialized courses learn quickly for this specialty for that. You see that was was needed in 68
Yes, a beautiful project, but think about how it can turn
Wrong
So when you hear the catchphrase which is from 68, of course demand the impossible you say no
Do not demand the impossible demand. It depends demand demand the very possible
It's again as a philosopher. I like to complicate things. I would say like this
What do we mean by impossible the my first reaction to what?
to this point is
to
focus or
What counts as possible and what counts as impossible? It's not as clear as it may appear. Listen today
we are
Perceiving as possible this singularity artificial intelligence. We will lose our individual mind blah blah
That's possible, but till till the epidemic
To raise taxes for two percent. Oh, it would ruin our economy. It's impossible
If there is one good lesson from the epidemic is that there were a lot of measures like
billions
Distributed to ordinary people almost
In a communist way trump had to act as a communist. You remember every family got a check for
So, you know first, let's be very specific what we consider as possible or as
Impossible in a certain situation. Maybe we should change
The view here as with artificial intelligence
of course
We are approaching a breathtaking
change
But I think that all the projections that we have
Of artificial intelligence taking over on the one hand the pessimist projection
We will be totally regulated by by mega machines
We will lose our individuality on the opposite hand. It will be like theology actualized
We will become one we got they are obvious nonsense. I don't know what will happen. I know this will not
Happen so you see that's my first reaction that be precise
Something declaring something possible or impossible is always also
I'm sorry to use this old obscene term an ideological category in a certain situation
It appears like this. Did you always want to be famous?
Did you always want to be famous because you have this wonderful life for most people
Where you travel the world you talk about interesting things highly educated man
You can have an opinion on films people love it. You can have an opinion on politics people love it
Let me let me make a step further here, please
Yeah, but I go dialectically to the end here
I even have an opinion on films that I haven't seen, you know, like what I wrote about barbie and openheimer
It's now a public secret that when I wrote that I haven't seen the films, you know
I'm a hero hegelian. You know that famous haggles stands if
If reality doesn't fit what I proclaimed to be the notional truth so much worse for reality
And I stand by this after writing my piece. I was convinced to see just openheimer
And I should have been even tougher for the film
I'm now a little bit repeating myself of what I said at other places, but uh, you know
Openheimer is a good film
The political part, you know all that committee how openheimer was manipulated doubly
But I hate that spiritual part Bhagavad Gita and so on isn't that horrible
To repeat and store it and sell it all the time. You remember the movie openheimer cost a scandal in india
I didn't know this. Yeah, you know why because when florence pew and openheimer
Make love for the first time
I think she asks him or the other way around. I don't know to read Bhagavad Gita and the indians explode that
Dirty sexual act how I
Agree with indians, but in the opposite sense a beautiful sexual act
And they spoil it with reading parts from one of the most obscene
Disgusting sacred books
Bhagavad Gita was the book which
Heinrich Himmler had all the time in his pocket because this was his reply to how to kill the juice
His ethical problem of Himmler was yes
We are doing horrible thing killing jewish
children
Mothers how can we do it without becoming beasts ourselves?
His answer was Bhagavad Gita. You know this acting through a distance or all that pseudo oriental
Bullshit, you know so about back to your point fame. Listen, don't you think that I am
I can even give you a list of how I am very suicidal systematically
Ruining my general acceptance or fame it began
with my critique of
Cancel culture and political correct. That was a big deal. Sorry. That was a big deal
Yeah, but do you know how many people now dismiss me as a secret right winger and so on although I always emphasize
I'm absolutely for all the goals of
LGBTQ and now I don't know how many electors you have. LGBTQ. Yeah
It's longer now the latest but and uh cancel culture and so on. I see but what worries me is that the way this is
Practiced it's deeply counter productive
because I
Think what I don't know. Don't ask me how to do it. I don't know but isn't it
Crucial for the left
Instead of getting caught in this self divisive censoring, you know, oh you use that word
But if it's still secretly racist and so on
To think in terms of broad coalition
For example, I think it was none other than Bernie Sanders who at some point said this
He said I was always radically pro abortion
But it's not enough to say
Just this no, we shouldn't make any compromise here
But what if we think in these terms first we should inform people how wrong this idea is
Uh uh propagated all the time by those who opposed abortion as if abortion is typical for
Middle-class career women who don't want to ruin their career
No, these statistics are wrong. These famous middle-class promiscuous women. They know how to take care of themselves
abortion the majority of abortions came from
poorer women who already have two three children cannot do more so the way I would address people
Who are uh against abortion? I would tell them. Okay. We all agree abortion in itself is not a nice
thing
I am not for abortion because I think it's a pleasurable
Penetrating experience for a woman. It's the opposite. But I would say
What if we try to you keep your
Position me mine
but can't we think in the terms of how to
Make abortion less needed less attractive better healthcare
More care to help for the families and so on and so on and here this was bernie sanders answer
You see we should always
focus on this
How to build a broad coalition seek converts not traitors. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah
So, why do you think the left because this is something you talk about in the book? I mean you basically sort of
Project two poles of attraction politically
Far right ultra nationalism and obviously far less powerful, but you talk about an extremist form of left-wing quite and quite woke politics
Where does the latter come from? Why has it emerged? I think that
Still here I remain some kind of a very problematic for some people marxist
I think that
The as it were the key to the crisis is nonetheless that
There is something
Not
Any longer functioning well with I'm sorry to use this term because it's jargon term with global
capitalism obviously
this was
the made clear by the
2008 financial crisis and so on
And I think that while of course I'm here very open when for example
Women's rights are
Concerned or gay rights or whatever
We if I may count
Myself still as some kind of radical leftist we should of course make tactical alliance with
Center left politically correct liberals
to
To counteract direct racism
Anti-feminism and so on but at the same time and again bernie sanders made this clear
At the same time we should never forget that trump is not an original fact
he didn't
Fall on our happy earth out of context all of a sudden everything was functioning nice then uh this no
he reacted or he
Reacted to a deep crisis failed by millions of ordinary people. He exploited this
in a way
Which was totally reprehensible, you know, so again totally against him, but the key is in the
Malfunctioning of our global capitalism and I don't have even here a clear answer
It can be proven economically. How disparities are growing growing for example
I'm here. I will say something with which I hope we will all agree because it's a very center liberal common sense
the
The basic condition of normal life is this
Safety of social order and I'm saying this as a leftist. I was never fascinated by this big bullshit
You know who Tahir square or syriza one million people on the market on the main place. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I am
That's my old joke. Probably, you know it. I am the the morning after leftist
How will ordinary people feel the change when the enthusiasm is over?
How will their life ordinary daily life? How will they be affected? That's why I got many hatred from
French leftist you remember some two three months ago. There were those big demonstrations
and I said
But I am more for law and order there because I read analysis
You know those demonstrations were basically destroying
things cars stores
mostly almost exclusively in the poor
suburbs
and uh
I think that's one of the resources of
Trump
We should listen to this cares of the ordinary people who
Like security and so on which is why let me give you a very problematic example along the same lines
I repeat it all the time, but I think it's worth repeating
Recently I talked with a lady from a and c african national congress and asker
Is this all this bullshit true that you know what I read it in the media south africa is
Approaching a failed state and she told me she radical left is something so sad. She told me the predominant
Atmosphere now among the poor blacks in south africa is nostalgia for apartheid isn't this horrible
She said life was more stable because it was a police state
Standard of living was the same. Maybe even slightly higher
And this is you see the dangerous situation where you have all these racist and falsely anti racist
Temptations, you know for example the anti racist temptation is mugabe way
You have new black government which is utterly corrupted
So you play the game of let's blame the white people because they still control the situation and so on and so on
My standard line here is maybe you know it
You saw the movie v for vendetta. Yeah in my stalinist universe that movie would be burned publicly. Why?
because it ends
You know the end scene the people
Occupied the parliament win
My standard joke is I would sell my mother into slavery
To see v for vendetta part two
But what will then they do the next day the leftist in power? How will they change the power structure?
What will they do nationalizing or what that's what the left should focus on enough of this
Enthusiastic freedom and so on and so on. I am shocking as it may sound
Law and order leftist our promise should be not this
enthusiastic freedom and so on my our promise should be we will
Change in a way that you will feel the change the daily life and
cases where this
succeeds
They achieve these the left are very rare. For example in latin america
The only clear case is but now maybe things are going worse is I admit this. I was linked with them
Morales linera lucho arce bolivia morales was
12 years in power
The standard of ordinary people went up
But nonetheless, they did it in such an intelligent way
They didn't scare out the capital
And they remember then there was a coup d'etat and they were even
re-elected
I like this type of
Pragmatic left who is not which is not caught into their own slogans and then take the easy way when things go wrong
Oh, we will blame the imperialist enemy, you know
So was the russian and french revolutions a mistake then because obviously those weren't law and order leftists those were massive
ruptures, particularly the french revolution against an entire
mode of being
It may surprise you first. I don't have let's begin with russian revolutions
I
I'm very critical of
Lenin
But nonetheless as a hegelian I don't buy this trotsky story
You know that if only Lenin were to survive for three four years
He would have made a pact with uh with with trotsky throughout stalin and then then what?
A big socialist democracy. No, maybe a little bit better
But nonetheless, and I'm ready to go even further back here
It's clear that
I don't care if he wanted he lenin this or not, but leninism
Obviously did open up the space for stalinism
You cannot say it was just a bad
Surprise and you can find this clearly in the ambiguities of lenin's
desperate book statement revolution as for the french revolution
I'm a little bit mine
It's my first puberty love. I don't want to renounce it for jacko beans. Let's make things clear
For me the great one of the greatest ethical figures or two of them rattle in world history are
Robespierre and
Saint-Just
Read their works. Don't listen to that bullshit
First they say the horror was the liquidation of denton. I spoke
I forgot his name with a at a round table with a british historian who said they were right
Now in some old british archives, they found it denton was financed by the
British, you know, but I want to say another thing
In the they saved france with winning the war the jacko beans then
In the last three four months of his rule
Robespierre was obsessed with the idea how to end the terror
He saw this deadly machinery is getting dangerous. So just follow
Detailed history all his last purges were against
Leftists who were usually at the saint. I'm corrupted and wanted more terror like joseph
Foushe the evil embodied who did horrible thing for jacko beans. Then he was the
minister of interior for napoleon, then he turned against napoleon. So
This was the big problem of
Robespierre and Saint-Just they were already
Practically ignored by the jacko beans and by the geront the other pole and they desperately try to appeal to those
lower mid-level neither left nor right
Members and this is why it's very tragic
Robespierre knew what is happening in his last speech in the
Convent or the one the day before he says openly. This is my testament
I know I will be killed soon and there is some so wonderful letter where he says he was he says
I know where history is going towards a new imperial figure like napoleon
And he says shall we jacko beans follow that path? No, I would rather
Lose my head. So if you read it really closely
Robespierre is
One of the rare cases of a guy who yes entered a little bit close to the abyss of terror
but then saw clearly the horror and
Consciously risked his life
Not even risk. He knew he is lost to to stop it
But the the point you made about being a law and order communist, which I understand in 2023
But obviously this idea of revolution is so critical to leftist understandings of how progress has simply happened throughout history
That can be the Haitian revolution the bolivarian revolution, etc, etc
Bolivarian revolution you mean clavez. No, no the original one seem
The liberation of slaves was lost was lost cost from the beginning. No, I mean the literal liberation of you know
African slaves in South America. No, I know the story indeed. Yeah, no, no. Yeah, but maybe the viewers don't surrender
I didn't make that clear. Yeah, yeah
So
Were those mistakes should those not have happened clearly clearly there's a place for huge disruptive
Politics in history. There is but I think that I'm here simply a pessimist
That
The way Hegel saw it correctly. No
You have to go through this terrorist moment which
Fails and then the true struggle begins. Will anything good survive from this?
Hegel saw this very clearly. Well, he condemned the French terror
but he
Made it very clear that nonetheless a more liberal democratic order
Was possible only through that excessive
Moment or to give you
Another example that I like. I read a book. I forget which one
old senile which
deals with this problem and says
Even if not actual violence
In a at moments of radical emancipation
You at least need
A threat of more radical deadly measure. For example, this guy looks at
the in the 60s Martin Luther King
For black full black emancipation the struggles and he said why did Martin Luther more or less the struggle goes on
Succeed because behind him there was a threat of much more violent radical blacks. Look at Mandela
The apartheid regime made a deal with him because they were afraid there were much more radical
blacks waiting
Getting ready for much more radical
Measures. So I'm here simply a pessimist. I think that yes, of course
violent measures explode
but then
What
Comes after is usually quite often a little bit of a better state, but in the second
Moments later like even 68. I'm as already said critical of it, but nonetheless. Look
How we talk about women today
This is one of the lasting legacies of 68
Forget about that sexual
Rebellion and so on that was commodified and so on
But the way we talk about gays the way we talk about women our sensitivity for racism and so on
This precisely became a moment of our daily
Ideology this time in a good sense by ideology. I mean how we spontaneously
The situation so no I but now things become more sensitive because
I think we have to judge
It case by case for example, it was not violent, but it was a rapture the only
Really big thing that recently happened and I hope we will all agree here. It's something incredible. It's the
Iranian after that Kurdish girl was killed
by the islamic police whatever for not having a
wearing a scarf
It was something incredible
Millions of people first women then ordinary people not just Muslims
You know why I like this because this was not the boring politically correct feminism, you know of you know
Are you he or she or they this was a big social explosion and
women struggle become
A focal point to reach all other struggles even the struggles of muslim men attack themselves
This is how we have to learn from
Iran we caught in our sectional struggles like you know demands between between
trans and terf
Among feminists and so on
Otherwise
like
Sorry, what was your question? I lost the table. We were saying about uh, you said on the one hand, you're a law and order communist
Yeah, but then on the other hand you're saying that like um, what implicit within that for me is that you basically would
Discard any possibility of change through revolution, but now you're saying that I should no no no no
I think no no no no no. I
I just think we should
judge it from case to case for example, let's go to the
Burning literally burning gas question today Hamas
I was
Booth out attacked all around germany really cover story for just saying that I
Unconditionally reject
What Hamas did and this was not an empty phrase because my israeli friends who are left there
close to palestinians
Told me they knew people in that kibbutz and raving part
They were the best of israelis in the sense of how to relate with arab's and it's clear that
Hamas
attack on them
was
Destined not so much to win over israel, but for decades in future to block any chance of peace
It was a war to make sure that there will not be a peace. So there I am
Absolutely
unambiguously against
Hamas what I'm just saying adding and for this I was vilified
Is not relativizing this attack of Hamas, but
Inquire into that you cannot even understand it without
Now everybody is talking Hamas versus israel. What about four million palestinians?
Is there any perspective for them?
Like, you know, I have connections there on the west bank with
Jews and with palestinians
And I'm not saying anything subversive, you know that Anthony Blinken
Secretary of state said recently
Israel has to stop this daily violence against west bank palestinian farmers
Burning their fields killing them and so on and so on that's
Even liberal media now in israel
Uh
Admit this here in this concrete concrete situation
I think that the Hamas style
violence
And don't forget that Hamas was everybody admits this now was
Not created but
Helped a lot by israel because they thought if if palestinians are split between
West bank, which is more PLO secular and Gaza more
Muslim fanatic
They will not be united. So this will postpone a two-state solution because
So what I'm saying is that in this case
concretely
I I don't think
Violence helps
It can bring a catastrophe to all sides to Jews also
My fear is this one
That because of what israel now is doing in Gaza
This will give a new push everybody knows this. I'm not saying anything original
To anti-semitism all around the world. Let's be frank till now
anti-semitism was more or less limited
Not quite, but let's say to european and middle east world now
We live in what with horror. I call unholy alliances
For example, example, I repeat all the time uganda
You know this they now established a law with absolute majority only one member of parliament abstained to criminalizing
homosexuality in a crazy way if you are caught in a
Homosexual act you can be put to death and so on
But you know how they justified it that this is a struggle against ideology of colonialism
homosexuality
So what I am afraid
Is that and this is what putin is aiming at
Is to create a kind of a very perverted
anti-western coalition
where
again to be against
feminism will be part of anti-colonial struggle
to
Advocate the prohibition of homosexuality will be against the
Will be to fight against imperialism and the same with anti-semitism
This and this
makes me so
Scared that's why my greatest fear is are
What I call that's why I mentioned them as was attacked what I call
Literally
Zionist
anti-semitism people
and
Trump was this he supported Israel there you take
Golan Hayes they moved but at the same time in the United States he was
Supported by so many anti-semitic organization grassroots like proud boys and so on and there is a long history. Do you know the guy?
monster Bravik the guy who killed
Ten years ago or when in Oslo and that's perfect. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, so you could pronounce it more correctly
It's very interesting. My Norwegian friends send me pages from his thousand pages crazy manuscript
where he says
In the Middle East there, we should totally support Israel. We should
Push Israel into destroying the axa that big mosque built a new temple there because they are a wall
Keep keeping barbarians from Europe here. Jews are a problem
And you know who is I repeating in all my talks because it's wonderful
Wonderful in the horrifying sense. You know who is one of the original authors of this idea
The horror itself Heinrich Heidrich the father of holocaust in 35. He wrote there are two types of Jews
Zionist Jews who want to move to Palestine and
Assimilation Jews assimilation Jews we killed them. They don't Zionist Jews
They're potentially our friends and partners. We should know my idea is that uh
it will sound so naive but
Uh
I like Jews here
Not that they shouldn't move somewhere if they want Jews are for me an extremely important part of our
culture completely agree I
I cannot even imagine
Let's be concrete modern european enlightenment
Without juice no because it was the juice without having a specific place here
That were as it were by their position
forced into
Universalism, you know universal reason independently of they embody
With their objective social position european juice
What can't called public use of reason
Immanuel can't and come didn't mean by this public in the sense of university and so on no for can't
private use of reason is when
Reason argues for the state institutions
Public use of reason is when people meet outside state institutions and debate and this wouldn't have been possible
Without the juice. So I want juice here
I have an answer for people who I don't know why accuse me of you are maybe between the lines unaware of anti-Semitic
my answer is
Much worse than the one, you know this anti-Semitic classical line, but some of my best friends are Jews
No, my line is almost all of my friends are Jews, you know
And the other are palestinians. There are many liberal palestinians. There is hope there
Do you remember you see I don't read enough of this in our newspapers. Do you remember?
About just before the war a month and a half ago, I think
Mahmoud Abbas
the head of PLO made a
Very bad
tasteless racist statement that Jews basically deserved the holocaust because they were so much involved in
Financial dealings and so on and so on my answer is of course they were involved
Because they were prohibited to own land and so on and so on they were pushed into but my point is that
Do you know that over 100 of palestinian intellectuals
From israel and west bank from united states immediately wrote a letter
condemning Abbas Abbas for
totally unacceptable
anti
anti-Semitic
Statement and so on
Please counterattack. No, no the thing you said about the european jew is so important and for me the the european jew is
Coterminus with the rise of the idea of a cosmopolitan and cosmopolitanism
Not just a cocktail, but like it's the key element. Yeah without juice. There wouldn't have been no
I agree, but so then the question is does the demise of european jewelry?
And and and this is a modern phenomenon over the last hundred hundred fifty years
The idea of jewishness being coterminus with israel and state of israel
Does that also go hand in hand with the demise of cosmopolitanism? Is that an idea now? Yeah from a previous century. Yes, but
Let me do something pretty boring so that we just don't remain in a political anecdote, please
I will just give you a very brief version of a speech where I succeeded in the sense of
Offending all sides. I gave a speech
In a big tel Aviv a couple of years ago library
and people mostly there were
where
bds pro palestinian
Jews minority and I disappointed them also
Because for example to make my position clear. I was asked about
bds boycott divest and so on and I said that I am ready to
follow it up to a point on one condition that it doesn't call for violence and that it's
Mixed palestinians and jews
Who organize it? But at the same time I said
That it's still dangerous for europe because with all my sympathy for palestinians
I know what is happening in europe now anti-semitism is effectively
Exploding in europe exploding exploding a big word. Yeah, it's a big word, but
Uh, you know, uh, like what broke my heart
is that
when I see and in germany there were cases of
pro palestinian
But really anti-semitic demonstrations where
extreme left
Elaborate that with extreme right
That's the end of the world for me because now I will say something crazy
I still think that
Although there is leftist anti-semitism in the sense that people who proclaim themselves
leftists are anti-semitic
This is an absolutely reliable
Unmistakable sign of the fact that something is wrong with their leftism
Look at when the left becomes anti-semitic
Lenin it's ridiculous to say this. Look everybody knows
Lenin's politburo the ruling clique forget about democracy the
Eight ten people who run more than half of them were jews
Which is why in the early
Anti-soviet in the 1920s the standard reproach was that the soviet union is a louis state, you know
then
Comrade Stalin enters the scene
Anti-semitism a discrete one, but nonetheless
enters enters the scene and it's everywhere like this like who got chavis
When things began to get wrong in venezuela. He made a couple of statements blaming the jews
You know who had to correct him?
Although I don't like him
Fidel Castro said don't talk like this glue suffered a lot and so on so for me
Whenever there is a left wing or something that appears to be your left wing anti-semitism
It means something is deeply wrong with that left. You know why for a very simple reason
For me the message of authentic left is not let's say a nice dream
I'm a big poor proletarian or whatever we call it today. You are a dirty bourgeois. I already see here the traces of the rope
But like an authentic leftist
Always knows that the enemy is not you as such
The enemy is the system
Angles went to the end angles even in one of his late fridrich angles of march in one of his late letters
He says my god some
Factory managers owner are my are my best friends. Where was angles in Manchester? I think and so on so
Every authentic left does not personalize the enemy
It's the system which even as march put it repeatedly
Forces the bourgeoisie. Otherwise they go bankrupt to act to act the way they do
Anti-semitism is the exact opposite
You want to keep the idea of our society as an organic harmonious whole?
So why are there tensions? Ah, because a foreign intruder
The juice in this case
But another thing I wanted to go on to make this more clear. It's very deep
Profound, I'm not kidding. What you said about the violence of modern anti-semitism
In my speech in Tel Aviv. I went into this and nobody liked it, but it's very
you you know
That till vaguely
French revolution
The focus of anti-semitism was to convert the juice and then the problem was
The main form of anti-semitism was okay. They converted but
Are they secretly still practicing their rituals? Did they really convert?
You know, that was the problem. So clues were considered as people who blah blah blah
And uh, uh, I must tell a story. Sorry a brief the tour which listeners or those who watch us will like
it's
It makes me infinitely sad how
The fake western christian support for israel now
Remains within this space in my own as donald rambut have called it shithole of a country slovenia
There were many attacks on my speech in frankfurt and
At the book fair and one idiot who attacked me
Totally defends the juice but wait to the punchline. He said I'm totally wrong
This this this all this is good for israel
Then he ends up
but there is one sin
which is
More ominous than all that I reproach to present
Government of israel which is inexcusable for the juice
That they don't recognize jesus christ
It was like a bad joke, you know, and that's what all those
Right-wing fundamentalists who support israel are doing
Therefore israel because they count on armageddon and so but let's return to the crucial point
You know, what's the tragedy of french revolution?
Even napoleon. Well, he did horrors in uh up there in haiti. No down there. Okay on the other
He did some good thing. He gave to juice full
citizens rights and so on but
The result was a surprising one
It was that
And I even don't understand it well, although I should because it's some kind of a mechanism explained by
A psychoanalysis you need psychoanalysis and I although I refer to it. I'm not good
At it. Namely the result was
A much stronger form of anti-semitism. It was no longer
We should convert the juice, but we should be careful. Do they
Did they really convert or do they secretly remain juice? No, it became
Genetic biological the idea was that in their very basic identity
Be it biological or spiritual
Jews are doomed. So
You cannot convert them. The only way is to annihilate them
And you have like the worst you have in
Wagner this in Wagner's operas the main hero of Wagner's operas is basically the eternal jew
Even if it's a good positive hero, but the eternal jew who longs to die for death as
The you have this is the most disgusting ideology of 19th century even this idea of
Jews are longing to die. They know that only death can redeem them
And so isn't this something so sad that precisely with
French revolution civil emancipation of Jews and so on this much worse
Let's call it biological
Or destiny style anti-semitism where you tell for example, it's a disgusting tragic letter
A jewish admirer wrote to Wagner. He said I admire your work. What do you expect me?
What would you advise me to do as a jew?
Wagner answer is I'm sorry kill yourself. That's the only thing
You can do. I mean, uh, this is I think the first sign that
Enlightenment already in the
Early 19th, sorry 1800s even was slowly
Shifting towards strong nation states and I think that although I'm still
Eurocentric in the sense that I think enlightenment is the greater things we haven't so on
I think that this legacy of
A modern Europe strong sovereign nation states is the catastrophe
today
Look first. I think that
Those who criticized most euro centrism
Follow it in this strong nation state. Look at Turkey
All the horrors that they did the Armenian genocide and so on. It was not done by old conservative turks
It was done by young turks who wanted to change Turkey into a modern
sovereign nation state. Look at china. I read wonderful analysis by
Chinese half dissidents guys who want to be a marxist
But are with one lack already in prison to put it like this
Who says that the problem today with china although they like to emphasize we are more than nation states. We are a civilization
No, the fact that they are now obsessed with becoming a large nation state. That's why they want to
Chinese fire or how to put it make it signify signify. Yeah, sorry signify
Uighurs muslims there or Tibetans and so on
Is not modi doing the same
erase
The muslims there. I'm absolutely pro muslim in india. I was even advised like not to travel to india now
It's dangerous for me. So, uh, I think that today precisely
When isn't it clear that all the problems that we have
Can only be solved in a some kind of global approach
You cannot solve ecological threats by this state is doing this in another sovereign state. No, we will be
compelled to develop mechanisms which will be
which will
have a status of
Not just a matter of choice, but which will be able measures to
over write how to call it cancel over the interest of the individual sovereign
States, I don't I don't see another solution. Sorry now you to distill to distill what you just said
So basically we've had a universalization of the bad parts of the enlightenment i.e
a proliferation of nation states
Hard nation states. Yeah, but not only this there is also human rights and so on precise
No, of course, but like we've had a we've had a universalization of the bad bit
And that's really coming to the fore in the last few years like you said modi boots and etc
Um, yes, that's the idea. Sorry. Yes, please. That's sorry. Just to interrupt you but to agree with you precisely those who are most vocal in
criticism of eurocentrism
Are taking over the worst part of european legacy. Yeah, you know, it's very astute
But then I suppose the council argument would be that democracies only ever gone hand in hand
with
An idea of national popular sovereignty and often that was the case with regards to anti-colonial movements in the 30s the 40s etc
So the idea that you're resisting a greater power
Well, how did you do that often? You mobilized through that idea of nation-shared language mega problem
That's what I would call in this cheap tv shows way a one million dollar winning question, you know, and I think
There are options. I don't agree with the
predominant answer today
which is
and after the
Soviet style communism was discredited even in china now to tease you a little bit more
I got now no wonder i'm half prohibited in china now because
I read some books. They are more right wing, but they make a point that
The secret of what is happening now in china
is that
What denkxiao pink really did is to change china to put it in brutal simplistic terms
From communism to fascism
Fascism means in contrast to communism where you nationalize economy
You allow a certain degree of free market economy
But you have a strong nation state one party non-democratic state to control it and so on and so on
and I think that a new
Forum, I'm don't like to call it the old
fascism
Because it's not as simple as that but something which nonetheless
adopts this idea of
Basic fascism, which is what conservative modernization? We need capitalist dynamics, which is the only one that works
But we need to control it and to control it you turn to your own national tradition
That's what isn't that just market socialism though
It again depends on uh, uh, like
Who runs the show in the sense of
Market socialism, it's an ambiguous term. You know, of course the first in what sense. Sorry. I'm not bluffing now
The first thing I want to say is that what is happening today, my god, I don't 100% agree with varufakis
But did you criticize him a few times in the book, huh? Yeah, but no, I have now some problems with it because he was for my taste
too much into this
slightly anti-ukrainian, you know, like you
No, no, I think I resist calls for peace there. It's horrible for some leftists. That's where I lose my fame
because
You know, let's be concrete. Isn't it that today to say
ukrain needs peace
Means it's strictly equivalent to saying russia should be allowed to keep what it occupied
But I suppose the question is then what if ukraine can't win if you think that ukraine can't win
Which is a reasonable position one can agree or disagree. Yeah. Yeah, if they can't win
Then clearly it's gonna have to be some kind of negotiated settlement
But the first thing to do
Ah, I hope you agree is to recognize that's my answer to guys who are discussing that
But are we aware that ukraine at least didn't lose?
No, it hasn't it's only because of our help
To have this position now kind of a world war one stalemate. It's precisely because we were helping ukraine
So at least retroactively all those who are for peace should
Acknowledge that we are in this position to say at least ukraine have a
Chance to survive only because we were helping ukraine
because it's
It's terribly depressive this I but I'm also critical of ukraine incredible corruption there and so on I did this
I but sorry another thing I wanted when you say market socialism this term is for me
A little bit to vague in what sense I agree with Varoufakis, although I wouldn't yet
I'm not sure should we really use I wouldn't yet use the term feudalism, but
This his idea of I think the techno feudalism now. He has some good points
Which I like which are I like his basic thesis that wait a minute
Stop just criticizing global capitalism something new is emerging today
Which is doubtful if we can still call it capitalism the way we knew it you have a conglomerate of
states and
mega corporations
Who exploit at the same time?
The under quotation marks normal productive capitalists and the workers
So a new form of power is emerging and I've written in different terms about it where I agree with some italian
neo marxist who are very critical of marks who claim that
The basic fact of today's global economy is that
Rent is returning. You know the classical history is capitalism begin with rent. You own land like
feudal master owns the rent you so owns land you pay him rent whatever
But now we are returning to rent in what sense
We have now this mega corporation from amazon to
The bill gates and so on
They own our commons in the commons in the sense of the space
We used to exchange communicate, you know, how did that my classic example bill gates become one of the wealthiest persons
Not by ultra exploiting his workers. He even pays them maybe reasonably well
It is because the way we communicate
it's through
The commons of digital space which is largely controlled by him and
He gets from publicity or from us directly if you buy new windows. It's rent. We are returning to
rent now. I am not
wise enough
To know how far does this go and so on and so on. But I think the first thing is to
Clarify
This and I'm here extremely pragmatic. I hope we agree here in the sense that there is an opposition
emerging between this new mega corporate
feudal class and
Leftist will crucify me for this
Small productive capitalists. No, that's true. And maybe we should even
Rely on this and make tactical alliances with productive capitalists who also feel exploited today
I'm very open here. Yeah, I'm not dogma. Oh, yannis when we spoke to him. He said the the same sorry who yannis farrafakis
I you spoke with him. He said he said the same thing and it's really interesting to me because
If you pay attention to some of the smarter people on the u.s. Right
They say that trump represented a conflict between family capital
A national global capital who is for you this martin? I often you know when steve benon gives a speech
I often tend to agree with first 20 minutes where he says quite reasonable thing. Then he goes crazy
You know and he goes into all this stuff. No, but uh, you can see if you listen to steve benon carefully
you can see
Why how trump gets this poor disappointed?
newly impoverished white votes and so on newly impoverished, but also like you say like
aspirational family petty bourgeois who were a very volatile cohort
They were the bulwark that they were the sort of foundation of fascism in europe
But they were also participants, you know, they were informing the anarchist movement of the early 1900s as well
That's very important. What you say now
Don't be it's so fashionable. Lenin in his late years fell into this trap when soviet union won
The civil war against the whites in when 21 22
Foreign investments began and Lenin made there. I think a crucial mistake before his heart attack and so on he was
some mega big names
ultra corporate
Visited soviet union and Lenin was so fascinated by them that he even said no big capital is our ally
Because the organization socialist is already there. We just have to take
It over the way it is just chop up the head
And he even then says this middle class
Small capitalists and farmers. These are our enemies. That was the catastrophe
This was the way then to
Open up
pave
A nice way to
You mentioned russia-ukraine
What's the correct position for a leftist on russia-ukraine then because
I've read an amazing piece in the time magazine recently the average person on the front line for ukraine now is 43 years old
There's clearly a military stalemate. Yeah, so what's what's the correct position? It's extremely
Difficult, I think but you know where I am a pessimist
I think that
Ukraine needs our support
At least to maintain this stalemate. I think it's too risky to say. Okay. It's a stalemate. Let's stop supporting ukraine
That's a permanent war. What's the situation? So it should be like syria. Okay, but now I will okay, but there's no easy options
I'm just saying that's what that's what you're proposing. Yeah, but what would be what is the alternative?
If you simply stop supporting ukraine, I'm not suggesting that. Yeah. I don't know. So if you're saying
Rather than a negotiated settlement, which I agree like it wouldn't be worth the paper. It's written on fine
But what you're proposing it seems to me is just a permanent low-level war between russia and ukraine forever then
Which maybe is the best you can hope for I don't know but that's that's what I am
I'm tempted
To suggest it's a very sad position, but I would just add something
I wrote two articles one one. Maybe it's here in another book. I don't know where it's the title is the two colonization of
ukraine and so on and so on
ukraine should
use this situation
To introduce a little bit more of trade union social justice and so on
Horrors also happen in ukraine. How much corruption is there?
Even
Concerning how you fight the war for example, if you are a leftist in ukraine today
You are in great danger that you or your party will be prohibited as
Potentially pro-russian are they crazy? My god, don't they read putting that's why maybe in this book
I like to quote
Putin made a crucial speech in
A year and a half ago when he started the war two days 21st and 23rd of february
Did you notice that he repeatedly mentions as a in a critical way only one name not zeleski zeleski is
Unpronounceable. He will never even mention him Lenin
He said the proper name of ukraine should be
ukraine of vladimir ilich lenin. He says bolsheviks invented ukraine and so on and so on and then
Putin makes an incredible cynical remark. He says
They want to de-communize ukraine
Zeleski and his gang whatever he calls them and he says okay, we will help them when we will
Enter ukraine
By by abolishing ukraine. We will finally de-communize it because ukraine is a communist
In that you know what I mean. Do you know I also quoted that the last speech and I'm not a fan of trodsky. He screwed it up
With his incredible arrogance in the last years of his life
He allowed stallion to take over but do you know the last speech of trodsky?
Before he died
Sorry written article. It's about ukraine and he said full sovereignty to ukraine even if it means
Becoming fully a sovereign state
And then he said what if you tell me but this goes against proletarian internationalism and trodsky gives a beautiful marxist hunter
He says no if you don't allow ukraine to go alone
This is russian nationalism true proletarian
Internationalism is simply you want a sovereign state
Have it and then we collaborate, you know, it's a beautiful so don't forget about this
That's where I despise those
anti-ukrainian
Leftist sorry, but the support for ukraine in its tradition
has much deeper leftist roots than
Rightist roots
So there's a few things going on at the moment, which are hugely important. One is the demographic explosion in africa
Economic development technological development of china. Yeah, the geopolitical though. I don't know to judge sorry to interrupt you
What is I'm trying to because I have many fans from china if they in china if I ask them they're afraid to answer the
digital space internet controlled of course better but
How seriously do you take this idea that china is now approaching a big crisis?
um
Well car sales were up 10 percent in september
um
I think it's facing a crisis, but I the problem is obviously with people that are watching china
There are huge incentives to overstate. Yeah the extent of problems
But that's why I'm interesting to know but there are huge incentives to chinese state to lie as well
So it's you know, I always joke that you know, western
journalists have predicted 29 of the last two chinese crises because this is just their tendency
So it's hard to say but at the moment, you know car sales were up 10 percent in september 9 percent. I think in august
um
They're 4.9 percent quarterly growth in the third quarter people say that's right. They still they still
People say it's fake right, but then car sales is a pretty concrete
But the big thing is those they have according to official data at summer so many empty apartments
That the whole population of france and germany come back. Yeah move there
Yeah, I think it's clearly it's it's slowing down the question is how much
um, but yeah in terms of
energy use
uh purchasing cars
exports
Construction of fixed capital. I mean it still seems like it's growing, you know, it's definitely in a different place to europe
So I think I would those predictions that have a pinch of salt, but my question is yes, sorry
It's for I know it's a really important question and I don't have the answer
I also
At least we are honest in this sense. That's the beginning of honesty today that you don't pretend that you have answers to ever
Yeah, yeah, yeah
We're looking at a bunch of things happening regardless of whether or not china goes into recession next year clearly
Power is shifting east because you can include asian, you know the east asian countries too and it's moving away from the west
Does the decline of the united states does the potential end of us empire?
Also mean the end of western civilization
I hope not, but it can because I think again
Let me not talk too much and condense it
I think that the true horror if you were to name me a spot
On the earth about which what goes on there. I'm really worried
It will have been not the middle east not china, but united states. I think that
this can you imagine what danger I think this is
This guy my god if they I'm for death penalty or I'll put it like this. I'm if you are against death penalty
I am
I would agree with you, but I will before give you a list of people after we kill these people
I agree with you on their list on the top is mike johnson. You know this new speaker of the house
We have a crazy
situation in mozense
Let's be frank here. I have no illusions about democracy the way we know it. It's
Maybe coming to an end, but I always emphasize in this book in other books that
Democracy are not just the written rules
Democracy are also there is no democracy without
unwritten silent rules
That you have to obey and so on and this is simply
Breaking down in the united states
You have now a guy who openly
Formulates disrespect for constitution for parliamentary
Democratic system and so on and who is the speaker of the house you have donald trump
openly
Advocating public disorder and so on and so on so I think
All this talk about the end of the american empire
It's predominantly
A matter of what happens in america itself and what really worries me is that
In different forums it's happening all around
the world
Here in the uk. I simplify it up to the utmost
But you probably notice that you longer have a leftist party. You have a moderate
Moderate conservative party. It's called labor party. No, yeah, that's the sense right party now. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, and then you have extreme freaky
Right-wingers. Yeah, you know and uh the problem is that
These extremely freaky right-wingers are
Maybe they believe in continued. Who knows what will happen with farage and so on and so on
You have in france similar tendency in germany alternative for germany growing and so on and so on
so, uh, uh
I think it's
The tendency today it's towards i'm still afraid to use
Determ but towards a kind of a
I don't have a concept
but
Kind of a
new
forum of
Fascism fascist capitalism not fascism necessarily in that nazi sense, but in the sense of strong nation
State and now I will tell you something so that you see that I look at all the ways, you know that friends from china
Showed me something that the chinese are terrified. They don't want to render it public when he was young and just took over the party
Mao Zedong met with Sun Yat-sen the father of the republic who was just dying
Oh, yeah, and they have a conversation about what china could take from the west
And you know what's the conclusion of that one?
fascism
They claim that that uh democracy would be chaos in china
But fascism is ideal because it's national unity
China needs unity but combined with economic development and so on Mao and Sun Yat-sen agree with this now
Desperately they're trying to erase
The trace the the traces of it. This this is a big secret of I think chinese
communism this
There is even a direct link again with with the fascist tradition and I think
This is the main threat which has different forums
Put in india more the one forum western european forum american forum
Even in latin america and so on and now to go to the end
I'm desperate because what is happening two days ago when I
Had a debate at that royal institute
I was sitting on the same chair. Maybe no it was that faraday was sitting
A guy asked me a nice cynical question, but it deeply affected me. It was the right question
He said but you are just saying to young people
There is no hope. We are fucked up
But he said but look you are old you will soon die. It doesn't matter to you
But looked and he showed the whole all the young people in their 20s
You can't say them to this taking hope from them. Then I think I found a good
Counterpoint reply. It was this one
How do you mean this reproach? Do you mean it in a moral sense in the sense of even if you are right in your analysis
You should lie as if there is hope not to
Disappoint young people
Or do you mean there is hope?
And we didn't have time we concluded with to answer this but
Now my answer here the only one that I can offer is what max horkeheimer one of the fathers of frankfurt school said very nicely
That in these desperate times
The position of leftist should be pessimism in theory optimism in practice
Pessimism. Yes, our world is coming to an end
and
We I am afraid to
Provide an opposition like a sorry a clear alternative like some of my friends
That's what I where I lost the thread before are not only david greber many others are neo anarchists
No, I don't buy this because I think that
The world is crying today for demanding
Global mechanisms and it's too utopian to think you know from local initiatives
They will come together and so on. So I just grab any opportunity that I can
There is a movement here a movement there. I have links in philippines. I have links in turkey
I supported series here there
but I
I'm sorry to disappoint you or others
my
Advice or what to do is
Let's say if I were to be in government in a relatively prosperous
western country what
Would be my advice or if I'm in government my practice
a modest one first comes my
Moderately conservative side, you know
Yes fight for freedom
but with the nonetheless leftist twist which means this is the lesson of
Socialism that I still keep not this Stalin is bullshit
Formal freedom versus actual freedom. No freedom is a form. Sorry freedom is formal freedom or it doesn't exist but
What socialism did taught us is that?
Freedom to be actual needs certain material conditions
For example universal health care
I don't buy this right liberal argumentation. It enslaves you. No life is much more free
If you are aware that if I get seriously ill cancer blah blah
some
Social state mechanism will take care of that that for example in my country, but here also
In my country one of the few moments of nostalgia for the old socialist Yugoslavia
it was
More or less functioning the public health care or the same with education to be really free
I think part of it is to have a fair chance on the market and so on to
Guarantee your health care, but now comes my communist side
I think that in answer to the crisis in plural
That we are approaching today ecological immigrant and so on war
We have to get ready to emergency states
They will come
and we had to build in mechanism of
How we to deal with new emergency states
Because if we don't do it
The right wingers will do it in their own authoritarian way. I think it's absolutely
Crucial that there will be for example new ecological catastrophes the story I repeat all the time
Maybe you know it my good friend Jean Pierre Dupuis a great French
theorist of catastrophe was in
Fukushima or rather Tokyo as a special delegate from European Union three days after the catastrophe and he told me for one day
Japanese authorities were in a panic
It looked that they will have to evacuate the whole Tokyo area 30 million people
Where to put them in a rational world order the answer is clear. There are now with global warming waste
vast land
which can
which can
Where hundreds of millions people literally can settle in Siberia in old times there were such crises you
Solved them with the war today. We cannot it means self-destruction because of nuclear arms and so on
We have to get ready for
Emergency state not I'm not saying be in a panic. I'm just just saying
Get ready for example. I'm here brutally realist and that's why again. I'm attacked by some leftists when I say
Let's control immigration. You know what so said I'm connected with people
In countries from air. Are we aware that immigration is a
great business
the smugglers turn around over 10 billions per year and
Those who come here are in great majority
People who can afford it the really poor
remain there
So we should approach the problem in this way first how to prevent this
I'm here very realist one right winger in germany and I tend to agree said
Why don't we instead of far east try to build
To construct factories in tunisia in northern africa to give them job there
I'm very and I don't downplay. I hate leftists who put all the troubles
On the side of we are not ready to integrate them
No, what if they don't want to be integrated many immigrants?
It's a much more complex question
Which we should approach without any old fashioned either right wing or left wing
prejudices I find this so interesting because my my father's iranian
Oh, really? Yeah, my father's iranian my god. I have so many friends in iran. Yeah, they are you know, sorry
You know that why I admire iran gone. It's totally different from other arab countries. It still has an incredible
incredible
civil society life
philosophy
They they translated there in spite of all the shitty politics up there
They translated over 10 of my books. It's a lively intellectual country what they did with so
You are lucky to have that's very kind of you. Yeah, but what he what he says. Yeah, tell me yeah
He says and I think there's an interesting point, you know, I remember saying oh look there's these afghans are going to iceland
and he said
Listen to me son
No afghan wants to go to iceland
No afghan you're born in this naturally fertile country amazing history
Beautiful weather less than the last 40 50 years, but historically it was a very fertile very no beautiful place
And you end up in a place. This is not to
Not to besmirch iceland, but you go to a place where you don't see the sun for three months
He said no afghan
Grows up as a childhood. You know what? I don't want to see the sun for three months
And I want to live in minus 10 degrees c for six months. Yeah, and
That's a really powerful point and I think a lot of I do think a lot of european liberals progressives
Don't understand that and I think there is this kind of strange. It's not racism
But like europe european superiority, which is well, of course they want to come here
We're better
I don't know many of them are coming because of war sanctions occupation capitalist underdevelopment
But that seems completely absent from that conversation
Why the left has this analysis about why these places have been underdeveloped by global capital
Yeah, and yet when it comes to this topic that goes out of the window. Why is that this is another
Bad consequence of I will give you a very simplified answer of 68 when
Marxism became cultural Marxism
In my orthodox Marxist term. It was recaptured by liberal culturalist ideology
You know, and I deeply sorry. We don't have more time. I profoundly agree with you how
Precisely those
Western liberals who pretend to be respectful towards the others are
At a deeper level
deeply
patronizing on the others their whole
Value system general frame remains remains the western one
And this this I I so I think
Now I'll put it like this
The way liberals are acting now
Letting immigrants in I am for this but in a more organized way
And at the same time with this focus on culturalism
I'm afraid that the nightmare is that the result will be that what is already happening in
Sweden, Denmark now, Germany, france this anti-immigrant politics will
Explode
So don't you agree here? I would totally agree with your father. I don't know how
But the problem should be solved there in those lands. Okay. We shouldn't now invade Iran
But we should at least reflect on how
We also screwed it up with our politics. For example
Uh, tell this to your father if you're please go, you know, I'll send him this claim
You know, I wrote a crazy text 20 years ago
Uh, give Iranian nukes a chance
I was
Beloved by Iranian concern, but you know, what was my point? Remember Iraq Iran war
Saddam used the chance
Invaded Iran
The world was silent
This was a clear aggression. He wanted to grab the oil fields in the south
United States at that point
Gave him I read this in new york times gave him poisonous gases and satellite
Photos there were no calls from peace. There were calls from peace only when iran was pushing them
The iraq is back. So when there was a trial against Saddam
and Iran
Iran official government said listen
He did his greatest crime towards us. No, this was totally blocked Iran just wanted to say
We also have a list of crimes by against Saddam, you know this so uh, are we aware that this uh, then
Later on the coup the way they overthrew
Saddam
The result is without that american intervention there
There wouldn't have been isis and so on and so on how we screwed it up there
Let's at least learn not to repeat these
Mistakes that would have been enough
As the beginning I I remember idiots americans after they occupied
Iraq their idea was as if we get rid of Saddam and then people will organize themselves into new democracy
No, it was a catastrophe the result of the american occupation of
Iraq was that first iranian influence grew
Plus most of the christians emigrated from iraq
Whatever you say about Saddam
And he was a nightmare. He wasn't a religious fundamentalist. He was relatively secular
You remember tarik aziz his foreign minister. He was a christian
And all this got lost. You see here a hegelian analysis is needed
Didn't they know what they are doing? It's the same in libya and so on
Even under
Gaddafi he was a nightmare. I know but libya was a
relatively stable half welfare very corrupted country, but
What did they expect you intervene and then you know
So I totally agree here with your
father don't
simply think that
Our not only our land but our notions of freedom and so on
Don't think that we have the universal model. This is for me the lesson of 2001. It's the end of fukuyama dream
2001 I mean
9 11th no fukuyama dream was we have
Liberal democratic capitalism is universal formula here and there countries are forever blah blah blah
And fukuyama today now, you know where he stands. He's a nice guy. I met him once there's nice man
Yeah, he is at I don't know where he is now now, but three years ago
He was pro bernie senders. He said I got it wrong. Yes. I know slowly slowly
We should do things like this
And all the best to your father. We need people like that. This is you know, what is so tragic
I'm serious that at some level what your father is saying and many others
Isn't this in the best possible sense most Iranians I meet say that by the way
They've come here as refugees. Sorry. Yeah. Yeah. No that it is
In the best sense of the term
A common sense thing it should be so evident, you know, and I have here, but I will stop now
So many similar examples from different countries
where
For example, my favorite one is to end with a standard joke by me. I was once in missoula montana
Giving a talk and there were many
so-called native americans
And they already hated the term
Because it's the political correct term. They told me
That this is so patronizing. What is the opposite of nature culture? So they told me we are
Natural americans and you are cultural americans or what and they gave me a one
They said we much prefer to be called Indians. Why?
Because then this name is at least at least a monument to white man's stupidity when they came there
They thought they were in india
Native americans and inuits eskimos. I admire them. They had such a wonderful nose
for this pseudo
anti race pseudo
anti racist patronizing attitudes towards
So-called primitives. So to conclude use it or not
My favorite thing that I said to some feminist years ago and they applauded I said let to ladies
Let's say you have a boyfriend who says listen. There is a difference. I'm man more than you
Your duty is to wash my socks to do the house. I said if you have
Such a boyfriend keep him. You may re-educate him. But if you have a boyfriend who says
I am a western imperialist. I see nature only as an object of
Exploitation you as a woman has a more dialogic organic attitude towards nature
Run away like crazy
That guy will be the ruin for you. You know this fake western
admiration for some wisdom of third world countries and so on. It's a fake
Well in there slavoj this was fantastic. Thanks for joining us on downstream. Ah fantastic. Yeah, in your sense
I'll now this as my extremely perverse private jokes
I now prefer slowly phanta to coca cola
It's the it's delicious phanta, right? Ah, the german's got something right another natalie
Collaborator, you know what is the origin of phanta? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah hitler 39
People don't know this
Where are we now? What is this?
You
