To support our discussions with the world's leading thinkers, please see the video description
or visit eism.eu forward slash support.
Thank you.
Hello and welcome to a theory of everything.
I'm Luis Rozzo, the director of eism and host of this channel.
Today we're talking to Dr. Judith Curry, an American climatologist and former chair
of the School of Earth and Atmospheric Sciences at the Georgia Institute of Technology.
You'll have to forgive me for the clickbaity title, but there's actually a good reason
for it.
On the surface, today's discussion is about climate change, and one of the fruits is the
challenge issued by Dr. Curry, a so-called climate denier, to climate alarmists in general
and to Lawrence Krauss specifically.
For those who don't know, Krauss is a prominent theoretical physicist and a public intellectual.
He's also a previous guest on the channel who wrote a recent book on climate science.
I think you'll be struck, as I was, by the combination of Dr. Curry's impressive academic
credentials and the confidence with which she issues her challenge.
In my view, her claims merit a response, and I hope we can eventually get a taker, whether
Lawrence Krauss or somebody else.
However, the most important takeaway here is not on disagreement, but rather on the
agreement.
Curry is abundantly clear, as is Krauss, that ultimately what we're dealing with here is
a political question.
How are humans going to resolve our different takes on science without eventually destroying
ourselves?
That ultimately is the heart of the issue, and it's one on which the long-term survival
of humanity depends.
It's one thing to have an opinion, and it's an entirely different thing to propose a better
way to resolve our differences of opinion.
These two things, having an opinion and proposing a better way to resolve differences of opinion,
belong on completely different levels of abstraction.
And the second question is much, much more important.
It's the difference between a group of people not being able to decide what to have for
lunch and the same group debating on whether to vote or draw straws or play rock, paper,
scissors, to settle the differences.
This second question of how to make collective decisions is studied formally in a branch
of economics known as social choice theory.
You'd be surprised how many otherwise very intelligent people don't pay even the slightest
attention to this critical science.
I hope you'll reflect on this because ultimately this is why this channel exists, and this
is why we have these discussions.
We're not just another YouTube channel, and we're not here to entertain.
Today's lesson is an important one, but it's not primarily about climate change.
Don't get it wrong.
The most important lesson here involves science plus social and political will, or science
and management, and that's where ASEM is a global pioneer.
We've started with fundamental physics, and we're working our way through all of the
branches of knowledge.
Our mission is to change the way the world makes decisions before it's too late.
So I hope you enjoy my exchange with Dr. Curry, but I also hope you don't lose focus.
As always, you'll find a timestamp and relevant links in the video description.
Thanks for sharing your thoughts in the comments, and thanks for your continued interest and
support.
Hello, and welcome to A Theory of Everything.
I'm Luis Rozo, the director of ASEM and host of this channel.
Today, we're talking to Dr. Judith Curry, an American climatologist and former chair
of the School of Earth and Atmospheric Sciences at Georgia Institute of Technology.
Dr. Curry, thank you so much for taking the time to talk today.
Well, my pleasure.
I look forward to our conversation.
Well, Dr., if it's okay, I'd like to start by telling listeners about your professional
background.
So Dr. Curry graduated cum laude from Northern Illinois University with a Bachelor of Science
degree in Geography.
She then earned a PhD in Geophysical Sciences from the University of Chicago.
Her research interests include hurricanes, remote sensing, atmospheric modeling, polar
climates, air-sea interactions, climate models, and the use of unmanned aerial vehicles for
atmospheric research.
She was a member of the National Research Council's Climate Research Committee and has
published over 100 scientific papers and co-edited several major works in climate science.
Dr. Curry served on the NASA Advisory Council Earth Science Subcommittee, whose mission was
to provide advice and recommendations to NASA on issues of program priorities and policy.
She was also a member of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Climate Working
Group from 2004 to 2009, a member of the National Academies of Space Studies Board from 2004
to 2007, and a member of the National Academies Climate Research Group from 2003 to 2006.
As you can see from this description, Dr. Curry is obviously a very accomplished climate
scientist.
She retired from her university position in 2007, partly because of what she described
as anti-skeptic bias, which she attributed at the time to the political nature of climate
science, and that's part of what we're going to talk about today, the very tricky relationship
between science and politics.
In fact, Dr. Curry, the primary focus of this channel, or one of the primary focuses of
this channel, is on the science of effective management, which is tricky.
In your case, you often talk about something that the vast majority of people will agree
with, and I'd like to place that at the center of our discussion, and that's the idea of
human flourishing.
Most people at any point on any political or ideological spectrum seem to agree that human
flourishing is the ultimate goal, and you've stated, if I've understood correctly, that
human flourishing is ultimately what drives your work.
Can you say a little bit more about that and maybe about why you think that something
that everybody agrees on can become so complicated?
Well, I'm not sure everybody agrees on that.
Some people want, you know, think that the answer is fewer people and more poverty, so
we use less resources and don't impact the environment.
So that's sort of an environment-first kind of approach.
Again, I take the people-first approach, you know, I want to see prosperity and human
development for all the world's countries and all the world's peoples.
Now there are a lot of things that get in the way of that, you know, the environment
is just one relatively small factor, and the wealthier a country is, the smaller the
factor of the environment is, because you have enough money to figure out how to cope
with it.
But in less developed countries, they're very vulnerable to the environment.
Their development is often hampered by poor governance and corrupt leaders, so it's difficult
to make headway.
But when we're talking about the climate change problem, to me, there is no way that
a solution of not allowing Africa to develop its fossil fuel resources can be regarded
as ethical or just.
I mean, that that's just something that makes no sense.
And you know, it's just two fundamentally different outlooks.
So I'm not sure everybody agrees that human thriving is really the goal.
There are a lot of people that say, well, there should be fewer people.
And if people didn't use so many resources and whatever the world would be a better place.
So it's the, you know, just two different views of humans relations with their environments.
You know, one is that we that we rely on the environment for our sustenance and we have
to take care of our environment.
And the other one is that, you know, we can survive, you know, that we can engineer our
environment to make it work for us.
You know, we don't want to trash it.
But the, you know, the earth is a vast place with many resources.
Let's figure out how to how we can best use this for human thriving.
OK, well, to be honest, that's kind of news to me that there are a lot of people.
I suppose we have to quantify a lot of people who think that less or that the environment
is more important than humans.
My guess is that there's not the majority of people do not have this concern.
Or do you have different information than I've been able to?
Well, there is very strong academic heritage in philosophy and environmental science, you
know, along those lines.
The UN, the UN policies from the environmental program and even the Paris Agreement, they
do not put human development first.
They're putting reducing carbon dioxide emissions first.
OK, a lot of the programs that were UN, you know, World Bank and whatever to help low
income countries develop and reduce their vulnerability to climate change, those resources
are being redirected to help mitigate CO2 emissions.
So I mean, there are some big international worldwide policies that do not seem to be
focused on human thriving, at least in the near term.
OK, but if I understand these policy initiatives correctly, the ultimate goal or the concern
about CO2 levels is not the CO2 levels themselves, but rather their impact on human flourishing.
Have I gotten it wrong?
Well, yeah, I mean, this is the weakest part of the argument.
OK, is more CO2 in the atmosphere dangerous?
They haven't really made that case very well.
It's tied to extreme weather events, which have always happened, will always continue
to happen.
It's very difficult to disentangle the role of natural weather and climate variability,
land use and the slow creep of global warming to try to attribute any of the problems that
we're having to increase carbon dioxide in the atmosphere.
The slow warming does produce a slow creep of sea level rise, but it's slow.
It's been, you know, the sea level has been rising most recently since the mid 19th century
at relatively slow rates.
Certain people predict that this could rapidly accelerate, but, you know, it hasn't been happening.
You know, anything catastrophic with sea level rise, such as the collapse of the West Antarctic ice sheet,
is more likely to be associated with under ice volcanoes than it is to CO2 in the atmosphere.
So this whole issue of danger is the weakest part of the argument.
And they try to get around that by blaming everything.
Pakistan floods, hurricane, and everything on climate change.
Well, these severe weather events would have happened independent of climate change.
And if you look back to the early part of the 20th century, you are always going to find worse extreme events
than what we've seen in the last 10 years.
If you go back even farther using paleoclimate records, you see some really awful, I mean, extreme events.
In the US, I mean, the worst weather by any standard heatwaves, fires, floods, hurricanes, everything occurred in the 1930s.
I mean, nothing comparable to what happened in the 1930s have we seen in the 21st century.
Did the US weather in the 1930s, did that relate to fossil fuel emissions? No.
So, you know, that there's a very weak argument in trying to present all this is dangerous.
Okay, well, we recently talked to Jeffrey Sachs, a professor at Columbia University and a widely respected global authority on sustainable development.
He's twice named by Time Magazine as one of the top 100 most influential global leaders.
So if I want to understand if I'm to appreciate your argument today, his work and the work of his team and the people behind him are
ill advised or they're incorrect or they're wrong or something else that's driving them and their work.
Is that what you're asking us to accept?
I'm not familiar in any, I know who Jeffrey Sachs is, I'm not familiar with what he's doing or his recent research.
The point is I'm very familiar with the UN reports and the Paris Agreement and the conference of the parties and the UN sustainability goals.
Okay.
The UN climate stuff is at odds with its own sustainability goals. In 2015, the world's governments and all the leaders got together and they agreed on 17 global sustainability goals.
The first one is to eliminate global poverty. The second one is to eliminate global food, global hunger.
The third one or number seven is clean abundant energy for all. And number 13 is climate action. Okay, somehow climate action has been elevated as the most important thing in the world.
Forget eliminating poverty, forget food security. The most important thing is climate action.
And those can't get enough fertilizer to grow their crops because it produces CO2 emissions. Does this make sense? No.
So there's a lot of stuff going on in the name of sustainability and climate change policy that has nothing to do with sustainability or human wellbeing or economic development.
It's in fact acting counter to reduction of poverty and food security.
Interesting argument. What are the forces that are driving this phenomenon from your perspective?
Let's go back to the 1980s to understand this. And again, the UN environmental program, they long have had a goal and an interest in world government, anti-capitalism, disdain and dislike for fossil fuels.
Okay, and once the global warming argument was put forward, the CO2 emissions, they latched onto this as the vehicle for pushing those policy goals forward.
Okay, and this was like in the 80s when they latched onto this.
And in 1992, the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change had their big treaty. We must prevent dangerous anthropogenic climate change.
And this was before there was even any hint of warming. There had been decades of cooling. Okay.
So there wasn't even any warming yet. It was just all theoretical and driven by a political agenda. So the policy cart was way out in front of the scientific course on this.
Okay, then the IPCC came along and the first IPCC assessment said, well, we don't see anything beyond natural climate variability.
Okay, well, the UN Framework Convention did not like that. And the existence of the IPCC itself was on the line.
So for the second assessment report, the report looked just like the first one. Okay, we're not really seeing anything yet.
And tremendous pressure was put on the scientists in the summary for policymakers meeting where the scientists meet with the policymakers.
And that was when the scientists came up with, we have seen a discernible impact of emissions on warming of the climate.
And then they, this was after the report had all been written, and then they went back and changed the report to be consistent with this. And this was an enormous scandal in scientific circles, but politically it served a purpose.
The IPCC was able to remain its relevance and its viability. So in these very early days, you can see how politics influenced the science.
The whole scientific problem was framed very narrow. Let's look only at CO2 emissions and other greenhouse gas emissions forget natural climate variability, and let's focus only on what might be dangerous.
We don't need to concern ourselves with any benefits of a warmer climate. So, all of climate science began to be framed in this very narrow way.
That's where the funding was for research from natural governments to support the efforts of the IPCC and the IPCC.
Third and fourth assessments.
They were both the absolute worst it was just pure political advocacy.
Then after that climate gates struck, and the IPCC was put under a lot of scrutiny, and they cleaned up their act to some extent for the fifth and sixth assessment report the fifth assessment report.
The working group two on impacts and working group three on mitigation they were relatively good.
The IPCC six assessment report the working group one on the science and the physical basis was quite good.
Working group two and working group three were not so it's a very mixed bag. It depends on who gets selected to be authors and lead authors and these authors are selected with, you know, a political agenda in mind.
You know, it's not not necessary I mean someone like me I was actually a reviewer for the third, a minor contributor and a viewer for the third assessment report.
So I did my thing.
But when I read the report I was just disgusted and so that that point I didn't have anything more to do with the IPCC.
I was very politicized, but that said the IPCC reports are a relative voice of reason.
Compared to what the activists are saying you know extinction and code read and all this kind of emergency.
Well I'm sorry that's just not on the climate crisis isn't what it used to be even two years ago.
The large emission scenario.
Apologies for the lingo RCP 8.5 if that's familiar to any of you. That one is now off the table. The conference of the parties 26 and 27 are no longer considering that extreme emissions scenario.
Three years ago, a warming of three or four degrees since the pre industrial period would have been regarded as policy success, because everybody was worried about this really extreme emission scenario and all the extreme
weather that might be associated with. Well now everybody's back down to the reference which is RCP 4.5, which is a much more modest increase and has much more modest impacts.
Okay, we're in reach of two degrees.
I don't think we're going to have a problem staying within two degrees centigrade by the end of the 21st century. No, we've already warmed by 1.1 degrees.
I don't think we're going to have a problem staying within another nine tenths of a degree centigrade.
Now that it's in sight they've moved the goal post down to 1.5 degrees to amp up the urgency to do this to do that. So these targets have nothing to do about with science they have to do with politics and efforts to achieve the maximum action to get rid of
fossil fuels. And it's not just about getting rid of fossil fuels. It's all about renewable energy they don't want nuclear either. So it's a it's a very specific worldview that is being put forward here that has very little basis in actual
science and sensible energy policy.
That's very interesting. There's a lot to unpack there, I suppose. I'd like to ask about the alternatives because it what you're saying here is that is a political issue, it's a political argument.
So, what are the some of the alternatives what do you think can be done about this and I should say that to a non expert outside observer. I suppose you are aware that a person who is in the minority in this argument.
It's also difficult to to to sort through the complexity here, and there's only, there's only a few people right because the overwhelming majority of climate experts do not agree with with this take.
Is that correct.
Not at all.
No, I don't.
There's a lot of very vocal people out there.
Okay.
Some of them even have press agents. Okay, publicity agents, scientists.
To me that's completely antithetical to being a science so there's a lot of people with big voices and big mouths out there, but if you look at the rank and file.
It is, people realize most people most, most people who really understand the processes of how the climate works.
Geologists meteorologists oceanographers do not disagree with what I'm saying.
Okay, we have over simple they understand that we've oversimplified the climate problem.
And people in the policy world.
Many of them agree that we've oversimplified the solution. Okay, you can't unring this bell, even if we were to somehow get rid of CO2 emissions.
There's a lot of inertia in the climate. Okay, it would be 100 years 50 years before we saw any change in the weather sea levels would continue to rise the ice sheets would be doing what they're doing.
It's a very long time scale so this urgency to cut emissions isn't really going to help the weather at all.
Now, once you take the urgency out of the equation for reducing emissions, then you're in a very different place in terms of thinking about policy.
Okay.
There's a long component of a new vision.
Better vision for 21st century energy infrastructure. Okay, with new ideas new technologies whatever cleaner cheaper, more secure more reliable etc.
I am absolutely all in favor of that. There are many reasons not to continue relying on fossil fuels.
By the end of the 21st century is going to be very expensive to extract anyways, but there's, you know, all sorts of political geopolitical instability associated with fossil fuels as we're seeing play out in with the Russian Ukraine and Western Europe situation.
So there's lots of reasons not to like fossil fuels.
But there is no way on earth that wind and solar is the answer.
Wind and solar is very low power density. It requires a lot of land, not just for the power plants themselves but also for the transmission lines that are required.
Okay, materials intensive enormous amount of copper cement steel and on and on it goes renewable energy is very vulnerable to the vagaries of weather and climate variability if we're worried about co2 impacts on the weather.
On earth would we pick an energy system that is exceptionally vulnerable to weather variability, wind routes floods hail lightning the whole works.
I mean, why would we subject our energy supply to that. Okay, so what should we be doing. Well there's the US is making tremendous advances and small nuclear.
Small modular nuclear reactors with all sorts of advanced technologies. These are just starting to come online. There's a learning curve, but within 10 years these are going to be really a wonderful solution.
Advanced geothermal is also a very promising solution it doesn't work everywhere but in locations where they have the right resources it can be a very good source.
To me those are the two solutions that I would hang my hat on, you know, with for the 21st century infrastructure. Yeah, we will probably need fossil fuels for a while.
But the thing about the energy transition is we need to understand that we're going to need a lot more energy in the 21st century, not just to bring countries like in Africa up to snuff in terms of having access to grid electricity.
But we're trying to electrify everything you know with heat pumps and electric vehicles and all this kind of thing, but more fundamentally electricity provides a source of all our societal innovations robotics artificial intelligence quantum computing new materials, etc.
So, you know, we're just going to need a lot more electricity. And there is no way, even if you could work out the technology, relevant technologies for wind and solar to keep it reliable and whatever there's no way we have the land use the that would support an awful
lot of wind and solar power so so that's the fact of it. I mean so much of this is driven by the desire for a particular political solution.
Stop the fossil fuel companies, you know just kill the fossil fuels that's a top priority. Okay, and then bring in wind and solar. I mean that's a solution that's not going to help anybody is going to give us less reliable electricity, which is going to reduce
the economic development, which means we have less money to actually protect ourselves from extreme weather events.
A lot of it like if we have a lot of electricity, we can run desalination plants indoor vertical agriculture, we can build all the infrastructure to protect our cities or whatever we can manage floodplains can smart grids to
increase the reliability of electricity so I mean electricity is so central. And here we are destroying the infrastructure that we that has built the prosperity of the 20th century and the first two decades of the 21st century and we're destroying it.
Without having a viable replacement and this makes absolutely no sense. This is not the way to support human thriving and flourishing.
Can I ask you how receptive have have your critics been to engaging in dialogue with you.
Oh, they won't debate me because I'll clobber them. They won't debate me no one will debate me.
Well, we've had on the channel, we've had on the channel in the past.
He's not a climate scientist but he's written a book about climate science. And that's Lawrence Krause a theoretical physicist. I know who is yeah.
Would you be interested in talking to him discussing these issues.
I'm game to debate and discuss with anybody.
That's good news. That's good news. Absolutely.
No, this is one of the.
Yeah.
That's good news. Okay, okay, but you have to tell him who he would be talking to because I've had debates scheduled, and then people.
My opponent who might have been invited first. They then canceled when they when they saw that they were going to be going up against me.
Everybody to debate me.
Get a signed agreement.
I'm serious.
That's very good.
Okay, I love the confidence that's fantastic.
Okay, for this final part, can we transition to some of your professional activity now that you're not no longer in academia, and where people can learn more about what you're doing these days.
I founded a company climate forecast applications network.
See fan climate.com. And this is basically about helping our clients manage understand and manage their weather and climate related risks.
We make weather type forecast, you know, temperature wind power, you know, related to the weather energy sector hurricane forecast a lot of our income comes from extended range hurricane forecast particularly insurance companies and also electricity utility companies that live in coastal that serve coastal regions.
We also do a lot of more climate related consulting.
We make projections out to 2050, give them a range of scenarios of what could happen out to 2050 in terms of extreme weather events, and this is a much broader range of scenarios and you would get from the IPCC.
We also include natural climate variability.
I recently completed a book titled climate uncertainty and risk.
It's in press.
The publisher is anthem press.
It's probably another seven or eight months before it will be published. And this is a holistic look at the whole problem.
You know, the, the pernicious issue of how this has become politicized how and why philosophy of science is comes in and then the middle section is really about just looking at what could happen in the 21st century and what we don't know.
Okay, about what could happen. And then the third part is related to
science decision making under deep uncertainty adaptation and energy, you know, a vision for the 21st century energy system.
So so a lot of territory covered in the book.
I'm pretty excited about it.
It's going to be interesting when it comes out but you know a lot of what I'm talking about here.
Kind of things are covered in but it's a it's an academic book it's not like a rant.
Like some books are that this has like several thousand academic references.
You know, it's a scholarly book, and it's published by an academic press so it's it's not a political rant like so many climate books.
Yeah, that sounds very interesting. I look forward to the possibility of having you back if you're interested when we'll take a deep dive we'll take a deep dive into that.
And I'd like to also continue on two fronts. One is, get somebody who's willing to talk to you, who's a critic of these points of view. Hopefully it'll be Lawrence Krause that would be I think it would be very interesting.
And the next front which we ran out of time today, I think it's probably more important is how we resolve these differences of interpretation and different differences and scientific outlooks.
How we resolve these issues politically which is a separate issue but I think it's equally or more important than the actual science because we have we have to decide how to proceed and how, how the plan is going to evolve and it's just so critical.
I agree absolutely at this point.
There's the science is almost irrelevant at this point.
It's really more about the decisions we need to bank and that this is what this last third of my book is about decision making under deep uncertainty.
You know, when you've got different perspectives. Well, you search for no, no regret solutions you under, you know, do lots of experimenting and bring in a lot of stakeholders and decision makers and try to come to some sort of an agreement it's a wicked problem.
Dealing with a wicked problem are not top down when mandated kind of solutions so there are better ways to approach finding solutions to this.
Very, very super interesting super interesting I think we can we can probably go on for at least a couple more hours just on that topic.
Yeah.
However, we'll put it on hold for the moment.
I've really enjoyed this talk to be honest I'm actually surprised at how much I've enjoyed the talk and the potential for for some really valuable exchanges down the line so I look I look forward to that doctor thank you once.
Okay well thank you I look forward to a continuing dialogue.
To support our discussions with the world's leading thinkers please see the video description or visit eism.eu forward slash support.
Thank you.
