So you're going to give me a tour of the cathedral.
That's right. Also known as the garden.
It's the unified you talk or a unified theory of knowledge.
There's then that's the theory of knowledge tree.
And even more complicated, the first branch on it is the tree of knowledge system.
So my training is as a clinical psychologist.
So I got sort of intellectually awakened in, well, a little bit in first off,
I skipped school a lot and smoked a lot of pot in high school.
So that was that narrative.
But I was not really certainly not thinking that my journey would take me the way it took me.
I got woken up a little bit into some interesting ideas and undergraduate.
But really my, my first sort of really turn into the intellectual space was in,
as I was getting trained in my master's program in clinical community psychology and I was getting taught on how to do psychotherapy.
And I was getting then introduced to the major paradigms or models or schools of thought that people use.
So in psychotherapy, you know, there are, are you familiar with any different schools of psychotherapy?
Well, yeah, you know, I read Freud and Jung and, you know, and a very, very, you know, the more philosophical ones, the psychoanalyst.
I know more, let's say the more clinical.
Right. So those are the depth, the depth perspectives, which then Zach Stein, who I think you know, you know, we'll talk about installment and sort of underneath our social emotional world are these sort of archetypal drives.
And so you get Freud and Jung and all the offshoots and relationship to that and their approach to psychotherapy is, you know, gaining insight into those and appreciating them.
But there are a lot of other approaches to psychotherapy.
Also, there's a much more straightforward, cognitive approach that my mentor Aaron Beck developed, which is really kind of an a stoic tradition that focuses on adaptive thinking.
Like, you know, it's not in the world itself, but it's in how the lenses and schema and narrative and the way you think about the world that is key.
So how do you become aware of that tendency and make sure you have adaptive cognitive processes that allow you to regulate your feelings and your actions.
And from what I understand, there's kind of an attention, but, you know, attention between cognitive therapy, right, in depth therapy or.
Yeah, there's, there's, there's a sort of struggle between the two modes.
And one comes from this more like pure scientific or empirical model and the other comes, I guess, from, from, I don't know how you would describe Jung and Freud, because they seem to be, you know, very.
They seem to be influenced by, by, by the arts as much as science.
Well, I mean, certainly Freud, Freud starts off trying to develop a scientific psychology, that's definitely what he wants to do.
He studies crustaceans and activation inhibition in, in the nervous system.
And he really does want psychoanalysis to be a science, first and foremost.
However, what his real impact, although he has an enormous impact on psychiatry and clinical psychology, the science of psychology and Freud were a bit of an oil and water mix, especially, you know, there's a love hate relationship there.
There's a lot of, and so the science of psychology and Freud have always had tension.
Yeah, I remember Camille Paglia saying he should be read as a poet, which is kind of weird for a scientist to be read as a poet, but, but I guess that's how.
But Freud is such a genius and he has so many different perspectives and he builds a Freudian meta psychology that, you know, that then opens up so much possibility for how to see the human condition.
And then so that he ultimately impacts the humanities, arts, literature, really in the world, much more than any other psychologist does.
But he is then seen as making lots of claims from a scientific perspective that are, well, not exactly up to the coherence and reliability validity language game that people in the, in the science world take.
So there's just been a longstanding tension. That just gives you one example.
And I guess Jung is more extreme because I know more about Jung and I've read more about Jung and his, I've read his followers like James Curse and Gillian and.
Sure.
You know, I've read a lot of Jung and he's even considered more kind of out there and from the academic point of view, I remember my professors were, you know, they were appreciated of Jung, but they were, you know, they liked Freud a lot more than Jung.
Because Freud was more easier to, you know.
Well, right. So if you follow sort of the history so Jung is really Freud's first unbelievably major student.
And he looks like he's going to follow in his footsteps and then he breaks off and then analytical psychology Jungian psychology then becomes this unbelievable fortress of thought a cathedral of thought.
Yeah, as it were, not unlike Freudian theory. Now, what happens to Freudian theory though is that you get the neo Freudians so Jung goes off on his way.
And then you get a series of what I what we study as neo Freudians that give rise to psycho that what I call psychodynamic thought.
So that's pulling Freud back into at least the psychotherapy place so people like Alfred Adler and Karen Horne and Eric Erickson are then and you'll notice what they are doing is they're taking Freud's depth view.
I often like to say that Freud went two steps into from conscious and really self conscious awareness into subconscious and then into the deep unconscious.
Okay, so that's a two step process. And then the psychodynamic people from Adler to Horne I to Erickson moved back up really to one level beneath and what I mean by that is that they if you pay attention to what they
identify as the core drives of our struggle. It's things like power and love and neurotic struggles about whether or not will be accepted.
So those individual and if you look at like the Erickson psycho social stages. So you get trust versus mistrust. You get autonomy versus shame and doubt industry versus inferiority.
If you look at Karen Horne I she talks about moving toward moving away moving against kind of like power love freedom kinds of themes. And so what you see with those figures is a real shift into a
libidinal identity, meaning the energy that really drives you to be relational. Okay, and to be connected to, to things like the genuine conflicts that you have with your parents, as opposed to some of the depth stuff like Melanie Klein really
up into the real nether world of symbolic fantasy pH kind of ideas and so with the depth psychology what you basically get is you get the Freudian tradition and the Jungian tradition that are both strands of depth psychology, you then get a subset of psychodynamic
and actually move back into the therapy world that the short of this mainstream therapy world. So those would be the people that when I'm getting trained as I get trained as a cognitive and a behavioral therapist I got trained as a humanistic therapist.
I got trained also as a systems therapist like family systems and social systems impact. And those, those big four cognitive behavioral humanistic and psychodynamic at the individual level, like I was very enamored with all four of those views, meaning that I thought that they had
important key insights that should just be available to us from a basic scientific understanding of the way people work. But in fact, that's not the way it works.
They're, they're different models, anchored to different gurus and traditions and emphasis and fundamental assumptions. So that's what I call the problem of psychotherapy was that psychotherapy had all of this, these different paradigms.
But when you actually do psychotherapy, you're really, you have to, or at least one, you know, very common frame where you have to have an identity, you have to have a sense making scheme, you have to have a way to extract patterns, you have to have some guide, what people call your theoretical orientation to do the work.
And what I found is the problem that you're talking about here that, that all of these different kinds of therapies, you know, Eric Sony and hypnosis and Gestalt and what there's like millions of them right there man they don't have a they don't have a common language to to communicate with each other and that is that the essence of your work is to try to figure that out.
Yep, yep, they don't have a common language or conceptual structure of understanding that grounds them.
Okay, okay.
So, so you back up into the core insights that define them, and they come from very different places of understanding that then frame the puzzle piece of whatever problem, like a behaviorist comes from the tradition of john Watson and Ivan Pavlov and then Clark Hall and Skinner.
The cognitive is come from a different place. Obviously we talked about Freud, the human is come from a different place. Then you also have Gestalt, although actually Gestalt therapists with Fritz Burles come from a slightly different place than Gestalt psychology, and it's a and it's just a chaos.
Okay, of different approaches that don't have.
So then the next question, I'm sorry to interrupt just a little bit more but the next question would be like.
Something to do with the discussion that came up in some of the email threads that we're both part of is like a unified theory of everything like you're trying to create a unified theory and and so and then that's your cathedral and what are the dangers of that in terms of reductionism and that kind of thing like how do you do that.
Right.
Well that's a big question.
That's a big question.
And I'll tell you, let me finish the story and then I'll get right to that. Okay.
Well, but it's a very good question and it's good for us to keep in mind because what I do call my system a unified theory of knowledge.
I can I reference that very clearly in the literature for some of your listeners if they're widely read and they're interested in big picture schemes, probably the most influential big picture science book that's ever been that's been written modern
is Edward Wilson wrote conciliants the unity of knowledge and he wrote that in 1998 Edward Wilson is the father of sociobiology.
He's an entomologist by training.
Sociobiology is the process by which you understand social behavior of animals through an evolutionary naturalistic framework.
And he was a he wanted to build a frame, a conciliants means harmony and unity and he wanted to argue that we could create an academic vision that was conciliant across the natural sciences into the social sciences and into the humanities.
That's so that's what his hope was.
It was called the unity of knowledge and my system basically says Wilson's hope for that was was good Wilson solution was not he was missing a couple of key pieces, and I offer a conciliant vision of knowledge.
So the other guy I know who has a huge theory of everything is of course Ken Wilbur and the integral movement so so what where does that fit into you does that are you influenced by that.
It's like it's interesting I was thinking about how you know everybody, people, there are popular therapists like there's popular Ken Wilbur is very popular right.
A lot of people know who he is and have absorbed his, his, his models and he's created quite a movement, and the same thing could be said for Carl Jung.
And yet these are really, they're viewed with suspicion within the, you know, the academic world.
That's right good reasons at times and, and perhaps not for good reasons at other times so.
So I'm what like I'm wondering like what your like ambitions are is it is it to make it more coherent to the, to the academic world or is it, is it, is it, is it another one of those big theories of everything that's going to be, you know, hard for people to understand, I mean, that's going to be controversial.
Well, we'll see first we'll see if it gets known.
I will say over the last year it's gotten a lot more known than it is I mean I've been working on this since 1996 1997 is when my world transformed into this.
And really like I said it's not the the desire or the vision was nothing more than hey why do we have all these different things and if they each have slices of truth.
Okay, my intuition is to seek coherence, and I want to see if you can put them together in a way and not really is just sort of like why don't they fit together and what would cause them to fit together.
That was essentially the deal I wasn't, and then when I found my path of how to put them together, then what I was being taught was this chaos, then all of a sudden it's like you turn a puzzle a couple pieces and then all of a sudden a picture pops in front of you.
And then you see the whole picture and you're like oh well that's how it goes together.
And now you don't need that now it's not really an issue anymore.
If you apply particular epistemological frames meaning how you know one of the epistemological frames I apply is coherence and the ability to parsimoniously explain a huge amount with logical internal consistency and effectiveness and that's.
Okay, great well then maybe you can start to lay it all out for us then.
Yeah.
So and it does, it certainly relates some to Ken Wilber I'm often asked you know how does my system relate to Ken Wilber. I like his system a lot and there are some differences as well.
Okay.
So, so I started at the problem of psychotherapy.
And then if we and then I'm sort of is like well let's think about medicine so psychological therapy is sort of like should be to what medicine is which is biological therapy.
Okay, so we think about medicines biological therapy that means that medical doctors take human biological knowledge.
Okay, and then they understand how it goes wrong and then they treat it.
All right, and then but in medicine is pretty well organized. Okay, meaning that we don't have circulatory doctors competing with gastrointestinal doctors saying we have the key to all of your health just get good blood pressure and get good blood flow don't worry about what you eat.
And then the gastrointestinal people aren't like oh no it's everything about your gut.
Okay, the reason is obvious because we know that the whole system, the whole human organism is a nested set of systems that go together.
Okay, and that we have a general view of health that's anchored to human biology, and although subsystems are part of the language of biology.
Okay.
And so, then it was like well shouldn't it be the case then that the different psychological therapies. All right, would be anchored to human psychology, like human psychology should be the science that organizes psychotherapy.
I'm wondering if the incredible complexity of human psychology makes that a challenge I mean the body is already complex but then, but then, well I guess the mind is has another depth of complexity.
Sure.
So, so then I went back and I then asked what turned out to be a life transforming question. I then asked well what is psychology.
Okay, all right. And it turns out there that there's consensus that we cannot answer that question.
Okay, I'll say that again, there's consensus that that's an impossible question to answer.
So that's interesting that the that the Academy so the structure, especially at least coming off of Europe into the United States, the structure of the Academy is that there's consensus.
There's complete difference, a different opinion. Now if you go to your most modernism or is that the result of postmodern. I mean, no, we know what science is we know what, you know, philosophy is we know what biology is but, you know, right.
And we know what chemistry, you know, literature is general literature is right. Okay.
But the fact of the matter is, is that although I don't know what psychology is. That's very interesting.
And what I mean by that is is that a some people think that psychology is the science of behavior. Okay, okay. Some people think it's a science of mind.
Some people think it's a science of mind and behavior. And when you ask people how to define mind and behavior and their relation, everybody, the magnitude of the difference of definitions explodes, and therefore you get a complete breakdown.
And what you then have what the actual field is, is it's grounded, not in a subject matter, but in a method. Okay, the method of science i.e. empiricism, the process by which things are measured, reliably tested, brought into experimental because there's actually a whole field
called experimental psychology, which is really the application of the methods of science to whatever this thing we might call mind and behavior might be. Okay.
So that's the that's my field is and they lie to you in Psych 101 and they what they do is just pay attention to say psychology, you know, a lot of people ask these questions.
Well, psychology is a science of mind and behavior. The key word is science. Science is about the way you measure things and can know things way more. And now let's talk about science and what that is.
Well, psychology is not a science, is it? I mean,
Well, it's a great question.
Maybe it's something that's very on a liminal space between all of these, you know, other things like it blends into philosophy, it blends into, you know, if you're a youngie, it blends into the religion, it blends into, you know, spirituality.
You know, people say that they're spiritual and not religious often thinking in psychological terms, right? Yeah, they're talking about their, their, their state of mind rather than something religious, or
maybe there is no duality between those two.
Yeah. So, so then the question is, is there a way or so what about that? Why? What, what do we mean by these terms? What's their history?
And then inside, then the, so then the fundamental question really that's at the center of my work is that, well, is there a frame within the natural, holistic, scientific language system?
Like how does this, how does science play its game of understanding? And within the game of understanding science, is there such a thing that you can call psychology that makes sense?
The, and the unified theory answer is, yep, absolutely there is. And I figured out a way to crack that nut and solve the problem of what psychology is.
Okay. So, so you're viewing psychology purely within a naturalistic mode, right?
Yep. So, so does that mean that, that, that we can throw out, you know, all the, you know, the depth psychology, which is usually
No, doesn't mean that. Okay, it simply means what I mean.
That's the part I like I studied literature.
Right. Okay, so you're familiar some with Ken Wilbur, right?
Sure. Okay, so you're familiar them with the quadrants, right? Okay, the quadrants are the on the right hand side, you have your exterior quadrant, right?
At the individual and collective level, and then you have your interior quadrant, right in it. Okay. And Ken Wilbur is exactly correct that science, the language game of science is to anchor yourself in the exterior quadrant at the level of the individual
or at the level of systems. So he has behavior and systems are the two fundamental language systems for science.
Okay. Okay. All right. And, and what Wilbur totally rightfully points out is when science took a hold of that, it and it's and develop their matter in motion way of understanding the world in the
Enlightenment, they dominated the crap out of the other branches of philosophy and art, which dealt with the I and the we, right? And then they crushed the through that dominance, we basically ripped it out technologically manifested it.
And then we lost the goodness and beauty, and it got excessively obsessed with truth and truth of a particular kind.
Talking about things like the soul, right? You mentioned in solely and you know, Zach, Zach, we saw this, it became a taboo sort of language to use this kind of mystical terms, which, which, you know, we could only speak in instrumental
terms, right?
Right. Well, right. And from in what's called the exterior, empirical epistemological language game. So it's like, I quantify it in peer from an exterior empirical way, meaning so I'm it's not about qualia. It's about quantity.
And I'm going to measure it. It's about iterator measurement and reliability that quantifies the exterior objective reality. That's, that's what science is about. Okay.
That's what science is about. But you said that you're fitting psychology within that. How do you do that?
Yeah. So one of the things you have to realize is that if you've one of the mistakes that Wilbur makes, in my opinion, is that you do not want to think about the right hand as in terms of physical mechanistic, although that's exactly where science
start, but you actually want to think about it in behavioral terms. In fact, that's the way he usually calls the upper right. Okay. In behavioral terms.
All right. Now, behavior is a very different thing than physical mechanism. Okay, because there's all different kinds of behavior. Okay. So, and so what what if you track like Wilbur, he'll go from, okay, so there's atoms and then from out here goes all the
way up to the brain. Okay, in the upper right. All right. So complexity, increase complexity up into a certain frontal lobes. That's what he'll draw the line from the unified theory perspective.
He gets that wrong. Okay. What what actually what the Tree of Knowledge shows and I'll show you is that there's an evolution in behavioral complexity from the material dimension and actually Wilbur's consistent with this.
But you know, anyway, there's a matter dimension. There's a life dimension. There's a mind dimension. By the way, that corresponds to the animal dimension of complexity mediated by the brain.
Okay. And then there's the culture person playing of existence. Okay. So the cult. So at the behavioral level right now, if we took a we could take a we are taking a recording of this, we are recording our behavior on this zoom.
Okay. From an exterior empirical perspective, we can take a transcript of our justification systems of interaction. Justification systems refer to the language based propositional networks that you and I because we both speak English and have enough of a shared schema of
understanding, we can then talk back and forth and develop open up an intersubjective highway. Okay, between our minds. That's what we're doing right now as we talk.
Okay.
And what that means is that actually, it's not so much just interior and exterior because there's actually an intersubjective space.
I mean, the thought the language based thoughts that I have are the same form in my head as when I speak them out here.
Well, when you said that I thought of, you know, there's the I that thou and the it right there's the, you know, and there's spacing. Exactly. Right. I think John Revekey calls it transjective space or something like that, but
Well, he wants to add. Right. Right.
That's another element.
So there's the the purely subjective perspectival I. Yeah. Okay. And from behind my eyes at a phenomenological level. There's the exterior it. Okay. There's the intersubjective we and John wants to add the participatory
transjective, which is, Hey, how do we, we're actually not only are you and I sharing an intersubjective understanding, but we're actually now shared in the agent arena, a relationship of developing a recording for a podcast.
So the people can have an identity connection and participate in relation and in whatever dynamic emergence happens as you tell me you hey stop there or hey elaborate on this and I'll respond and you and I will dance together in a participatory way to be whatever
dynamic issues come up.
Yeah. Yeah. And I guess that's the interesting thing about how, you know, a conversation as opposed to a monologue is is is this third element that comes in that other other people that, you know, and widens the whole lens of what can what can be understood and discovered.
Exactly. Exactly. So, so this justification, this was actually in 1996. This is my first sort of point of discovery was that the cell shape of your self consciousness system in the way it gets entangled with language and culture, it really is an organ of justification.
So your propositional knowing system is a system of justification that makes us very unique animals. That's in fact that propositional knowing and dangerous animals just dangerous is the most dangerous thing, isn't it? Yeah, interesting.
Yeah.
So one thing I could do is I could show you the Tree of Knowledge system and might give you a picture of that.
Great. You can. Let's do it. Yeah.
Okay.
All right. So this is a picture of the Tree of Knowledge system. Okay. Have you ever heard a big history?
Yeah, vaguely. I know a little bit. Yeah.
Well, big history is a big picture view of the universe that moves from the big bang at the beginning of time up to the present and then moves from the simpler things up to more complex things. Okay.
Right.
So this is a very good and standard way to map what's called cosmic evolution over time. And the tree, although I wasn't aware of big history when I developed this, the Tree of Knowledge system can very much be thought of as a map of big history.
Okay.
Okay.
So let's take a look at what we notice from this map. What jumps out at you right away?
Well, I look at culture and it seems bigger than everything else.
Yes. It's expanding.
There's an expansion going on.
Yeah. And also that the matter is a darker color. So there's some more dense. So there's a density to matter and things become more lighter and subtle as you get up into culture.
Okay.
Good. It's actually the lightness here is supposed to catch a little bit of a heat reference because there's a little bit more complex activity going on that's lighting it up a little bit.
That's actually what the shading is supposed to into it.
But so we see then basically at the very beginning you have energy. Okay.
So at the Big Bang 13.8 billion years ago or whatever, you have the beginning of the universe in a unifying meaning just singular sort of collapsing of the forces and collapsing of all the matter in a radiation energy state.
Okay. That's where it starts.
And then out of that is there is a chain reaction and inflationary chain reaction that then all of a sudden essentially you can think about energy getting chunked into frozen bits of matter, which then actually have to occupy space and time.
And then you get the emergence of the space time matter dimension of complexity coming out of the Big Bang.
Okay.
So and that is then going to be this is then a representation a particular kind of map of the territory then of the material dimension.
And then it says so that took from say 13.8 billion all the way up as far as we're aware. Now, this is the map of the human place in the universe.
I'm essentially mapping out our cosmic coordinates here as from the human perspective.
So if there may well be other life forms out there and then that would fill in additional aspects of this tree, but right now it maps our own knowledge of our own history.
So that 4 billion years ago, there may have been we're not really aware of any other life form, but around 4 billion years ago, 3.8, certainly by 3.5 billion years ago.
We see the emergence of life on planet Earth.
Okay.
So the so there's a shift some such that by 700 million years ago.
So somewhere between 4 billion and 700 million years ago, we see the explosion of the complex adaptive plane.
We call life.
Yeah, what the hell is that life?
Right, right.
Right. Exactly. Well, in the language of the tree of knowledge, it's a complex adaptive plane of existence.
Okay, where the fundamental unit of information is the gene.
The fundamental structural unit of operation is the cell.
Okay. And what the cell does is it metabolizes information, it reproduces and grows, it stores and processes information that's stored in the DNA, RNA protein relation.
Okay.
And then it communicates with other cells to create this unbelievably different set of complex behavior patterns that we would that we then would see that oh my gosh a cell like a bacteria cell man does that behave so differently.
So differently than a molecule, we call life the cluster of behavior patterns associated with this structure of a cell storage of information in a DNA RNA and then their communication patterns between cells that either either single cell organisms or then we get what's called big life where you get a eukaryotic cell.
And then you get multiple cell creatures like trees and plants.
Okay, so 700 million years ago, there was a multi cellular whole bunch of multi cellular living creatures on the planet.
Okay.
Notice that what made life so different is an information storage computation and processing system and which also set the stage for a communication between cells.
Okay.
And that that information feedback communication network, the way that's processed is very different than what happens at the matter dimension.
Although certainly there's information at the matter dimension. There's not a lot of information processing storage and recursive feedback and communication.
Okay, that's very interesting. So, so the more advanced life becomes the more communication is going on the more, you know, the more there is a flow of flow of communication happening.
That's right. So what you're going to get is you're going to get a stacked increasingly stacked and nested hierarchy.
Okay, of layers of information feedback that are actually constantly moving up from a bottom up perspective into a top down perceptive.
Okay, okay. And so, so you go from single cells that that don't have a nucleus, and then there's actually a fusion where there are mitochondria of cells that get pretty much absorbed by a larger cell and then there's a dynamic feedback
between those that give rise to the larger big life cells that give rise to things like plants. Okay. And then what happens is is that about 550 million years ago in what's called the Cambrian explosion.
But you we have a fossil layered record where you see the emergence before the Cambrian explosion there were things like jellyfish. Okay, that had distributed neural networks.
So you see the emergence of a nervous system, but you don't get the emergence of a brain, and they don't have complex active bodies. Okay, right.
But at the Cambrian explosion bodies and brains are relatively recent is what you're saying.
Well, if right if half a billion years is relatively recent, I mean, relatively recent. 100%. Right. And cosmic time are in whatever.
Well, that's exactly right. So when we start to think about the nature of time, our human conception of time. So you're, it's a totally proper statement. But yeah, 500 million years ago or 550 million years ago.
We see an explosion of complex active bodies, and you get crustaceans and insects, though not quite modern insects, but basically you see, in other words, they have segmented bodies, they have eyes, they have other sensory input, and they start moving around.
Okay. And then the world of mind is is sensory motor movement in real time. Okay, and by real time, I mean time that you and I, and your dog and my fish over there. That's real time for us as animals.
Okay, plants clearly move, but they don't move in the same time scale that that animals move in. Okay, animals move much more quickly and holistically.
And what happened is, is that there are these, these century habituating reflex movement systems that are then connected to sense detection systems. And it's that fusion.
Almost certainly that gives rise to the brain on top of a nervous system and then you get a lot to do with motility, right? This is very interesting.
That's, that's really interesting. Because we don't see flying trees, do we?
We do not see flying trees. They don't. There's, there are some carnivorous plants you might know of a Venus flytrap that will eat a fly and there are other, there's a subset of plants that actually do eat animals.
But they're very, very, they're rare and they, they collapse on animals or they have traps for animals, but they do not get up and walk around.
They can't avoid predator predators. I mean, they can try to send out toxins and they will communicate plant. There is certainly plant intelligence, but it's not nearly, not, not nearly the same way that we see in the animal kingdom.
So, so between 500 million years ago and 5 million years ago, you see the evolution of anywhere things from first from worms into things like flies and crabs.
And then you see up the vertebrate line from fish into birds and reptiles into birds and mammals. And then 5 million years ago, you get the cousins or ancestors of modern chimpanzees.
And if we looked at the great ape kingdom 5 million years ago, we would see behavior patterns very similar to our cousins, the apes today, things like gorillas, bonobos, chimpanzees, orangutans.
And, and that is then sort of that then gives you that fleshes out the picture. Now there's a I use capitals here capital M mind is the term I use to denote the the activity, the behavioral complexity of the animal kingdom.
Okay, so this is a different word. And I definitely spend a lot of time justifying why we need this word.
But it's the case that if I look over and see my fish women around in the language of the unified there you're seeing mental behavior there. Okay, mental is the proper adjective that we need to tag on to in front of the word behavior.
Well, I guess, when we think of the brain, and we think of you know the frontal lobe that that's that that's mental for us right because that's where our abstract thinking, right, right.
There's, there are actually three very different definite I like to emphasize that the word mental processes mean three fundamentally different things. Okay, depending on who you're talking to.
So, some people mean the the most broad in general and more modern definition of mental is the neural information processing activity of the brain.
Okay, for the mind. So for many some people mean, what is the mind. Oh, it's the information instantiated and processed by the nervous system. Okay, that's one definition.
A second definition refers to phenomenology or sentience or subjective experience. Okay, so in this definition, you your mind comes back online when you wake up in the morning. Okay, that's your mind coming online.
At what we kind of call consciousness right exactly, exactly.
Equification of many different versions of what we mean by mind and right, it's good to, you know, right, exactly what we're talking about.
Exactly. So I call that mind to mind to is what I call experiential consciousness. Okay, that's the felt experience of being and the job, the work that John and I are doing in that in that lecture series untangling the world not.
Okay, that's all basically we're really focused on trying to get them the parts and mechanics and generative functions of mine to.
Okay, or the experiential consciousness. All right. And then there's mine three.
Now, which is unique to humans and then emerges as a function of proposition and dialogue and justification. Okay, so that's what we're doing now is you and I, we can hook up our mind three highway and talk to each other.
Okay, can I throw something very unscientific at you please because I don't know Gershchev said we had three brains he said we're three brain creatures whereas animals were two brain creatures and one was motility and one was emotion and then there was the mind that's
probably a much cruder way of looking at a little bit of what you're talking about completely completely and in fact a palm a claim talked about if this will make it slightly complicated but but it's actually a little more precise.
Talked about the triune brain, right brain brain. Yeah, I'm not a reptile brain, and then you have on top of that you have an emotional brain, and then you have a cortical brain.
Now that's all in animals. Okay, and you can think about that as you're acting or doing habit brain. Okay, that regulates, then you're feeling learning like in dynamic relation pleasure pain and rely in the environment brain.
Okay, and then you're simulating thinking brain that other animals can do. And then on top of that we humans have a talking mind brain. Okay, so it's you have doing habits and then feeling learning pleasure pain and reaction in a dynamic way that gets
rise to the participatory and and perspectival stuff of john, and then you simulate across time that gets you into the cortex so you can say, animals can do this and certainly.
Oh, what's going to happen how do I make a judgment. And then finally humans get to have symbolic language on top of that, and then they hook up their minds through the talking domain.
So symbolic language is a uniquely human sort of right it's actually the proper function, the proper term and from a sign is really symbolic syntactical, because other animals do certainly other animals communicate and they do have fractured symbolic
communication, but they do not have symbolic syntactical communication. And that sets the stage for propositional talking and propositional talking is a game changer.
Okay, so.
So if we come back to here what we just were talking about was the this picture is the evolution of very simple things like worms all the way up to 5 million years ago. This would be all the complex social higher animals like chimpanzees elephants.
And you know the sort of the most complicated creatures in the animal kingdom that would exhibit the most higher order mental functioning, usually those are social mammals that are the most complex although birds and other animals are also very complex but that's a picture of that.
And then between 5 million years ago and the present and basically really probably fundamentally taking off about 75,000 to 50,000 years ago, we see the evolution of this fourth plane of existence what I call the culture person plane.
So this is animal mind cell life object matter. And now we're up at culture person plane of existence. And that has been growing for the last at least the last 50,000 years.
And that refers to the way in which humans get together and they tell stories, and they develop language based belief value networks that justify what is and what ought to be, and they the way they negotiate, who's to blame and who should get what, and how do we make sense out of our place in the universe.
Religion and law and, and you know, call you know we have I guess we have text right we have that was what even before that alphabet and then we have text and so right yep so but so first you get for the vast majority of time this is just oral indigenous.
You get animism. Okay, at the level of belief value systems. Alright, and you get people living in the Dunbar number of 150 plus or minus you know but they live in the original tribe. Yeah, the original original hunter gather tribe and we live like this, certainly probably pre linguistically for, you know,
millions of years and then we have a broken symbolic close coordination system for hundreds of thousands of years, and then there's a symbolic syntactical tipping point where you actually make propositional statements, and then the cool thing or the trick of those is that as you make propositional
statements those propositions, give rise to questions and what can be called the negative propositional space, which is, if I say there, if I'm if you and I are hunting together and I say there antelope. Okay, we, you can get a sense as to what I mean and we can check that out.
Alright, but if I say there antelope versus there are the antelope. Okay, when I make a meaning based propositional claim. Alright, that now creates a structure an epistemological structure that says Oh, this is either true or not true.
Okay, which is called the analytic problem of justification which is like, well how do you know that they're over there. Maybe they're over here. Wow. Okay, so that's interesting to me because that means that human beings are concerned with truth.
Whereas animals animals have no real conception of there's no there's no notion or concept of truth in the animal world is there.
This.
Certainly they'll get some sense of self to set of deception and other kinds of issues yeah but when you make propositional truth claims that can then be analyzed, you have jumped up a level that of truth relatedness that is very different.
I mean, try to do it with your dog. How do you figure out how do you have a engagement about the concept of truth with your dog. Okay, that's not easy. It's really easy to love your dog and play with your dog and and get your dog to be upset with you or be upset with your dog all of that's
really, but to get a truth proposition and then analyze that at all you know that's the you know clever experimental animal psychologists have done some things that certainly can show animals can manipulate and simulate.
But as my friend Joe Mikulski who's worked with me some on this although this was certainly my idea.
He happened to have a good meeting with Jane Goodall about two years ago he they invited her to his university and he was the dean of a college and so he got to have lunch with her and because he's familiar with my theory asked her.
Well, you know you spent a lot of time she's like oh my gosh do these chimps have such complicated and rich lives and he was like well do they ever justify their actions.
She's like, no, never I've never seen anything like that.
Okay.
They don't they don't have the existential question of who am I or they don't have a question right also that's that's exactly that's sort of what defines us a human is this primary question like who am I what you know what's going on here what's what's this what's this all about.
Exactly. In fact, I would actually say that's what defines us as persons.
There's a cool concept analysis by a descriptive psychologist by the name of Peter or Serio, who really argued that, you know, the unique thing about what defines a person is an entity that can be self conscious and justifies his or her actions on a social stage.
Okay. And what's cool about that is although empirically the only creatures we have seen to be persons are human beings.
Science fiction, you know and creative people have generated many examples of persons that are not human beings.
Like aliens and Jabba the hut, and you'll notice that they all have this ability that they know who they are and they justify to other people what they're doing.
And they, you know, manipulate others and they taught and but that's that's the defining feature really of of personhood so I often will say that we human beings are both primates and persons.
And, and that's actually so makes sense to me.
Yeah.
So, so this is, so then the argument here is that about 50,000 years ago, this idea is what I'm explaining to you is called justification systems theory.
And it's the joint point that turned us from primates up here into persons and gave rise to the evolution of this culture person plane of existence.
Okay.
And then these cultures are systems of justification. And what the Tree of Knowledge says is there's a particular kind of justification system that emerged about 500 years ago.
Okay, that we call science.
And what science does is it tries to develop an objective map of cosmic evolution across time.
Okay.
So the Tree of Knowledge is a theory of reality, mapped by matter, life, mind and culture.
And it's a theory of science that maps reality.
Okay.
Do you think that science stop sharing this.
Do you think science does away with religion in that sense or, or, I mean,
Absolutely not.
Yeah, I think that because I think a lot of scientists think that right. A lot of scientists think that at that point when we develop science, religion became a fantasy.
Right.
I don't believe that personally, but
Well, I'll put it this way. So, so certainly the scientific worldview was a big blow to simplistic dualistic worldviews.
Okay, great. They like what what John calls the two worlds mythology.
100% dualism dualism and religion there's
Exactly. So one of the big jumps from the pre modern formal world, especially this is much less true in the East because of the nature of the justification systems and philosophies that emerged there but in the West of course we had the Judeo Christian Greco Roman
tradition and scholastic European traditions and it was Christian dominated metaphysics. Right.
And that, at least the vast majority of people that interpreted that somewhat.
Literally, there was a dual world God and the real world and science basically does pop a lot of that bubble. Okay.
So, I've been studying, you know, Jewish mysticism a little bit and you have the tree of life in Jewish mysticism. And there's, you know, there's there's a kind of there's there's there's there's there's a sort of evolutionary model there.
But at the same time, it's understood that.
The versions of that, you know, in the Jewish mysticism some some of them are very dualistic, and others are more monistic it's like, it's like the whole model becomes transparent at a certain point.
Right.
But but but but I find that a lot of these things which exists in the East are hidden in Western traditions.
But as well, it's just that we've been brought up with this very dogmatic narrow version of the Western traditions or something like that.
Yeah, no, I think that's absolutely true. I mean the way I think about it without being pejorative is that you need certainly in the West, based on these you needed a fairly concrete version of reality for the church to have its authority, and that God looked
at you and he cared about what you did, you know, and would watch you and if you were good you'd go to heaven and you were bad go to hell. Well, that's that was a, you know, fairly concrete picture and that many people give an education and capacity and
everything else. And certainly for children that's there you go you need that function. Yeah, you need that function and they needed that level of concreteness.
They didn't have a lot of other justifications competing with that. As you get into it and you get the intellectuals really studying this right, and then you start to make well what do you really know about God, you know what kind of descriptive can we really
say about what God is, and then very quickly as well it's a very abstract concept right. I mean you know anybody that starts saying I know that God wants this, or does this or this is God is this way at a very at a very high level of intellectual function
and you start saying, how the hell do you know that, right. So God recedes into abstraction, and then you get you know get a spin azoa kind of view for many people is sort of like whoa, nature becomes or there's some force but it's, it's more than that so you, I think many traditions
go into sort of an abstract monism of sorts with God is everywhere and nowhere, you know, because when you really start to get, you know, deep into it you realize, huh, the bearded guy in the skies for children, you know.
But there is, there are more sophisticated versions of theology than that certainly.
Of course, and I think, and I think that the Dawkins and Sam Harris of the world basically killed the child version, and science killed, you know, like the utility.
Which is pretty much a straw man pretty easy to do right it's pretty easy to prove the non existence of Santa Claus on in a literal on a literal level like.
But but the archetypes of Santa Claus, right the archetype of Santa Claus and the archetype of God and this is why I like I'm a big fan of Jordan Peterson's like Bible series, I mean my things a tree in a garden.
Okay, I'm not lost on that mythology in fact that's the whole point is that I want people to weave together the logos of the tree of knowledge and then cultivate a mythos of the garden and a return to what could be you know my vision.
Of realistic paradise in the 21st century.
Yeah, I feel that I feel that somehow religion and science became completely split off from each other.
And there has to be some kind of re re re re emerging of the two which is very complex and difficult.
I think I think Ken Wilber does a really good job. Sure.
In his work.
I don't share all of his ontology but I totally agree that science and the right hand side of that of his quadrants came overly dominant and dismissed the I in the we and the good in the beautiful.
In fact, it's balanced in fact I talk about a scientific humanistic philosophy that's appropriately balanced across concerns of truth goodness and beauty.
Sure.
Yeah.
So, so what's next for after after your model.
What do you do with this model what what is what is what is its utility and how you know you're talking about a unified theory of psychology, you know, um, how does that work.
Right. I mean, I'm sure that's a big question but but can you give us a.
Well, let's go back into, you know, when you when you so now let me bring it so that I'll put it this way the, that's the first branch what we just covered on the tree behind me.
Okay, that's the first branch. Okay, first branch. Okay, there are eight branches and then the yellow flower in the middle.
Okay, so if you see in the back and I could pull up the whole thing but you know, I don't want to get too far into the weeds because I want to stay also engaged in relation, right.
So the left side of the branch of the tree refers to the unified theory of psychology and that's the science side.
Okay.
And then the right side of the tree refers to the unified approach to psychotherapy.
Okay, okay. All right. Okay, I see so you're splitting psychology and psychotherapy into different domains. Yeah, it makes sense because you know psychology remains psychology will remain within the realm of science.
So psychotherapy can go in all these other spiritual directions, etc. Right. Brilliant. Exactly. I get it. Okay.
And indeed you can also if you're with from like a Kantian tradition, the left side's about pure reason, and the right side's about practical reason.
Okay.
And so, so, and if we then jump to the other side to the eighth branch that black dot.
The black dot is a symbol of mindfulness.
Okay.
Mindfulness. And so there's approach an integrative approach to psychological mindfulness.
Mindfulness is mindfulness symbolized by a black dot. That's very interesting. Well, where you can only see that it's actually an eye looking down if you get into the detail so inside that black dot is an outline of an of an all seen eye.
And the idea is that it symbolizes a metacognitive observer.
Okay, so mindfulness is is the ability. So here you and I are in conversation, a mindful, a metacognitive mindful stance steps outside the stream, and then studies the stream between us from that perspective.
So then you then put up. Okay. So mindfulness is about so that's what it symbolizes step outside the stream and become a participant observer in your life.
The model is called calm MO.
Okay.
MO stands for both metacognitive observer. So that's the symbol. Okay. And also MO like make sure you have that as your modus operandi.
Okay.
And then calm is of course the word. And then that says, Hey, be aware of your calm body calm mind calm spirit, as opposed to closed and defensive get calm.
All right. Okay. And then it's an acronym that stands for curiosity, acceptance, loving compassion, and motivated toward valued states of being.
Okay.
Because I've, I've been practicing Buddhist meditation since I was 21. And I always object when when people describe meditation as some sort of, because they probably have never done as in Sashin, if they think that Zen meditation is to get you into a state of calm.
Okay. So I don't want to be critical here of your, your model. No, it sounds fine. But, but, but, but I sort of think a minute. I think, I think that that that tranquility and calmness.
You know, that might be a byproduct of what's going on. But, but, but you're also you're sitting there with a molten ball of burning lead and
and you have a sword and you're, you have to cut the, the knot of eternity. So, so, so I don't like this new age version of meditation.
Right. And, and there's a big, so there's meditative mindfulness, which I don't do, although I'm, or I've done some, but I'm no meditator.
This is so psychological mindfulness. Okay. Is, is a slightly different angle. They're both concerned with being aware and emphasize elements of acceptance.
So mindfulness means rather than mindless reactivity, we are going to have awareness of observation of what is present.
Yeah. Yeah. Psychological is the witness in consciousness or something like that. Exactly. Yeah. So mindful meditation is a practice in the witnessing muscle.
Okay. Yeah. So, so what you do is you maintain your capacity, your will to attention to the witnessing muscle and to bring the witnessing function back online.
That's drawing your attention back to breath. Right. Yeah. Okay.
So psychological mindfulness refers to the capacity, it's much more in the logos domain, whereas opposed to the perspectival witnessing function.
Okay. And it's essentially for, from a John Verveke perspective, it's essentially activate your inner sage.
Okay.
So it's like, what would it's about wisdom rather than just observation, right?
Well, yeah. And what, what's right? Wisdom actually means cultivating knowledge and practice toward valued states of being, which is the M in calm.
Okay. So it's like, yeah, what are your valued states of being in the long, short and long term? And then what would you, what, how would you get curious about what is going on?
How do you learn to accept if it's something shitty is going on? How do you be present there? How do you engage in loving compassion?
And then how do you find that adaptive path toward valued states of being in the short and long term? So it's engaging wisdom, say an internalized sage.
Okay. Yeah. Yeah.
Okay. Yeah, I'm okay with that.
So, so that gives you an example of sort of like, what do you, so does the, does the garden tell you what to do? Well, I mean, it's not like a simple, you know, do these 10 things and life is fine.
Okay, but it, but it carries with it a whole set of maps and ecology practices.
And commmo provides some of the frames of reference on that. Okay.
So, so those are two good aspects of the, of the cathedral as it were, those are two good rooms commmo is one, the tree of knowledge certainly is there's a lot and there's a lot of layers to both of those but particularly the tree of knowledge.
And okay, so, so take us to some more rooms. I think you should put this up on the screen. I think people sure might like the visual of it as you're talking about it.
Okay.
All right, so let me put it, see where I am here.
Actually, so let me share my screen with you. Yeah.
If I go to this one.
Yeah.
Okay, so the this particular, I can see something that says a journey with my daughter. Yeah, actually, okay, that's right. Okay, okay.
Actually, yeah, the garden when this pop this was 2016.
And I was working I had the unified theory and the unified approach and they both had four ideas so unified theory of psychology and the unified approach.
There's a conference called cultivating the globally sustainable self and the globally sustainable self. They were having they were discussing that and a really good African man from Africa talked about African philosophy called Ubuntu.
Okay, that's an effort means toward humanity cultivating humanity cultivating a sense of brotherhood sisterhood.
And I had been calling my system in the last, you know, like,
mine is yours doesn't it mean something like that.
Right, it's a, it's a flow.
It's a flow between self and other that creates goodness. Yeah. Okay. And an attitude toward that. Okay.
And that was actually very, and I would be calling my system which was utu a and then I was just shrinking that to a to a, and then everyone's like what the hell is that what a weird word to two, and I was like, Oh, it's this that and the other.
And I was like, Oh my gosh, we should plant a to a seeds and grow a to a trees. Okay. And what I meant by that is to cultivate the globally sustainable self. What we need to do is we need to, we can share this schema, and we can share it with the children.
Okay. And then create and that was then that created an artistic calling in me, which I've never had really I've never had a, and I don't do much in the way of music. I drew a little copying stuff.
I have a vision logic to use Ken Wilbur term that's why I draw all my schematics, but I never had an artistic calling. But this is what happened to me at awoken, awoke something at the artistic space, and actually then it ultimately started.
I brought it home, my daughter. We were talking about various gardens and trees and flowers. And it ultimately set the stage. So then this is the first thing that I built. Okay, so we talked about the tree of knowledge system that's the far left justification hypothesis actually became justification systems theory later.
It's the second we were talking a little bit about that behavioral investment theory. That's a third branch thing called the influence matrix and then a thing called. So that's those four make up the unified theory and then character adaptation systems theory or cast the character wheel of development.
The nested model of well being and come mo those make up the unified approach. And this was the first like, Hey, if it's a tree, what does it look like.
And then my daughter encouraged me to put flowers on it and then use visual, the visual diagrams that it would become. And then it grew and grew from there. And then it grew ultimately into a the current representation of the system.
Okay, well, and, and then ultimately it grows into a whole garden, where each of these, the bees and the right this what's called the stepping stone, and the me flower in the middle they all have very clear reference and symbolism and
what's the me flower in the middle. I think you you mentioned that briefly but
Yes. So what it stands for if you if you see the zoom in a little bit on it. Yeah. Well anyway you could see it right there. You see it's a yin yang symbol. Okay.
M stands for metaphysics. And the E stands for empiricism.
Okay, and it's the relationship between metaphysics which is your concepts and categories and empiricism which is the data you pull through your senses, and it's about creating the proper relationship between our concepts and categories.
It's also in the shape of a big one in the middle. That's called the big me which is the big justification system of concepts categories and data, and then little means represent your each individual.
Okay.
So, so you can think about your own Andrew Sweeney's concepts and categories like sub personalities or something like that. No, well each into each of us is our own small one, and then we would get together like, and this is any belief system so you'd have individuals that
would make up Christianity, each Christian. Oh, okay, an individual. Okay, and then they would get together and make it up and then so then the question is, how do we create one of the things is while creating a big picture that connects to the little each of us is
little pictures to create the whole. Okay, so that representation of a community kind of exactly like another feature of this is that it spells me me. Okay, as a meme.
We create a meme plex a metaphysical empirical big small meme plex. That's a, that's a artistic representation. Okay, so that's another idea is like we need a, we need a metameme plex for the 21st century that collects the large scale systems of justification, and the individual
harmonizes them in a dialectic. Okay, and then that will that's part of them, where we are in the 21st century that's kind of that's the calling of it.
Yeah, it makes me also think of the left brain right brain model of Gilcrest and, you know, the mathematics being more of a right brain kind of associated of mind and then in the left brain being the more empiric empirical type of mind.
No, is that something. Yeah, I think I'm throwing that you know I'm really stretching it here, probably. Well you're not stretching it really at all I just actually would twist it just a little bit because I totally get what you're saying and you're absolutely right.
But there's another layer that kind of inverts it. But let me say that the, like the left side of the tree is your left brain. Okay, so that's, that's your logical brain. All right, and the right side is more of the intuitive practical brain that's embodied.
Okay, so that's totally okay. And that's, so that's right. The interesting thing about metaphysics really is your it's really your linguistic concepts and categories and empiricism as I mean it in bot in your body I mean through your perspective which actually is a much more right brain
phenomenology. Okay, so we're talking about internal empiricism. That's you opening your eyes and seeing a red can. Okay.
And really that and then your concept that that's a red Coca Cola can is actually part of the metaphysics. Oh, I see. Okay, exactly. That's why actually it is really metaphysics is a little bit more left brain concepts and categories.
Okay, and versus right brain phenomenological and first person interior empiricism, as opposed to although I mean it in both senses here so it's, you know, there's multiple layers to the system.
Yeah, I see. Yeah.
So, then, basically what this says is the garden, the word it to a comes from the combination of UT and you a where UT stands for the unified theory of psychology, and you a stands for a unified approach to psychotherapy in the garden you find the stepping
stone that actually stands for the standard theory of elementary particle physics. So that grounds it in physics. The metaphysical unified theory unified approach theory of knowledge tree. That's the long version of it.
The UT UA or to a flowers or to a seed, and the to a to a bees, the wicked wisdom be in the wick WB.
And they all their symbolism, the garden's artistic representation of a system of knowledge that offers a novel way to unify modern science, psychology and philosophy into a coherent scientific humanistic worldview.
It's scientific in the sense that it offers a map of the universe that's consistent with modern scientific knowledge from quantum mechanics to sociology.
It is humanistic in the sense that it embraces value based living, meaning making creative expression and the concept of the sacred.
As such the garden provides a place for the two cultures of the Academy, the sciences and the humanities to come together in a mutually inspiring dialectical dance.
Okay, yeah, that's good because again we're seeing we're living in an age of where these two realms are split right schizophrenically.
Completely, completely.
So, just this gives you sort of a frame of the components there's also I did a thing called the I quite coin and the elephant sun god around the garden.
Let me go, I'm going to jump ahead just a little bit because if I get too much in the weeds here but I want to at least show you the eight key ideas. Okay, and then we can see where to go from there.
All right, so.
So the wick WB stands for wisdom, interest, character and well being. All right, if you so if you want to say well what fundamentally is the message of the garden.
The garden is about cultivating these four elements. So I want to cultivate wisdom, want to cultivate interest, meaning, okay what are resources what are needs, want to cultivate character and cultivate well being.
Each one of the branches has a core word associated with it. Okay, so we have knowledge justification investment influence adaptation development and well being.
And there are eight key ideas this should pull from the idea of the eight fold path.
And getting right relation with various elements got overlap with that.
And the first branch then was what we covered that's the tree of knowledge. Okay, and that's the new map of cosmic evolution. And that actually provides the proper descriptive metaphysics.
And the conversation with Bard on the list as to why I actually need the word metaphysics.
Like, no, you don't need that. You know, it's like actually I do.
Pardon I can batter banner. I appreciate what he's saying but I do need descriptive metaphysics. And this is a descriptive metaphysical system, meaning it defines the terms and categories in a particular way.
The second branch of the tree. Okay, and it's, it represents justification systems and what's called the updated tripartite model of consciousness, human consciousness.
Now that's a direct reference to Freud. Okay.
And what this is as a model of consciousness you have the behind the eyes experiential self. So this is your screen of awareness.
Okay, that is your sensory consciousness and it also then plugs in to what's called your episodic declarative memories of self, which is sort of your point of view of being in the world and what you remember would be your core phenomenological self.
Okay.
And that's different from your private self and in what sense.
So your private self in this context refers to your private narrating self. So this is what's mediated by language and your and how you talk to yourself. Okay.
And then that's what you can directly share through the information language highway that gets opened up with language so that just like you and I are talking right now.
I take my private narrating cells and go they go right through the skin and in their propositional language content and we'll get dropped right in your head. Okay, unlike my experiential self which you can never gain direct access to which is the subconscious in Freud in terms isn't it.
Freud is actually not super clear his topographical model needs work in the sense that he does not differentiate clearly between self conscious narration, which he normally means by consciousness and consciousness at the level of experience.
Which he generally means by subconscious. All right, but it's, but it's not really clear always versus that and then into unconscious. So I would argue you absolutely need experiential consciousness and self reflective consciousness.
Those are two different domains of consciousness. What about the collective unconsciousness where does that belong in here. Excellent. Hold that thought. I'll come back to that in a second. Yeah.
So to bring you in in the story. Yep, now bring actually right I'll bring a psycho dynamic version of young and then we can go deep into young in relation. Okay, but at the second branch level then you'll notice one other thing about a couple of two other things I'll share.
So this is your attentional filter into the experiential stuff again this map between what and so underneath the attentional filter is your neuro cognitive processing.
Okay, the neuro cognitive processing is the the non conscious information processing that your brains engaged in. All right, that's regulating and translating your muscles into action and also communicating a network behind the scenes backstage and doing all of that.
Okay, this then creates a tip of the iceberg, but very important part of our minds experiential consciousness.
The relation can be thought of as an intentional filter. We can debate about the term but basically what is it that brings it on to the stage of awareness.
Okay.
And then there's a relationship between what you're self consciously aware of, and what you're willing to bring on to the stage and how you narrate it. I call the relationship between that the Freudian filter.
And then what do you actually share relative to the public. Okay, and what do you hide. When do you lie when you deceive when do you worry about judgment when you try to put on a face, the filtering between those two domains is called the rogerian filter
from the other therapist, Rogers from from him.
I guess, from play from Carl Rogers.
Yep, because what call Rogers identified as the split between your social self and your core, what he called your core organismic valuing process, or we can just call it your true self. Okay, that social split where people because of conditional love and judgment, you put on a face, and that
is your fake social self. And then that's disconnected from who you truly are. So Rogers tried to create a therapeutic environment of non of unconditional positive regard, non judgment, empathy to break through the rogerian filter and create a connection into what the person
fundamentally felt at their core.
Okay, yeah, I understand. Yeah, so that's, yeah, because, because there's a sort of wall of perception between you and the person unless you're able to penetrate that wall.
Exactly, exactly with empathy, and I and positive regard. Okay, and all of this is taking place in a socio cultural historical context called the context of justification.
So like a therapy room, and the professional relations so you don't sleep with your therapist or are you at home and what's the rules of the family. Are you in Saudi Arabia versus northern Virginia. Okay, so that's all context of justification, which sets the rules of engagement from a cultural perspective.
Okay.
Okay, great.
So, this is the third branch of the tree. Okay, and this is, this is how the brain turns into the mind, meaning the mind at the level of neuro cognitive functional processing. So neuro in other words, how does information get processed by the brain.
And this is then a architecture of the neuro cognitive function of the human mind. Okay, and what means that it detects input, it, and then translates them into sensation and I don't necessarily mean experience sensation I just mean the language of the nervous system.
Architecture the human mind so this is instead of consciousness this is a map of cognition. All right, neuro cognition. And basically that's like, okay, when you put inputs into the function. What's the brain activity and what's the output that you get and then how does that processing seem to work.
And this basically maps it according to four levels and three levels of memory. Okay, the four levels are the first is this reactive level. Okay, and then you have the what's called the operant experiential that means this is the more conscious level of feeling.
Okay, where you get perception of the outside meeting the inside. All right, which then connects to your drive to what you want to see versus what you don't want or what you want to approach versus what you want to avoid.
Okay, and then the relationship between where you are inside and out, and what you want and what you want to avoid activates emotion or energizes motion.
And the most obvious example is pain. Alright, so pain is an intersection of where you are where your body is what you definitely don't want. And then your emotion is escape from that.
Okay, so pleasure and pain form the base and then that grows into your positive and negative emotion system. Okay, great. And this is then very connected to what BF Skinner on the outside talked about in terms of the operant which is reinforcement and punishment and all that.
Okay. Okay, then you get up into a higher brain levels. And then this is the ability to then not just be responsive to rewards and punishments in the world, but to have a cognitive map of the world and be able to simulate your interaction with it and see what you can get out of it through
through imagination and planning. So you manipulate the world, and then you would plan and inhibit this is like out and maybe that has something to do with metaphor does does it like you can
Yeah, we're actually we're still talking the way I like to think in evolutionary terms so right now I'm still talking like climbing up from say jellyfish and then into fish and birds and now we're into birds into mammal so that this is a higher thought.
Okay, so like, if we're at like a rat, like actually just happen to have a book right here. This book is called the mind within the brain. And what this guy studied is like when a rat comes to a maze, a T point that's like it can go left or right.
It will simulate the path of least resistance and the out reward on the right hand side. Okay, I see. Okay.
So that's planning, and then it's got to inhibit its action and then select which one it does depending on its anticipated reward in the future.
Okay, so metaphors a higher level probably then. Yeah, so I think to really get into, then you get into the level of justification now this is so your right brain, then really organizes around this stuff and then for humans you tack on the left brain.
It gets plugged into now in animals you see the tension to the part in the context of the whole animals have this brain differentiation, but then humans tag on language on top of the part whole analysis and then that gets plugged into the left hemisphere language.
Okay, and then that's linguistic justification. So you basically have the doing reacting, the feeling learning, the thinking imagining, and then the talking. Those are your four levels on the hierarchy.
And then you have a distance in terms of memory. So you have an immediate sensory motor awareness like basically between half a second and three seconds. That's on the screen of consciousness.
Then that's called sensory perceptual consciousness. I mean in memory. All right.
Then you have working memory which goes to about 20 seconds. And that's kind of like a whiteboard that you can bring up and manipulate like we're trying to remember a phone number.
And you can move stuff around on your working memory. And then you store stuff almost infinitely in your long term memory.
And consistent with this you have three different kinds of memory. You have procedural memory which is like embodied fixed action patterns. That's like tying your shoe.
Okay, or learn how to ride a bike.
Episodic memories are the perspectives that you have that are important to you in the world. Like if you had a fight with your wife or, you know, you were rejected sometime or you accomplished something.
All right, those are meaningful episodes. And then your semantic memories are your fat memories for fact.
And when you're developing your narrative you yoke together your semantic memory for declarative fact with the position to give your eyes to an autobiographical memory of story of the self.
So this is called your justification narrative. This is the story of why Andrew does what he does and why other people should treat him a certain way or all that.
Okay.
So this is your map of your human cognition. The other one's a map of human consciousness.
Okay.
Very good.
Now, this is a map then you talked about young and I in archetypes. Okay, this is a map of the human relationship system. All right.
Before let me go back to this one real fast. You see this level of perception motivation and emotion.
Okay.
Now that can be for non social things like oh my gosh I'm thirsty. I'm going to proceed something I'm going to approach it. I'm going to grab it if I gain access to it and feels good.
I got my thirst and I feel positive. Okay.
But we also have architecture for not just the non social material world but also the social material world.
Okay. And what this is, this is the architecture for your motivation in the yellow. This is what you want to approach and what you want to avoid. And these are elements of that.
And then the emotion is on the outside. This is what then tells you whether or not you're moving in the right direction or how things are changing.
Okay.
So what it says is here in the center of this things the black line. And this is called the influence matrix so it's a map. You heard the term internal working models ever.
I've heard the term yeah.
It just means the pictures that you have the episodes that you have and models that you have in your head about how other people will treat you. Okay.
And what you see there is that you'll see yourself in relationship to the other and the kind of pattern that you expect are you going to be trusted or mistrust.
Okay.
That's an Ericksonian first phase. All right. Are you going to be. Are you an industrious person that's successful. Are you inferior.
All right. Are you going to be a whole host of them. Are you going to develop role identity or you're going to develop confusion or role confusion versus identity.
Are you going to be isolated or you're going to have intimacy. Okay.
So what what this maps is it says the core of what you're actually seeking is what's called high. This is the social influence and relational value line.
Okay.
Which basically means hey do you have good influence and are you known and valued.
And what you have is a template for what it would be like to have high relational value and and social influence.
Like think of the successes that you have you put down together the parallax you know podcast and it's great and all of a sudden everyone's like Andrew we love this.
Okay. That would be like oh yeah all right I feel I'm proud of this is something I want to share and then other people see me for me value it and and attend to me and give me attention then we'll feel good about that.
Yeah.
Okay.
If you put it out and put a lot of work in and people say it sucks are going to pay attention to it then you feel wounded by that at a social emotional level.
Got it. Yeah.
Okay.
Yeah so it's kind of your relationship to your ego in some some way.
Right.
Yeah.
So what you see with kids at first initially is that they will track this with their parents. And if they have a good secure relation that's basically means they're getting signal that they're known and loved and the parents will protect them and they've got a secure base.
They'll have a secure felt feeling of being loved. And if not they'll get insecure and then they'll get defensive.
That's that's what happens to my fish. And then they move to their peers and they basically ask the same question.
Am I going to be known and loved in my peers or not.
Then they move to significant others and themselves when they move into adolescence meaning that they get a secondary self concept. It's like what's my self the scene.
And the reason that so many people go crazy when they're in adolescence is because they start having that second order analysis of them own cells so they will think differently about themselves.
And as a do I like myself. Okay.
Five year old kids don't think like that they basically just take what other people treat them as but adolescents and then into adults will carry a separate self concept.
It becomes more real fighting.
Exactly. It's because that narrator back in here this narrator becomes much more present and holds you through time. That's that's your adult identity and it merges in adolescence and now I now have a concept of what I should be.
And now I reflect myself five year olds don't do that.
Okay. Yeah and I guess that affects your your private self and your.
Yeah, whatever the subconscious was I forget your exactly it's really a map. This is the yellow circle influence matrix maps some of the really key dimensions and we talked then about well where does the experiential where is it guided.
And you can think about so the hero archetype.
Okay, you can see actually in this left left hand corner that has anger pride self this is a much more masculine corner self oriented.
And down here is the feminine other oriented.
Okay, so your mother and the love and the more father pride archetypal structures to the archetypal structures and male female of hero of failure.
These will have embodied self other pattern relations and the influence matrix traps the process dimensions around the central dimension of high versus low relational value.
Okay, that makes sense.
And this really connects the the underlying subconscious or animal conscious and in its social world then with the conscious self conscious justification world.
Okay, because you're trying to justify yourself on the social stage, you have to worry about your own self and your influence that you have in your own investments and and together then these that that those four create the unified theory of psychology.
And does that have much to do with is there an ethical component to that.
Because I was thinking somebody can have very high sense of high value about themselves and be a total asshole and another person can can be really have, you know, qualities that are very good and look, you know, be very down on themselves and.
Oh, absolutely. Right. So the overarching ethic from the unified theory comes from a slightly different place but this is unbelievably relevant for both our character and then ultimately what we're going to value from an ethical informed perspective.
So right now this is just a description of it, but the description of it will inform our nature and from that will actually understand why we make the valuations that we do why we choose to.
Okay, I see. Yeah.
So, now what we're actually doing here is we're jumping over into mapping how individuals grow and adapt this is the key word here is adaptation. Okay, and what this is is this maps the core systems of adaptation.
All right, that evolved have evolved, and it maps them so we can understand, in particular, relative to sort of like well what are adaptive versus maladaptive pathways so these are adaptive systems that they can be tracked for that entrenched what we call in the
psychotherapy world entrenched maladaptive patterns. Okay, and the argument actually remember when we started this whole thing I said the problem of psychotherapy is that we have what I believe we have is really these different mental systems, but we
don't have a system for putting them together. Yeah. Okay, so this then says hey if we had a system that actually had the right language, instead of thinking of behaviorism, we would talk just about the habit system.
Instead of talking about the emotion and experiential humanistic therapies we would just talk about the emotionally grounded experiential system.
Okay, instead of looking at modern psychodynamic approaches that look at the underlying relationship system in terms of its power love and freedom needs, and then the defenses of the ego.
We would just understand that those that psych modern psychodynamic theory focuses on patterns of relationship implicit, and then the way we defend our egos.
And then the cognitive model would focus on the explicit systems of justification that we build to make sense out of the world.
Okay, so rather than having members like oh my god the cognitive model makes sense psychodynamic behavioral and humanistic. This would say actually, just like a model of psychological science would say oh, there's a habit system, experiential system, relational system
defensive system of justification. People, collections of these different psychotherapies have focused on different patterns of maladaptive that can then be made aware of and reverse, and they operate with different mechanisms basically or models, but we can put them all together with this kind of
So in a practical sense, you might look at the patient and say that he needs to work on what like his, it would be more appropriate for him to work on his relationships and other ones, it would be more appropriate to work on the habits.
Exactly. Exactly. So, if I was like a generalist psychologist, psychological doctor, you'd come in I'd be able to assess you all. But if you had say borderline personality disorder, a serious problem with the relationships and your emotion, I'd be able to send you off and work with that guy.
Okay, but if you wanted to come to me and you had a habit problem with smoking. All right, then there would be a behavioral expert who was like okay I'm really focused on habit change.
Right. If I want if I was more interested in existential meaning making, you know, we'd obviously want generalist but we want to be able to be potentially have specialization. But what this does is this is now all the same language system, rather than all these different languages.
Okay, I see. Okay. And so this is the adaptation systems. And then these are the domains of character development that then give rise to a personality structure. Okay, so you have you may have heard of like the big five personality trait.
Yeah, I've thought a lot. Yeah. Okay. And then then what is your identity this is you as a person in terms of what your narrative is. What are the domains of virtue and values that you try to cultivate and what's your worldview. That's of course going to overlap with identity but they're also separable.
What are the talents and abilities that you have. Okay, and then what are the challenges and pathologies that you struggle with. And it's in the shape of a wheel with character adaptation means that these cast sits in sort of on the axle and then across the process of engagement.
Each of these are have domains of development. And if you're familiar with Wilbur, you can think about the lines of development, the domains of traits, domains of identity, the various domains of virtues, you can then think about how they would grow and operate in different contexts and different people and be a different
lines of development. So this is where this would overlap with with Wilbur's view. So this is the wheel of development. So we've gone then from at understanding social. Now we're like, Okay, yeah, how do you can cultivate a healthy and then what gives rise to unhealthy adaptation. And then we put that over time and then what are the domains of development.
And so these together create a picture of character.
Then this next model is the nested model of well being.
And that this is a map of what do we mean by the concept of well being the term well being gets kicked around a lot.
People actually don't have a good map about what what it actually is made of and how to actually model it in its entirety. And what this says is it starts with your subjective first person experience.
You have the experiential which is generally organized by your emotions. This means positive and negative emotion or affect.
And then you have your narrator which makes a general evaluation of satisfaction like hey house on a scale of one to 10, and then it will have specific domains of satisfaction like I am satisfied with my relationship with my wife but my work is going shit.
I'm anxious about my finances but I like my living arrangements.
Okay, now that then you're nested as an organism. The subjectivity is nested. One is the dimension of the mental which corresponds to the psychological domain.
This is what I as a psychological doctor would assess in you from a third person doctor perspective.
So you might say you're really I've met people say they're really happy and I would say yeah but you're not functioning very well.
Okay, and then somebody's functioning very well and they're extremely unhappy. They're just their life is perfect.
They're asking this question why you know why if you're miserable by definition you cannot have high well being and be miserable. Okay, by definition.
You can have other values. But if you're like I hate my life. I'm totally depressed. That would be inconsistent.
But it's also not the case just to say that you're happy. That means you do not. That's not the same thing as high well being.
Okay, so you have to take subjective perspective into account and then psychological functioning and then your biomedical physiological functioning.
Both in terms of any malfunctioning elements and then vulnerabilities and the overall coherence of your bio physiology.
Okay, and then we place you in the environmental context which you can divide sort of at its base at the material level like what's the biophysical ecology.
For example, is there any toxins in the area? What's the temperature? What natural resources do you have available?
Okay, then we can move into technological elements and then we get up more into society and culture like what's your social role?
Are you a minority? Do you have economic resources? What are the norms? What are the relational domains that you experience?
Okay, and then finally the worldview of the evaluator. Okay, values what is good and evil? How do we understand the person?
You have to take this into consideration because well being is inherently a normative concept that involves a prescriptive element about what is good and what is bad from the vantage point of the evaluator.
And then it is the alignment of these elements that is the nested model and it actually aligns a lot with what the short summary statement that Immanuel Kant gave for what is well being and that is happiness with the worthiness to be happy.
And we can think about that in terms of okay you have this is happiness and the worth means your function is psychologically, biologically, materially, socially and you are living in accordance with a set of values that the evaluator deems worthy and good.
That's the meaning aspect which I guess Jordan Peterson talks so much about.
Absolutely, you have to get into that and we know that people have trade-offs. In fact parents for example have trade-offs like what's your hedonic value? Are you happy? You have freedom? Or do you have meaning and purpose?
Many parents will report that their general stress goes up, their levels of hedonic value go down meaning they're not as happy because they're so stressed taking care of kids and at the same time their meaning and purpose goes up because now they've given rise to another life.
I know I have a one-year-old.
I've got a 10-year-old and a one-year-old.
I hope your meaning is high because I know you're straight you've got to be dealing with a one-year-old. My kids are older 16, 19 and 21 so we're on the back half of adolescence into young adulthood.
And then finally I already spent some time talking about the eighth branch. This is that metacognitive observer that creates psychological, not meditative, but psychological mindfulness and then creates an internal sage that's curious, accepting, loving, compassionate and motivated to grow for valued states of being.
So this is the theory of knowledge tree and in the middle you have this metaphysical, empirical flower which basically gives rise to this dimension.
So what are the ultimate concepts and categories and then the broad paradigms and theories into more narrow paradigms that then have specific causes that give rise to hypotheses that then make predictions about particular data.
So this is the continuum of understanding that you want aligned on a dialectic.
And this is why ultimately it intentionally spells what the big me and the little me means and ultimately gives rise to me.
On the left hand side you have the unified theory.
That's what the UT is there. On the right hand side you have the unified approach.
You also have the theory of knowledge and that's why there's a TOK in there.
And then so this is the tree in and of itself. This is why it's a metaphysical, empirical, pure reason, unified theory of psychology, practical reason, unified approach to psychotherapy, new theory of knowledge that bridges philosophy and psychology into science.
That's quite a cathedral you got there.
Thank you.
Thank you. And I'm very glad you took me through that because I would have probably had a hard time trying going through it on my own.
I mean, I would have seen a bunch of diagrams in my mind would have sort of like turned off but when you take me through it, I get excited about it.
Good. Good. Yeah, the basic argument.
When I see scientific diagrams, but there's also, I guess you have an artistic component there as well, which is nice.
Well, it's really, it's me reaching out to your poetic side. You know, I'm raised as a scientist and I try to basically say, oh, I'm going to go to the human side scientifically.
Then I realized it's just a, it's a chaos. It's chaos trying to sense make based on the grammar that we're given.
And then they try to reduce it to the scientific method and you can't do it actually because the grammar itself is broken.
But then I figured out a way to get the grammar right. And then I organized a lot of the science and then I came back out the other side said, oh my gosh, we can give this to the poets.
Well, it's the thing I find actually is when I'm listening to a really intelligent scientist like, you know, somebody like Brett Weinstein or something.
And I'm going, wow, he's just incredible. This guy, he's got such an amazing mind, but he doesn't know shit about religion or poetry or literature or, I'm sorry, Brett Weinstein, he probably knows more than I'm giving him credit for.
But I often get the sense that there's this whole other domain of reality because he's specialized so much in science that there's this whole other domain of reality, which he, so when we have a conversation between him and like an Orthodox priest like Jonathan Pazio, they're just, they're just not, they're not connecting.
Right. Because he's trained with that what the modernist people are trained is that the real truth is in logos.
Yeah, and that the scientific method gives you objectivity. And that's the highest thing in the world.
We have to move up to that right.
Right. But he but he actually what I the point of it though is that he doesn't know how to then loop himself and his brother and every other human individually knows back into the system.
He knows how to speak from the evolutionary biological level. Okay. And so he does not know how to get through evolutionary biology into human psychology. I listened to him all the time. I think he's brilliant.
Yeah, me too.
That's exactly right. And I had that's this impression I have that there's just a sort of tragedy of of not being able to take that next kind of take that bridge over you saying to psychology and you know my domain is more is more in the spiritual and artistic world.
But but but there's there's there's people that everybody there's this yeah there's modernist people are always talking about how we have to go back to this modernist worldview which is, you know fact based and empirical based and and and you know,
whereas and they have no conception of Carl like like like Sam Harris, he just has no conception of Carl young and Frederick Nietzsche and and all these people they're just idiots to him because all they can see is is is this empirical model or something
Right. So what what like E. O. Wilson wanted conciliants and to get that you have to have natural science like stem science what we conceive of and but they break down in social science because of the problem of psychology.
Tree of knowledge puts psychology in the social sciences on top of physics and biology that's the code silly picture.
Okay, and it says and it says that's a justification system, just like Wilbur identifies this is an exterior epistemology, but holistically it's clapping with one hand.
It's only one side of the epistemological system.
Right. You need this the interior individual and interior group to create truth, goodness and beauty.
Wilbur sees that.
All right. Nice.
Yeah.
Yeah.
So then the tree of knowledge says, okay, now we can actually fill in the right hand side with what I call men's knowledge, which is modernist versus pre modern formal empiricist.
Okay.
Natural science, modernist empirical natural science men's knowledge.
Right.
And then obviously it's called men's and you're like what that was that and it's the then I want to give rise to the postmodern critique.
Right.
Postmodern critique is that we were we yoked dominant knowledge and power.
This is Foucault.
Right.
Yeah.
Knowledge and power get fused together and the system say, oh, this is transcendental truth, but they also happen to be transcendental truth that benefits who white Christian European men.
That gets colonially distributed throughout the world and sacks them up.
Right.
So what do we need?
We need to understand science as a justification system and the truth that can give us, but realize that it's actually just that a system of justification.
It does certain things very well, but it certainly isn't everything.
We need a wisdom oriented framing of men's knowledge.
So we transform men's knowledge into a holistic women's knowledge.
All right.
And that's what we need in the 21st century.
That is a scientific humanistic bridge between the natural natural sciences, social sciences and humanities.
Okay.
So the analogy or the metaphor is the bringing up together the mask on the feminine principle in some way.
Exactly.
The the the the hardcore analytic pure reason and the the wisdom soft therapeutic practical reason to cultivate our heart and soul with our logos.
So they can then blend our mythos or logos and our pathos for an ethos for the 21st century.
That's what I mean by unified theory.
So we've been going for two hours now.
I think I think I think my brain is a bit a bit fried, but at the same time I'm I'm wired and excited by by your formulation.
And I.
Good.
Well, we are talking in a week.
Exactly.
Yeah.
So I'm glad that we did this before that conversation.
Right.
Which will enable me to be a better perhaps interlocutor between you two guys.
I love talking with Bard.
We have slightly different versions.
I can't believe how much our versions overlap, which is cool.
And I hope to support him in the ways I can.
And I think vice versa.
And there's only minor areas of disagreement.
So it's really quite remarkable.
Yeah, that's awesome.
Yeah, that's great.
Yeah.
I think it often feels like, like.
Yeah, like you're coming from such a totally in many ways different perspective than than barred.
But yes, there's this many, many crossovers because because Bard is just in pure philosophy and art realm.
And I guess he knows a lot of science as well.
So yeah, but it's.
He certainly knows what I was transformed by his book, Cynthia some totally transformed.
I was already on the cusp of drop my new atheist view.
I was raised sort of in the new atheist Dawkins view.
I'd already just fluff that off, but I was looking for something else.
The unified tree of knowledge.
We'll talk about sort of the fifth joint point.
What it says is that the world of the digital world of the digital is the next information communication age.
That's what it says.
So each one of those members information system communication.
Now we built this other information communication system.
So I knew once I built the tree of knowledge, it's like, oh shit, 21st century is going to be intense.
And it scared me because it meant, well, what's going to happen.
And so to think about the digital and to think about God and to think about the God we create in 21st century.
And to think about, okay, we need to shed theism and atheism to create a synthetic view and God of God in the digital age and the God we create.
I read that book and I was just like, damn, that's exactly what I was completely.
This is why I called to turn my thing into a guard.
You know, I was like, oh my God is this is all this sort of this idea of orienting then towards the future with wisdom.
And that's why I have so much respect for what garden is doing and why I was so very moved by it.
