Hello and welcome to What's in the Box. My name is Sophie Clark and I'm here at
Wessex Archaeology's head office where I will be speaking to our in-house
specialists about the artefact they find most intriguing.
On today's episode I am joined by a somewhat familiar face, residential
fieldwork archaeologist Phil Harding. Hi Phil. Hello. Right. I am surprised by the
size of this box. I thought we were going to be looking at flint today. Big box for
very big flint, Sophie. Oh my goodness. Really? Okay. Now then. Grab the box. I will. Okay, let's go. Now you see why I needed a big box. What is this?
Isn't that a beast? What you're looking at there is probably, no, unquestionably, the
largest piece of worked flint that's ever been found in Wiltshire, probably in the
south of England, according to where you draw the line on the south of England.
And the nice thing is I found it. Did you? Yep. Where did you find it? Well, it's
found at a place called West Canet. West Canet is just a little bit further south
of the Naefbry. Down in the valley where the river Canet flows through, there are a
series of late Neolithic timber, we call them palisaded enclosures. They were timber
structures put together by very closely fitting timber posts. And several years ago they
decided that they would stop plowing the field. There's nothing to see in the field,
but they stopped plowing it. But before they went down to permanent pasture, we'd do some
field walking. Okay. And I walked across putting in a grid and I got to the fence line and
I put a cane in. I looked over the fence and I saw that. It's a whopper, ain't it? And
I think I can explain why it was found in the hedge. I reckon that that was lying in
the ground. And he'd come along with a tractor and he'd dink that off with a plow. Right.
And of course, that is so big, it probably threw the plow out of the furrow or summatly
dislocated it. I suspect the plowman said something in the Anglo-Saxon, got down off
his tractor and picked it up and hefted it into the nearest hedge. But because he's actually
been able to remove that big lump of flint, it gives me the chance to just wonder at the
quality of the raw material. Yes. And the story gets better because flint of that sows and
that quality does not occur in the Avery area. So where's this come from then? Exactly. It
must have been brought in. And I was talking quite casually to a good mate of mine in, lives
in East Anglia. He was a very, very good flint napper. And I explained to him that I'd got
this wonderful T-Cosi type core. Okay. And he said, oh, he said, we got loads of those
up here. I said, you're having a laugh. He said, have you ever seen that one from Falsham?
It's a place called Falsham. And he reminded me of this Wackengrate core that used to be
in Bereson Edmunds Museum. And this one here, mine, mine, you know, mine is about 16 kilos
in weight. Okay. The Falsham one is 27 kilos. But it is exactly the same. It's got this T-Cosi
shape with this beautiful flaking on all the way round. And I reckon that this one was made
in East Anglia. And the Falsham one's not the only one. There's two or three others,
exactly the same as this. The quality of the flint is very, very East Anglian. And I reckon
that this object was made in Norfolk or somewhere like that in East Anglia. Right. Okay. And traded
down to, to, to the Avebury area. And who knows, it might have been set up in a place like that.
And, well, let's be honest, you can't look at that without saying, my goodness.
It's impressive. It's impressive. It's a beast, isn't it? It's an absolute beast.
It's ginormous. Okay. So how, how old do you think this is likely to be?
I reckon, I reckon it's probably about the same day as the, the, the palisaded enclosures.
Those palisading enclosures were probably sort of ritual ceremonial sites. So you might expect
to get ritual ceremonial objects with it. And I would reckon that if the, the palisaded enclosures
are about, let's say two and a half thousand BC, I reckon that that core would fit in,
in the late Neolithic, maybe about two and a half thousand BC. So you've got Avebury and
Silbury Hill and the palisaded enclosures. There's a whole load of things going on around there at
the time. And you've also, by looks of it, got flint there, whether or not that was made in
East Anglia and moved in one hit to Wiltshire, or whether person in East Anglia moved it two
miles down the road and gave it to somebody else. And he then moved it on and moved it on and it
moved on and gradually ended up, I don't know. I reckon that that object came from East Anglia.
So do you think that this could have ever originally started off as a core? So they would
have ever used it to make tools from? Or do you think this is just for decorative?
I think it's for, I think it's for symbolic purposes. In my opinion, it is not a core as we
would accept the definition of a core. I don't think that they were making flint tools out of this.
They might have made some, if you look at, we turn it round, we look at that flake scar there,
you could possibly make, let's say, a flint knife out of that. But that is far too big for a scraper,
it's far too big for an arrowhead, it's far too big for most of the flint tools. What they've done,
you can see they've, you can see the bits of the outside ruined here, the cortex. They've basically
taken off the top. And when I talked about this, this object, because I did, I took it up to East
Anglia. And, and my, my mate said to me, God, he said, that's a nice piece of flint. He said,
he said up here in East Anglia, they call them ringers. Because ringers, because when you tap
them, they ring like a bell. Really? Oh yeah. Oh wow. And, and, and, and that's a, that's a
sign of a good quality piece of flint. There's a much darker part of the flint here. And the
rest of it is quite a light grey. What causes that? When that was originally made, it would have been
blacked like that. Oh right, okay. This blue is what we call a patina. It's the, what is the result
of this surface of the flint just drying out. And it's, it's, it's the sort of typical colour that
you'd expect to see in, in a, in a chalky environment. If it's, if it's an alkaline chalky environment,
then the flint goes, then if the flint goes a sort of bluey white like that, when it's fresh.
So they wouldn't have seen a bluey white object. They would have seen a black one. This would
have been much blacker. Thank you so much Phil for bringing this in. That's absolutely incredible.
I love it. It's an amazing piece of flint work.
Thank you for watching. If you'd like to learn more about Flint Cores, please follow the link in
the description. You can also follow us on our social media channels. And until next time, bye.
