LIT 큰
LIT
LIT
LIT
LIT
LIT
LIT
Brother
You are
Must
You have
Must
You have
Must
You have
Must
Mr. McDonald, let's talk chicken.
Are you aware that the public prefers the taste of Kentucky nuggets to your chicken
muck nuggets by almost three to one?
No, sir.
And is your muck chicken sandwich made with the Colonel's secret blend of eleven herbs
and spices?
No, sir.
So how do you expect to sell chicken?
Toys!
Lots of toys!
It's our best.
A dollar and ninety-nine for the Colonel's chicken sandwich and fries or Kentucky nuggets
and fries.
Comes the time in every guy's life when, well, things begin to change, you know what I'm
talking about, fellas?
Suddenly, wheels means cars instead of skateboards.
Look, let's broaden your horizons.
It's time to move on.
Instead of always reaching for that same old bag of potato chips, why not tear into a bag
of nacho cheese Doritos tortilla chips?
Bigger taste, bigger crunch.
Here's a snack chip that bites back.
Come on.
Nacho cheese Doritos.
You're a man now.
You're going to handle that.
Come on.
Aren't all you want.
We'll make more.
Dave, Dave, if you make a grilled chicken sandwich at Wendy's, they will come.
They will?
If you make it with a chicken breast, they will come.
It has to be boneless.
If you make it with lettuce and tomato.
And honey mustard.
And put it all together on a toasted bomb, they will come.
Call it Wendy's Grilled Chicken Sandwich.
Dave, I told you they will come.
It's Wendy.
I just can't figure out how she's doing it.
For fun around here, me and the boys liked it, it was something a little bit crazy.
Put two kinds of cheese on a cheeseburger.
For a while, new taste headed the store for two kinds of cheese and lean ground beef.
Cheddar and monster.
Crazy.
Things do go bump in the night.
There are bogeymen.
Fortunately, Silly's exclusive post-yepidic sleep system is designed to support everyone
differently.
More comfortably.
To keep your night from becoming your worst nightmare.
For a better night's sleep, better sleep on a Silly.
Wednesday.
This isn't just about sex.
I don't know why not.
There's a little about sex though, isn't it?
It's sort of nice on the phone, it's a portable upbringing with me.
Things are really heating up, anything but love after Tuggy Hussein.
When Reggie and I agreed to meet for breakfast, I didn't think I needed to say where.
It could only be one place.
Where else can you get this delicious bacon, egg and cheese biscuit?
So much for him.
Nice move, Jack.
The Prelude SI with four-wheel steering from Honda.
Grandpa, you think you could have a party every time you come out with a new product?
This is really nice.
You don't have a party like this every night.
This is big.
This is really big.
This new light microwave popcorn.
With one-third fewer calories and two-thirds less fat.
Then our regular microwave, and it pops up more than any other light microwave.
It's going to keep my figure just like it is today.
Well, you're pretty good looking, Grandpa, you know.
That's what grandma says too.
Yeah.
Not all of us can be as good looking as you, Grandpa.
That's true.
That's true.
Look what's new at McDonald's.
What is it, Dad?
Let's just wait and see, huh?
It's the stars of Walt Disney's classic movie, 101 Dalmatians and a Happy Meal for just $1.99.
There's Lucky or Pongo, the Colonel with Sargent Tibs, or Cruella De Phil.
It's a good toy each week when you buy your kids a $1.99 hamburger Happy Meal.
The movie is only at theaters.
The Happy Meal is only at McDonald's.
Does your man control you next time?
Now at Little Caesars, you can get picnic, picnic, two medium pizzas, two orders of crazy
bread and two servings of Coke Classic, all for only $7.98.
It's picnic, picnic, two pizzas, two crazy breads, two soft drinks, all that food for
only $7.98, and it rains at floors, picnic, picnic, only at Little Caesars.
Pizza, pizza.
Why are beers that go down lightly, watered down so heavily?
Why?
Ask.
Why?
Turn off the water, and turn but dry.
It's smooth draft taste is dry brewed, not watered down, to drink light, yet satisfied
completely.
So why get soaked?
You can drink but dry.
Baby changes everything.
Safety takes on a whole new meaning when it's somebody you love in that car.
This is our family.
They're the most technically advanced and lifelike dummies in the world.
Only GM uses a family like this to develop safety technology because we know quality
cars, safe cars, should help protect everyone.
I look at my family and I want us to be thinking of everything.
GM safety, it's not one thing.
It's everything.
She's everything to me.
Dorothy, you marry me or is my ring a lifesaver?
It's beginning.
Don't worry.
I'll give it to my mother.
Lifesavers candy isn't life delicious.
Macy's pre-season sale, the shopping opportunity of the year, you'll save on fall's newest
fashions now, before the fall season, at our lowest prices of the year.
The best for women, men, and kids.
Everything you need for fall, from names you really want, our biggest sale of the year.
Macy's pre-season sale, don't delay, prices go up, August 5th.
El Torritos Fajitas Fiesta, our famous steak or chicken fajita combos, and a delicious
dessert, all just $7.95 at El Torrito.
Three bites big, hey, three bites big, packs of eight, new snacks on stickers and Milky
Way.
Three bites big, pose in a pack, one, two, three bites big, hey, introducing Milky Way and
Snickers in a brand new size, a new snack size, snack around the house size, three bites
big, hey, three bites big, packs of eight, new snacks on stickers and Milky Way.
Three bites big, packs of eight, new snacks on...
And now, today's weather, cold winds out of the north-northwest with a 30% chance of snow
tonight.
Temperature dropping doesn't need to load 20%.
Boy, this is going to be a hot sticky wind out there today.
At last, a weatherproof formula that holds longer and stronger than the other leading
pumps.
Honey, don't forget your food.
Exclusively ours, new Final Net Ultimate Hold, the weatherproof hold that lets you laugh
at the weather.
Saturday, this June, your 60th anniversary celebration will continue in a moment.
Tuesday's terrific in Fort Lauderdale.
Hey, first.
Did I just feel a drop?
Or are you drooling?
It's who's the boss, then.
She dumped me.
Paul snapped out of it.
She said I was suffocating her.
I thought she wanted to be suffocated.
The Wonder Years, Tuesday.
This is what American Airlines does better than anyone else.
Arrive on time, again and again.
In fact, American has had the best on-time arrival record of the nine largest domestic
airlines for as long as records have been kept.
American Airlines.
This is what American Airlines does better than anyone else.
Arrive on time, again and again.
In fact, American has had the best on-time arrival record of the nine largest domestic
airlines for as long as records have been kept.
American Airlines.
This is what American Airlines does better than anyone else.
This is what American Airlines does better than anyone else.
Arrive on time, again and again.
In fact, American has had the best on-time arrival record of the nine largest domestic
airlines for as long as records have been kept.
American Airlines.
This is what American Airlines does better than anyone else.
Arrive on time, again and again.
In fact, American has had the best on-time arrival record of the nine largest domestic
airlines for as long as records have been kept.
American Airlines.
This is what American Airlines does better than anyone else.
Arrive on time, again and again.
In fact, American has had the best on-time arrival record of the nine largest domestic
airlines for as long as records have been kept.
American Airlines.
This is what American Airlines does better than anyone else.
American Airlines.
This is what American Airlines does better than anyone else.
The on-time machine.
It was a big day when the new equipment arrived.
It's big.
The biggest one I've ever seen.
Of course, being a custom job, some assembly was required.
It'll be a few weeks, people.
But finally, it was ready.
One of the world's fastest check-writing systems.
Some insurance companies look for ways to get your money from you faster.
I hear you should do $12,000 an hour.
At Ethna, we look for ways to get your money to you faster.
Probe of misconduct by Oakland Housing Police on 7 at 11.
conduct by Oakland Housing Police on 7 at 11.
See, a woman's body is merely a frame.
On the side, we're created to release.
Pants are mandatory.
And tasks, you won't see a leg in Paris this year.
Perfume and infusion, the short skirt is dead.
No matter what the gentleman prefers,
the lady prefers hands.
Carnation instant breakfast.
You gotta love it in an instant.
Wake up to the nutritious, delicious taste of
Carnation instant breakfast.
Carnation instant breakfast.
You gotta love it in an instant.
Hey, dog lovers, this is ordinary dog food.
But feast your eyes on Grand Gourmet, 25% more protein
and less fat than leading brands.
Grand Gourmet, it now only looks better.
It is better.
Red Lobster introduces our shrimp sensations dinner, just $7.99,
with tangy shrimp vera grooves and new Parmesan fried shrimp,
together with popcorn shrimp, specially priced at just $7.99,
for a limited time.
Now at Red Lobster.
It's Red Lobster's new lunch special,
shrimp and chicken, just $3.99,
golden fried shrimp and grilled chicken breast,
with salad and baked potato, just $3.99,
for a limited time at Red Lobster, for lunch.
To our tribal breakfast cereals.
Total, Kellogg's just right.
Both high-nutrition cereals.
So what might make one better than the other?
Just right has vitamin B1.
We have vitamin B1.
Just right has vitamin B2.
B2.
Just right has iron.
We have iron.
Just right has almonds.
Just right has sweet dates.
Plump raisins, plus four different tasty grains.
Just right has two out of three people preferring our taste,
which means just right is just better.
Kellogg's just right.
It's the taste that makes it just better.
The Mureen earwax removal system has drops that safely loosen harden
wax when used as directed, plus an ear washer to gently flush wax away.
Mureen, the complete medically approved system to safely remove earwax.
The temperature is well below zero this morning.
Perfect to test Chevy's heartbeat.
With the electrical system fully taxed, Chevy delivers reliable cold starting.
After thousands of tests, an incredible 99.9% success record.
With 84 models redesigned and engineered, GM is putting quality on the road.
It's Velvita versus Cheddar.
Our Velvita mounts much better when the cookbook calls for Cheddar.
Make it with Velvita, it cooks better.
Every day, 22 million people come into McDonald's.
They count on the same hot, fresh food at every McDonald's all over the world.
But imagine if there were only one McDonald's you could count on.
And 22 million people came in at the same time.
The whole restaurant would fill up, the city would fill up,
and all those people in one place would cause the earth to tilt off its axis
by spinning into space.
And that would make a real mess of everything.
That's why we make every McDonald's from Poughkeepsie to Pomona
just as good as every other McDonald's, thereby saving the universe.
While the Daytona Shelby Turbo may not be quite as plush as the Aston Martin,
and the power plant isn't quite like a Lamborghini,
its new VNT Turbo makes it one of the most powerful front-wheel sports cars built in America.
And while it doesn't quite reach the speed of a Testerosa,
at that speed, you might miss something.
The all-new Dodge Daytona Shelby Turbo, the hot new spirit of Dodge.
Now get up to $2,000 back at Dodge, guaranteed.
The bravest men.
Ain't no dream.
Are those with something to prove?
They got it, no, there's nobody's going to let them fight.
And nothing to lose.
Someday they're going to let the 54 get into us.
Matthew Broderick.
We'll be ready, sir.
Denzel Washington.
Come on!
Kerry Ellways.
Ready!
Morgan Freeman.
Go!
Glory.
Rated R.
Now playing at a theater near you.
Yep.
If you're old enough to worry about gum disease,
you ought to be smart enough to use Listerine.
I want to try something different.
Can you make me look like that?
Tuesday it's a brand new job.
Oh, I'm sure you can, Iris.
I'll go get the wand.
But she's the same old Roseanne.
Ben.
I'm not going to spend the rest of my life splicing wire.
We all got chances, Elvis.
Some of them we just can't take.
In 1954, Vernon Presley wanted his son to have a steady job with a secure future.
Well, I said, tell me, baby, what's wrong with you?
His dream came true, a special preview of Elvis Tuesday.
Sammy Davis Jr.'s 60th anniversary celebration will continue in a moment.
You don't want, you don't get.
That's arithmetic.
Joe Kennedy.
He became the father of two senators and a president.
You were a very successful and wealthy man.
Isn't that winning?
No, not yet.
We had an appetite for power.
For the first Irish Catholic ambassador to England.
Wealth and women.
I've never made history with anyone I've made love with.
How soon will you be home?
If there's any dirty work to be done, I'll be the one to do it.
The Kennedys of Massachusetts.
Two weeks from tonight.
To the eye, the Lexus LS400 looks like an elegantly contoured luxury sedan.
To the wind, however, it doesn't look like much.
The Lexus LS400, the most aerodynamic luxury sedan in America.
You have a bunch, you can have it all.
You have a no cholesterol, have a little sunshine.
Sunshine.
Just about every cookie and cracker sunshine makes is absolutely no cholesterol.
Now what could be better than sunshine?
Have a little sunshine.
Have a little sunshine.
Have a little sunshine.
Pentagon waste reaches the billions on 7 at 11.
The producers of the show, the producers of the show was hoping you'd have a little more,
feeling more Mike, you know, a little more Mike Tyson, you know, more Mike Tysonism.
Like, like...
Hello, ladies and gentlemen, Sammy and I would like...
Hey, Rizzucci, look a little pale.
Maybe he needs a doctor or something.
Maybe I do.
What happened?
Hey, don't get me.
You have to drive it to believe it, the new accord.
This is delicious, Danny.
What do you call it?
It's new ragu, fresh Italian pasta sauce.
So delicate.
What's it called?
Fresh Italian pasta sauce.
Yeah, it's really fresh, but what's the name?
See, ragu uses less heavy tomato paste and twice the crushed tomatoes.
But what's the name of the sauce?
New ragu, fresh Italian pasta sauce.
More crushed tomatoes, more fresh tomato taste.
Here's a jar.
Look, it has a name on it.
Forget it.
They instantly turn on.
You put that show lead on and that spark is right there.
That's the difference between a good dog and a great dog.
These are champions.
They deserve the best.
And I recommend pedigree and pedigree meal time.
Pedigree, recommended by top breeders.
And now there's a new kind of pedigree.
Pedigree choice cuts.
Tender, juicy meaty chunks where the sauce dogs can't resist.
One look tells you its choice.
One feeding shows you its irresistible.
New pedigree choice cuts, recommended by top breeders.
My poor brother Tom, every time he tried to see what he was missing,
he would miss what he was seeing.
Then Tom got this amazing Magnavox TV that lets him watch one show
while he checks out all the others on this remarkable little window.
Hey, that's a smart window, Dick.
That's what they call it, Tom.
They call it Tom?
No, no, no. They call it smart window, Tom.
I don't know. I kind of like Tom.
Magnavox, smart choice. Very smart.
Friday.
I am now officially a teenager.
It's DJ's first kiss.
Thirteen candles to a whole new full house.
I'm the king.
Followed by a new Family Matters Friday.
All new. And it's all about comfort, style and technology.
And Chrysler's exclusive Crystal Key on a program completes the package.
The all-new Chrysler New Yorker Fifth Avenue.
If the rebate goes up, Chrysler will pay you the difference.
I think I'm in love.
Oh, now that I've got this on the rack.
Out of your league.
Oh, yeah.
Watch and learn.
May I have a towel, huh?
Richard?
Never underestimate the doctor.
Hi, excuse me, y'all. Are you French? You look French. I love French food.
This morning, I was following a Sears service truck when it dawned on me.
I see Sears trucks all the time.
It also dawned on me that I hardly ever see a service truck from those so-called superstores.
So before you make that next big buying decision,
ask yourself what kind of service you'll get five years from now,
or if they'll even be around to answer the phone.
That's one of the big reasons I feel better when I buy a major appliance or electronics from Sears.
And that's what they mean by your money's worth and a whole lot more.
Know what a lot of today's teens are doing?
What they're thinking about their futures and the future of black America.
That's why once again, McDonald's celebrates Black History Month by looking to the future.
Join us now as we salute our 1990 McDonald's black history makers of tomorrow.
These 10 teens have been selected because of their visions, their dreams,
and the roles they want to play as leaders in America's future.
And someday they may truly have a place in black history.
Woo-hoo!
Bite-sized Ritz-Bitz Peanut Butter Sandwiches.
The taste of Ritz-Bitz and real peanut butter in tiny sandwiches with no assembly required.
Now it's time.
Hey, wait for me.
Monday.
Stop raping the forest.
MacGyver goes out on a limb to save the trees.
I can handle it.
MacGyver, then, based on a true story.
Daddy, you're alive.
The father who refused to let his family die.
Mady, Mady, two children stranded.
Robert Conrad, anything to survive.
Monday.
I'm using this other long-distance company.
Call Phoenix. I miss dial feature.
I call the operator.
She says she can't give me instant credit.
I say AT&T always did.
She says you're not dealing with AT&T.
If you miss dealing with AT&T, it's easier than ever to come back.
Just call 1-800-582-1700 right now and we'll switch you back for free.
They kept saying how much money I'd save.
Then I get the first bill.
I'm not kidding. I thought it was a typo.
I mean, where were the big savings?
People who thought they could do better than AT&T are coming back for the real value.
You can too. It's simple. Just call now and come back for free.
It takes longer getting through, but I'm saving a ton, right? Wrong.
You gotta read the fine print.
I couldn't believe it.
You're not dealing with AT&T.
Well, I am now.
1-800-582-1700 for Dependable Crystal Clear AT&T Long Distance Service.
Call now and we'll switch you for free.
You couldn't pick a better time to come back.
If you want an anti-lot braking system like Mercedes,
a driver airbag like BMW,
a rear load leveling suspension feature similar to Rolls,
and a more advanced transmission than Jaguar,
this is a simple way to get it all.
Introducing the all-new Chrysler Imperial.
There is no luxury without engineering.
The guaranteed rebate has been extended until February 28.
Get $1,000 now.
There's only one thing I used to hate worse
than having to wash out my pantyhose every night.
And that was having to throw him out.
Ladies and gentlemen, Dennis Miller.
I just knew they'd call.
It's almost as if someone once said,
just in case people like sunshine and water,
we'd better make Florida.
And we'd better make miles of beautiful beaches
in places like St. Augustine and Key West,
just in case people want to go to them.
There are over 4 million miles of roads in Alamo territory,
all across America.
And nationwide, only Alamo gives you all those miles for free,
including the ones that run through a state that's named.
Knowing how to read and write
can really make you feel wanted.
Help someone learn to read.
Volunteer is a tutor in your community.
Tuesday.
Hi.
Hi.
I've missed you.
You're married.
It's a second chance for love.
What are we doing?
I can't do this.
I wish that you didn't have to go.
I'm in love with you.
30-something, Tuesday.
The day may come when every free-standing range
will have a smooth, sealed-in surface
that's easy to clean and heats up this fast.
But Whirlpool has it today.
Hey, Mike, I really like this white sinfondale.
Well, good, good.
Now put it down.
We're going to try another one.
He loves to do this.
This one's for you.
Yeah, I like it better.
Why?
Can't it just taste better?
Isn't that loud?
Did you know Gallo made a white sinfondale?
No, it's terrific, isn't it?
Am I going to get any credit for this?
Oh, yeah.
Ernest and Julio Gallo present
a very special white sinfondale.
It will change the way you think about Gallo.
Wednesday.
The war is over.
It's the moment they've all been waiting for.
Forget your troubles.
Come on, get happy.
But is it really the end?
Don't you believe it?
When the wheels of my freedom bird left off,
I'll believe it.
China Beach.
Alphabeta shoppers are finding
when the new sign went up,
the prices came down.
For the last year, I shopped at Alphabeta,
and now that it's switched over to Leckies,
I find a significant reduction
in my weekly grocery bill.
It's important that I...
have quality and affordable prices,
and I find that I get both of that
when I shop at Leckies.
Alphabeta is now lucky.
We think you'll like the change.
I want a ten-minute breakfast,
so I'm bringing a clock to time it.
You don't need a clock.
The waitress has a stopwatch.
If her watch is stopped,
how will I know when ten minutes are up?
Because if breakfast takes longer than ten minutes,
it's free.
I get a broken watch for free?
I'm talking about breakfast.
And you've rambled on long enough.
It's time to go eat at Lenny's.
Denny's.
Denny's.
Now you can have your breakfast or lunch
served in ten minutes, or it's free,
only at Denny's.
It's where individuals become a family.
It's where they share memories
and news and opinions.
It's where parents get to know their children
and their children's children.
Homes will always be an important part
of people's lives.
That's why home loans are such a secure investment.
And that's where home savings of America
has put its depositors' money
for more than a hundred years.
Juice!
Aish!
Aish!
Quiet, please.
Oh, no.
Not here.
Oh, no.
Not here.
Aish!
When allergies come on this strong,
Benadryl comes on stronger.
News.
Can I help my teacher?
Good morning.
Good morning.
Good morning.
Good morning.
Good morning.
Good morning.
Good morning.
Come on, I'm late.
Sorry.
Sorry.
I know this won't stop running.
When allergies come on this strong,
Benadryl comes on stronger.
got the taste for me gonna change the pizza hut delivery call pizza hut
delivery now for the double cheeseburger pizza get one medium for
899 a second for just four bucks more or make it deluxe with bacon and onions
for just one more buck it's here trying his believing week and here's how
people who are trying breakfast with grape nuts feel you've got to try it I
did and I feel great it's a great natural energy source and it's fat-free
you won't believe how good you feel I do I feel great grape nuts cereal is full
of complex carbohydrates you won't believe how it helps keep you going all
morning look for this display in your store post grape nuts trying is
believing week you've got to do it I'm excuse me in a blind test women compared
new advanced formula agree shampoo to an expensive salon brand red canamino
pun guess which one they like better agree it's that good aren't rich and
rich bits really the same so they're different but they're still the same so
they're the same don't you get it rich or rich bits two sizes fits all Wednesday
it's a buster to the back and honey is there something wrong with it well
nothing they can't be fixed you get sympathy pains on the Wonder Years then
a special episode nobody makes blueberry pancakes like you do Margaret those
aren't blueberry pancakes share memories of grandpa on growing pains Wednesday
the health care industry in California generates enough paper in a year to fill
the Rose Bowl enough to cross the Golden Gate Bridge half a million times so how
does one person keep from drowning in all this paperwork by turning to the one
company big enough and innovative enough to offer plans where you never have to
fill out one single claim for me we make the system work for you
while the competition only offers a three-year warranty plan Taylor made
office systems offers an exclusive five-year warranty plan on their Canon
NP copiers with all of the guarantees in writing remember that the next time
your copier company feeds you the same old line
any suzu rodeo then I'll start rich oh not rich at all yet here they are with a
bigger engine than our Toyota four-wheel drive they have more power it's a
ugly thought a longer wheelbase so for a smooth ride rear anti-lock brakes kids
put the tire back on and more overall passenger space stop having fun it
doesn't add up the suzu rodeo true it doesn't add up suzu there's no
comparison now a factor to dealer incentives air conditioning comes
standard with any four by two rodeo for a limited time lots of men have heard
about minoxidil and lots of men have heard about Rogaine but lots of men
don't know that only Rogaine has minoxidil and only your doctor can
prescribe Rogaine for more information call this number now if you're wondering
whether Rogaine is for you call this number and we'll give you an incentive
to find out a certificate worth $10 toward a consultation visit with your
doctor call 1-800-556-4800
some men would rather live their lives sheltered at the harbor and some would
rather sail into life with the unmistakable scent of old spice clean true
and classic old spice one of the legends of the city
aren't you glad you use dial to the airport let's go over to window here don't
you wish everybody did so I start watching the discovery channel thought
maybe I learned something then I see they have this guide you know to kind of
help you figure out when everything's on so I order it real easy just 1-800-TDC-8343
and I charge it and now a few weeks later it's here I mean look at this thing
it's a magazine TDC magazine I open it up and there's this grid which is great
because I can see the whole week at a glance so I just circle the shows I
want to see and look at this it's a complete description of every single
show and check this out these photographs gorgeous there's even articles by
famous authors amazing all I expected was a program guide and I get all this
what a bargain I wonder if they'll ever be a swimsuit issue call now to order
your TDC magazine and receive 12 monthly issues for only 1495 that's more than 50
percent off the cover price or tell the operator to bill you later these and
MasterCard accepted it's never one food that gives you what you need it's the
combination and the balance and how you balance the combinations so at McDonald's
there's lots to choose from lean burgers to low-fat shakes and frozen yogurt
salads no fat no cholesterol apple brand muffins and cholesterol free oil for our
chicken potatoes and fish we've got a long list of good foods to choose from
all you've got to do is just choose the food for you always good food always
good value at McDonald's it can be downright frustrating and difficult to
get perfect orange juice one with that pure fresh squeeze taste with no water
added or taken away but if you remember that no other major brand of juice comes
closer to this than this Tropicana Pure Premium we think you will find
everything will just fall into place Tropicana Pure Premium also appearing in
96 ounces just because the other guy is on the road doesn't mean his mind is so
the superb traction of the Subaru legacy with four-wheel drive and anti-lock
brakes can be quite a comfort since the next guy is capable of almost anything
shouldn't the same be true of your next car factory to dealer cash could mean
great savings to you during the Subaru spring value days three hours nine
minutes may I ask what you're doing timing tiny time pills excuse me well
this morning when I woke up I thought like this man like that so I took a
contact so well contact has 600 tiny time pills at last 12 hours up to three
times longer than ordinary cold medicine there's a whole day's work in every
contact eight hours and 30 seconds look if you're gonna time the tiny time
pills all day when are you gonna do the work right you time there's a whole
day's work in every contact coming to ABC I'll give you three and a half in time
served no way two years tops right two and a half three or no deal done you
know something's wrong you still want to try this case you said you took on the
cases nobody else wanted hell are we supposed to win a case with our
witnesses they'll deny oh your honor we got a big problem here treat Williams you
mean you a real lawyer surprise Eddie Dodd premiering this week on ABC TV
announcing something you've never seen before in an inexpensive Macintosh
color lifetime no wonder many of us seem to always big bell calling card you
can easily charge calls whether you're just down the street or somewhere up the
coast but unlike most calling calls Pacific bells is based on your own
familiar phone number and since it's welcome at most every phone it's really
only calling card you need to hang on to Pacific Bell we're making things easier
everywhere
McDonald's explodes another myth if it's no fun it can't be delicious not so
introducing McLean deluxe made with a 91% fat free beef patty low fat and
delicious can't be done can too you want a great burger taste with a lot less fat
only McDonald's responded new McLean deluxe will blow you away it's terrific
it can't be low-fat it's both new McLean deluxe after billions and billions
another first at McDonald's today
Johnson's baby oil for skin soft as the day you were born
I'm gonna tell you how it's gonna be
are you gonna give your love to me
I wanna love you night and day
you know my love not that way meet the Kodak color kin toys get them free by
mail when you buy these Kodak products see this displayed for colors you can
love
I love the real not that way big odors lurked in small places
big odors linger in small places
air wick has big news a new decorative design and a great new scent
my friend Carol is so different from me she does Lunchables all at once but I do
it one by one we're total opposites but we've been best friends forever Oscar
Meyer Lunchables lunch combinations because lunch is what you make of it
McDonald's explodes another myth if it's no fun it can't be delicious not so
introducing McLean deluxe made with a 91% fat free beef patty low fat and
delicious can't be done and to you want a great burger taste with a lot less fat
only McDonald's responded new McLean deluxe will blow you away it's terrific
it can't be low fat it's both new McLean deluxe after billions and billions
another first at McDonald's today
make me make me oh baby touch me touch me and maybe you will see how baby soft you can be
make me make me oh baby Johnson's baby oil for skin soft as the day you were born
I'm gonna tell you how it's gonna be
are you gonna give your love to me
I'm gonna love you night and day
you know my love and not fade away meet the Kodak color kin toys get them free by
mail when you buy these Kodak products see this displayed for colors you can
love
love for you not fade away big odors lurk in small places big odors linger in
small places air wick has big news a new decorative design and a great new
scent my friend Carol is so different from me she does lunchables all at once
but I do it one by one we're total opposites but we've been best friends
forever Oscar Meyer Lunchables lunch combinations because lunch is what you
make of it
poor Sam and Samantha so young and yet so glum changing time was just no fun but
old mother goose waved her wing and put all the magic of story time into new
diapers just the thing nursery rhymes learning rhymes playful pictures to 11
designs in every package now Sam and Samantha are full of glee in new story
time huggies and changing time is happy as can be you may have noticed lately
that lots of people are having considerable trouble walking and
chewing gum at the same time perhaps it's because of the great taste of trident
original fruit and bubble trident good for your teeth and great taste to when
allergies come on this strong Benadryl comes on stronger
cheese cheese cheese not one but two pizzas loaded with cheese and up to five
toppings for 898 cheese or teaser bravely Fred has faced one too many healthy but
boring breakfast enough I want taste indulgence Kellogg's frosted mini
wheats a friend naughty frosty ready Kellogg's frosted mini wheats are good
for you this fiber no and no salt but they taste so good and they're fat free
see that free Kellogg's frosted mini wheats surprise they're good for you you
see it your way I see it mine we're all going to Italy Tuesday when Tony and
Heret's a vineyard greetings fellow villagers he's welcomed with price
free who's the boss and at a special time that baby guest tires that's a
chemistry set every boy should have one no you shouldn't have done that Ed we
could just turn on the gas and blow ourselves up an hour of Roseanne and I
flew here this morning from Colombia a dope smuggler swallows his stage if
somebody dies it's not your fault is it no not totally what percentage would you
say
Johnson's brings out the baby soft shine born in your hair
double fresh double good come on and double it double meet double meet
gun there's no single come life it's not so easy to grow beans you know you have to
water them pull up the weeds and tie them up so they can reach the sun then
your mother has to help you build a fence to keep the bunnies out then you have to
pick them carefully after that you get to eat them and if you're lucky your
mother will make a right at golden twirls to go with them golden twirls are
very delicious and so much fun I wonder how they grow these the average driver
puts 12 to 13,000 miles a year on a car at Saturn we knew this where and how
though as anyone's guess for sure we knew people would be taking the new
Saturn places and using it in ways you'd never figure or even imagine so we
tested it we ran at 6 million miles everywhere sometimes nowhere
Wednesday Kevin's got a big problem with Paul's little sister I'm not taking
your sister to the catillion I mean you're gonna have to tell her unpleasant
as it might be it was time to break a heart would you go with me the wonder
years then it's a growing pains European holiday and Mike's getting a head
start party party it's a tale of two vacations happy anniversary I'm stranded
in Spain with a crazy woman catch all the fun Wednesday they ate their words
critics are saying McDonald's new McLean deluxe is revolutionary that's because
it's made with the leanest beef patty in the business 91% fat-free they're
calling it phenomenal that's because it tastes fantastic the public demanded
McDonald's responded with great burger taste and a lot less fat but don't fill
up on the press taste for yourself one bite and you'll be talking about it too
the swallow first new McLean deluxe after billions and billions another first
at McDonald's today Bradley decided to express his artistic talent on the
living room wall let him will cover it in one coat they're so cute at that age
you can't get mad at him what a bet are you sure you have everything yeah turn
around hmm I got the Fuji film while you were in cosmetics I didn't forget oh
you forgot you married the perfect husband you were right dad Kmart's
pretty cool you should listen to me more often of all pine cleaners more
people choose pine saw pine saws got more active ingredients than the next
leading brand and pine saw disinfects better it even kills staff germs it's
not really clean until it's pine-solved Friday on Full House Joey and Jesse get
close to nature
maybe even a little too close it's time for a boy to become a man your mother
sent out 150 invitations that we got 10 tons of potato salad downstairs rejoice
Robbie comes of age on his hauling day and all new dinosaurs right after Full
House Friday tonight tonight tonight the Bay Area connection to the Indian
apolis 500 thrilled at the daredevil driving some of the biggest names in
honor racing today feel the rush of driving at speeds over 200 miles an
hour experience the trials and tribulations of top contenders careening
toward their place in racing history many attempt only 33 will qualify be
there is channel 7 stand love it gives you a driver's eye view of the Indy 500
from the local racers who make it great the Indy 500 the Bay Area connection
tonight tonight tonight on Channel 7 news at 11 Royal Caribbean's three and
four night cruises from Los Angeles to Mexico the grand resorts that offers so
much for so little so why wait
is this your kid and is he drinking the only juice drink with a full day's
vitamin C for other vitamins and all natural flavors well maybe this isn't
your kid but this should be his juice drink tang fruit box nutrition in
disguise
you can't just say you're the best you have to prove it you have to perform at
the highest level that's why century 21 professionals are trained to know their
business better skill but making everything work together committed to
giving you the highest level of professional service the standard of
performance by which all others will be judged
I like wearing white but not under my arm this solid leaves a white flaky mess
but now there's new arid sportscent solid protection that never turns wide or
new arid sportscent solid protection without the white mess for fun around
here me and the boys like to do something a little bit crazy put two
kinds of cheese on the cheeseburger for a while new taste headed to store for two
kinds of cheese and lean ground beef cheddar and monster crazy
kiss me once and kiss me twice and kiss me once again it's been a no no
Oreo unlock the magic now appearing at a Burger King near you a cool new star
Snickers ice cream bar rich milk chocolate buttery caramel and fresh
roasted peanuts together with a cool taste of premium ice cream just the
way you like it so have it your way with a coolest new star Snickers ice cream
bar at Burger King
I
Aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa
a few degrees away from the every day.
Diet 7 upward neutrosweet. Break the ice.
In great times, the best things in life never change.
The best of Disney. 50 years of magic will continue in a moment.
Customs officials harassed for reporting possible corruption in the war on drugs.
ABC News investigation on world news tonight with Peter Jennings tomorrow.
We believe in putting people first and that shows up in everything we do.
Cause everywhere we go, everyone of us knows.
Everything we do, USA begins with you.
Every time we fly, every mile of sky.
Everything we do, USA begins with you.
The world's wildest acrobats are doing the wild thing, Green World.
See the incredible acrobats of China. It's one wild show.
All across the USA, as long as we've been around.
Our passengers are our neighbors. This country's our hometown.
And we know how hard it is to work that hard for you.
We believe in putting people first and that shows up in everything we do.
Cause everywhere we go, everyone of us knows.
Everything we do, USA begins with you.
Every time we fly, every mile of sky.
Everything we do, USA begins with you.
Yo, from our home studio, it's Ricky and Dee and I'm a man.
Rick, a serious burger lover.
He's doing a blind taste test of McDonald's New McLean Deluxe Sausage.
Yo, then the taste is gone.
McDonald's is the only one with this 91% fat-free lean beef fat.
Wait, hold up, 91% fat-free?
No, man.
Straight up.
The taste is kicking.
And it's a serious value.
The New McLean Deluxe.
100% death.
On taste.
On taste.
Word up.
McDonald's today.
The thing about a bon bon, it's almost always gone, gone, bon, bon.
It's our bike size, bon, bon, it's the right size.
Twenty ice cream bells dipped in chocolatey shells.
The thing about a bon bon, it's almost always gone, gone, bon, bon.
Bon, bon.
If your socks are announcing unexpected new breakthroughs,
introduce your feet to ours, Burlington Socks,
for quality at a price you'll like.
Burlington Socks.
The green sea means more sock for the money.
Sunday.
They're the first inhabitants of the moon with a dream of a new life.
There's a solar flare heading for them.
But it becomes a fight for survival.
My brother's out there.
I'm not going to leave him out there to die.
Incoming Flutter Alert.
Do you copy?
A world premiere movie, Plymouth Sunday.
Next, John Stossel discovers some of the best kept secrets in childcare.
Mastering the terrible twos.
Getting your children to sleep.
How to raise a happy child.
Whether you're a parent or not, don't miss this special edition of 2020.
Next.
Once you've tried something like this, you just don't go back.
After Johnson & Johnson created AccuView disposable contact lenses,
there was one thing left to do.
If they would give away a free pair, everyone would wear these.
So we did.
It's comfortable.
Just put them in.
Boom, they feel great.
You don't clean them.
Visit your eye care professional for an exam.
And if AccuView is right for you, you'll get a free trial pair.
That's all they took from me.
Just put them on one time.
I see your true colors shining through.
True colors shining through.
Because the world gets more colorful every day,
Kodak introduces a more colorful film.
New Kodak Gold 400 film.
It now has the richest, most saturated color available in high-speed film.
New Kodak Gold 400 film.
Isn't it worth this to get a bag that can take this?
Isn't it worth this for a bag that can take this?
I'm announcing the new hefty steel sack,
the toughest, most puncture-resistant bag hefty makes,
and only two cents more per bag than the average.
Go wild, go crazy, go Disney.
Go on, go on.
Go for the Jungle Book, now on Video Cassette.
Take me home, Daddy.
Buy it today and get $5 back with our Nabisco rebate offer.
The Jungle Book, you can't bear to be without it.
Whoa, Mom, this isn't Kraft cheese and macaroni.
Yeah, I know.
What?
It was cheaper.
I saved a few cents.
Mom, it's not the cheesiest.
What's the difference?
No, no, no.
Sam, come on, pal.
Dinner.
Mom, you'd never serve anything but Kraft cheese and macaroni.
Right?
I wouldn't dream of it.
Kids love Kraft cheese and macaroni,
and that's worth every penny.
Kraft macaroni and cheese and new dinosaur and teddy bear shapes, too.
Tuesday.
Ugh, you're gonna hate L.A.
I will.
Melissa's got a job on a sitcom.
Do you have a real feel for the show?
Loves the star.
It's a pressure cooker.
It really is.
Loves the writer.
Something about you.
Hates the business.
Who do you want us to contact?
Excuse me.
Who represents you?
I do.
30-something Tuesday.
All across America, one out of two homes is a Kenmore home.
Yours can be two.
With our large capacity washer and matching Kenmore dryer,
just $399.87 and $309.87.
Exclusively at Sears and Sears Brand Central.
It's a sizzling deal.
It's hot.
And it's only linked to Pizza Hut.
That'll get one new Sausage Lovers Pizza for $899,
or a second for just $4 more.
It's a deal you can sink your teeth into.
You're not leaving until you eat breakfast,
so you might as well do it.
If we've told you once, we've told you a thousand times.
Have you forgotten everything we taught you?
A suggestion for all you grown-ups
who think there's no time for a hot breakfast.
Kellogg's Pop Tarts.
They will float.
You like food, don't you?
Open wide.
Kellogg's Pop Tarts.
The hot breakfast everyone has time for.
You know you like it.
I'm Kay Kelly in New Orleans, coming up tonight on Nightcast.
The power of Voodoo could it determine
the outcome of Sunday Super Bowl?
And are the 49ers superstitious?
I have a little ritual I go through before the game
and try to get myself as nervous as possible.
I'm just going to stay out of the small towns
and stay away from the people working the Voodoo.
Voodoo at the Super Bowl.
Live coverage from New Orleans continues tonight on Nightcast.
For years, we've been telling you how the four-wheel drive
Subaru helps the U.S. ski team get to their events early.
Yet at the 1989 World Championships,
the U.S. team was not the first to arrive.
The Norwegians beat us.
The French beat us.
As did the Italians and the Swedes.
How'd they do it?
That was the year we lent them all a Subaru.
Imagine a Disneyland as big as the city of San Francisco.
A Disney world with a surprise around every corner.
43 square miles of tropical paradise.
The spectacular new Disney MGM Studios theme park.
And the incredible Epcot Center.
Imagine yourself here.
Walt Disney World in Florida.
As big as imagination gets.
Beauty and the Beast will continue.
You never know where history will unfold,
but you always know where to turn.
The CBS Even News with Dan Rather.
You always know when it's CBS News.
Gary's being pushed too far.
If you love me, you must leave me alone.
His worst nightmare is taking shape.
My children are going to be living under the same roof as a rapist.
His last resort, an act of desperation.
Speak now or else forever holds your peace.
I'm going to yell rapist or rapist.
I'm not slanting.
Thursday.
This is CBS.
It's the biggest party in the history of Disneyland.
Disneyland!
Disneyland's year-long 35th anniversary celebration.
With the biggest parade we've ever staged.
Towering four stories over Main Street.
Our biggest giveaway ever.
A new GEO every day.
And over 400,000 other prizes.
Plan now for your biggest vacation ever.
Disneyland 35th anniversary.
Party, party, Disneyland big.
It's Disneyland Big.
Instead of sitting there, you could be sitting here.
In a Mazda MX-6 GT.
Get one now and you'll also get $750 cash back.
It's a better value than Toyota Celica.
The feature Celica doesn't have.
And a price that's already less.
So for your MX-6 and an additional $750 cash back,
you know where it's at.
At your Northern California Mazda dealer now.
There are very few guarantees in medicine.
But if you have arthritis pain like I do,
you should know about Mediprin and the Mediprin guarantee.
If two Mediprin don't relieve minor arthritis pain
better than two regular aspirin, you get your money back.
Strong promise? Strong medicine.
The medicine that concentrates the power of ibuprofen
into these potent little caplets.
The medicine that guarantees better relief than regular aspirin.
Better arthritis pain relief.
Better arthritis pain relief.
That's the Mediprin guarantee.
They know they want to win.
They look at the judge and they ask for it.
The show dog begins with what you feed it.
I mix the pedigree with the pedigree meal time
because the dogs enjoy it.
It's the perfect combination.
These are champions.
They deserve the best.
Pedigree.
Recommended by Top Breeders.
Thank goodness, in just 90 seconds.
What do you mean by your money's worth and a whole lot more?
This looks like something my mom would eat.
It's kind of quiet, conservative.
I don't think I can get into this.
I mean, it's just a bunch of flakes.
Hmm.
It doesn't taste the way it looks.
I like the way it crunches.
Maybe it's good because it's simple.
Wait, wait.
Don't tell me.
I'm just like my mother.
Kellogg's cornflakes.
Cornflakes?
Taste them again for the first time.
I hope you'll be with us tonight.
Dan Miller will be live from New Orleans
inside the Super Bowl bringing you updates on
Goodness Knows What along with actress Karen Black
and much more.
See you later tonight.
Brought to you by
Dr. Pepper and your local Dr. Pepper bottler.
Dr. Pepper is just what the doctor ordered.
The good time, great taste of McDonald's.
AT&T, the right choice.
And Chrysler Corporation and the Chrysler Motor
is Black Dealers Association.
What do you like about your Eagle premiere?
Everything.
You mean the leather interior and the roominess?
I said everything.
So what's premiere got that other cars in his class don't?
Me.
You test drove the Maxima?
You got it.
The Taurus and the Cressida?
You got it.
Then you tried the Eagle premiere?
You got it.
What'd you think?
I got it.
All the phone cords that bind,
that hold your small business back.
Now AT&T can set you free
with the first cordless phone specifically designed for business.
The multi-line Merlin cordless.
It works with AT&T small business phone systems
so you don't have to lose any quality to gain your freedom.
Set your business free.
Call 1-800-MERLIN-ATT for the new Merlin cordless.
Who's Levin?
Kay.
Pitcher, Morone, is due up.
Kay.
So Merge is going to have to go to his bench.
Only a choice is John Kay.
Hey, kid.
You gave me the doc?
Merge has been reluctant.
It's Kay, he's afraid to go with the younger plans,
but he may not have a choice here tonight.
Now betting for Morone.
Kay.
Kay.
Now betting for Morone.
Kay.
This is Hubert Strohls,
Austrian downhill racer and Olympic gold medalist.
He's not afraid of extreme vertical drops.
He's not afraid of speeds over 90 miles an hour.
He's not afraid of anything,
except going slow.
But if you think he's tough,
wait till you see the guys at the ticket window
at the Olympics if you don't have your Visa card,
because the Olympics don't take American Express.
Asa, it's every way you want to be.
We really missed you, man.
Really.
You were left all night long.
It was your kind of thing.
You made me laugh.
It was so embarrassing.
I haven't seen him in years.
That's great.
He still cracks me out.
I'll tell you one more time,
because I think I liked it.
I just did that.
We just did that, yeah.
No one helps you share the feelings
like AT&T long distance.
I wish I could have been here too.
AT&T, all you need to reach out.
Like to try, Total?
Mom says grape nuts.
Hope you're hungry.
It takes four bowls of grape nuts
to get the vitamins in one bowl of Total.
Total has 100% of a day's supply
of 12 vitamins and minerals.
You tell her.
Total, one bowl, 100%.
Red Lobster announces great new trios.
Six delicious trios you're gonna love.
Terrific.
Like our large butterfly shrimp,
lobster alfredo and scallops.
Love it.
Or our crab legs, juicy scallops and shrimp.
Let's go.
But hurry, our great new trios won't last long.
Red lobster for the secret lover.
Try the trio with the unbeatable price.
Our Atlantic trio, just $6.99.
$6.99.
That's incredible.
On One Life to Live, the start of a love affair.
This is gonna be a good trip.
For the beginning of the end.
Oh.
It's an attraction that could be fatal.
You'll be perfectly safe in the boat.
Trust me.
You'll never forget the incident at Loom Lake
on One Life to Live.
Ford trucks.
The best, never the best.
The first vehicle Henry Ford sold was not a car.
It was a truck.
Our full-size pickups were first with rear anti-lock brakes,
first with electronic overdrive transmission,
first with push button four-wheel drive.
Now what does all this get you?
It gets you number one.
And if you keep doing it, you stay number one.
More people are driving the best-built,
best-selling American trucks than ever before.
One.
One just ain't no fun.
It's just better than a one.
Starts.
Oh, yes.
Starts.
It's too bad to work.
Freshens breath and tastes great.
Yes, it's too bad to work.
People who use plain-calamine lotion to relieve itches
or poison ivy are easy to spot.
But new caledrial clear not only works better to stop the itch,
it dries this clear.
So nobody will ever spot you.
New caledrial clear.
One man unwilling to forgive.
You break the law, don't come running back to me.
The other unable to forget.
I swore an oath to my country,
not to what was going on over there.
Charlton Heston.
Peter Strauss.
Proud men, Saturday.
China Beach will continue in a moment.
We are an eclectic mix.
Everyone comes from different backgrounds.
We are a boisterous, diversified group.
Everyone has their own ideas in the newsroom
about how they think the day should go.
We tend to have loud laughs and loud debates.
I think the newsroom is a microcosm of the community.
We're really a cross-section of the Bay Area.
In the form of life, Sandy can be seen walking in the park,
wearing stirrup pants and stretch denim.
A deep purple waterproof parka with an attic fleece liner.
And a black rubber backpack.
A line and a climb.
Jody, who lives on Russian Hill,
and his brother Peter, who lives in Eureka.
Remarkably, this call costs 25% less than last month,
because Peter is in Jody's bonus zone,
and Jody just got call bonus from Pacific Bell.
Wherever you live in California, call us.
We'll check and see if call bonus can save you money, too.
Call 1-800-PACKBELL.
We're making things easier.
Another wimpy sandwich.
I've got vintage farms, deli loaf.
It's got real, sliced meat chunks.
Still going, nothing outlasts the energizer.
They keep going and going and go.
A better way to catch your z's
is on Sealy's new posture pedic sleep system.
Designed to conform to your shape.
Distribute your weight evenly, comfortably.
Only Sealy posture pedic has it.
So for a better night's sleep, better sleep on a Sealy.
Someone finally made oatmeal the way I like it.
He doesn't like oatmeal.
Oatmeal crisp is big crispy flakes with oatmeal.
Little brown sugar, lots of crunchy almonds.
Don't you lie to your mother.
Look ma, I'm eating my oatmeal.
Look ma, I'm eating my oatmeal.
Oatmeal crisp, oatmeal raisin crisp.
Look ma, I found something for nothing.
Pop secret popcorn, free and specially marked boxes
of oatmeal crisp and oatmeal raisin crisp.
Be sure and write them a nice thank you note.
Now there's a new reason to put down those fizzy diacolas.
It's crystal light in a new shade.
Pink grapefruit.
Light and luscious with no carbonation.
Okay, sit down.
Ring side seats.
250 bucks.
This is gonna be great.
These days a good value is hard to come by.
Unless you come by KFC for the amazing double bucket deal.
For a limited time get a 10 piece bucket of chicken for 8 bucks
and the seconds just 4 bucks.
Repeat 4 bucks.
The double bucket deal only from KFC.
Are you lonesome?
He was rock's first and only king.
He had the fame, the cash, the women.
And he had the pills, the pain.
One woman saw it all, lived it all.
This is her remarkable story.
Priscilla Presley's devastating account
of life and death in the eye of the storm.
Elvis and me, Sunday.
Here is a group of people who were going along
doing what they do better than they'd ever done it before
and someone came along and pulled the rug out.
It was a struggle for survival.
Peter Jennings reporting from the heart of Harlem Thursday.
McDonald's is so close.
McDonald's introduces the breakfast burrito.
Only 99 cents each.
The breakfast burrito.
Only 99 cents each at McDonald's today.
The Pepsi Summit Chill Out
gives us permission to let our hair down.
What is it? Chill out?
I don't know, but what else am I going to do this summer?
It's games, promotions, fun, and free costs.
It's like Woodstock, man.
It's people in tight pants moving fast.
For my family, Tartar Control AquaFresh fights Tartar.
It makes you feel this fresh.
Tartar Control AquaFresh helps remove plaque.
It makes you feel this fresh.
Tartar Control AquaFresh fights cavities.
It makes you feel this fresh.
Only Tartar Control AquaFresh is the fresh way to fight cavities,
fight plaque, and fight Tartar,
all with one great aqua fresh taste.
Tartar Control AquaFresh.
It fights Tartar.
And makes you feel this fresh.
I've got great news for everyone who uses bleach
to clean up the kitchen and bath.
New Clorox Cleanup is a bleach,
specially designed for cleaning.
You see, Clorox added a special cleaner to bleach,
so it cleans even better.
Now you can clean up stains, clean up germs,
and clean up greasy dirt bleach alone leaves behind.
So, when you reach for a bleach to clean up,
reach for the one with a special cleaner inside.
New Clorox Cleanup.
Cleans like bleach, only better.
Coming to ABC This Fall.
The war is over.
A celebration has begun.
Boys have returned as men to open arms,
to laughter, and to love.
Sir, the whole time I was over there,
all I thought about was you.
How am I going to tell them?
Is she seeing someone else?
Is she what?
These are their stories of triumph.
This is an impressive record, soldier.
And despair.
They can't pay you less than other men on the line.
They can if I'm a janitor.
Their hope for the future.
Hank has been fighting a war, not dating.
Their dreams left behind.
Americans are wonderful people.
Linda, if you'd made an effort to pretty yourself up,
you wouldn't have lost Mike to somebody.
They became wartime heroes.
Now, they've returned to the home front.
Because America is watching ABC.
They tried it in Rhode Island.
On ABC's World News Tonight this week.
What's hot in fashion?
Clothes that change colors all by temperature.
See it on 7 at 11.
Hey, listen to this.
In a blind test, women like new advanced formula agree conditioner
as much as a salon brand, Nexusumetris.
So if one cost less, would you switch?
Agree. It's that good.
Tuesday.
I was more wondering about sex.
No reason not to have sex.
Sex is definitely in the mind.
Sex. Call it what you will.
It's still sex.
30 Something Returns Tuesday.
Are you ready?
Yes, I'm ready.
Get ready to feel softer.
Never thought I could ever feel so good.
Caress with its silky touch of bath oil leaves skin softer than soap can.
Are you ready?
Yes, I'm ready.
Get ready to feel your softest.
Never felt so right on the show tonight.
Before you dress, caress.
I won't wear anything without Cross Your Heart.
Cause great looks start with Cross Your Heart.
With crisscross shaping, I always look better.
The Cross Your Heart bra.
Great looks start with Cross Your Heart.
From Play Dex.
The fit that makes the fashion.
Hey, thanks man. Stay cool.
7-O.
The Cool Spot
Let me show you how the educated consumer can tell the difference between my deli meats
and Oscar Meyer deli thin slices.
Now you can't go by looks or taste on a con of they're both sliced fresh, real thin.
But my deli meat comes in this beautiful white paper.
See how nice you can write?
But Oscar Meyer comes in this resealable bag.
You can't write nothing.
Presenting Oscar Meyer deli thin slices.
Deli fresh taste.
Without the deli.
Can you believe it when some margarine say buttery taste and there's no butter in them?
Craft touch of butter spread has rich creamy butter in it.
Just a touch.
Craft touch of butter.
A touch of real butter makes a real difference.
A touch of real butter.
A touch of real butter.
A touch of real butter.
A touch of real butter.
A touch of real butter.
A touch of real butter.
A touch of real butter.
A touch of real butter.
