Calling Gamma Ray.
This is Major Cigar.
Do you read me, Gamma Ray?
Gamma Ray, Gamma, come in!
Gamma Ray, please respond!
Well, his brains are fried.
Pack it up, mission's over.
Do you read me? Do you read me?
Do I need to reach through the TV? Do I need to reach through the Weegee?
Houston and Meg, I'm too deeny. I'm too uneasy.
I'm out of face and I'm orange-hanging.
I'm powdered eggs and my radio's been down for days.
To just stand around and shout out the phrase and go,
Do you read me?
Shook up, shoot a beanie.
I'll look for the Mongofeety.
Deep into some hellhole.
Come detect this tempo.
I've been beating back in these headphones.
Beating back in profile fear.
Farewell to my breadcrumbs.
Is anybody even out there?
I'm like, out there in that true tweedy.
That new piece that I do.
Do you read me?
You don't read me.
I'm barely a thing.
I'm staring off too scared to blink.
I might shrink some and I shrink more.
Shrink past this pink dwarf.
No sign of my bull star, but up here it don't mean north.
Beep space and no G4.
Some more tumble out.
Some death bells.
Some bleep bleep.
Robot voice.
Some red lights.
Some send help.
Straight meep.
Some ET.
To come deep-frying.
I'll freak, race, and re-haul.
Reach out, reap what he sow.
Jesus, do you read me?
We don't.
We don't.
We don't.
We don't.
We don't.
We don't.
Do you read me, Gamer Ra!
And I play drums on the wheel
Where the feeling at it cooks your outgun in the field
Drums on the wheel
Bomb sights and blackouts, and fog lights and gas clouds
Jackie through vacuums
None of our flaps down
It's shocking
Shot-off's was one small part of some squadron
That ain't once chosen to abort
We ain't once chosen to abort shit and we've honed in on our problem
Not stop until you stop and see what kind of quad you're in, you got lost in
Do you read me that option? And y'all's options are exhausted
Been dropped off in this mosh pit instead of locked in a one orbit
Knock knock, fullback of this cockpit is my coffin
Bust levels, I'm doomed to repeat, new dance called do you read me
It evolves beyond the under mantra, once nothing ping in my transponder
Once you up a copy, y'all play the copy, then hand it back to y'all
Unresponsive, ten hut and I'm in sync, thrown home but just ring and ring
Mask weights that leave marks in black holes that eat stars
Green cheese and GPS beat deck with heat tours
The fuel gauge around the street, my beacons are all blanked out
I might slink up in a junk heap, you can't read and or pin down
Gamma Ray, come in!
And I play drums on the wheel where the feeling out of touch are outgunned in the fields
Drums on the wheel
And I play drums on the wheel where the feeling out of touch are outgunned in the fields
Drums on the wheel
And I play drums on the wheel where the feeling out of touch are outgunned in the fields
And I play drums on the wheel where the feeling out of touch are outgunned in the fields
