Why did we learn Python Uni? Because we had to become a senior machine learning engineer before we had the time to learn programming
Before we start make sure, you know, we're talking about Python 3 not Python 2 actually a bit of Python 2.7 is also okay geared towards children and
PhDs children and PhDs Python. I know Python, which means I know machine learning AI data science
Computer vision, big data, Keras, TensorFlow, scikit-learn, PyTorch, OpenCV, deep learning, NLP
Huge community of kids. Now, I didn't learn Python in an online course. Actually never really learned it.
Lists are arrays. Tuples are arrays. Sets have no order. Dicts are arrays. Comprehensions are arrays. Numpy arrays are arrays.
No more semicolon errors. Only white space errors. Where is that error?
Enumerate. Enumerate zip. OS walk. Tuple unpacking. It's not dynamically typed. It's strongly dynamically typed. In Python
We don't do constants. We only do change. Who put the main function at the bottom of the file?
Equality is not identity. Is not identity. I can do in Python in five lines
Which you can do in C in 50 and it will take ten times the time to execute. Oh, I didn't I didn't say that wrong, right?
Who needs brackets anyway? All these people with their illogical syntax sugar might need brackets. You can return multiple values
Multiple values. Multiple values. Are you to me? No, no, I learned all of this on Medium.
How many libraries does it take until I can actually put Python as my status on LinkedIn? Like 3, NumPy, Medplotlib, Pandas,
Pandas, Pandas, Pandas. Or maybe 2, you know, because we start counting from 0.
STR minus 1 double colon 0 minus 1. Huh? It's that smart engineering.
Fast and that's engineering. That's smart. All the compile languages are worse because you get errors before you can even run them.
It's like, man, it's really, you know, holding you back from innovation, science,
automation, progress. It's not very child-friendly if you ask me and I'm not a child. So I'm a PhD.
Oh, the shirt goes into the jeans. In C++, everything takes so long. You have to write int main, declare variables.
It's literally just the execution that's fast. Who cares? It's about the scientific, revolutionary data science,
machine learning, NLP, big data that you're going to do with your software or you can automate your coffee machine,
which does the coffee that helps you make the scientific advances in Lua.
Ideas to code. Why can't I just run this in Leitech? Leitech. Oh, this is a Python interview. All right, Python.
Why am I so good at this? I've never written code before. Tuple open bracket. Oh, this is machine learning.
Oh, this is data science, big data, NLP, computer vision, AI. Do you know what that is? I can give you a quick tutorial.
I just learned that on medium just an hour ago. That's machine learning. Generative adversarial networks.
Have you heard of them? Me neither. Let's check it out. Oh, it's really easy to find. The documentation is just one page.
Almost there. Almost there. Where is the async with?
All right. Oh, you want to learn Python? We can do it just right now. You don't really need to learn anything.
Or you need to learn at least three libraries. Panas, Mapplotlib and NumPy. Fundamental.
Well, the good thing in Python is single and double quotes are not differentiated because you don't need to cite properly. It's not Leitech.
Sadly, are you convinced? Should we do a tutorial? I mean, should we read a medium, write a medium block?
Let me show you a graph real quick. Let me introduce you to a graph real quick. This represents the amount of memory used by C for my program.
And this represents the amount of memory Python uses. My screen is not big enough.
