Have you ever felt like the Internet Archive runs on sticks and stones and is constantly
on the verge of a major security breach?
It just happened.
That was the ominous message that greeted me yesterday when I visited the Wayback Machine,
one of the most important websites in the history of the Internet, because it literally
archives the history of the Internet.
It's been taking snapshots of websites, including their HTML, CSS, JavaScript, and images,
since 1996, allowing us to remember the World Wide Web in its peak form, when Amazon looked
like this, and weird people made weird websites just for fun, unlike nowadays where everybody
just chases algorithms on cringe factories like TikTok and Instagram.
Unfortunately, the fate of this website hangs in the balance, as it's currently getting
pwned, boned, and owned from multiple angles.
A data breach exposed 31 million email addresses and password hashes, its open library lost
a critical legal battle, its website was defaced with some JavaScript graffiti, it's been
getting DDoS non-stop, and its current status is offline as we speak.
What the hell is going on at the Internet Archive?
It is October 10th, 2024, and you're watching the Code Report.
The Wayback Machine contains over 890 billion archived webpages, weighing in at nearly 100
petabytes.
It's an unimaginable amount of data, like if you look at one web page every second for
the next 100 years, you would have looked at less than 1% of the total archive, and
this data is practically irreplaceable.
The only company that might be able to replace it is Google, but Google recently stopped using
its own cached archive in its search results, and now points to, you guessed it, the Internet
Archive's Wayback Machine.
Now we don't know if the hackers have access to the archive website data, but if they do,
and they might, they have the power to erase the history of the worldwide web.
Before we untangle this mess, you should first know who Brewster Kale is, an advocate for
universal access to all knowledge, and the digital librarian who started the non-profit
Internet Archive back in 96.
At times we're different back then.
You could buy a house in San Francisco or Seattle and start a company, and the Internet
Archive could easily be a multi-billion dollar company, but instead it's a free non-profit
service that benefits the world.
Not everybody's a fan, though.
You might want those unhinged posts you wrote on the Temple of the Screaming Electron to
be erased forever.
The Internet Archive will remove personal data and comply with GDPR, but some people
want legitimate content to be memory-hold forever.
In addition, the Internet Archive also offers a service called Open Library, which was founded
by Kale along with the late Aaron Swartz.
It digitizes physical books, then allows one digital copy to be lended out for each physical
copy that's owned.
It sounds reasonable, but they were sued recently by a bunch of publishers claiming copyright
infringement, and the publishers won that lawsuit, which could result in over 600 million
dollars in damages.
That was a big L, but now let's move to the timeline of the recent hacks.
HIVP, which is not an STD, but rather a website that helps people find out if their data has
been compromised in a data breach, was informed of the Internet Archive's data breach on
September 30th.
It's confirmed on October 5th, the Internet Archive gets notified on October 6th, and
provides a 72-hour window before making the data breach public.
On October 8th, Brewster Kale posts about a DDoS attack occurring, joking about it coming
on a Tuesday instead of a Monday, because the Internet Archive has been facing aggressive
DDoS attacks, going all the way back to May.
He posts again on October 9th, but this time it's a lot more somber.
The website is defaced with some JavaScript library, which triggers an alert message about
the data breach before it's been officially disclosed.
Then finally, as of right now on October 10th, the website is still being attacked and is
completely offline.
These are not looking good, but that brings up a big question.
What sort of sick-twisted hacker would want to mess with the Internet Archive, and why?
Well a hacktivist group called BlackMeta is claiming responsibility, and will continue
to attack until all their systems are completely down.
And just an hour ago they posted this crazy video.
I found it kind of funny, because it uses a lot of the same stock photography that I
use in my videos.
In the video, they say they're not a bunch of teenagers, which means that they're probably
just a bunch of teenagers.
They have a political message about the situation in the Middle East, which doesn't make a
ton of sense because attacking the Internet Archive isn't going to make people like you,
which means the only explanation is that it's a false flag.
Now I have no idea who the real hacker is, but I'm sure you're watching this video
right now, and I have a message for you.
If you let the Internet Archive go now, that'll be the end of it.
I will not look for you, I will not pursue you, but if you so much as delete a single
website in that archive, I will look for you, I will find you, and I will kill you.
This has been The Code Report, thanks for watching, and I will see you in the next one.
