Alright, let's do class. So, today we're on character part two. Alright? So, I'm just
going to dig into it because this is what I do, I blab. And I've kind of divided today's
topic into four different general areas we're going to talk about using what we learned
last week in order to characterize and also hopefully teach a few other things about writing
books that don't quite fit anywhere else. Because books, short stories, they basically
are made up of four types of things, two types of writing you're going to be doing. You are
going to be doing dialogue, description, beats, and introspection, also called navel gazing.
And this is going to basically be mixing these four things together are what your story is
made up of. So we're going to take each one of these, talk about some strategies for using
them with an eye toward how to characterize with them. So we're going to start with dialogue.
So the question becomes how do you use dialogue for maximum impact in your writing? There
is no, again, like most things, one way you have to do this. There are strategies to use.
And when people talk about your voice as an author, it's going to come down to how you
intermix these and how you decide to use them. So some tips on dialogue. Dialogue generally
is one of the most active ways that you can convey information and characterization, particularly
when there are multiple characters speaking, and it feels like a dialogue. The first thing
you want to avoid, if you can avoid it, is avoid having your dialogue sound like monologues.
Unless you are purposefully writing a monologue, sometimes you will do this. For instance,
the character will stand up to give a speech, St. Crispin's Day, or you have a character
who has an epilogue in each one of your epic fantasies, which is basically him monologuing
to an empty room. You will have reasons that you want to do monologues, but you want to
avoid your dialogues feeling like monologues. How you do this is you generally, here's
a thing you don't want to do, big dialogue chunk, then another character says, ah. And
then big dialogue chunk, and the character says, hmm. Right? You will find yourself doing
this naturally, and this reads pretty poorly. Now, it reads better than most infodumps done
in description or in introspection, so it is a step forward. And once in a while, you're
just going to have this, because it's basically a monologue disguised as a dialogue. But this
is a less effective way to do it. More effective is generally when you have it look like a
conversation. Bum, bum, bum. Person starts to launch into M dash, gets interrupted by
other character says, wait. Blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. And this
character says, no. Blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. And then this character
says, oh. Blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. And this character says, yeah. And then
another part of your infodump, right? And then this other character is like, but what about,
but this other thing, and the character is like, we considered that, then blah, blah,
blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. And you are breaking your infodump up and making it into
a conversation, right? This is just going to read way better, and it's going to give
you way more opportunities to make your dialogue feel like it's expressing character. The thing
that we want to get across with all four of these is you want to find strategies for letting
your dialogue description, your action, your introspection, either convey likeability for
a character, convey proactivity for a character, convey the arc the character's on, their flaws
in other words, to convey their competence and their motivation, right? If you can get
those five things into your dialogue for your characters, suddenly your dialogue is
going to start to pop off the page, look really fresh and interesting, and it's going to be
expressing character. And you can see how you would be doing this. How would you maybe express
likeability or increase likeability for a character in this sort of thing? Any suggestions?
You want to move that character up on the likeability scale. Humor. They're funny. They're making
a wisecrack. Absolutely. How would you move them down?
Winey. Winey. Move them down. They're winey. Argumentative without it actually serving
a purpose. Not paying attention. Making fun of the character in a way that's not funny
that's just cutting them down. You could move a character in this conversation up or down
on that scale. How do you express character's proactivity in a dialogue? Yeah.
They talk a lot. They talk a lot. They're really excited about this idea. They're like
me talking about writing, right? That's going to come across as a proactive character. Any
other suggestions?
Their contributions are meaningful because like if they're just like not meaningful.
Right. They offer like a proactive character to say I can do that and I could do this to
help too. They offer like you want, when you're in the group, meaning if you ever do this
and someone volunteers to take a task, that's like a great thing. We're all happy when someone
actually volunteers to do something, right? You can use your dialogue to express that.
How can you use the dialogue to express motivation of a character? Yeah. Go ahead.
But oh my son.
But oh my son. Right. Completely can be overdone but that is expressing the character's motivation.
When the character cuts in and says but what about the droid attack on the Wookiees, right?
In the middle of a conversation about something else, that character is expressing part of
their motivation. They're raising the issue. Get across the character motivations in this.
When we're on this trip, could we stop and see this place I've always wanted to get a
stamp from going back to our stamp collector character, right? Like you can put these things
into the dialogue in a way that's just going to express your character. How would you express
character's flaws in dialogue? Their journey in other words. How are you going to get across
that they are having an arc?
You take a character's stomach for like constantly repeating the same thing.
Yeah, totally. And if you want the arc to work, you're going to show them changing on
that over time through the dialogue choices they make. Any other suggestions? Show their
flaws?
I haven't seen something really stupid.
Yeah, I haven't seen something really stupid. Or if their character journey is the journey
of, because sometimes a journey is apprentice to master, right? They can be asking a lot
of insightful questions. They don't have to, you know, the flaw, again, that's instead
of, you know, the flaw is not their fault, but they still don't know things. They can
be asking information and later, asking for information, later in the story, they can
be giving the information, right? How many, I've seen lots of great arcs where character
learned something and by the end they're teaching that thing, right?
Have them pointedly not say anything when they really should.
Yeah, yeah, absolutely. All right, how can you show character's competence? You want
to move them up on the scale of competence in dialogue? Yeah, we'll go, you already answered
the question, so we'll go right there.
If they know a lot about the issue or nothing, they'll just keep giving up no or put things
together and no one else will put together.
So one great way to do this is as I warned you last, mentioned last week, if another
character acknowledges it, it's going to be more reinforced. So if someone says, this,
this, this, another person's like, wow, I didn't realize you were so up to date on this, right?
That's going to reinforce it to us. Finding ways through the conversation or, you know,
somebody who's really competent could cut through all of the, say, rigmarole about an issue
and get right to its core, right? You are showing the competence. How could you move them down
on the competence scale? You're like, you want to establish that the surgeon is not competent
yet. Yeah.
You're talking like they think they know a lot about something, but obviously they don't.
They didn't. Yeah. Exactly. I didn't know that. Yeah. I didn't know that. Totally. Yeah.
Or they could ask some really asinine questions, right? Yeah. Yeah. Humor is not appropriate.
Like you can see as you're starting to build your story, if you can master doing some of
these things, if you can master getting across all of this in dialogue instead of your normal
way, and there's a reason why we're going to do this one last, you are going to default
to this every time unless you start training yourself not to. That doesn't mean that introspection
has no place. It does have a place in the story, but you are going to default to it.
And you're going to end up with these things. You're like, this is an infodump. This is
important meaningful stuff about the character. And four pages later of the character ruminating
about whatever issue that they're trying to work on to become a better person, your reader
is collapsed on the floor asleep. Whereas if you're doing it like this and you have
three characters with different motivations, different flaws and different areas of expertise,
having a conversation together, where at the end of the conversation, the reader feels
like they know all three characters better and it's given us the information about the
heist they're going to pull off suddenly, you have just mastered characterization in
a way that will not put your reader to sleep. So we talked last week or another week, we
won't talk a ton about it, but you do want to try to vary your dialogue based on the
character, aggressive stance versus non-aggressive stance. The character who always asks for
more information or clarification versus the character is like, I got it, I'm ready
to go, even if they don't have it. One question I get a lot is on dialect. How often should
you use dialect? This is a personal choice. This is a stylistic choice. My default recommendation
to you is less is more. Even for little tag words that a character uses that are to distinguish
them. I used one of these in Elantris, right? It's based off of the, we have them in English
but it's more like eh, we say eh, you ask for, if the character, what are these called?
Linguists can tell me. They are a form of conversation where in conversation a lot of languages have
a thing you stick at the end to ask if the other person's understanding. What's that?
That's handling. Okay, so in Korean it's, isn't that so? And in Elantris I put in, right?
If you've read Elantris as a character who always has one of these, it's part of a linguistic
quote of his character. My editor cut like three quarters of those and said, I know that
realistically in dialogue, people use these all the time. And indeed you'll find in some
languages and some conversations, every sentence is tagged with one of these things to make
sure that the person you're talking to understands that, you know, they can speak up at that
point and say if they understand. But you don't need nearly as many as you think you
need. Any of these things that you are adding to the dialogue, consider using them as a
light dusting of a dialogue, dialect rather than a all in. That said, there are some writers
who write fantastic pieces with all in dialect. There's a nice little section in Name of the
Wind that has an all in dialect section that is very fun. The We Free Men by Terry Pratchett
is very into this. You might even argue that a bunch of Star Wars is in dialect with Chewbacca
and R2D2 in a dialect we don't understand. A lot of times if you're going to go heavily
into dialect, you will need to understand that a lot of readers' eyes will glaze over
even if they could figure it out. So be careful about that and give contextual clues of what's
going on in the conversation. But this is really just a personal choice sort of thing.
All right? We're going to go through these fairly quickly. So let's just ask other questions
on dialogue. Particularly getting across character, yeah?
So, good question. How do you make it a trend for a character without making it seem kind of stiff?
Number one is, again, less is generally more. If you're having the character do this every
sentence, it's going to get old really fast and it's going to feel stiff very fast. Number two,
variety. For almost everything you're doing in your writing, particularly it comes down to these
sorts of things, variety is king. Having some conversations that go a little bit more like
a monologue mixed with some conversations that read like an argument and feel almost like a
fight scene with words. Having other things where people are just shooting the breeze and talking
together and stuff is coming out. Having a variety of different types and in the same way the character
who always asks for more information can have a variety of ways they do this. The idea is never
to have the reader in these sorts of things really pick out. This is the character that always asks
for more information. If you do your job right, they would be able to tell that this character is
talking but they wouldn't be able to tell you why until you say, well, they often are asking for
more information. This is the character who is empathetic to how other people are feeling and
always ask the person who has been quiet in the conversation what they think. If this character
does that several times through the story, your reader is going to pick up on that subconsciously
and that character's dialogue is just going to feel like their dialogue. The king way to show off
your skills in this is to do dialogue only sections and to practice them without attributions.
This is very hard and it rarely works to keep them in a book. I have one in an Alcatraz book
where that's the joke is that people keep entering the conversation and there's like a random pirate
I think that wasn't there when the story started and the idea is that it's a joke that you don't
get any attributions and people are just yelling at each other. But practicing this can be really
handy. Generally got to be a three person conversation for you to really practice it.
Write it without any dialogue tags or any descriptions and see if you can pull off
having different characters with different motivations, different ways of speaking,
that the reader can mostly keep track of who all these people are without the tags.
Then when you add the tags in and give it a little bit more of description and stuff,
it reads like a really powerful sequence often. I usually recommend a couple of short stories I
really like that do this very well. One is they are made of meat which is a two person or two being
conversation and then there's another great short story called wiki history which is an
epistolary story told all through forum entries by various characters where you could strip away
the dialogue tags. They still have them in this and you could still follow what's happening
It's a story that takes place on a time travel-ish forum
and it's really fun. Those are both free on the internet. I can't remember who wrote wiki history
but they are made of meat on Terry Bisson's website. Anyway, let's move on to other questions.
Yes, okay, lying. You've got basically two things going on here whether it's lying as
untrustworthy narrator or whether it's not. We're going to talk about untrustworthy narrator in a
little bit but basically the idea with untrustworthy narrator is to show through these one thing
and contrast it with introspection that says something else. Oftentimes you say something in
introspection but you show something else through dialogue description and beats in action
in that contrast between the two that that dissonance is what clues the reader in that
this is an untrustworthy narrator. That's not the only way to do it but one of the other ways
is to simply have the character find out information in one scene and in the very next scene tell
different information to the people around them which will let us know that everything
that character says from then on is a lie. If we know that this character is telling a lie about
something else then we're going to be suspicious of everything else. They tell if that makes
if that makes sense but we have to know that the character knows that information first
and then see the lie being told and you can do this. Someone asked I think last week about how
you do things with side characters and characterization. So keep in mind you can generally do all of
this and all of this through someone else's viewpoint for a side character. You can do
a decent amount of this. You just can't generally do much of this and so you have two and a half
of the four tools for characterizing people who are not your viewpoint characters. The reason
description is only half is because half or more of your description power is characterized in the
person who is doing the describing. Not necessarily the person they're describing but two and a half
of your four tools exist for all side characters and people you aren't in view points of. So you
just have to practice making sure you get across those people's characterization through dialogue
beats in the half description that is about them rather than relying on introspection but if you're
doing your job and you are practicing then you are learning how to do these three and not leaning
on this one as a crutch except when you need to and that's just going to make your writing more
powerful. Now one little thing to mention about dialogue is there is a lot of discussion in
writerly circles about how much you should modify your dialogue. This is a personal stylistic choice
and you do not have to follow anyone's rules on this. I think it's useful for you to know the
rules however. Generally the rule of thumb is that pieces of dialogue should have what we call said
bookisms at the end right he said that said or said and asked should be rule of thumb 90 percent
of your attributions. The reason this is a rule of thumb is that said and asked are invisible to
the reader and it doesn't draw focus away from the dialogue. I generally expand that my personal
philosophy is shouted whispered and some of these other things are really handy. I use more than I
really need. I use noted way more often than I probably need to use it because it's basically
a meaningless word. If it's been done in the dialogue it's obvious that they're noting it and
things like that. If it's just two people dialoguing really quickly can you take those out? Yes you
can take them out. What Dave said in his class is he usually tried to make sure that you only went
through three exchanges in a do-person dialogue before you added a beat or another dialogue
but generally if it's just two people and it's quick back and forth you want to scale way back
on your tags. If there are three people in the conversation or even another person in the room
it's often better to use more tags than you think you need just because that third person it's going
to be jarring. If you were reading a novel version of some of this like Joss Whedon quippy dialogue
between two characters most of those shouldn't have dialogue tags at all. This goes also in
the adverb direction. He said softly. Rule of thumb is to avoid those or to be very sparing with
them or to only use a couple of them to modify tone like softly or loudly or things like that.
Some people will say just take them all out. This is a personal stylistic choice again. I think I
may have mentioned JK Rowling loves all of these things. She loves using every different synonym
of said that she can come up with and putting it in and she is the most successful writer of our
time. So this is why you should take these things with a grain of salt but the why remember your
chef's not cooks. The why is that if you aren't leaning on these things then you often will naturally
make your dialogue sharper. If you have to replace shouted with someone actually emphasizing a word
and being very angry then you will write your dialogue more strongly than if you did if you
could just say he said angrily furrowing his brow and so generally writing advice from for most
professors is going to be cut as much of this out as you can and try to let the dialogue do the
talking haha yes yeah right so yeah so that's a beat and we're going to get to those that's what a
beat means um variety there is really handy and the reason beats are also very good is because a
beat like for instance he slammed his hand on the table I am done talking to you then you don't need
to shout it you don't need a he said you can you are we all are framing that and it also does this
kind of pyramid abstraction stuff where we're grounding you in the scene and keeping you there
so this is also a stylistic choice how often you use beats in your dialogue some writers
like a beat almost every line of dialogue some writers like to keep only a sparse number of beats
as they can in order to keep you grounded in the scene and who's talking and add some varieties to
the to the said and asked personal stylistic choice I find that if you use fewer beats just like if
you use fewer adverbs and things like that that you are naturally going to force yourself to
write better dialogue and the reader is going to be adding more of those beats in themselves
um but this is a stylistic choice right um basically it comes down to as you as a writer
how much do you want to be painting a cinematic picture in your readers heads and giving them
every single action and how much do you want to back off on that and have them be imagining
it and adding it themselves um and this is also going to vary based on your your genre
some genres like more some genres like less um so and also it's going to depend on how much
you want that dialogue to pop right you can imagine on the page how different it's going to be
if you read a scene that looks like this you know short dialogue short dialogue
short dialogue short dialogue joke short dialogue right now change that just in your mind to
beat right here you know he went and uh and scratched his face um and then beat right right
here she sat back folded her arms and cocked her head beat right here beat right here beat right here
instead of reading like bam bam bam bam rapid fire you're going to get a slower scene you're
going to get an introspective scene where you're seeing characters you're stopping the reader
from focusing on the dialogue and you're pulling them into what the characters are doing and you're
making the subtext more important than the text of the dialogue um these do different things
generally i recommend airing on doing less with beats but there are definitely sections
where you want to pull out from the dialogue and actually be talking about the subtext and stuff
like that um you'll see like some fantastic writers like um frank herbert will do this
where it's like your what you're really doing is you're showing the character giving commentary
on all the dialogue and things people are saying and the purpose of that scene is more
to characterize the character who's giving a running commentary either in their head or to
someone else about the dialogue and the dialogue itself becomes less important than that commentary
because the purpose is to show this is how this person is right so any last questions on dialogue
yeah go ahead what are your thoughts about writing in caps uh writing in caps i tend to personally
feel that all tools available to a writer um are good to use now and then so i am a fan of caps
and small caps as both tools to use um i am a fan of uh m dashes colons i think i talked about this
last week right semi colons no i didn't okay i'm a big fan of using all of the punctuation marks
um the only one i don't use is the interabang um because it feels too comic book to me
uh i'll show you um so i am a big fan of using um so of your three different types of emphasis
right italics caps small caps i guess there's another one there is both of these italicized
um i like using generally i stick to italicized versus caps and maybe in a caps italicized
as varying levels of emphasis and my emphasis is going to be 90 percent that's a weird nine
90 italics um but i'm a big fan of italicizing words uh to emphasize them in dialogue and in
prose just because it's an extra way to get information to the reader in a way that feels
like it's showing rather than telling what about bolding things uh bolding things is definitely
not done um but very often in prose fiction in the market right now italics and bold mean the
same thing generally you can make a distinction and some writers do uh but i would say most of the
time uh italics and bold are the same thing and so they just pick one or the other for internal
dialogue do you prefer quotes okay all right so uh direct speech or free indirect speech
these are fancy writer terms for there there's actually a different one i'm trying to remember
what's called but there's three different ways you can convey information um in someone's head
one is oh no classes are canceled what am i gonna do he thought the second way is uh he heard that
classes were going to be canceled and wasn't sure what to do and then the third way is uh classes
were canceled whatever will i do but not italicized uh just left as it is right um and generally you're
choosing between the the first two um italicized thoughts and head or not my personal style which
i find very effective is to use the italicized thoughts as um as uh either subject or uh subject
sentence or uh concluding sentence to a section of introspection we're kind of jumping all over
the place well that's okay because the questions are so for instance i would if a character was
thinking about classes they would start with a subject line of man classes have been canceled
what am i gonna do he had seven classes they were all had tons of homework it was gonna be
really troubling and how was he ever going to get to the dance on time was a dance gonna be
canceled and then anchor it with a coming out of it line like i guess we'll just do it deal with it
as it comes he thought so you're both using the you're using the the direct thought the direct
speech as a way to funnel into the introspection and out of the introspection that's my stylistic
choice different people have very different styles on this and none of them are really um no one's
going to come down hard on you for picking one or the other it's just a personal style i italicized
the he thought i really strongly prefer italicized direct thoughts as opposed to non italicized
direct thoughts mental dialogue between two characters i will also italicize
now you have a lot of different options on this because some people will small caps those
and that will be tagging as this is what small caps means people are speaking mentally to each
other some people will use italics and quotation marks to mean mental dialogue between people
some people use italics to mean this is happening in a different language than the normal language
you're going up in right now we have shifted italics can mean a lot of different things and you
can play with those your own way um and how you want them to go i generally put um thoughts with uh
with someone else as hey what's going on with you he said but it's in italics with no quote marks
that's a mental projection of a thought to someone else um in telepathic communication
um but lots of different ways you can go on this
my my experience so in working with publishers and editors are they going to make you adhere to
their standard or just be consistent my experience has been be consistent i've never had a publisher
change any of these sort of things i've had copy editors do that but those are the people
they send the manuscript through who are going to try and apply a style guide and you can change
that style guide by saying i use this don't change instances of this i like direct thought
don't take it out they moat almost no copy or do that but what they do try to do is they try to
you know change your use of ellipses sometimes and things like that um if you prefer ellipses so
we'll get to all all the punctuation marks in a second do you think it's better to have thoughts
as part of your life not as an entire other side section but as part of like
narrating almost okay so narrate is you do i like to have a big block of narrated direct
speech inside of someone's head i do not um that's because i feel like variety is really important
and that i can signpost using it for instance if we're doing a big block you need no you need to do
three big paragraphs of introspection the characters by themselves and you know there's not a lot of
beats or action but here these happen a lot i prefer thoughts right here in italics to launch
us into it and maybe a summarizing thought right here to keep us focused in the character scene
and then like a thought right at the end to summarize what the characters come uh decision
they've made that just breaks up that big block of text it's visually more appealing
it and you do this enough and it starts to some get the the reader starts to realize
these italic things are summaries or subject lines if i'm paying attention to them i'm
getting uh breadcrumbs through this long section of introspection in a way that starts to make it
feel like an internal monologue but also has more back and forths and things like that particularly
with like a lot of times you'll see this one from me uh this is by the way very how the sausage
is made if you guys start paying attention this is going to ruin books for you for a little while
but it will unruin books for you later on generally for a little while books you will only see how
this stuff works and it'll be really frustrating annoying to you but then you kind of get over
a hump where you can you're internalizing this and you're noticing what the author's doing
at the same time as kind of internalizing the tool and paying attention to the story separately
and you can start to do that so it will just warning you right um but it's not usually permanent um
so usually this one for me is going to be a contrast to where this went right so uh topic
sentence right and then ruminating on it going a different direction kind of off topic and this
this saying but no i can't do that because remember this clue we found circles us back to
having to deal with the clue um character almost is having an argument with themselves at this point
flows you through to the end where they've made their decision i'm going to go tell
you know who would such and such about this clue we have now made progress in the scene and there's
been motion and it's been summarized for you at the end um yeah um like i said how the sausage
is made i hope this does not yeah but start paying attention to how you do this use all of these tools
to you want to control the reader's flow through your story you want to know when things are going
to be slower paced for them and introspective and when they're going to be fast you want to direct
the reader's attention in the direction you want it to go and using some things like this can take
this introspection and boost them into the next section where they're going to go have an argument
with someone and you have laid out their entire motivation they have had a mini argument with
themselves you are coming out of this introspection knowing what their motivation is and what they're
going to do next and then you get to see what they do next is they have the argument with someone
else about the things they just talked about thought through themselves uh establishes motivation
again don't lean too hard on this one but i only say that because i know from experience that
most writers are going to do 90 percent that one when really it should be probably like 20 or 30
percent depending on your personal personal style yeah um i read some online books with
post comments and i noticed books with a lot of introspection get a lot of criticism from people
because i think people introspect differently yeah or sometimes they criticize how they're coming
that's true people introspect differently in their own lives yeah and i think it's like opening up
the you know machine and like showing how it's working and sometimes people don't like how the
machine is working and so they'll criticize sometimes that's true that is very true um i would
agree with that comment um all right uh let's do the punctuation marks really quickly um
so your punctuation marks job is to help you be more clear to your reader to help
let that to guide them through complex ideas all right use the punctuation marks to do that
when you're taught grammar in school it wasn't about this these things are really useful tools
for instance so our punctuation marks our period comma um m dash um semi colon colon
did i miss any um and then you know uh the the period replacements right so these are all tools
in your toolbox to use if you want oh by the way in terabang is that one um that's a question mark
exclamative question mark see it all the time in comics not very often in pros uh some people hate
it some people love it um sometimes you will see it actually written as uh right uh the interabang is
just a a combination of those two things um i don't use the interabang in either of its forms
that's just a that thing most riot most pros fiction does not use the interabang in either form
um you are totally allowed to use the interabang there is no rule against it even if your copy
editor tries to cut them all out you are allowed you are the author um so most of the time your
the purpose of your comma is going to be to set off thoughts in a way that they are where they
all combine together they're not parentheticals but they are controlling how the reader absorbs
your information this is when you have dependent clauses or introductions or conjunctions or things
to give the uh the author or the reader a chance to be like all right i have to kind of segment
this piece of information that's going to relate to this other piece of information and that is
really useful for controlling how people read through your uh your books and if you're not
using your commas to set off ideas like that your books are going to be really hard to read um and
so study how writers do it i can't give you a big grammar lesson here but generally this idea
is going to be like the purpose of a comma is almost always to be hang on a sec and now we'll
get the rest of it as opposed to the m dash which is a parenthetical which is an aside
m dash is when you say i was on my way to get um i had to go get milk oh and my wife had also said
that i should stop by and pick up the kids on the way home m dash when i got in a car wreck right
like that's a parenthetical it's a completely separate independent idea interjected into the
center of another idea you will also use them when a sentence breaks kind of almost midthought
and moves to another idea um and so you kind of are stapling two sentences together in a way
that they are disjointed from each other where you're trying to indicate that the reader the character
is either breaking their own thought or someone else is interrupting them or something is interrupting
them or they're being kind of they're jumping around to a lot of different thoughts uh m dash
will say to your reader okay whatever that thing you were doing we're thinking about this is a
completely new idea um whereas comma doesn't do that uh note that one of the most useful ways to
remember if you want a comma is almost always if you're repleting subject and verb you're going to
want a comma uh because their independent clauses can join by a conjunction then i went to the store
to buy some milk and i saw my friend john the reason you put a comma there is because if you don't
and you say i went to the store to buy some milk and i met my friend john until they get to the
second verb the reader's gonna be think they went to buy milk and what else they went to buy milk and
ham they went to buy milk and bread but no you're adding an independent clause on the end of that
put that comma in to indicate to them and i also did this other thing okay uh i know it's all
grammarly it's annoying stuff it's really useful to keep your reader remember the whole point is to
keep your reader from getting confused all right um and then semicolon and colon use less often
semicolon staples today together two related ideas that for whatever reason you don't want to
do with a conjunction um and uh colon is usually uh used for lists uh you know how that goes or a
definition that's coming um where you're gonna define a thing for people you're gonna set off
you're like here's the thing now the definition of what that thing is he had to go get some milk comma
this blue stuff that he really thought was cool i don't know if that one actually works
but you know that's where that's where you're going with uh with colons i may have said come i
meant colon all right that's a complete aside this is stuff that most of you already know but i'll
say it just in case there are those who don't the whole purpose is to control the reader's
flow through your story and i tell you if you do not use your commas particularly when you're
separating those independent ideas you're gonna have reader comprehension issues all over the place
all right all right let's move on to description which we have already mostly covered
um when we did the pyramid of abstraction if you remember that uh that conversation
but where did i put my phone uh my back pocket um but let's ask how you then can use description
to make a character more to move up or down on the likability scale
i can use your descriptions your paragraph of description about the setting
yes a character who is humorous about the way to describe their world is naturally going to be more
likable uh yeah go ahead what you describe is kind of what the character is thinking about
yeah what you describe is what they're thinking about right
yeah like i'm not sure if this is an exact one but kind of these things like
when matt kothon thinks i'm gonna get this quote wrong but he's like he looks she looks like she
could bite iron ingots and spit out nails right that's his description of what this person looks like
that tells you something about him and about them uh yeah um i saw one book to you this really well
with everything he described was either sexist or just gainful yes yes um you definitely can do that
make sure that the reader knows that this is uh the character and not you um which you need to
separate by making sure your viewpoints are distinctive or that you're hanging a lantern on it
yes very handy um yeah
if you are in third limited or first person which is going to be 95 percent of what
writers should be writing uh in today's market it's always through the perspective of the character
doing the describing and so every description is going to say something about the character
that is doing the describing and the character being described and those are both separate tools
right um now a lot of times your description will uh pretty if you're in third limited and not first
person you're just gonna veer into being just a little bit omniscient for a little while um it
doesn't all have to be in the character's voice um sometimes you just do an economical this is what
this thing looks like or this person looks like and in that case you're moving that dial all the way
over toward describing the thing and characterizing it and less on the the character doing the
describing but remember that character doing the describing is one of your primary tools of
characterization like you've only got four ways to to uh to characterize people and i've told you
that you want to avoid the last one as much as is relevant for your writing style so use those
tools right um how would you use the description that you're doing to establish a character's motivation
yeah for example like if they're in a desert then you can describe something as like looking like
water or like yeah but like super audible yeah let's say there's a character who wants to go
oh go ahead we'll do yours first yeah exactly uh just just try to imagine two different characters
describing this classroom one whose main goal is to get a's on every every class and it's working
for them how they're going to describe their classroom and another whose main goal is to get
married how do you describe the classroom differently for those two characters this is a tool in your
toolbox your descriptions and it is one that writers new writers particularly ignore way too often
how can you make a character um sit more proactive through your descriptions
there's the important things first notice the important things first ranks them uh plans
out what they're going to do um yeah how can oh go ahead yeah all the descriptions are you know
pointed out towards the character's goal yeah um how can you oh yeah go ahead yeah um so how can
you keep make a character um express their flaws through their descriptions
yeah um I mean I guess the the first thing that came to mind for me is if you go like a drug addiction
there's something along the line so yeah looking at the evening like oh that looks smokable
there you go there's a great uh uh it if you guys haven't read the truth by terry pratchett uh
there's a character who's always looking at things through the eyes of whether he could snort it
and he generally thinks he can and it'll give him a buzz when it's not something that will give him
a buzz and it's the characters the most amusing thing is this character does that this is also
the character who has read a whole bunch of victoria novels and it's never stated directly
this is how you use dialogue where he thinks that this
is a swear word because in victoria novels they would edit out the curse and they would
write it in the book like this he's read the books enough that he knows that's a swear word
but he doesn't know that the dash replaces a word so he says in in per in dialogue
all the time and other characters are like what what in what and it's this it's brilliant right
talk about using dialogue in order to characterize a character right this is someone who likes to
read but is not good at putting two and two together this is a uh right this is a world
that has a victorian sort of sensibility about its its literature where they're not writing
the um the the actual curse words out um and it's characterizing all the people around him
who all know all these curses and are really confused by him it's just brilliant and it's
it's it's half a word right like talk about a dialogue sequence that does so much where Pratchett
could use half a word to just give you so much uh he was a master at uh at all of this so uh
Pratchett's my favorite writer um so that you that's why you hear me gush about him so much
um so all right uh let's move on because we we want to do these other two um and we've covered
description a ton um let me make sure that there wasn't another bullet point on description um okay
um right all right there's a few more things to talk about with description um one thing is um
establishing shots uh this is a screenplay term or a movie making term where often you will use an
establishing shot the pan across the area the character's going to be in so you get a large
scale look at this before you zoom in on the character interactions um descriptive uh establishing
shots can be very handy for a writer as a shorthand you will often see um writer start scenes
with an establishing shot which is description sometimes they're in omniscient this is Robert
Jordan's style right if you haven't read the Wheel of Time uh every book starts with an establishing
shot in omniscient before moving into a character's third limited viewpoint um and these establishing
shots generally if you're in third limited be careful about how you start a scene because the
first name that a reader sees is the one that they are going to assume you're in that person's head
not always but you have to be very careful so if you're not in someone's head and you then are
mentioning someone else it's going to start to root the reader's um idea in that character's head
so often if you're going to do this establishing shot oftentimes you say brandon lean against the
little railing thing and looked over the room blah blah blah blah blah establishing shot
description of what the room looks like now we move into the scene and then once you've done
your establishing shot you use anchoring descriptions that are very short descriptions
to keep us centered in this space or relative to one another and to keep us focused in this
space this is our pyramid distraction thing um you use this sometimes as beats which we're
kind of moving into here um and sometimes just as pull back for a second give us another sentence
of description um you know brandon has noticed the uh the uh expo pen and for some reason it's
relevant and gives us a description on the expo pen um that extra bit of description right there
just will keep us in the scene rather than your day the danger is white room syndrome
where the longer your characters talk without interacting with the setting the longer your
character spends an extra inspection without uh interacting with the setting the more danger
your reader starts to be of imagining that this is all happening in a white room with no actual
setting around it and then you're way up on the top of the pyramid abstraction and when things
start happening the reader will be lost at where they are in relation to this where the characters
are in relation to this they'll forgotten the uh the scene remember description has to it more
than one sense there are five senses depending on who you talk to um you're going to over rely on
sight almost all authors do you are going to under rely on sound and you're going to under
rely on scent taste is the hard one right um and you're gonna under rely on on touch um oftentimes
a great establishing shot in writing um prose versus you know and the thing is that you can
tell us what temperature it is and how the character feels about that temperature you can get us
key sense that no film can really get across in the same way um and play to your advantage the
fact that we can use multiple senses when films have to evoke other senses through using sight or
sound um so understand that these are tools of yours and they are great at the beginning of setting
a scene all right um okay let's uh let's move to beats in action um so i just explained to you the
advantage we have over visual mediums like cinema we have a big disadvantage at the same time and
that is that cinema being a visual medium with a strong secondary audio component means that they
can set a scene real fast and you will if the filmmaker is doing their job right never lose
track of where the character is in relation to everything else around them unless the filmmaker
wants you to the reader of your book is going to struggle to place your characters into the setting
this is going to be a constant back and forth between you and them as you don't want to become
white room syndrome and you don't want to overly laden them with too many blasé descriptions of
people walking around in the space but at the same time if you're going to have action in particular
the reader needs to be able to place all the important components into the scene so action
sequences are a little harder for novelists to do than films are the films just say they get uh
they get an extra um little boost from being a visual medium to action sequences everything is
slightly more exciting on film than it would be on the paper naturally when it comes to
quick things like an action beat you can counter this by using the advantages that you have that
a that cinema does not which are specifically more than two senses but also you are inside a
character's head so you can treat an action sequence and i would recommend that you treat
action sequences and introspection and and dialogue less description but you can treat them all as
many arcs as we talked about in plotting for instance if you're having an action sequence one of the
best things to do is to start off with showing character motivation then you hopefully have
established this before the action sequence starts then you can show the character making a plan
it doesn't have to be an active i'm going to have a plan now but you can say that set up
what the promise is the character can see all right there's 10 of them in this room and you can
you can give us an indication of what the progress is then going to be
there's 10 bad guys i win when they're all dead we're going to count them right because you can
show the character going through and giving a sense of progress to an action sequence by even
you'll see me doing this counting off how many they've defeated to get to the end now that's
not the only way to do it and don't rely any too much on any one tool but you can also have your
plan be i need to get to the end of this hallway that is your stated objective for the character
the progress is them fighting their way through the hallway taking cover here going here in this
case you don't count the enemies because your progress is not how many enemies do i defeat
your progress is do i reach you're basically writing a fighting travel log in this case right
do i reach the place that i need to get to and then what is the payoff
and you can do an action scenes a little mini versions of each of these things
the characters like you know um if it's uh so how about this there is a there's a great scene
where in the emperor's new groove there's a short action sequence where cronk cuts a rope and drops
a chandelier on isma right um and it all plays out in this way most of them you will this is a
big strong character who's goofy and funny and sympathetic antagonist versus the very unsympathetic
antagonist who has been his boss through the whole thing and you have character um uh motivation set
up all the way through where cronk is thinking has shoulderangers and things like that and you
have all this motivation established that his motivation is i need to we're done then she insults
his food yet his the spanish puffs and you have his plan from above yes you know what the plan is
you're going down right the progress is his shoulder angel points at the ceiling or he
points at the ceiling and they say that then you have your payoff where he cuts it and because
it's a comedy what happens she she goes right through the middle right strange that usually works
right this is all a little sequence of an action sequence that is done you can go but most action
sequences you will read in books that work and in movies will have some variation of this you've
established a character motivation you show them come up with something they want to do
you show you lead the reader to the uh the points of progress and then the payoff which is success
or failure run your action sequences that way and you will have a lot more success than if it's like
action sequence happens now they fight for a while and then we're done those action sequences are
gonna be boring um and uh you want to avoid them as much as possible and you want to have this as
much as possible yeah so there isn't like a sense of progress because they're just fighting until
one of them slips up and the other wins and gets the upper hand like how do you yeah great question
so how do you write two characters in a fight how do you express a sense of progress to this fight
and you're not sure who is stronger than the other and one of my writing pieces i have two
characters that are just physically separated and as they move and attack each other it just gets
closer and closer that's true that's a great way to do it if you're fighting at range and they're
moving to closer and closer you can show like a back and forth and small victories is really the key
yeah back and forth and small victories are very very key there changes in the status quo like what
this didn't include is changes in the status quo a lot of times you do this progress and the status
quo changes right a lot of times you know you have a great action sequence where jackie chan needs to
fight all these dudes with a ladder and then what happens at the end a bunch more dudes come in right
and so then jackie's like okay new plan i give up right um go ahead
yeah addition of injuries how tired they become these are all things like writing your your fight
sequence between two characters to ask yourself what are my surprises like i would in a regular
plot what are my twists and turns what are the the issues we're going to get into where we have a
narrative turn or we discover new information they've gotten out of chair from underneath the
the thing wrestling tends to be really good at this the one-on-one that has back and forths
that you can use to strip uh fight sequences they tend to be very good at it how do you describe
fighting sequences about some things your readers might not know about that they might not know the
punches and kicks okay so the reader how do you describe the technical punches and kicks in a
way that is going to work for the reader that doesn't know all this you got a couple tools
one is to establish to teach them it through the course of the story so they're an expert in that
jargon by the time it's relevant another way is to abstract it some way or summarize it some way
right uh so robert jordan would have these like forms like it's like boar rushes down the hill is a
way of using the sword you don't need to necessarily imagine exactly what rand is doing when it does
boar rushes down the hill because you're like okay i see what's going on here it's a momentum
it's i can imagine the boar going down the hill and then he'll use that tag uh to explain it in the
future and things like that um you can use it like dialect right this character's using dialect
but we're going to make sure there are summaries periodically so that you know what's happening
as the reader even if you don't know all of these things um you can have commentary going on at the
same time that is working that for you there's lots of different approaches depending on the
style of story you're writing that said subgenre can help with this for instance if you're writing
a regency romance there are certain things you can you can expect that your reader will have will
pick up on or will just pick up through context that you do not have to explain uh because it's
part of the genre uh you if you're writing science fiction you say they went to ftl between planets
you don't necessarily have to set up that how the ftl works if your story's not about that
and your reader will accept all right they went between planets i don't even know what ftl means
but maybe i should know um and yeah what's that yeah it means fashion light yep go ahead
right so how do you approach these things when you're not an expert in some of your
readership might be um so you have um a lot of information at your fingertips on the internet
you have a lot of primary sources on the internet and you have a lot of people doing really great
useful things to help you learn about whatever it is you need to learn about uh for instance i
use matt easton's channel on youtube where he will often record bouts of this is a person with a spear
versus a person with a knife we're going to run it 20 times and you can see how it plays out
very handy for someone who has never fought a knife against a spear um you have the advantage
that you can get you can learn a bunch about a topic very quickly and make your get yourself up to
i'm making up these numbers you can get like 50 of the way to an expert on something with a minimal
amount of research and then that next 50 takes nine more years right and so my recommendation
to you as a writer is to get yourself to 50 on as many of these things as you can they're going
to be relevant to you and then find experts to fix the little things you get wrong um i generally
hire subject experts um on things like for instance callitans field medicine um particularly for the
first book i hired a field surgeon who had medical training in the military to who had been in these
situations to go over all of the things i was doing and say if i did it right or wrong um and to give
me little little hints here and there i found that if you get yourself most the way there that easy
part then you will not make the big mistakes you will make small mistakes that somebody can tweak
for you it's not 100 in skyward i made some big mistakes even though i i didn't realize it but
fortunately i had three fighter pilots read my book and they very quickly disapused me of the
three the big things that i had gotten wrong and he did require a more extensive rewrite then um but
yeah those experts people who are passionate about things generally look forward to the
opportunities to be passionate about it in a way that's going to make your story better so
find those people and make use of them go ahead so skyward mistakes is mostly about how it feels
to um to feel uh uh g forces in different directions um and what it did to you i was not writing that
g force this direction versus this direction versus this direction i was not separating
the three different ways those would feel or that direction i guess there's four basic ways so um and
it they were all jumbled together in the original draft and i was not accurate on how those different
things felt and that the differences they had on your your body as you're being pulled the different
directions um i had worked on the instinct that g force makes you go unconscious but it only makes
you go unconscious is the g force in the direction that's going to draw blood from your brain
somewhere else um it's more dangerous to have it blood go into your eyes and do visual damage to
you than it is to go unconscious yes i'm sorry about that uh that image in your head yeah go ahead
gyroscopic cockpit did not exist before this conversation in skyward uh the point of that
was me realizing i was exerting g forces in the wrong directions for what people could actually
tolerate and i needed some sort of system that would help with that so um so that was why it's a
bigger rewrite um we don't have a ton more time there so let me just make sure that i've got
everything that we were going to talk about uh on action um let's see um oh we won't go over this one
along but let me ask the same question for you think about in your head how can you use an action
sequence and beats to make a character more likeable how can you use it to establish motivation
how can you show someone being proactive how can you show their flaws how can you uh whatever the
fifth one is um show how competent they are that one's pretty easy in action sequences right or
incompetent right you're gonna look to use these five things and all of these things um so we're
gonna end with navel gazing uh you don't need a lot of uh of explanation how to do navel gazing
because you all probably are doing it way too much um already you're probably experts at navel
gazing at having your characters ruminate on their problems for multiple pages yeah in both
the real life writing um so uh some recommendations for your navel gazing um
try to break it up try to use the other things and try to find some way if you're not going to use
like the free indirect or the direct thought versus free indirect thought thing like i do figure out
how you're going to make sure that there is a point to this this period of navel gazing and
that the reader can have a strong solid takeaway from it that something's been accomplished make
your navel gazing do those five things make sure you're not accidentally just not doing any of those
in this one where it should be very natural for you to be doing them but make sure that the navel
gazing is causing your reader to strengthen their motivation or change their motivation and make
sure that the navel gazing is establishing for them you know their flaws and they're coming uh
becoming aware of them a lot of your navel gazing is going to be reinforcing your character arc
and so for your character arcs just a few things to keep in mind right um at some point most arcs
involve a reassessing of goals all right this generally is your character's want versus need
sort of thing where they're coming to understand the need and giving up the want not always but
a lot of your character arcs are going to do that in fact a lot of your character arcs are going
to follow a little bit of three act structure on their own um because a lot of your character arcs
are going to have a point where your character has established their flaw theoretically through all
of these things without really noticing it and there's going to be a point where they change
from inactive about their character flaw to being active working on their character flaw
just like you often have the transition between act one and act two between the character being
acted upon and taking action that doesn't always happen at that point but at some point most
flaws that's going to be the case sometimes you have an entire book where the character
does not acknowledge their flaw until the end and the end of book one is the character saying
I really need to work on this thing um this is this is this is serious this is a big deal
and then you're going to in next book show them actually working on it but at some point they
should move from inactive to active regarding their flaw not all stories follow this format but
I'm just kind of giving you a few a few rules of thumb um a lot of times your character is going
to have a relapse on their flaw which is going to be kind of parallel to the darkest moment in the
plot the all is lost moment um where your character thought they had it but then they slip up and it
looks really bad because they have slipped up but there's still something left for them to learn
to pick up and move forward and a lot of times in your character arc you're going to have a moment
where the character's internal conflict aligns in some way with the external conflict this can
be an overlapping where the character finally gives up their wants and realizes that their need is
the thing that is going to accomplish the plot it can be a contrast where the character realizes
that they're going to have to lapse further into this dangerous territory with their flaw in order
to accomplish what the plot needs them to do this is kind of more of the tragedy sort of thing this
is where the serial killer character who doesn't want to be serial killer killer anymore realizes
that he needs these to kill this demon um dan wells um right where you know you're having that moment
where the character has to give up something they really want and backslide you can do all sorts of
these different things but at some point those two need to intersect external and internal motivation
you do it intersect almost all plots that's going to be a very vital and important moment for you
all right so all the time we have for character we will do q and a on these two weeks of characters
so please do fill out your thing remember that we have put over here um the writing advice section
we have on there we have the skyward outline and the first two chapters done differently
that i threw away before i finish settled on the third one so you can see actively me doing this
next week we'll meet on meet online and i will answer your questions from this week and last week
thank you guys
