All right, guys. World Building Week 2. Woohoo! The fun stuff.
So, we'll be talking about World Building this week, and then we will have Mary Robinette here to do next week a lecture on short stories.
And at some point, I will do the Q&A on World Building.
Either maybe next week is half of that lecture, depending on how much time Mary Robinette takes, or maybe the week after.
So, I will get to the questions that you guys asked last week, and we'll ask this week if there are things you're curious about.
Before we kind of really dig into this lecture, I wanted to ask you guys to list a few of your favorite stories in regard to World Building specifically.
Film, or book, or video game. What are your favorites? Yeah?
John Wick.
Okay. John Wick.
All right. What do we get here?
I think you were priced into saying that one, right?
All right. Yeah, go ahead. Firefly? Great.
All right. Firefly. Yeah, go ahead.
You like the expanse?
All right. Let's get one more.
Sure. We'll go over on this side, because I haven't.
Dune?
Dune. All right. Great.
Okay. That'll be relevant later. We're going to use those.
But let me ask you guys a different question. You are presumably in this class specifically instead of the other creative varying classes,
which you might also be taking, but you're here because of World Building, right?
That's what differentiates this class from the others being offered.
This is the sci-fi and fantasy-themed creative writing course at the university.
So why do you want to learn to build worlds? Why are you building worlds?
What is it to you? What does it mean to you to have World Building in a story?
It means the world to me.
It means the world to you? Okay, great. Yeah, go ahead.
I need a world that can implement the cool designs I have in my head that aren't physically possible.
Okay. All right. Let's write a few of these up. That's one that I noted.
The impossible made plausible is one of the purposes of World Building, right?
To take that impossibility and make it while you're able to suspend disbelief while you're in there.
Go ahead. What's that?
Theme.
Theme. So you can play with theme. All right. Like that.
How does World Building play with theme?
Like if you're having, for example, a more serious story,
you can have more serious or grungy settings.
It could be like sort of everpunk or something.
Okay.
Or something a lot more fantastical could be like.
Awesome. What else? What else do you guys got?
Why do you like World Building in stories?
Why do you read stories with lots of world building?
My real life is boring.
Okay. Okay.
Can we say maybe sense of wonder and or exploration in regard to that?
Or we could probably also write down here sheer coolness to encapsulate those things.
What else? Go ahead.
I really enjoy just seeing like a cultural butterfly effect.
You change one small thing.
Okay. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
I'll write that up.
I love how you put that cultural butterfly effect.
Butterfly.
Okay. Great. Yeah.
The ability to explore real world problems in a world that's disconnected.
Yep.
Yeah. How can we phrase this?
What's that?
Zootopia.
I actually had, what did I write down?
Let me look at my list of notes.
I wrote something for this.
Yeah.
Ability to approach ideas in a fresh way.
How about that?
Approach.
How do you spell approach?
Real world.
Yeah. I'll just make that sounds as approach.
I totally got it right.
Ideas.
In a kind of disconnected way, right?
Disconnected. We'll talk about this.
Your ability, you can talk about something without the baggage that it brings to talk about it in a real world setting.
This allows you to approach difficult ideas in directions that are maybe not as immediately polarizing.
That's a good way to put it, immediately polarizing.
Anything else, you guys?
Yeah. Go ahead.
What's that?
Reminiscent of the sins.
Okay. Okay.
Play God.
Yeah. Absolutely.
Actually, one of my favorite comics on the whole internet, look it up sometime, is caveman science fiction.
This comic is a bunch of caveman science fiction scenarios.
At the end, the moral is, I am play gods.
Meaning, oh, I made a mistake.
I pretend to be the gods.
Really funny. You guys go read it.
All right. Let's talk about this, because sci-fi fantasy has this weird disconnect that I've noticed, at least in writing it.
Which is that the setting is both the thing that defines us as sci-fi fantasy writers or sci-fi fantasy works,
and is at the same time the least important part of our stories.
You may laugh about that, but in most cases, I think it is true.
Generally, if you have a story with excellent world-building but bad characters and story, or bad characters or bad story,
you are going to have a worse story than one that does an excellent job of character and story and has weak world-building.
And so, of the three sort of things I talk about that make up our stories, our setting, our plot, and our character,
your time is best spent learning how to make engaging and interesting characters,
followed by learning how to tell a really good plot with, in third place, your ability to have a really great setting.
Now, ideally, you want to learn to do all three.
However, I think there is a tendency to have what we sometimes call world-builder's disease.
Yes. This is where you become so enthralled with building the world of your story that you never finish world-building and never start your story.
And if you do start your story, you have spent so much time on your awesome world-building that you want to fill every nook and cranny of your story
with that world-building, and by so doing, you undermine the story that you are actually telling.
And so, because of this, one of the things I like to talk about when we get to world-building, because don't get me wrong,
it is important. Having a great world will be a bonus to your story.
I like to talk about world-building in service of story.
Ways that we can use, as has been pointed out on the board theme,
that we can use the world-building that we are doing to enhance the specific story we want to tell
so that that world-building becomes a big part of that story.
And an important part of that story, and not just something that's there like billboards to watch on the way to actually getting to your story.
That's what you want to avoid.
Now, as a little aside on this, I want to talk about info dumps and about conveying information in a fantasy world or a science fiction world.
I often say that I consider the grand skill of writing science fiction fantasy.
The single most important thing to learn for sci-fi fantasy, as opposed to other genres,
is learning to convey information about your world in a way that is interesting and not boring.
And this is a trick to master writing sci-fi fantasy.
That's not to say that this will make up for bad characters or a bad story.
If you are doing a good job with those, mastering this, I think it's the single best thing you can do to get yourself picked up by agents,
to get passed up to editors or to make it to that nest round of acquisition,
or if you're self-publishing to make sure that people, when they are reading that first chapter, say,
I want to read the next one, and that is to make sure you are conveying your world-building without boring people.
This can be kind of hard.
So I've got a couple tricks to recommend to you on doing this.
And the first one is to always think of your world-building in service of the story you're telling,
and in service of making good characters.
And if you can find a way that you can convey your setting information through the eyes of your characters
in a way that exemplifies who that character is,
so the point of the sentence or the paragraph is actually to give us more information about the character,
but you, as a side effect, tell people about the world.
That's what you want to do.
For a kind of example of this, a metaphor of this,
my wife often has trouble getting my children to eat vegetables.
This is really super uncommon.
I know it's only my children who won't eat their vegetables,
but she realized in the mornings they like to have a smoothie with breakfast,
and they really like, because they're little boys, they have three little boys,
when things look gross.
And so putting a handful of spinach into a smoothie and turning it green, they loved.
They're like, it is so gross, it looks like snot.
Yum! Right?
This is just how my children are.
Oh, it's radioactive goo, yum!
And you do that by throwing in a handful of spinach.
Well, this is how you want to have your world building gotten across to your readers.
You want them to be getting the world building by saying,
wow, this story and these characters are so fascinating.
Oh, and by the way, I know a whole bunch about Hogwarts now, right?
This is how you want to be conveying your world building,
and you want to avoid the number one, the encyclopedia entry.
A lot of fantasy in its early days, in particular fantasy, some science fiction,
would start with an encyclopedia entry, not very well disguised either.
Like you'd start up and it's like, here is the myth of this world,
and then there's basically a whole bunch of broccoli or spinach thrown at you,
and you're like, you're going to have to track who all these gods are,
and they're going to give you kind of a boring write-up of the history and lore of this world
before we start the book.
Or sometimes they were literal encyclopedia entries put in the front or the back of the book.
Tolkien, I love Tolkien, lots of encyclopedia entries.
He invented a new subgenre, we can give him a pass,
and he still did it better than almost anyone does it,
but a lot of encyclopedia entries.
He's like, I can't get this all in the story, so I'm going to give you an encyclopedia.
You want to avoid that.
Now, you can do this in a couple of ways.
One is to start trying to get more of it into dialogue.
You run into troubles when you're doing this, however, for some reason we call made in butler dialogue.
Made in butler dialogue comes from the old stage plays
where they would often start the stage play by having the maid and the butler come up onto the stage
and be like, as you know, the master is away for the weekend,
and the other one's like, yes, and as you know, the lady has been getting very close with the coachman,
and they're basically explaining to each other things that they already know.
Avoid made in butler dialogue.
It reads really stilted and is kind of a problem.
We'll talk about more if we go into dialogue later in the year,
but the idea, stilted dialogue is often dialogue that feels like
the character is not acting according to their own sincere motivations,
but according to the author's motivations and getting out certain information
and making the plot happen.
So avoid made in butler, moving things more to dialogue,
but also giving us less than you think we need is generally a good example.
One of the things I learned in my grad program,
and it wasn't from one of the teachers,
but perhaps the most valuable lesson I learned was from another student
who taught me about something called the pyramid of abstraction.
And he said, imagine your descriptions as a pyramid.
The goal of your descriptions are to form kind of the base of a pyramid
so that you ground a reader into a story
so that when you start talking about things that are a little more high level
or a little more abstract,
or if you're going to go inside the character's head for a little bit
and do what we call navel gazing where the character is ruminating on,
oh man, I have all these problems.
Let me list them off one at a time so that you, the reader,
are aware that I'm aware that I have all these problems, right?
Whenever you're doing things like this,
that sort of stuff is pulling the reader out of the story
because it's divorcing the character, the reader from the setting,
and they become more and more aware of the author doing things.
Like if you want to have a character ruminate on the nature of art in a story,
then the more you do that,
the more ironically it will pull the reader out and make them start thinking,
this is the author giving me a lesson or a lecture
instead of the character actually dealing with this.
And my friend said, and I really believe this is true,
the way that you offset that because you want to have some of this stuff in stories
is you let the abstract be the tip on the pyramid
that you earn by laying your groundwork with concrete language
so that the reader is very firmly set in your world
in a real concrete place and time
that then when that character is walking along and starts having a discussion
about the nature of art with someone next to them,
you are still imagining them walking down the street
in this place that you have painted very well
so that you don't have this problem of losing them off in the ether.
And this works very well for world building as well
by being able to, you know, you have this character say,
well, magic works like this,
you're already kind of going into this abstract.
It's stuff the reader needs, it's that broccoli, that spinach,
but you want to have grounded them first in the setting.
And my friend did a really cool thing with me
that helped me kind of understand what he meant by abstract versus concrete.
And some of you have watched these lectures before,
have talked about this before, will understand that let's just say,
you've got at the bottom concrete and the top abstract,
where would you put if you were going to talk about love?
I'm going to say, you know, someone's experiences with love,
where is that on the abstract concrete scale?
What's that?
Yeah, more on the abstract side, right? Love.
Right?
Now, you can pull that down by making sure you're talking about
what love means to this person and the actual emotions.
Where would you put if you say the character saw a dog?
Where is that?
The dog is way up here.
Probably right underneath love, but maybe above it.
Because everyone in this room, when you say dog,
how many of you imagine the same dog?
Almost none of you.
How many of you imagine love and are on the same page?
My friend's argument, I put it right underneath,
his argument was dog is above love and abstractness.
More of us, if you just say love,
are going to experience a similar thing to one another
than if you just say a dog,
because the picture that pops in your head
is going to be completely abstract from,
it's going to be completely different from everyone else.
Now, if you say it was a mangy little white dog
with one leg that was whimpering on the side of the street in a puddle,
flaked with mud from the passing, you know, the passing carriage,
then you're all imagining a very similar dog, right?
And so that pulls dog down into the concrete.
Now, there's a lesson to be learned here, however.
Down is not always better.
We talk about in writing this phrase called,
show don't tell, right?
And it's become a mantra.
It's this thing, it's like, you know,
anytime anything's wrong in a story,
people will be like, well, you didn't show enough,
you didn't do too much.
And they're often right.
But show versus tell is not something to hold up
as like the absolute gold standard,
because almost always showing more and pulling down
on the pyramid's traction requires what?
More words.
And so the more words you spend,
the more concrete you can generally make things.
Now, if you understand this model well,
what you're going to do is,
you're going to learn how to use those more words
to pull yourself down,
rather than just using words that are meaningless.
And you will find if you actually look at your writing,
you will be using a lot of meaningless words.
You'll be doing a couple of things.
I do this a lot in my first draft.
You will be doing what we call a tell then show.
This is where your paragraph starts
with like a line kind of explaining
that, you know, he was a really nervous person.
And then your next line is,
he started the table tapping his pen against it
and moving his foot like this.
That is what we call a tell then show.
The show is enough.
You don't need to have a thesis sentence in your paragraph
telling us what you're going to then show us.
But we do it a lot,
because as writers we're trying to organize our thoughts.
And then we go on to the show.
You will find these all the time still in published books
where the author didn't catch that one and delete it out.
You want to learn to delete those out.
I have a lot of,
a word that comes up that is very controversial in this
is the word suddenly,
or abruptly.
A lot of writers will say,
just don't use that, just make it abrupt
or sudden the thing that's happening.
I still tend to prefer using the suddenly
because it becomes a marker very well to the reader.
But this is why we say get rid of the passive voice.
Get rid of too many adverbs.
Get rid of too many descriptors
that don't actually pull you down
on the pyramid of extraction.
And you'll find you're doing this a lot.
You're using a lot of varies.
You know, he was very mad instead of saying he was irate.
I rate is further down than very mad,
but very mad uses more words.
Any time you can go down by using fewer words,
you're almost always wanting to make that change.
And you want to get rid of these sentences
that will often just not say anything
or have lots of just modifier words
that don't mean anything, a little bit,
and things like that.
Like little bit is one I use all the time,
whereas I'm going through my visions like,
I don't need to say that he stumbled a little bit.
A stumble is a little fall.
It's already in the word.
I don't need the a little bit,
but I use it all the time.
You will find all sorts of things like this
that you can cut that will cost you nothing
on moving up or down the pyramid of extraction
or things you can cut and replace that will move you down.
Learn to do these things
to start really grounding your reader in a world
that feels very real.
Dan Wells, good friend of mine,
has advice that if you want the reader
to believe you about the big things,
that there's this big problem in the political system.
You often describe one small thing very concretely
that impacts the characters
in a way that will make you really understand this.
Saying that, you know,
the cantina is a place of a hive of scum and villainy
is nowhere near as useful as having two random people
decide to bully Luke and almost, you know,
get him killed until a hand has to get cut off, right?
So grounding people in these scenes,
showing them the ideas you want,
pulling down on the pyramid of extraction,
is good to start grounding your world building
and you will find if you start to do this,
then you will have more space in your story
to kind of talk about now and then
slipping in world building details.
This is why it is almost always better
to start with your character in a situation
where they want something,
even if it's not related to the main plot,
they can't have it and we get to see them
working proactively to get the thing they want
and we explain only as much world building
as we need for that single instance for that character
to grab us and ground us in a scene in a world
before you start to pile on more world building.
These things work differently for different stories.
I intentionally in Mistborn,
if you haven't read this book,
it starts off kind of working to ground you in the world,
but the first time the main character uses the magic,
I cut and you don't see that scene.
This is Kelsey attacking the manor house
in the early chapters.
Do not show it because there's a whole ton of world building
I'd have to drop on you to explain the magic
and it works so much better if I hold that off
until you are more grounded in the actual setting
and characters and then you get it.
Way of Kings, I throw it all at you in the prologue.
The second prologue.
Right?
The one I actually called prologue of the three,
I throw it all right at you.
Why did I do this?
Well, understanding I had already an established audience
who already was looking forward to reading about
an interesting magic system,
knowing I only had to explain one of the many types of magic
I was putting into the story
and knowing that this story needed to start off
with something dynamic that promised
where one of the character arcs was going to go later on,
I made the decision in that case
instead to lead with a character using the magic.
But that increases my learning curve
and that increases the likelihood
that someone is going to put the book down
and get bored early on.
And if you go read reviews of Way of Kings,
people who give it low stars
often put it down early
because the learning curve was so steep
and I wasn't then able to cook them into the characters as quickly
because I was spending so much more time on lore and world.
That was a risk I was willing to take for that specific story,
but it also has a cost to it.
So, learn to make things more concrete.
Learn to deliver your world building
through the eyes of the characters.
Robert Jordan was a genius at this.
When a character walks in the room
and says there's a cup of water sitting on the table,
the way they describe that cup of water
will tell you a ton about their culture
and their history and who they are.
When you can describe a cup of water in a way
that gives you more world building
about a person's culture
than most people's three paragraph long psychopedientries,
then you are mastering the grand skill
of writing science fiction and fantasy.
Questions about these ideas?
Yes.
In Warbreaker where you had something similar to the fact
where you showed magic right away.
Yep.
I guess.
So, would you say the takeaway for that is
if the excitement matches the level
of the explanation you're doing, you can pull it off?
Oh, yeah.
It's much easier.
Like, if you were able to explain,
oftentimes in a fantasy book,
it is good to lead with the magic, I would say.
If you can do it through the eyes of a character
who is achieving a goal
and what they are doing is intrinsic to the magic,
some of the best ways to start fantasy books
is indeed in that way.
And so, here is a problem in the magic,
or some obstacle I need to overcome.
Here is me using the magic in a simple, easy to understand way
that evokes an entire world that's more.
Like, you can use that small instance of a description
of one part of the magic to indicate
there's a much larger world to explore,
but let's make sure you master this one thing first.
That can be a really great way to start a fantasy story.
But, again, try to keep it grounded
in the character's motivations,
and a lot of times what's working is character motivation,
here's a line of world-building.
Character motivation, concrete description,
here's a line of world-building.
And you're moving this through, this is why so often
you see authors using Watson characters
and fantasy novels, apprentice characters,
you know, a person who's unfamiliar with the world
or setting, getting it explained to them
as they're trying to navigate some sort of issue
or problem in the world, lets you get it out slowly,
but it also lets you have these, what we call,
hang a lantern on it, where the person can be like,
I don't understand this, and that person can say,
there's no time to explain, this is the one thing
you need to know right now.
And then that works really well,
but there's a reason why the apprentice plot
became the go-to plot in the 80s for fantasy novels.
Almost all of them were apprentice plots,
all the big ones, where someone young is learning
about a fantastical world and then gets introduced
to it step-by-step by some old master,
so that you as the reader can follow that path.
That gets really repetitive if it's done too much,
which is why in the 90s you saw an explosion of things
that didn't do this like Game of Thrones or whatnot,
where it was like, no, we're just going to throw you right in.
Boom, deal with it.
Here we go.
But then Harry Potter came and portal fantasy is,
so Harry Potter is a hard one to use as an example,
because portal fantasies are always going to be
very popular in middle grade.
They started basically with Alice in Wonderland,
and they go all the way through Narnia,
all the way up to Harry Potter,
and this is because it gives you an easy way
to make the Watson character, the protagonist,
who also gets to go with you and explore this fantasy world,
and generally by genre, as your age group gets older,
the more you can count on a steeper learning curve.
Middle grade needs the shallowest learning curve in general,
YA can get a little steep, and adult, it can be like this.
It can be Steven Erickson, right?
She's like, oh, here's a wall, climb up it by your fingernails,
and then you'll love this, right?
That is very hard sell in middle grade.
I don't know that I've read a book that has had anywhere
near that steeper learning curve,
even something like Sobriol by Garth Nix,
which is more YA than middle grade anyway,
starts you and then transitions you in,
even though the character's part of the world.
It's very common to do something like this.
Middle grade and YA have different sort of understandings there,
but even in adult, sometimes you want to come up with
a really shallow learning curve for various purposes.
Yeah?
What's your advice with including world-building and magic systems
in journal entries without it being cheaper?
Right.
World-building or magic systems in journal entries,
so I do it a lot, right?
I use them as epigraphs at the starts of stories
because that forces me to dole it out slowly
and only use it kind of as flourishes here and there.
I tend to like it.
I think it works pretty well,
but you have to understand there's a percentage of your readership
who will not read them.
Because of that, anything you're putting in there,
you need to be careful to try and reinforce through the story
or make not vital to the A plot line of what your story is.
You can't always do this, but I often recommend
imagining that people are not going to read them
or remember them because of the way they are.
The majority of your audience will,
but you can't count on as much as if it's in the text.
And this kind of gets into this other idea of
world-building and service of story,
like whether you want to use epigraphs
or you want to use songs like Grandpa Tolkien did
or whether you want to have a steep learning curve
or a shallow learning curve,
really comes into the question of
what are you trying to do with your story
and how does your setting enhance it?
Let's go to our list over here.
Let me ask you this.
For those who love the Assassin's sort of thing
of the John Wick universe,
how does the setting of the John Wick universe
enhance the story that they're trying to tell?
It sets up the rules of the universe
that the characters all have to abide by
and establishes the consequences of breaking.
Right. This is a very violent, dangerous world
where if you transgress a simple rule,
it can lead to massive consequences.
And the world-building is there to warn you
that all of these rules are very touchy.
Right? They're very touchy.
Anyone else want to talk about John Wick?
Yeah, go ahead.
This is like an entire world of assassins.
If John Wick's supposed to be the awesomest guy
moving an entire society of assassins,
it makes it even cooler in the top of this world.
It's an entire world of assassins.
I'm going to repeat it for the microphone here.
And if John Wick is the best of them all
by showing how cool everyone else is,
you then establish how cool he is
just through natural sort of consequences of the world-building.
Star Trek did this sort of thing with Wharf all the time.
There's actually a TV tropes page on it
where if they wanted to establish how awesome a bad guy was,
they had them beat up Wharf because you know how cool Wharf was.
And if Wharf gets beat up, then this person must be cool.
They did it enough that Wharf, if you actually look
at what happens in the things, is actually not that tough
because people are beating him up all the time.
But this is the same sort of idea.
By establishing these, this world,
I really like this idea.
It happens a lot in espionage stories
that you kind of like, my wife and I say,
all right, we're in spy world now.
In spy world, you can accept
that everybody has a minimum level of spy training
and every character you meet, like there are just certain tropes
that if you're watching Alias or if you're watching
even a James Bond movie that you just be like,
you know what, this is spy world.
There's going to be tons of double crosses
and no one trusts each other because they live in spy world
and they've just all been betrayed a hundred times.
And using the setting to enhance that idea
so that you're on board for the fact
that the main character is going to be that not willing to trust,
you're using your world building to enhance your story.
Let's ask about Last Airbender, a popular choice.
Let me, we'll go to you first and then we'll ask others,
how does Last Airbender, how does Avatar
use its world building specifically in service
of the story they want to tell?
They set up a lot in the prologue
and have Katara kind of go through that
but it's not an info dump as much
because it personally relates to her and Sokka, I feel like.
And then the next instant is Sokka and Katara hunting
and that's how they introduce bending is a mutual goal that they...
They introduce water bending by having them on a hunt.
They've got a situation they're trying to accomplish
and the water bending helps them accomplish that.
How else does the overall world building of Avatar
enhancing its story?
Well, the entire A-plot of the story is part of the world.
I mean, the bending, you know, at Aang and the Avatar,
the project's character arc and the whole thing with Sokka's Comet
that's a big event that the story is leading up to
that is just inherently part of the world.
Yeah, and I would say that you mentioned Aang
with all these things.
I would mention that one of the best things they do
is they establish factions that are at war
and then they give you a person
whose job is kind of to unite the elements.
Hey, theme!
This is about uniting the factions
and making peace by having one person
who represents the unification of all of these things
and so therefore world building becomes theme in that way.
Go ahead.
Okay, give an excuse for why that fate of the universe
is in a 12 year old's hands.
And a very silly 12 year old as well.
Go ahead.
They show us all of these amazing powers,
like the phenomenal, like,
literal earth-bending abilities of this magic system
and then they put it on that 12 year old kid
to save the world and a huge part of his character
and the plot is him learning to deal with the fact
that he, like all of these phenomenal powers
that he has to learn and overcome.
And so it becomes the world building
but it adds so much to his personal character
and the burdens he has to.
I would say you nailed it right there.
The fact that there are all these four factions
and all of them are so powerful
and then putting all of these wishes,
these desires, this responsibility on Aang,
it's a story about him accepting his responsibility
and the world building enhances that
by showing how tough it is to master all the different magics,
which is a metaphor for him to learn
to master all of the different magics,
which is a metaphor for him learning
to master all of the responsibilities
that are in place on him.
Excellent. Yeah, go ahead.
It makes it easy to break it down in three seasons.
It makes it easy to break it down in seasons.
There is a reason why Mistborn has three magic systems,
as I told you in a previous week,
and we dig into one in each book.
Very nice structure. Go ahead.
It's based on a real world of religion and philosophies
that are familiar enough that it doesn't mean too much exposure.
It's familiar.
So what he said is that it's based on real world philosophies
and religions, which allows us to not have to explain as much
by using the four Aristotelian elements
and kind of using, like, I,
before Avatar came out,
I remember giving some, talking to some people
and being like, I'm so tired of water, earth, fire, air
as your magic system.
And yet, in this story, they did it fantastically well
and kind of proved that anything that has become a cliche
done well stops being a cliche real fast
and starts being an advantage instead.
Like, what do they say in programming?
It's a feature, not a bug.
The fact that these bendings are established
that you can kind of imagine.
What would a firebender do?
That you can make that leap by yourself
and then they can show this person
and then expand on it in their world can be very handy.
Now, the danger with some of these things is
some things that have become used so often
such as the vampire, what is a vampire?
That you also pull a lot of baggage.
The Aristotelian elements, not as much,
but you do have to watch for this, right?
You're like, if I have to, if I'm going to use a vampire
to cut corners, but then my vampires
are very different from vampires in other stories,
you're losing some of that world-building learning curve stuff
that you've got and you're going to end up replacing it
with info dumps that you're going to have to constantly
remind the reader that my vampires aren't like these other vampires,
which in some ways is as much or more work
than it is to just come up with your own thing.
So that's a push and pull you have to kind of come up with on your own.
Avatar has one of the best maps to like plot stories.
Yes.
Because they're constantly moving everywhere
and every place they move to has like a big impact on the story.
Right. Using the map, the actual, like we talked about in the travel log,
that having a map with places you can go opens up a lot of mystery,
but also opens up you can follow the characters along.
And Avatar, of course, has the map split up by kind of factions,
which really enhances the sort of where we're having an argument together.
All right.
There's a lot of conflict going on. How about that?
We have to move on.
Otherwise we'll spend all our time on this firefly.
I don't want to talk about how the world-building of firefly
enhances the storytelling of firefly.
Okay, go ahead.
You get, it's really easy to feel the desperation and the difficulty
that the characters are in when you understand how just kind of
uncaring the universe around them is on one hand and then on the other hand,
if they get noticed by the Federation or whatever that the government group is called,
they're just going to squash like a bug.
Right.
Establishing an uncaring universe where you can get squashed like a bug
and also this kind of oppressive group.
And then I would add to it using the sort of Wild West metaphor
to reinforce that they are in a place where they can get away with some things.
They're outside the law, allows them to have some flexibility within the system.
You learn a lot about Malcolm and Zoe's characters by the fact that they were
in a rebellion that lost.
Right.
So you automatically learn a lot about the history of their characters
as well as learning about how the Federation is now.
Putting them in a rebellion that lost is an excellent way to talk about
their being, this evil empire, right?
To talk about their characterization is that I thought I lost,
I've stopped caring, no I really haven't, but I pretend I have.
Like that gives excellent world-building that relates to the story.
Absolutely, go ahead.
I think the introduction of the Revers is extremely well done because it wasn't,
I mean it was like they were meeting the Revers and then she says something like,
super scary, which tells you just how bad it is and you're also in a super tense situation,
which sets up for pretty much everything else.
Yeah.
Introduction of the Revers is called Revers, right?
Yeah.
Revers, she says, was done very well and yeah, I agree.
And in fact, part of this whole uncaring universe of, enhances the danger.
Like in a lot of science fiction, something like the Revers,
which are just like space pirates who've gone crazy, would not be that dangerous, right?
But in this universe, they are super dangerous because it's an uncaring universe
and it's not full of force users and things like that.
Yeah.
I think the big thing is, over the course of the series, you become so familiar with serenity
that it almost becomes a character unto itself.
Right.
And like, if it becomes a place that you want to be, I think that's something that a lot of
visual types of media have in common.
Yeah.
Like the aesthetic pulls you in.
The aesthetic pulls you in.
Serenity, the ship becomes a character.
I would say that that's a good rule of thumb, regardless of what you're doing,
that you want your setting to become a character unto itself
and treat it much as the way you would treat a character
and apply some of the lessons that we're going to talk about in the character weeks to your setting,
making it have interesting quirks.
It maybe won't have motivations, but it can be consistent in what it presents to the characters.
All right.
Let's quickly just do like one on the expanse and one on dune.
The expanse.
Who wants to handle the expanse?
We'll go over here.
The nice thing about the expanse is that it makes everything really dangerous immediately.
You're in space all the time.
You're always dealing with really physical problems.
And it forces the captain and his crew to make difficult decisions all the time.
It forces the captain and the crew to make difficult decisions all the time.
It's another kind of uncaring universe, dangerous.
And I would say some of the world-building expanse, like a lot of the tension in the expanse is either politically,
you know, political tensions, or it is something is broken and we need to fix it is kind of how things go.
And so they do a very good job of showing you need to understand the physics of this world
if you're going to fly around in space because you're going to need to fix things that are broken.
And if you don't, you're going to get squished.
Dune.
We cannot cover Dune by one person, but let's see if somebody wants to handle Dune.
By the way, Dune is my favorite world-building sci-fi fantasy world, probably of all time.
So go ahead.
How does Dune's world-building enhance its story?
Well, you're dropped in a setting where computers are immediately illegalized right at the start of the book.
So you understand why there's not such a high technological place there.
But at the same time, you're brought in to understand why there's this space war going on with the trading of spice.
And it just gives that sense of tension throughout the entire story is when you're dealing with it.
Yeah, it gives tension to the story and things like this.
I would say one of the elements that makes it work is the spice.
By having your fantastical resource be what the universe needs to function,
but also be central to the mythology and lore of the people living on this planet,
and immediately important to the political control of the main character who's been put in charge of it,
it becomes the linchpin piece that makes it all work.
And that making a fantastical resource work that way really enhances the fact that this is going to be about factions fighting over it
and the religion and how it intersects with some people wanting it for money,
some people wanting it for trade, other people wanting it for religious purposes.
All just enhances this idea.
We can't, we could talk about doing for an entire three hour session.
I'm willing to bet.
But let's go ahead and move on to this idea of how you actually do this.
This is all great sort of, a lot of what we've been talking about here is kind of the abstract stuff.
So how do you, Brandon Sanderson, sit down and build a system where this all works,
where your world building is done in service of your story, how do you begin?
And I usually divide my world building into two general categories.
I have what I call the physical setting and the cultural setting.
This just helps me have a division point in my mind of the different types of things that I'm going to try to world build.
Now physical setting for me is all the stuff that would exist whether or not there were sentient beings on the planet doing things, right?
If you remove them all from the planet, this stuff would all exist.
So this is things like the weather patterns, right?
Or, you know, the tectonic activity.
Why don't you start throwing some more at me and we'll put them up on here.
What else can you do for physical world building?
Okay, the map, yeah.
What else?
Flora and Fauna.
Okay, what else?
Magic, I think you could say that a lot of the magic would exist without, yeah.
This is the physics, the cosmology universe.
What else we got?
Color of the sky.
Yeah, yeah.
The kind of the visuals, right?
Yeah.
What's that?
The cosmology, right?
Yep.
Climate and terrain.
Terrain and climate.
Are you guys going to make me spell climate?
Well, I-M-A-T-E?
Yeah.
What kind of people are the people?
Yeah, races.
We'll go ahead and stop there.
We could go on for a little bit longer, but this one starts to get, you know, you run through them pretty quickly what these things would be.
Let's go over to cultural setting.
Let's start talking about all the different things you can world build with cultural setting.
Start throwing them at me.
Religion.
Government.
Yep, economics.
Gender roles.
Borders.
Fashion.
Food lore.
History.
History, which is too big, but there's lots of things underneath it.
Rights of passage.
That's actually R-I-T-E-S of passage.
Hierarchy.
Oh, that's another one that's hard to spell.
Social ladders.
That's one of the words that my computer has automatically because I type it wrong every time to just change for me an autocorrect.
You know what else I can't spell?
I can't spell villain.
I always put the I in the wrong place.
What else do we say?
Accents.
Yeah.
Languages.
Taboos.
Taboos.
Flash mores.
Military.
Military?
Yeah.
Military tradition.
Uh-huh.
Greetings.
Ah, swear words.
Yeah.
Oh boy.
We could go on for a long time, couldn't we?
One lesson of this is there's a ton of things that human beings do that are really interesting and really fascinating.
And you could probably spend the rest of your life building a world where you took everything that we wrote on the board.
Say we took an hour, wrote everything we think of on the board, and then you could spend 80 years building a world where you consider every one of these things.
Remember what we talked about last week with the iceberg?
Yeah.
If you realistically want to have a career in sci-fi fantasy, you are going to need to be able to produce, I would say, a book every two years at minimum.
Right?
Now, it depends on your subgenre and depends on how popular your first book is.
If your first book's pretty popular, that moves to once every 10 years.
No names mentioned.
But if you want to have a career in this, you need to assume that you're going to, once you go full time on it, want to be able to produce a book a year.
All right?
If you are producing a novel every year, they can all be in the same series if it takes off, though as a little aside, if you're trying to break in, you have a decision point to make,
which is how much do you write in the same series and how much do you not?
When I was breaking in, I realized if I sent off a book and someone rejected it, that I couldn't send them book two.
And so if I wrote 10 books and they were all in the same series, and then the first book got rejected by all six major publishers back then, there's only five now,
but got rejected by all six back in the days before self-publishing was really viable, then those 10 books could not be sold, right, until maybe later if I broke in.
So that is why of the novels I wrote before I broke in, there were 13 of them, only one of them was a sequel, and it was a sequel to my first book where this will happen with your first book sometimes.
You just get halfway done with what you want to do and you realize it's too long and you're like, all right, this is the end.
And then you just write the other half. That happens a lot when you're a newer writer because you don't know how to estimate how long a story will take you.
But basically I wrote 12, 11 if you count some of the things I did, separate different things when I was trying to break in.
That served me very well because I was able to always have a bunch of things on submission.
Now, there's somebody who did a very different way for me, and that's Naomi Novik, who broke out around the same time I did.
She had already written several books in her Temeraire, His Majesty's Dragon series, and it turns out that the first one was really good and it got picked up.
And then she was able to say to them, yeah, I've got two or three, I don't remember how many more she had done, but she's like, I got two more done.
And they're like, wow, and this is the first instance of me seeing what eventually became a very strong strategy for self-publishing.
And that was they published one a month for three months. It was May, June, July, I think, something like that.
First one came out, boom, second one came out, third one came out.
Stephen King quote on the first and McCaffrey quote on the second, Terry Brooks quote on the third, I think.
And they did them straight to paperback, which earns a lot less money, but generally is easier to get someone to try out a new author.
And they flooded the bookstores with these, and everyone was reading them, and they were fantastic.
And it just basically gave a huge jumpstart to her entire career.
And then the next one started coming out in hardcover, and all of a sudden it was like overnight.
Naomi was one of the best-selling authors in the genre, selling what other people had taken ten years to build up to because of how well they had done that sort of marketing blitz at the beginning.
That's what she gained by writing everything in the same series.
This is very common, by the way, in self-publishing these days, in indie publishing, where you write a bunch of books in a series, usually for indie publishing.
You want them to be short, you want them to be episodic, and you want them to be fast-paced.
So you're looking at something either romance-focused, something accident-venture-focused, something mystery-focused, where each one is its own story.
And then you get all those ready, you've written like twelve, and then you're like, I'm releasing one every two weeks, or every week, for this huge blitz.
And I'm going to pay for all of my marketing money, and all of my book-bubbing, and all of my Amazon ads during this three-month blitz where I'm releasing all these things to try to jumpstart a series.
I have never done this, so you would have to ask some indie authors who have how it's worked for them, but I've seen it be very successful with various people.
Regardless, you're going to have this decision point of do you write all in the same world or not.
There is a halfway point, and this is where they're all in the same world, but different characters.
They're like the fake sequels to each other, kind of like Anne McCaffrey did.
You see this a lot in romance where it's like, here is a cast of characters, and here is the first one's romance, and then the next one you're going to get this character's romance, and then this character's romance.
And you could theoretically rejigger it so you could sell any of those first if you needed to, depending on how you write it.
Regardless, that was a little aside.
If you're going to want to do this, you're going to have to get good at world-building effectively, which generally is a synonym for quickly, but not necessarily.
This means you're not going to do all of this for every book.
In fact, you're going to do highlight a few of these things in a given story.
Generally, I pick one from this side.
Very big surprise for anyone who's read my books from this side.
Hey, we're going to have a really strange weather pattern in this world, and we're going to then let that very strange weather pattern,
let us spiral into a few of these other things, but they're all coming off of the interesting weather pattern.
And then I will pick a couple of these, and I will really focus on them.
A launchers, I focused a lot more on the linguistics.
Why? Because the linguistics was the same as the magic, and so I spent more time understanding what the different languages people would speak.
In Mistborn, no time on the linguistics, almost none at all.
All of the linguistics in Mistborn, they speak galactic standard.
They all speak the same language.
There's been an emperor in charge for a thousand years.
I'm not going to worry about the history.
I'm not going to worry about the linguistics because we're focused on the now,
and I'm going to spend my time on the political situation right now,
and also have a more complex magic system with all of those sort of...
Imagine you have world-building points.
If you guys play like Warhammer or whatever, you have 100 points to build your army.
You have 100 points to build your setting, and after you get above that threshold,
you start to lose your audience because you're stuffing too much in there.
And the number of points you get is depending on your subgenre that you're writing.
Epic fantasy, more points.
Urban fantasy, far fewer points.
So you want to then target those points on the things that are going to enhance your story
in a way that's going to be interesting, exciting for the reader,
but not feel like you're leaving stuff out, just feel like you're focusing really well.
So this is kind of Sanderson's third law talked about in this way.
Let me... Let's just do a little experiment here.
Let's write up... I'm going to write up four general genres of story.
You have an action-adventure.
You have a mystery.
You have a romance.
And give me one more.
Horror. You've got a horror.
All right.
So let's pick one of these on this side,
and let's come up with a different take on it for each of these four things
to build a setting that would enhance our story.
So raise your hand.
Somebody will have you pick one of these things we've written up here.
Go ahead. Anyone want to pick one? Go ahead.
Okay. The climate's going to be different for each one.
We're just going to deal with the climate.
So let's say you wanted to build a climate
that was going to work really interestingly to enhance your action-adventure story.
How would you do that?
Everything's on fire? I like that.
I don't know if that's actually a climate.
I don't know if Australia this summer is a climate.
Or give me another one.
Let me ask you this. How would that enhance an action-adventure?
Cheyenne, was you the one that said that?
How does having everything on fire enhance an action-adventure?
They're learning to live on a volcanic planet.
They're learning to live? How does that enhance an action-adventure story?
Well, they have to avoid not falling in the water.
Okay. So you're going to have an action-adventure story
which often will have moving from place to place
and exploring exciting locations.
You have a dangerous...
It's not really a climate, but we'll go ahead.
We've got a dangerous biome that is really dangerous to explore,
but the characters are going to have to do it anyway.
That enhances an action-adventure.
What else do we got on action-adventure?
Someone wants to suggest one. Go ahead.
Super mild climate, then all of a sudden turns hard and...
Yeah. Out of nowhere, the climate goes crazy.
In fact, I think there are action-adventure movies
based around the idea of suddenly climate change hits us tomorrow.
And now we have an action-adventure story.
You can see that they've done that, though.
The sudden change in status quo is fantastic for an action-adventure story.
This is basically how you kick off an action-adventure story
is a sudden change in status quo.
Whether that change in status quo is...
Climate change happened tomorrow, for some reason,
or it's your father was investigating the awestark of the Covenant
and he's missing, right?
Sudden change in status quo kicks off an action-adventure
is a great way to start.
Yeah, go ahead.
Regular fogbanks reducing visibility to three feet.
How does this enhance an action-adventure story?
Enemies are all around you and you have no idea.
Enemies are all around you and you have no idea.
Great. All right, let's move on to a mystery.
Let's use climate. Do you guys want to move to a different one?
Different one? All right, pick something.
Oh, wait. We'll do these ones in fashion.
We'll go ahead and do one of these. Why not?
Someone said fashion.
So we're going to talk about how fashion can enhance a mystery story.
How could you use some world-building with your fashion
in a way that will make your mystery more interesting?
Many pockets.
Many pockets, all right.
Hey, someone said masks over here.
A society that wears masks is going to be great for mystery
because it will enhance the theme of your story,
which is who is it? Who done it?
They all wear masks. Go ahead.
People change every single 20 minutes of the day.
They change every 20 minutes.
It may be a little extreme, but maybe everybody changes for each meal.
How would that enhance a mystery?
Well, you say you have a detective. He has no idea.
He knows what someone looks like, but they're constantly changing to it.
Oh, you mean change their features as well?
No, just their fashion.
Okay.
Okay. Yeah. All right. Go ahead.
Or if they're living in a world that destroys their clothes
or from living arounds, they're constantly, I think,
going to try another pair of clothes to be atmospheric.
And if there's this great centigrade of clothes,
are you sure that's not for the romance?
No.
All right. Let's go over here. Go ahead.
Oh, cool. Listen to this. This is a great idea.
Let's quiet down. Cool idea.
The murder happened at Comic-Con and it was Naruto.
Yeah. That's actually genius, right?
There was a Naruto cosplayer who committed the murder,
but there's 50 of them at the con and we have to try to find them all.
That's using fashion perfectly in your story's world building.
I love that one. Go ahead.
Okay. Yeah. You've got a society where people look very similar to one another.
You can even go a step further and say this is a society of clones.
Everybody looks the same.
But now you have to figure out which one of these killed someone
if there's specific motivation to one of the clones.
Yeah. Go ahead. Did you have one?
Yeah.
Maybe everybody or different families have like embroidery or something.
They put on their clothes.
Oh, yeah.
You can like trace where some article of clothing is from
and maybe be traded then.
Right. So what's he saying is there's maybe special embroidery
that certain families have or things like the tartan.
Is it called tartan? Yeah.
Yes. And things like this.
Like you could imagine a detective who is a fashion expert
and solves crimes based on the fashion, right?
Which there's got to be someone who's done this, but I don't know.
What's that?
Legally blonde.
Legally blonde is actually a really great mystery.
It's paced very, very well.
But something like that you could totally use.
It's a perfect idea. All right. Let's go to our romance.
What are we going to use from around here for our romance?
For the military structure.
All right. All right. All right.
We'll go with military structure.
How can you have an interesting military tradition or structure
and tell a great romance story in it?
Lovers have to be star-crossed.
The military star-crosses them.
So, I mean, are you saying that an enlisted man falls in love with an officer
or something like that?
Like whatever military hierarchy.
Yeah. You're breaking the military hierarchy.
Or, I mean, the easy go-tos are she's on one side of the war
and he's on the other, right?
But what can you do that is a different military tradition
or thing from our world that does not exist in our world
that would be distinctive for a fantasy world
that would let you tell an interesting romance.
All right. Go ahead.
Maybe there are different factions of the military
and they each have, like,
poems their craft in the family
and people from different paths want to get together.
But which...
Right. Right.
What culture would you stay in?
Right.
The assassins are a certain hierarchy in the military
and they all intermarry.
A family and assassin falls in love with, you know, a dragonrider.
Right. Okay.
Okay. Let's go back here.
Anyone back there? Go ahead.
Jedi can't date ambassadors.
Jedi can't date ambassadors.
I don't like sand.
Right.
All right. All right.
Have you done one yet? You haven't, right?
Go ahead.
Romance by combat.
Actually, I've seen good romance stories on this
where it's like, yeah, Star Trek,
but also there's some classic stories about, you know,
if you want to marry my daughter,
you have to defeat my champion,
but then the daughter is the champion, right?
Right. That's brave.
But there's also...
There's a Greek story that's that, I want to say.
Yeah, an old Greek story.
Yeah. Go ahead.
That's actually a really great idea for a story.
That it's kind of this thing where you've got the,
you've got like the Pacific Rim where it needs,
you need a team for some reason to work this military.
You could have some big Mac where it's like this
and you need to be, you know, a pair.
I mean, it works very interestingly in Dragon Riders of Pern
where if your dragons hook up,
it's kind of almost impossible for you to not hook up
with the person that is the other dragon
because of the way that the bond between human and dragon works,
which is also kind of the same but different sort of idea.
There's so many things you could do there.
So, yeah. Great. Wonderful idea.
You should write that story. That'd be a great story.
Is that in Scottish?
All right. Let's do a horror.
Who wants to pick the horror one?
Economics. Economics.
I love it. All right.
Oh, someone's really excited.
The coronavirus destroys China and so the economy is in chaos.
Okay. Okay.
The coronavirus destroys China so the economy is in chaos.
How else could you use economy to enhance a horror story?
We're going to go in the back over here.
A certain monster is chasing you and if you have money,
you can buy the solution to whatever the monster you're buying done.
Okay.
A monster is chasing you.
You can use money to make the monster not chase you in some way.
Maybe you can buy off the people who have sent the monster against you
and it goes to someone else.
Maybe you have to be on the list that the monster is going to kill,
but you can put a whole bunch of people by paying it on the list before you
and if you can fill the list with enough people for it to kill,
that it'll never get to you, then you're in good shape.
Yeah. Go ahead.
Yeah, go ahead.
All right.
Alien invasion via stock market first.
Like this. Over here in the red hat.
Oh.
Gold star. Gold star.
Okay. People who haven't done one yet.
People who haven't done one yet. Go ahead.
Kind of like in the monkey's paw, there was like an economic pressure
that made them make terrible decisions.
Yeah. Yeah. Monkey's paw.
Economic pressure making people make terrible decisions
is a mainstay of horror.
Yeah. Go ahead. Back here.
It's April 16th, the day after tax day,
and you wake up and they're not done.
Yeah. Yeah. Okay.
Isaac's got one. Isaac, what you got?
It's a world where people have horrible, debilitating nightmares
that you can get out of it if you get into a higher tax bracket.
That's a little more dystopian than it is horror,
but yeah. Okay. All right.
We'll do a couple more. Go ahead.
Everyone's a contract killer.
Everyone's a contract killer. Hey.
Way to bring it back around to John Wick.
Yeah. I mean, the purge is basically an economic
or political social hierarchy driven horror series,
and that kind of plays along those sorts of same ideas.
Go ahead.
Yeah. Yeah. Dangerous game.
Super rich people have a way that they can hunt you down.
Let's go ahead. We'll wrap these up.
We could go on and on and on. I'm sure.
So why do I do this exercise?
Well, the point of this exercise is to point out
we could take one of these things and we can riff on it
to the point that that one thing changed in an interesting way
can make your whole fantasy story.
Because of that, you don't need all of this.
It is good to be aware of the different options
that are available to you,
but it's also really important to pick a narrow focus
for most of your stories.
And the subgenre you're in, again, will let you determine
how many of these things you do.
But remember rule number three.
One of these done really well
is almost always better than trying to do 5% of all of them.
Now, a lot of times what I will do is I will pick,
for instance, weather, the high storms in Roshar, right?
I'm like, all right, I'm writing epic fantasy.
I got a lot of world-building points.
This is my focus in physical setting.
There's a magical hurricane that hits the world every couple of days.
Now, what I want to do is I want to interconnect it.
And if there's one thing I want you to take from this particular lesson,
it is that picking an idea and then interconnecting it into the rest
is a lot of times the best way to create an epic fantasy or epic science fiction.
If you say, okay, weather is our focus,
that, of course, is going to influence our climate, obviously.
How can I have the weather that influence my flora and fauna?
Because what happens then is you're spending your world-building time on the storm
and how society reacts to the storm.
Then when you mention some little thing, oh, yeah,
these animals have a life cycle that uses the storm.
The reader says, wow, it's so expansive because their imagination
then takes that and runs with it all along the directions you want them to
by showing one small thing, one small effect done really well
about how the world-building works.
Your reader will add so much more to you.
And then when you say, all right, I'm going to make sure the weather
is right into the magic somehow because this is our major world-building theme.
That's where Stormlight comes from.
If you haven't read the books, the storm deposits magical energy
which you can use to feel your magic.
No storms, no magic.
Therefore, whether or not you're able to use the magic as much as you want
is based on how often the storms are coming through
and your ability to tap into that.
And so suddenly we start reaching and saying, all right,
how does this affect our religion?
How does this affect our government?
How does this affect our economics?
Not all of it interconnects.
Once in a while, I'll pick a few things and say, okay,
gender roles in this world are really wonky compared to, you know,
what your average American's gender roles would look like.
Women can read, men are forbidden.
What does that do?
And then I start to look at, say, all right, how does this affect this?
How does this affect this?
How does this go here?
Why do women wear one of their sleeves covering one of their hands?
Why do they?
Well, the actual answer is I think taboos are really interesting.
And when I was in Korea, you didn't show the bottom of your foot to people.
It was considered very taboo, which was just bizarre to me.
And I thought, human beings have really weird and interesting taboos.
There are certain tribes in South America that walk about naked,
as we would see it, but they don't consider it naked
because they have their gourd on that is covering a certain part of their male anatomy,
just a bit of it, but enough that it's not considered naked.
And we look at them like, they are just naked.
They're like, no, I'm not. I'm perfectly well-clothed.
Taboos are really fascinating to me.
And so I wanted a fantastical taboo.
That's why it happened.
Now, my explanation in world was that there was a really influential piece of writing a long time ago
where a philosopher said, well, all the true feminine arts are one-handed
and refined women can paint and do music and do art and all these things.
But all masculine skills required two hands
and they're like smashing swords against each other and things like that.
And so refined society began to take this less as one philosopher's random thing
that she came up with, which is actually not all that accurate,
and then started imposing social mores to reinforce behavior as what happens.
And then shard blades and shard plate got abandoned in large numbers.
And when you're in shard plate, it doesn't matter if you're male or female,
because if a man has an average strength of nine
and a woman has an average strength of seven and a shard plate adds 50,
then it doesn't really matter anymore who's in that shard plate in relative strength.
And so certain factions started using this as the social structures and excuse
to keep women and basically eliminate 50% of the competition for their shard plate.
But this doesn't matter so much as doing something that feels like it works in the society that I'm writing.
Your explanations are not as important necessarily as making it feel real.
Remind me next week, if I have time, one thing I missed from this lecture
we didn't get to is internal logic versus external logic, right?
And we will talk about that another week.
For now, go forth, build some worlds.
