you
you
you
you
you
so if you guys are in the chat let us know and if you are a student in my
class or not let us know you non-students are perfectly welcome since we put
this up for everyone
lots of behind-the-scenes technical interesting things we need to give a
few minutes for all of the students to make their way to this link it's been
so much fun to figure out technology right Adam
oh it's a land minefield minefield yes seems like a new thing every week that
they goes wrong yes yes mm-hmm so we'll just give a minute or two for my
students to all get the link from Isaac to make sure that they know where we
are and then we'll launch into it so
and you've sent that link to Isaac and he's sending it to the students great
okay it's being spread it's being spread around so everybody's getting it all
right we will we will go ahead and start I should have my phone so I know what
time it is sorry I'm going off-scamp camera for a sec so I keep track of this
only seven minutes late not too bad all right let's begin we are going to be
doing the publishing lecture today we're gonna do two of these next week we
will cover indie publishing and this week we are going to be focusing mostly
on traditional publishing this is going to be a bit of a fire hose lecture I
apologize for that I'm gonna throw a lot of information at you but the good
thing is it's up on YouTube so you can watch it again later if if some of this
is too much for you the way I'm gonna format this lecture is I'm going to
step you through how a book is created and explain all the different kind of
behind-the-scenes people who are involved in it we should talk we'll be
talking about agents we'll be talking about marketing yourself to publishers
and that sort of thing so lots of whiteboard this week so let's start with the
publisher so the publisher on a book is usually somebody who has started what
we call or is running what we call an imprint back in the day sixty seven
years ago these were all independent publishers they would start up a
business usually named after themselves and they would be acquiring books and
publishing these days almost all of these are owned by five the big five
publishers though there are some very large book companies that are not part
of that for instance scholastic is not part of the big five and they are very
large publisher but generally everything is under a big one of big
publishers and a lot of these imprints are many little shall we say cities in
the publishing empire so in a big company like Macmillan which is one of my
publishers there is an imprint called tour books which was founded by Tom
Doherty back in the late 70s early 80s was run as a separate independent
publisher for a while and then acquired by Macmillan in the 90s Tom Doherty is
still the publisher of that imprint at tour a publisher is primarily a business
person and they have several people underneath them that you probably should
know about they have what is called an editorial director
they have editors and they have acquisitions editors
and there's also sometimes VPs or assistant publishers different types of names
so what is this doing basically your publisher's job is to handle the business
side of things and the editor's job is to handle editorial the editor's job is to
acquire books for the publisher to publish now what you should understand is that these roles are
often held by not held by separate individuals depending on the company for instance at tour
for many years Tom Doherty was also the editorial director Harriet McDougal was the editorial
director at first she retired it became Robert Jordan's editor only and his wife and Tom Doherty
basically became the editorial director an editorial director's job is to oversee the editors
to make sure that they are doing their jobs basically middle management in charge of editors
and editors job is to work with an author in ways we'll explain later to take the book to make it
better to perfect it and kind of be basically a project manager
sorry barely read that editors kind of like a project manager their job is to oversee each
project which is a book and an acquisitions editor is somebody who reads through what we call the
slush pile slush pile is all of the submissions that have been sent into the publisher the people
who want their books to be published and the acquisitions editor reads through them and finds
books that they want to publish now at tour for example and at a lot of companies these are not
two separate jobs much of the time indeed a lot of times the editor is the acquisitions editor or
the editor has an assistant whose job is to help them with all of their work and will also act as
a partial acquisitions editor for them and that the assistant will not be acquiring themselves
they'll just be looking for promising manuscripts to give to the editor that the editor might want
to acquire my editor at tour Moshe Fader was the assistant to another editor for many years helped
him with acquiring books and with editing them and then eventually was told you are allowed to
now acquire for yourself and then Moshe went out and started to look for authors to acquire for
himself and moved up into being an editor so this is just useful to know about the publishers
you're submitting to to know which imprint has who is their publisher at Random House which
publishes my teen books we have a basically editorial director slash publisher all wrapped up in one
who is not the head publisher but is in charge of a small group of editors her name is Beverly
and she doesn't acquire she just manages these editors normally the people in this position
are going to do much less acquisitions in fact they may not do any once in a blue moon a friend
of Tom's would want to publish a book and Tom would read it himself and be like you know what I
really like this if it's tour he would then assign it to one of his editors and say you become the
editor on this project I don't believe that Beverly over at Random House Delacorte is the
imprint there that I publish with does any acquisition herself she just oversees everyone
else once in a while an editorial director will have their own line of books they're publishing
while they're overseeing everyone else in fact that was the case with Harriet at tour before she
retired from that position so it's useful to know because this will influence who you're
sending your books to who you are targeting and who you want to buy them for instance at tour
approaching Tom Doherty directly is probably not going to work for you
like I said once in a while one of his friends or someone he knows or some contact will make him
say you know what I'm going to acquire this book but most of the time at tour you're going to be
looking for directly at the editors and trying to pitch your books to them how do you do that
well this takes us into kind of phase two this over here we'll talk about how books get to these
people and they come through two general format our avenues one is agents and one is direct
over the years that is a really weird way to write direct Britain over the years
publishing has moved less direct and more agented this has been a continual trend that began
decades ago and is still a continuing trend that more and more publishers are saying
on their submission guidelines that they do not take unagent submissions the big shift in this
as I understand happened really in the 80s and 90s where agents started to shoulder more of the
burden of reading slush and picking out the gems and sending those directly to the editors
um this is how most books I would say these days are sold traditionally is that an author picks
up an agent the agent then takes it to all the editors in town pitches the book to them picks
and gets offers back goes back to the author and says here's our offers what do you want to do in
these sorts of things direct still happens I sold direct I sold a a launch list to tour books in 2003
through a submission directly to an editor that I had met at a convention that was Moshe
instead of having an agent I was submitting to agents at the same time but I sold directly
now one of the questions that arises a lot regarding this is should I be hunting an agent
should I be going direct as I said direct is actually getting harder and harder to do most
agents will say to you and most editors probably as well will say your best bet is to hunt an agent
first don't submit the book to editors directly the reason they say this is because if an agent picks
up a book then finds out you've actually submitted it to every editor already and they've rejected
that agent will feel like this book has already gone through the town and is therefore
soiled goods I don't know it's like they can't sell this book that's the fear that they have
I will tell you a contrasting opinion to that I think that that opinion is wise and valid
there is an argument for sending directly to editors I might be survivorship biasing this one
because it worked for me but my argument to myself was always I might as well double the number of
places I can send books to and if it turns out that an agent picks up a book that I've already
sent out a bunch well then they will have better avenues for selling that and get the editors to
take another look at it or I will just give them a new book because I write quickly enough
that if they feel like this book has already seen the town well then if they're willing to pick up
one of my books there's a decent chance because I write so much they will like the other ones as
well in fact an agent is not looking for a book they're looking for an author agents generally
want to represent an author during the early part of their career and then reap benefits later in
fact this whole industry for most of its life has been focused on this idea the idea that a new
author is a money losing proposition in most cases for a publisher a brand new author takes
time to launch a brand new author's first books are generally not going to sell a ton of copies
and it's over time with that author establishing a fan base that becomes and that author becoming
popular that is what they are looking for so in general through the course of history that's
what they wanted and I'm a good example of that. Elantris sold fine it did just fine but it wasn't
probably even paying the bills for tour in the long run but Mistborn the whole trilogy ended
up selling better and then The Way of Kings ended up doing even better and suddenly I am one of their
best-selling authors in fact I think I might be tours best-selling author and because of this
now those books are extremely profitable for tour when early they lost money on me so in
an ideal world everyone is looking for authors to build up over time the unfortunate part about this
is over the years this has become less of a theme and it's become more best-seller driven what do
I mean by best-seller driven so for a long for for most of entertainment let's just say this in
most of entertainment the the pieces of media that do highly successful business pay for all the risks
you take on ones that don't sell as well and then you will have something in the middle called the
midlist in books a midlist book is a book that makes money for the publisher pays for itself
but doesn't make so much that it's really funding anything else these are successful books by career
authors who have a dedicated fan fan base but not a huge one these people were very important to
publishing for many many many years because them an aggregate would be as much money to the publisher
as their few headliners of which they'd only have a couple and so keep maintaining a really
strong midlist was a very important part of the business however some things have happened
one is indie publishing and indie publishing has begun to bite it out that midlist quite a bit take
big chunks out of it because generally if you're a midlist author it is more profitable for you to
independently publish than it is to publish with a publisher this is because all of if you have
a small consistent fan base that is not growing but is also not shrinking then and they are willing
to buy every book you put out you don't need marketing budgets you don't need huge marketing
campaigns you can directly target that audience yourself and you can sell to them and you will
make a much better cut of the money doing that and because of that a bunch of people who would be
midlisters are now indie publishing because of that publishing has said well we need to focus
more on the hits we need more hits the other thing that happened that caused this is some
consolidation in the book industry when a lot of the small bookstores folded and the large
conglomerate chains took over which was a big process happening through the 80s and 90s into
the 2000s what happened is a lot of niche bookstores that were very good sellers for midlist
vanished for instance there would be bookstores in the past Tom Doherty tells the story of
it's not even a bookstore it's like the corner store the truck stop let's say he often uses this
one so the truck stop exists and in that truck stop there are a bunch of truckers come through who
really like westerns and Tom Doherty could publish a few midlist western books and he could get those
into those truck stops and his bulk of his audience was these truckers who would buy them
well during the 90s what happened is books started to consolidate into only the big bookstores and
the truck stops stopped being able to sell as many books because people were going to Barnes
and Nobles and things and what was happening is that some of these niche markets were drying up
the distributors where it wasn't worth their money to go to all these little chains anymore
and put these books in because it was just so much overhead to hire all those people
that even though there was an audience for those books those books were no longer profitable or
as profitable as sending them all to the big corner bookstore which then was going to be
more hit driven plus a lot of your market started getting picked up by places like Costco
and things like this where you weren't selling niche books you were selling very hit driven
books someone going to Costco is looking for the new Dan Brown book they're not looking for the
new niche western book that a lot of truckers might like but it's a small enough segment that
is just not profitable I could go into this for hours trust me I'm just giving you a summary
I'm getting some details wrong on this but the end result was the publishers feeling
they needed to be more hit driven and so they started to focus on let's buy a book
see if it explodes big if it doesn't explode big we drop that author and put another author in
that slot because the book that hasn't come out yet has that chance of being really huge
very rare chance but it has a chance once an author is a known quantity there's this sense
that a mid-lister will remain a mid-lister and that there are some upper echelons they're like
cut those mid-listers let's look for more hits this is fallacious you may be saying wait a minute
do mid-listers never become bestsellers George R. R. Martin was a quintessential mid-lister
all through the 70s and 80s and became the biggest epic fantasy writer in the business
in the 90s into 2000s great example of someone who had a long career with some dedicated fans
and then wrote a book that just connected with everybody and it spread from those fans like
wildfire to the rest of the world so I think you know personally in the long rung this old method
is still better for writers readers and authors but that is not necessarily how some executives
think about it so be warned hit driven is kind of a thing now let's go back to this sort of thing
and let's talk a little bit about agents for you and then we'll talk about direct publishing yourself
and this is going to answer some of your questions that are popping up so what is an agent agents
are people who let's say in a Hollywood agents have this kind of reputation where you know maybe
this whole sliminess reputation and things in New York book agents generally have a very good
reputation I rarely hear authors speak ill of their agent and if they do it's a relationship that's
on the rocks and the author generally leaves that agent and goes to someone else agents tend to be
very good at being their author's advocate in the business and so I really like my agent
I think highly of him I think highly of agents in general I will give you the counterargument
to agents in a minute here but let's talk about what agents do so an agents pro you know what let's
do direct for a minute it'll explain better if I talk about direct so to publish direct sorry for
that lane change here to publish direct with a publisher for many years and still viable what
you would do is you would take a full and completed novel you're not selling on proposal in fiction
nonfiction you can often sell on proposal and nonfiction let's say you are a person who has
lived their life as a specialist career you are you are a rock star or you are somebody who knows
a ton about weight loss or things like this you can rely on your credentials and an outline to say
well I'm going to write a how-to book on this you can sell on proposal does not happen in publishing
by new authors an established author can sell on proposal and usually will you won't yet you need
a completed novel all right so you take your completed novel and you will then start sending it out
via query letter so stage number one is query you are our why I think a query is a one page
synopsis of your book usually the format follows this sort of you know paragraph about the book
little paragraph about yourself and talking about at the end asking that they review the book and
ask if they're interested I am terrible at queries so I'm going to refer you to lots of
resources online about how to write a good query Google it there are people who are way better
at it than I am I was always terrible at queries I still don't really think that I'm good at queries
when I asked my agent when made a good query he basically said credentials basic premise
some sort of hook few rhetorical questions meaning stay away from the what would happen in a world
he doesn't like those that's personal to him but just kind of the the premise in short this is a
heist novel about a group of thieves who want to rob the dark lord of the world after the prophecy
prophesied hero failed to bring the dark lord down there's your your kind of hook sentence for
Mistborn a little bit about myself would follow particularly have credentials if you publish
short stories or things like this and then following a little bit longer sort of summary
about the book hitting only maybe one or two key elements that make it really interesting
potentially some comps saying if I were trying this right now I'd say it has a feel a little bit
like Scott Lynch's series don't say it's Harry Potter meet Lord of the Ring actually do like
a real comp and then get out but I'm going to refer you to other people to explain to you how
to write a good query usually you will send them a query then those queries that you send out
a small small percentage of the editors will write back and ask for sample chapters
and all the years I was doing this I got one response to a query asking for sample chapters
out of dozens upon dozens that I sent out that was to Joshua my the person who eventually
became my agent he didn't pick me up before I sold my book somewhere else but he did pick me up after
it. If they like the sample chapters they will request a full manuscript
all right they will then read the full manuscript and if they like it they will then make an offer
this is the way the process is supposed to go I don't know how often it actually goes like this
you'd have to ask an editor how often I did remember reading an editor once saying out of every
hundred queries they got they asked for sample chapters on about 10 out of every
10 sample chapters they asked on a full manuscript on about one and in about every 10 full manuscripts
they got they made an offer on one that seemed like a pretty too even a number of percentage
split down to be realistic but there's at least one look at it now this might seem soul crushing
to you it certainly did to me when I was trying to break in because the odds of getting through all
of this seem really low there are a few things that improve your odds particularly once you get to
this stage most people who want to publish books do not know what they're doing
most people are have not actually written a lot they have written one novel they may not
have even finished it despite submitting it they have not watched lectures on this
and most people their books can get dismissed very quickly based on the sample chapters
queries I don't know I hate queries if you can't tell but it seems like the same way
one of the ostensibly the reasons for query is that the agents will take all the books that are
written by people who seem professional that was not my experience but that's what they say
your mileage may vary but one of my goals was always to skip the query stage after sending
out all those queries on books I knew were pretty good in fact launchers was included in that
and getting no answers I started to figure can I somehow jump to the sample chapter stage
because once they're rejecting me on sample chapters at least they're rejecting me on my
prose and my storytelling not on my ability to write a summary and a good business letter
the way that I went about this is by trying to meet the editors directly going to conventions
listening to them at conferences trying to read what they write online about books and things
like this and trying to ask them directly hey I've got a book that I think would really match you
would you be willing to take a look at it and almost every time that I asked someone in person
they said yeah send me sample chapters which skipped this step for me again your mileage may
value I don't know how many editors these days this was 20 years ago that I was doing this
how many editors these days are willing to look at unagent submissions at all I still know that
if you go to conferences that a lot of times editors at conferences will ask for sample chapters
by the way this is also the process by which you get an agent the same sort of query sample
chapters full manuscript offer is is almost exactly the same process for picking up an agent
and agents go to conferences and conventions as well so how do you meet these people
well one of the methods is this conference method this conference method is that by the way I will
split conventions and conferences into two part into two things when I say a convention I mean
something like world fantasy convention world horror convention world con these are fan run
conventions that are not professionally focused world fantasy tends to be the most professionally
focused of those but basically they're not for profit they're gatherings of authors who and
agents and editors who get together to talk about the business and about writing or in the case of
world con to talk about who's the best star trek captain and editors happen to be there and they
are working and you can hear them on panels and you can bitch to them conferences are different
this is like locally we have one called writers for young readers conferences tend to be you pay
a larger ticket price to get in an editor or an agent often is a guest brought in there are pitch
sessions with them professional offers are often you're part of what you're paying for is critiques
from professional authors and a lot of writers conferences fall into this category these are
ways to network both with authors around your writing skill level or professional level and
to meet editors and agents it's still very hard it is very difficult and it is still a little
soul crushing I understand that but this is a method you can use you can also follow these
editors and agents on Twitter or on Facebook or things like this see what they're saying
you can at least put into your query letters some personalized information I would recommend if
you're going this this route imagine two different query letters right so we imagine
query letter from author a and author a says dear acquisitions editor I would like you to read my
book such and such it's really great here is why thank you for your consideration perfectly
professional well-written query letter imagine you get another query letter that says dear put
in the actual name of the editor say dear Moshe fader I am a big fan of Brandon Sanderson's work
and I know you are his editor I've been following the other authors you've released lately including
this one this one and think your editorial eye is very sharp and indeed I feel like the writing that
I write matches what you might enjoy because I like for instance very intricate magic systems that
are easy to understand and a focus on characters interaction with their setting here is my book
such and such and such I hope that you will give it consideration that second query letter if
written well is going to probably get a better chance of response than the first one this requires
you to do your research you have to know who the editors are at the publisher and if they're
acquiring or not you have to know which authors they are editing and what books particularly
by new authors that they've released recently you have to do a lot of legwork finding out all
this stuff because it's not easy to find generally you're looking in acknowledgments pages of authors
books you are googling online you're sometimes asking the author who their editor is that sort of
stuff and whether they would recommend them in my case you probably do not want to submit to Moshe
Moshe takes very very few books he is a consulting editor at tour I can't remember the last time he
picked up a new author in these most recent years he's mostly been editing me so you would want to
find someone at tour who is probably newer and who is acquiring a lot that said Moshe is a fantastic
editor if by some luck you do end up with Moshe he is a really really good editor.
So you have to do all this work and it is a ton of work we talk about people having a little
black book of all these people that they're interested in dating and all their phone
numbers and information you need a little black book that says here's the publisher of this imprint
here are the editors at this imprint who are acquiring here are books they've released in the
last couple of years that they acquired by new authors and read those books and start to get a
sense for it that sounds like a lot of work one of the read things that agents do now going back
over here the pros of agents what they're going to do is they do all that legwork
there one of their primary jobs is to know in person all of the different editors at all of
the different publishers and the books that they have released recently and things they've said
about what they're looking for by the way never ask an editor what they're looking for quick tip
ask them what they bought recently if you ask what they're looking for they won't want to pigeon
the hole themselves because they wouldn't want to exclude a book that they don't know they're
looking for yet that is really fantastic so they all hate that question but if you say what's the
most recent book that you acquired by a brand new author and why did you acquire it much better
question to ask an editor gets them talking about what made them pick up this book and that sort
of thing granted you don't always want to send an editor the exact thing they've just acquired
because they just acquired that so they won't need another book just like that but it can be really
handy to get a feel for what the editor likes editorially all right so agents do all that legwork
they're going to lunch with these editors they are meeting them at you know cocktail parties
they are keeping lists of who's bought what recently all of that stuff
an agent is also a negotiator
when you get that offer from a publisher the agent is an expert in contracts specifically
publishing contracts they will know what's what should be in a contract and I should put in here
contracts they will know what you can argue for and what you can't argue for as a new author or at
least how hard it is to argue for things you can ask for anything anything you can argue for but
what you're likely to get they'll know they will know your worth as an author because they will
know you know editor or publishers need books if this is all like why this is so hard understand
you have something they want even though you're a brand new author they need books to publish they
can't rely on Brandon Sanderson forever because Brandon Sanderson is eventually not going to
have books for them anymore hopefully not for many many years but they know this they need
what you have so you have innate value to the publisher and the agents will know how to exploit
that value to its fullest extent to negotiate for the best deal they also can offer editorial
an agent a good agent often knows how to help an author make a book work better for the um for
the editors and can do kind of a first editorial pass to fix things that might turn editors off at
the beginning and help them want to pick up the book so with all of these things why would you
not want an agent well let's talk about the cons not conventions but cons of having agents number
one is they take 15 percent they take 15 percent of the off the top of every contract in fact the
way that most of the business is done the um the publisher sends money to the agent who takes 15
percent out and sends the rest to you now this can be a slight advantage and consolidation
um of oh and of um your money for instance at the end of the year I get from my agent a summary
of everything we've gotten um and basically a 1099 from them saying here is all the money that we
have paid to you in one easy uh form for taxes but this can also be a con some once in a while
doesn't happen once in a while an agent is corrupt and it has happened that authors have been not
paying attention to what their actual in money in was and agents were taking more than they should
again very rare but there are some people who don't like agents that say if you do get an agent
make the money be split at the publisher and not at the agent the publisher sends 15 percent of the
agent and 85 percent to you uh full disclosure I do not do this it sounds like a huge hassle for
the publisher and um I do trust my agent but this is a legitimate uh concern about agents and one
reason that people do not like agents um another reason that people don't like agents is they do
not want editorial uh as agents have become more and more the slush pile that publishers are
are that people are submitting to and that they are then sending on to editors sometimes there is
this conflict of interest where the agent feels like they don't want to submit anything but the
best work they can find so that those editors will always be trusting that this agent only
submits the most high quality work and therefore the agent uh you know goes to the top of the slush
pile because of this agents will sometimes run of authors through many revisions on a book
looking to get it uh editorially just as the agent wants it and then some people uh and I think this
is a very legitimate concern um who don't like agents will say that's not the agent's job the
agent's job is to sell the book the agent's job is not to be the editor of the book and if an agent
is holding a book back from submitting it because they want it to be something it's not then that's
dangerous because what if the agent's opinion is wrong they haven't revised all this other direction
and the editors would have liked it better if it just would have been submitted some people say
just submit the book don't go editorial you're going to have to decide for yourself if you go
traditionally published how much editorial you want from an agent and how much you're willing
to take from an agent some agents for instance will not pick up an author until they've gone
through a couple rounds of revision with every author to see if the author is willing to revise
and is good at it some authors that's just not what they look for in an agent so be aware of that
and there is this sometimes other conflicts of interest for instance
let's say an agent could spend an extra couple of weeks negotiating on your contract
and bring it up from getting $10,000 in advance to say $20,000 and that agent looks to that and says
my 15% on an hourly basis of the amount of work I would have to do to get this from $10,000 to
$20,000 is just not worth that hourly rate I should just tell the author to take the 10 grand
whereas for you 10 grand to 20 grand as an advance could be the dividing line between you being able
to go full time at this or not so sometimes there's this conflict of interest with agents and good
agents will acknowledge this and will kind of have a blanket our job is to get the best deal
for our author regardless of how much time it takes as long as the author wants to keep pushing
because otherwise you run into conflict of interest levels and this is why I base a lot of what I
think a good agent does on what Joshua does. Joshua is willing to spend months negotiating a
contract for $500 for foreign rights on a book because it's kind of a matter of principle
that he doesn't violate that he is always looking for the best deal for the author
because to not be looking for the best deal the author leads you down this path of madness. So
pretty legitimate gripes that people don't like about agents. A lot of indie published people
do not use agents at all. If they do use agents, they use them for another bonus that agents have
which is overseas. Overseas sales are very hard for you to sell on your own. Most indie authors I
know do not sell overseas and in translation. Usually that is the agent's job. The agent will
take your book and will have deals with a lot of agents in other countries and these agents in
other countries will be already have a deal that anything the US agent picks up the agents say in
France is going to accept as a client and try to sell in France. This can be really good money,
particularly new as a new author. One of the advantages we have in writing in the English
language is that English language entertainment is generally entertainment leader worldwide.
Just like French wine or German or Japanese cars have a reputation, English language entertainment
has a reputation for being very high quality. We benefit from that in that a lot of our books
are able to be sold in many different countries for sometimes small deals, but an aggregate
make quite a bit of money for us. This isn't to say that other countries don't have really vibrant
and great local publishing enterprises of their own. A lot of them do, but this is an advantage we
have plus the English language market is just so big that starting English language and going to
smaller markets generally makes a lot of sense because if you are, for instance, are writing
first language and you're writing in a language where there just aren't a lot of book sales,
then your advances will be so small that you can't live on it. But if your English language and then
picking up extra money from other sales, it can work much better. Regardless,
your agents, one of their jobs will be to sell these books overseas. And even before my first
book came out, Joshua had three deals for me overseas before the book was published.
And this is just a thing that agents tend to be very good at because it also makes a lot of sense
for them to have their authors all around the world. So let's go ahead and talk about some
of the questions that we have here regarding agents and up until this point. And then we will dig
into what happens when a book actually gets an offer on it. So when do you give up on finding an
agent? Only when you decide that you want to go indie published. As long as you want to be
traditionally published, you should be looking at getting an agent. If you have these problems,
that would be another reason to not get an agent. You should not give up on an agent because of
rejections. You should give up on an agent because you legitimately have problems with these sorts
of things and don't think you want to use an agent. It is still possible, very hard but still
possible to do. And there are some indie authors who use an agent only for overseas contracts
or things like that. Or you have decided to indie publish, which we'll talk about next week.
There is a good argument for being what we call a hybrid author,
which is an author who's open to both avenues. And I will talk about being a hybrid author
next week as well. All right. So should agents be approached with complete books? Yes.
We already kind of covered that one. What can a midlister expect salary-wise?
So a midlister in general is someone that I would consider who is earning a part-time living at
their writing. For instance, they are making $10,000 to $20,000. All the way up to somebody who's
making $70,000 to $100,000, that's still midlister money. This is hard to talk about and give you
an expectation for because your earnings will be directly tied to how many books you sell.
And what counts as a midlister? How many books count as a midlister? This really depends on a
lot of factors. And I'll try to dig into this in a few minutes. When is a manuscript good enough
to submit to an agent? First, second, third. I would recommend third draft is where you start.
This is going to be very individual to you. But I recommend it. Finish the book, put it aside,
come back to it in six months, do a solid revision of it. Get a bunch of early readers,
do a third draft, incorporating what comments you think that they make that is good, and then
start submitting it. As you practice revision, you may get better at doing drafts in the future.
And as it's out for submission, you may want to solicit another group of readers
that can help you revise that book and make it better. But there's no one answer, but there's
a quick one for you. How hard is it to get a publisher to pick up a book after it's been
indie published? It really depends at that point on your success as an indie author.
It's been a while, so ask some editors directly. But for a while,
managing to sell 10,000 to 20,000 copies on your own was where the publisher started to
sit up and take notice. It depends on the price point, too. If your book is being read mostly
as part of the Kindle, whatever it is, where you pay a monthly fee and it can read as many of the
books that are in that group that you want, that's not going to be as interesting.
If you're selling your book at 99 cents and you sell 20,000, that's different than if you sell
your book at 399 and you sell 20,000. I don't have the hard numbers for you. I would ask around on
this to people who've done it. See, one of the problems you have with me is it's now been 20
years since I broke in. And so my information, though I try to keep very up to date, is just
not going to be as good as people who are selling right now and breaking in right now
or who are indie publishing right now. In fact, I'm going to hopefully,
hopefully you guys are watching, Jen and Becky are going to give me their notes on indie publishing.
These are two indie published authors who are in the class right now.
And they were going to teach you next week the indie publish lesson. But because of this whole
having to go from houses and things like that and quarantine, I'm going to still teach it.
I do know a decent amount about it, and hopefully they will be sending me their notes through that
I can use to kind of understand how it's going right now. But yeah. Is there a magazine website
we can follow that would have this type of publishing industry information?
There are a bunch of different places. Again, I'm not the best at tracking this anymore.
For a long time, the Absolute Right forums called the Absolute Right Watercooler was
the place to go to find out about publishers and who the editors were and things like that.
I don't know if it's still up and running. There are lots of resources for queries online
that people talk about. There are publishers weekly. Often will list deals people make,
but you have to belong to their subscription service to see those deals. So really, this
is something that also is going to vary widely depending on your genre. I'll try to give you
a rundown either this week or next week of all of the Big Five publishers in sci-fi fantasy,
but you can then start to use as a guide for going out and finding these things. But I don't
even know all the editors at TOR anymore because editors do tend to change and TOR has gone through
some big revolutions lately. And so I barely know the names of anybody at any of the publishers
because now these days that's what my agents job was. Back in 2000 when I was trying to break in,
I knew they're all of their names and I had them all written down. I just don't keep track of that
anymore. It's too much work to do when I don't have to do it, if that makes sense. I apologize for
that. Do agents, editors often get feedback or reason for declining a book, or is it radio
silence? So that's a great question. Generally, it's radio silence if you get rejected on query
and half or more of the time if you get rejected on sample chapters. Some of the time you will get
feedback on sample chapters. We'll say, this is why we rejected it. Every time I had a full
manuscript to get rejected, I got full, I got feedback explaining why. If they're taking the
effort to go through a full manuscript and read through it, they generally are giving you feedback.
So it depends. Once you start getting personalized feedback, it's a really good sign that you're
getting close. About a year before I broke in, I started getting a lot of personalized feedback on
my rejection letters. That was a very good sign to me. Granted, most of these were things that
skip the query stage. But yeah. All right. What are some warning signs? We'll end with this one
on this Q&A part that you should look out for with agents. It's a really good question.
Because while there are certain kind of professional groups that collect agents that
agents can belong to, bad agents belong to these group professional organizations and good agents
there are some that don't belong. So the professional organizations are not a one-to-one
correlation on a good agent. What you should be looking out for is this agent, if you're going
with this agent, they should work at an agency that has sold books by new authors recently
that you can find in bookstores. The big danger that you're looking out for is someone who calls
themselves an agent and then is soliciting all of these things and then is funneling your books
toward what we call vanity presses. Vanity presses are this segment of the
book publishing industry that exists to charge you money to publish your books. This is different
from indie publishing. In indie publishing, you're in control and you may pay for an editor. You may
pay for a cover. In fact, you should do both of those things. And that is legit. That's what you
should be doing. A lot of these kind of vanity presses, they'll act like they're a traditional
publisher. Some bad agents will exist simply to funnel people into them. They'll say,
good news, we've accepted your book. All we need is $5,000 in order to publish your book.
These are people you should run away from full speed. An agent who sends to any of these places
is not a legitimate agent, or at least is a legitimate agent with huge ethical problems
going on. And these publishers are not people that can do what you want them to do. There are
very, very small number of people that vanity presses actually serve legitimately, in my opinion.
And this is someone who has a book that they want to publish so they have lots of copies of it to
give to their friends and family, but who is not looking to make a career out of publishing.
There is a small chance that also a celebrity who does their book and wants to sell it, like,
let's say you are a rock star and you want to have a book for sale at your concerts to sell
with your CDs and things like that, vanity publisher probably is a decent option for you.
But in most of these cases, indie publishing, the book on your own,
can be done print on demand so you can order as many copies as you want to sell yourself.
They'll be at a very high price point. You won't make a lot of money off of those print copies.
But the ebook copies you will be able to make money off of. There is no reason to go with
a vanity press. From the majority of people, you should just investigate indie publishing,
which again, you will have to pay for, but you do not need one of these vanity publishers.
And so stay far away. If you want to read more on them, there is a website that for a long time
was maintained. I don't know if it is anymore called Rider Beware, which was maintained by
CIFWA, the Science Fiction Writers Association of America, where they would list a lot of things
about why vanity presses were just not recommended. A lot of them have died off in the era of
indie publishing. There's still a bunch of them around, but a lot of them have died off.
Another warning sign is an agent who is asking for eternal revisions on your things without
actually sending them out. An agent who says they put your book out on submission, but isn't
willing to actually tell you the names of the editors they submitted to, which imprints they're at,
and is not willing to send you the rejection letters. That's a warning sign. They should
be willing to do all of this stuff. An agent who asks for a lot of money up front, bad. The only
thing an agent should ever charge you for is sometimes postage. And even then, my agent
never charges any money. He will take things out of what he sells. If he sends a bunch of books
overseas, it's part of our contract that he can charge the postage to that to me,
and that comes out of money that I've earned. It's never more than a couple of hundred bucks
a pay period. And it's just really minuscule. And again, I'm never paying any money. It's coming
out of other things. So watch out for agents that are asking for money. Watch out for agents
that are asking for reading fees. Watch out for agents who aren't publishing books,
who they don't publish, but you know what I mean, who aren't selling books to legitimate publishers
that you can find in the bookstore. Here's the bottom line. If this publisher or person you
want to work with, if you can't go to Barnes & Noble and find their books on the shelf,
not orderable, but on the shelf, you don't need them. You can do indie publishing,
and you can do everything that those people would do for you on your own, and you probably should.
If you can go and find a book by a new author picked up in the last couple of years
on the shelves at Barnes & Noble already there, not have to be ordered in, then chances are good
that's the legitimate publisher slash agent, if they represented that. All right. Okay.
Whew. How much time do we have left? About 15 minutes. All right. So we are going to break down
what happens when a book gets acquired. All right. And I'm going to go fast through this part,
because we only have 15 minutes left, because we've got a bit of a late start. So
the book gets acquired. This is great. What happens is, first there's an offer,
and this is usually of an advance. And advance from a publisher is money upfront
that is a loan against the money that book is going to earn for you over time. It is a loan
that does not need to be paid back if the book does not earn enough money. It is a loan that
needs to be paid back if you do not deliver the book or something like that happens. All right.
And advance will be offered. Usually advances for first-time authors are around 10K.
They range between 5 and 20K. But last time I saw one of the polls that said,
what did you get on your first book? It was around 10K. So this is $10,000 upfront.
It's even a little bit worse than that, because usually this 10K is split
between half on signing and half on publication,
which means that you're going to get 5K of that when you sign that contract.
Once in a while, it's one-third on signing, one-third on turn in and acceptance of the book,
and one-third on publication. Sometimes it's even split by paperback. So there's a fourth one,
one-fourth on publication of hardcover, one-fourth on publishing of paperback. I think that's where
mine are now, because my advances have gotten so astronomically huge that the publisher wants
to space them out as far as possible. How high do advances get? They can go all the way from here,
up to 10 million, is about what you see the highest that you're seeing for anyone except for the
really big kind of rule-breaking authors like your JK Rowlings and stuff like that.
So it's anywhere in there. How do they know what to offer on a book if it's by a new author?
Well, this is where, as my agent puts it, imaginary numbers come in, not the actual
mathematical sense. But what will happen is the editor will go to the publisher and say,
I really like this book. I think it's really good for our line. We should publish it. And the
publisher, sometimes working with the marketing director and other people, depends on the publisher.
The imprint will get back and say, all right, how much do you think it can make? And the editor will
say, I put this sheet together, it's called a P&L profit and law sheet, that assumes this book does
as well as this other book that we published by a new author that's kind of similar. And based on
those imaginary numbers that we've made up, I think we can offer $20,000 on this book. And the
publisher will be like, great, that's your negotiation negotiating. That's like your high end.
You can start negotiations below. If they're demanding more than that, you need to come back
and renegotiate with us. Sometimes that imaginary number will be like, we've hit the zeitgeist.
We can offer up to 100K on this, or whatever. They just kind of decide. Now, how they know
partially about this is if the book has been up for what we call a bidding war. This is if the
agent gets a book that they think is really hot. They're like, wow, this is fantastic. This is by a
new author. Everyone's going to want this. They will send it out to all the publishers. And instead
of what normally happens when you submit, you submit to the publisher, they take like six
months to a year to review it and get back to you. It's this really miserable way. It was 18 months
I waited for launchers to come back to me. Instead, the agent will say, we're taking offers in two
weeks. We expect this to sell really fast. And suddenly everyone goes crazy like, wow, this
agent has a fantastic book. They all go read it. The agents try to keep a good reputation,
because an agent who doesn't have a good reputation for books in the past can't get away with this
as easily. They all read the book and let's say they all like it. Then they all get back and
they start making their offers. And then the agent goes back to them and says, well, these people
offered 100K. And that's, you know, you've got to have to beat that. And so they'll basically
play them all off of each other and eventually arrive at a high number. Now, there's some
interesting things about advances you should know. Because they are money that you are going to be
paying back out of your royalties, it means that if your book sells the same number of copies
that a famous author's book sells, you will generally make about the same amount of money
as that famous author. You'll make it on the back end instead of on the front end.
And these numbers do change slightly, but a lot of publishing contract language has been the same
for years. And basically the percentages are around the same for everyone. It's just how many
books do you sell. And so because of that, you are kind of insulated against this sort of,
if your book takes off, you haven't just sold it for $10,000. If your book takes off
and sells a million copies, you're going to make five million bucks on that book,
regardless if you are a brand new author or not. At least if you have an industry standard contract,
which all the big publishers should be offering as boilerplate, you should be making a certain
percentage, which I don't think we have time to talk about this week, but we'll try to get in next
week. But one of the things to know about advances, the more money the publisher has paid
up front, the more likely they are to be like, man, we need to push this book because we spent
$200,000 on the advance for this. And if we only sell 10,000 copies, we're not going to make our
money back. So we better give it a huge marketing campaign. So generally the bigger your advance,
the better within reason. There is one reason sometimes it's bad to have a big advance.
And that is if you can imagine two books, one of which both of these books are going to sell
50,000 copies. One of these books, they paid a $10,000 advance on, and it sold 50,000 copies.
And so off of that, the author's earning around $150,000, maybe $200,000, depending on paperback,
stuff like that, whatever. But 50,000 in hardcover would be around usually three to four bucks a
book. This other book, they paid $2 million for. It sells 50,000 copies. Suddenly, this book is a
flop, and this one is a huge surprise success, selling the same number of copies. So there is
an argument for what my agent will always call us say, here's where it seems like everyone is
settling that this book is worth. Pushing them higher than this may not be a good idea because
they all have instincts about what it'll sell. It's all made up instincts. No one knows for sure
what you'll sell. But there is that little caveat that I know Joshua likes it when I put in there
to mention why sometimes pushing the advance astronomically high may not be a great idea.
But regardless, this book has, and advance has been made, your agent negotiates. Generally,
you want to have a contract where you're selling more than one book. You don't generally want to
sell a dozen books because you want to be able to renegotiate, but you also want them committed
to trying to grow you as an author. So for instance, they offered on a launch list,
they offered $10,000 for one book. Joshua, they offered $5,000 for one book. Joshua got them
argued up to $20,000 for two books, so $10,000 per book for two different books, and said,
let's go with this. He feels like he could have taken it other places and got higher. He still
thinks that. But since I'd already, I wanted to be at tour, and I'd send it to tour already,
and I'm like, I think we should be at tour. I took a slightly lower advance than Joshua
thought we probably could have got if we would have played the field a little bit more.
So the book has been negotiated. All the terms get negotiated. We'll talk about contracts next
week. And at that point, you start working directly with the editor. If it's not the
acquisitions editor, it's generally, it's going to be the person who ended up negotiating for
the book the most. Sometimes it's not, sometimes he's handed off to a different editor. Either way,
this is the person that you're going to have a great relationship with, hopefully. This is the
person who's the project manager for your book. Their job is to find out from, talk with you
about how to make the book better. They always want to make a better version of the book you
want to write. Remember that they bought your book. They're not going to try to push it to be
something it's not. They'll want to help you make it a better version of itself. People ask,
do editors ask for things to be added? Only if they think it's going to make a better version
of the book that you are trying to write. They will make suggestions. It's always your job to
make the changes and to decide if you want them or not. At the end of the day, you can always pay
back the advance and cancel the contract if it doesn't end up working out. That happens very
rarely. Most of the time, you work with the editor. You try the things they suggest, some of the
things they suggest you really like, some you don't. You come to a kind of consensus at the end
of the book is now ready. The editor, in the meantime, has been working with the art director
to come up with a cover. Your cover is a movie poster for your book. It is not an illustration
of your book. The art director's job is to come up with a cover that will get the right audience
to pick up your book, not to be detail accurate to what's in the book. Keep that in mind.
Editor handles that. They will show you sketches. They usually will not let you
have too much influence over the cover as a new author. Sometimes they will. Most of the time,
they won't. At that point, then, they take it out and give it to their sales force. The sales force
takes it around and sells it to all the markets, all the bookstores and says, you should carry this
number of copies. It's a really important, cool book that we're releasing. They come up with
negotiations and deals and things like that about releasing the book into the stores. Then,
they do publicity, which is money they put into the author's tour and things like that. They do
marketing, which is money they put into convincing the booksellers to push the book. At that point,
your book gets released. We'll do more questions about this in two weeks, because next week,
we'll do another publishing lecture. Then, we'll do a lot of your questions. Students,
make sure you fill out the form. Make sure you write questions I didn't get to in that form.
I'll try to get to it in two weeks. Next week, we'll do indie publishing and contracts.
Sorry about the fire hose, guys. Sorry about the late start, but keep going,
keep writing. We'll see you again next week.
