We should be live. Hello, class. This is very strange. We're going to do our best doing this.
Fortunately, it's a lecture series, so I'm pretty good at just talking. But oh, now Adam is
double-checking that I'm live. So theoretically, you should all be able to see and you should be
able to type questions and comments and Adam over here in the corner will be able to ask them. He
will do his best. If for some reason it cuts out on you or things like that, we will post this on
YouTube as we've been doing. But theoretically, we're going to be going through your questions
about character. And I'm just going to launch into that, and we'll just go from the questions from
here for a while, and then we'll try to get to some of your questions that you can type in.
Reminder, fill out the sheet that is your attendance sheet to the little questionnaire
to make sure that we know that you were virtually here.
So question number one, how can you use pity to help readers connect with a character who has a
tragic past without making them too incompetent or annoying? This is actually a really great question.
So couple pieces of advice here. Now, if it's tragic backstory, the thing you generally want to
avoid is having the character themselves ruminate on it too much. Now, we talked about introspection,
navel gazing. You will do some of this. Good suggestion is often to have something remind
the character of the thing they've lost, and then have them have a spike of pain and move
beyond it. People who move beyond their pain are going to be innately more sympathetic than people
who ruminate on it. This is difficult because it's very natural for a person to actually
think about their pain. And we don't want to minimize the pain or the tragedy that people go
through at the same time, just having people be one note and focus on it all the time,
is going to make people annoyed. So multiple notes have them have multiple emotional reactions.
Try to have them not bemoan their situation too much, and maybe have other people bemoan it.
Show them trying hard to succeed and failing anyway, particularly through reasons outside their
control. And you will be able to build that sympathy for a character who is failing or who
has lots of tragedy in their life. If you're worried that something I should mention here
is that there is a, what do you call it? There's a trope called Women and Refrigerators
that I would recommend you read. There is a theme in storytelling where a person uses a character
who has not got a lot of influence or power over the story, usually the girlfriend of a superhero,
which is where this trope originated. So read about the whole Women and Refrigerators trope.
It is a troubling theme that writers tend to take people with no autonomy over the story and kill
them as a way of building sympathy for the character who does have autonomy over the story.
And what this tends to do is treat a lot of characters, particularly women, in the stories
as having no control over their lives and treating them as objects who exist only to
further the motivations of the protagonist. This is dangerous trope to fall into because
it leads you into all kinds of difficult situations where you are both making your
characters not feel realistic, you are removing autonomy from a large number of your characters,
and you're falling into a cliched trope. At the same time, you do want your protagonist to care
about the people in their lives who are generally, if you're writing fantasy science fiction type
things, going to have less power over their situation. So it's not an easy, never kill people
in your books, but it's also a be careful when you're doing this to make sure that they are full
and developed characters who have autonomy in their lives, and ask yourself if you're falling
into the tropes a little too much. What comes first? The characters of the plot
would generally change this more during the writing process. I would say for me it's
about even, but characters do change more during the writing process. They change the plot
rather than the plot changing the characters for me most of the time.
Does being a teacher at BYU who agrees to live the honor code ever affect anything that you
write or how you write? This is a very BYU-centric thing. For people who don't know,
BYU is a religious college, which means it has certain rules that people follow who are faculty
or who are students. This is generally never affected what I write. My membership in the
church, my personal morals and philosophy do affect what I write, but the honor code is
just something I barely have ever thought about. No, but the fundamentals that make me who I am
certainly do influence what I write. How does writing graphic novels differ from
writing novels especially concerning character growth? Ask a graphic novel writer. Ask me maybe,
in a few years after I've done it more, I can't give you the answers there, and it would be
disingenuous of me to try to talk too much about that for you.
What motivates you to sit down and work out how to plan plot progression and character
progression to work together? Not sure if motivates is the right term here. I am
motivated by the same thing basically every day, which is that I want to tell my stories.
Getting them out of my head onto the page that people can experience
is the thing that I love to do. It is what drives me every day. Now, that's my motivation,
my large-scale motivation. Get these stories out of my head onto the page. Let people experience
the things that I have dreamed and imagined. What makes me work every day, like my small-scale
motivation, my daily motivation, is watching that number count up toward being complete as I
finish more and more chapters like I've talked about. I do really love it when plot and character
mesh together. Oftentimes, it's a little bit of a revision process to make sure that alignment
is working. In Rhythm of War, which I'm writing right now, I had a character that the plot all
worked, but I felt like there wasn't the right character beat. The third revision finally kind
of made me find a character beat that worked for this character. In this case, I changed
the character's journey a little bit so that it dovetailed into the plot in a better way.
It feels really satisfying when you find that, but yeah. How much time do I need to devote to
a secondary character to make people care? There is no set limit. This is a good question.
You can, or I say, some writers, some filmmakers can make you care about a person
with just a short and brief scene. I've found myself in films caring for a character who
doesn't even have a line of dialogue if this person is presented very accurately. I remember,
for instance, that in the comic books, again, in the death of Superman storylines,
after Superman died back in the 90s, there are a lot of people who tried to take up his mantle.
And the one I remember the most is the one who had the least screen time. It was a guy who
had a hot dog cart and started giving away free hot dogs while wearing a Superman shirt,
because this is how I'm going to be Superman. That just stuck with me. That's a character
I think had three panels or something like that. Maybe I'm remembering wrong, but doing something
very brief to add a lot of rooting interest for a character can make a secondary character very
powerful to us in a very short amount of time. What does it mean exactly when you say add a
viewpoint? This is in context of the, I believe, where I was saying, if you need to lengthen your
story, you add a viewpoint. What I mean by this is a viewpoint character. Generally, in a book,
the number of viewpoint characters you have is going to greatly influence how long your story is.
A viewpoint character is a character through whose eyes we see. In a first person story,
this is going to be the eye. You can have multiple eyes in a story. In a third limited,
which is what I generally spend more of my time writing, this is just someone else's head that
you're in. Now, I'll make the caveat here that occasionally writers, myself included, like to
jump to one person's viewpoint for a short period of time, one chapter, and you're not going to get
a lot of characters or a lot of viewpoints through their eyes. Usually this is to add flavor to the
world or to show a plot point you can't normally show or to just show a scene from someone else's
perspective while all the other characters are there just so you can do something new with it.
But each time you get through someone's eyes, you're going to have to start establishing
rooting interest or sympathy or antipathy if you're an antipathy. I'm sure how to say that word.
You're going to want to establish this character in the reader's eyes,
and that's going to take some extra words than using a character you've already used.
You're going to have to establish the way that they think about the word world, which is going to
use extra words. And if you actually want this to be a solid viewpoint character, you're going to
want to create an arc for them, either an internal arc or an external arc or multiples of each,
and you're going to want to have a sequence of viewpoints that shows them working toward their
goals or in other ways changing, which just adds another parallel dimension to your story.
You can imagine this if you were watching a movie that was about teenagers going to school
and about a young woman who is trying to join a sports team, and her arc is this whole get
in onto the sports team, get onto the soccer team, how that would be a story. If you are going to add
a viewpoint, you perhaps add the coach's viewpoint, and you're showing the coach's
home life and all the things that are going on in her life and how things are difficult for her,
and how all of this, and suddenly you've got a second storyline that then needs to dovetail
into the first storyline in some way by the ending to make it feel cohesive. And you can
see that that just adds a lot of extra work, but also it adds a lot of extra depth and changes
your story dramatically. Now, if instead of showing the coach's story, you are showing the team captain
story, and this team captain has a different story, it changes your book in a different
direction. So adding viewpoints is one of the ways that you sculpt the story and the way you're
doing it. How do I keep character development happening at a steady rate instead of too much
at once or not fast enough? This is practicing with your beta readers and your alpha readers.
This is not one of those things that I can give you a formula for very easily. This is one where
you're going to just have to look at it. You're going to have to try it. You're going to have to
see what works for you. Generally, you're going to want every scene with that character to either
keep establishing their motivations or to show them changing in some way. Ideally,
every scene shows something like this. They make a step forward or backward, both in their
emotional plot, their internal plot, in their relationships or their external plot in some
way, and also is helping ground their motivation even further. I'm doing that in every scene if
you can. Watch what readers say. Watch what readers talk about. This is where your pacing
comes in. How quickly are you moving us through the progress towards your promise is what pacing
means, or at least one of the definitions of pacing. How do you write characters that have
mental illnesses that you don't know much about? You come to know about them.
I highly recommend for topics such as this. These are topics that if you do them poorly in your
book, you can do damage to a group of people. For instance, by inaccurately representing mental
health issues, you can in your book help to isolate people. You can make people feel worse,
or you can sway the public opinion in ways that are harmful. Because of this,
this is one of those issues that you should be really careful about. I don't think you should
avoid doing it. This is where maybe I differ an opinion from some others who have legitimate
suggestions that you just not write about things that you don't have personal experience in.
For me, writing is about exploring the world and the human condition. For me to do that in a way
that is in any way satisfying me, I have to have every character explore being something or someone
different from how I am. This is just part of my writing foundation. Because of that,
I'm going to get some things wrong, and you're going to get some things wrong, and you are going
to accidentally do damage. Be aware of that. Do your best to avoid it by doing your research,
going to primary sources, and asking them, reading their blogs, reading their biographies,
reading about them, the things that they write about their life in any of these
sort of situations. Then make sure you get some people from that group to read your story.
Pay them if they are an expert, or in other ways try to get people to read your stories and give
you feedback so that you can know. This is just something I feel that if you're going to approach
these issues, you take upon yourself as a burden, as a writer, that is part of your responsibility.
How do you keep character voices different from each other? How do you make distinct characters?
We talked a lot about this last week, and so I'm not sure if we need to delve into this again,
but I would say that remember motivations mixed with characters' background influencing their
view of the world, mixed with their individual voice, their personality coming through in the
way they describe the world, that's going to get work. But last week's lecture covered this,
and this is a question from two weeks ago. Let's see. Oh, here's a great question. How
do you kill characters? It's kind of an interesting thing for me, because I often
take a little more of a philosophical approach to this one. A lot of writers you'll talk to,
they say, my characters live, and I just let them do what they're doing. When I first started
writing, I thought this was complete bunk. I'm like, no, the characters do what I write for
them to do. I'm a novelist. This is what I do. But at the same time, I can understand that,
particularly in characters taking great risks. I, as a writer, kind of view it as I am going to
not withhold the consequences, some of the times, some of the times I will, of characters taking
actions that could cause their deaths. And I feel like when a character death is a direct
consequence of actions taken by them or other characters in the story, it is going to come
across, it's going to work. Lots of times in life, deaths are not direct consequences. They're
often indirect consequences. In stories, those tend to be very unsatisfying. When you have a
giant war epic and your protagonist general dies of dysentery on the battlefield, it's a very
difficult story to write in a way that's going to be satisfying. That's a challenge if you want to
do it. But most of the time, that character dying as a result of the decision they made to have a
battlefield in a certain place or a decision another character made to betray that character or something
like this is going to be a more satisfying story to tell because that's how we do storytelling.
Now, you're going to have to decide how you want this death to work. What are you
wanting the death to achieve? It's a very different thing if a character fulfills their arc
and in fulfilling their arc decides to take a risk or make a sacrifice and die because of that.
That's a very different story. It's a very heroic story. It's a very classical Hollywood story.
A different story is the character is about to complete their arc and die right before it.
This is hugely unsatisfying, which is something you can use as a tool in your storytelling. I
have done it before. George Martin is very, very good at this, this idea of leaving you hanging
in a way that all of the characters are left hanging because they thought this character's arc
should be completed and it didn't get completed. This is a very dangerous tool to use. Readers
do not like running across this very often unless you've already established that this is a theme
of your story and it becomes a plus instead of a minus. How else do you kill characters?
Making it a direct consequence of the actions of the antagonist is always a great idea if you
are going to be killing characters in your story. There are a lot of great ways to do this, however,
you need to ask yourself, what result do I want to have? Why is this character death happening
in my story? How can I make sure that it is not feeling tropey but is feeling like the
real death of a character that, and understand this is going to have real consequences on reader
emotions? And how, what do I want it to do as a story piece? That is a difficult balance to walk,
because on one hand I'm telling you, make sure it doesn't feel like the author just playing with
figures on a table and knocking one over. While on the other hand I'm telling you,
you are an author playing with figures on the table and deciding to knock one over.
It's about the illusion. It's the illusion of this is all real, don't let them see the author's hand.
When they see the author's hand, then you have generally made a mistake.
Joy Frederickson asks for you to talk about software you use to keep everything straight.
Software I use to keep everything straight? All right. So software I use to keep everything straight
is Wicked Pad, which is an open source Wiki software, which I recommend if you want to
keep a Wiki for yourself. There's moderate documentation about it. I was able to figure
it out, and I am not terribly techie, so I assume that you can figure it out as well.
I use Microsoft Word for everything else, and I keep it on Dropbox. Those are really my tools.
I generally mean nothing else. I have not used Scrivener extensively. A lot of people swear by
it, and they are people I trust, so I think it is probably a very good tool. But I have never used it.
So how do I know when my character is too competent with 7 Os? So character competence
becomes a problem when things are supposed to be difficult for that character and they aren't.
Now, things not being difficult for the character doesn't have to be a problem is the thing. This
comes down to the tone of your story and what people are wanting to get out of your story.
For instance, having a story that is a mystery where the detective is extremely competent,
and the fun of the story is watching the detective step through the discovery process
is really fun. This is Sherlock Holmes. Why was Sherlock Holmes loved by everyone?
Sherlock Holmes was incredibly competent, and you just got to watch him solve a problem.
Through the course of that story. Now, if the story were more about Sherlock Holmes as a character,
as a lot of the modern adaptations are, then these stories tend to focus on the areas of
incompetence that Sherlock Holmes has while balancing it with competence. So for instance,
if Sherlock Holmes were also emotionally very stable and great at relationships and had everything
together in his life, then the modern adaptations would not be as interesting because they're
expanding to other areas. They're not just about can he solve this mystery. Modern adaptations tend
to be about can he solve this mystery while maintaining a relationship with Watson, while
his own life is falling apart because he's a sociopath or something like that. In this case,
competence in one area is balanced by incompetence in another. If your character is competent in
all areas, you can still have a story that's engaging. It's just a very different type of story.
It's going to be, we're going to enjoy watching the character go through the motions. We are not going
to connect or empathize with that character generally as much, but this can still work. You
just have to decide what type of story you're telling. In general, most writers, myself included,
would recommend balancing areas of competence with various incompetence to give yourself more tools
to tell a more varied story, but it is not the only way to tell stories.
Adam, do you have any questions for me? No.
All right. How do you make an iconic villain terrifying instead of cliche?
Any time, so how about this? A cliche is when a story is doing something that has been done
so many times that the original purpose of the cliche has been lost and replaced with the pop
understanding, the collective understanding of it. For instance, the original purpose of a
villain giving a monologue at the end of their story is to fill the reader in on details. Now,
when a villain does that, a significant portion of the audience says, oh, they're monologuing again.
That reminds me of that other story where they made jokes about that. Isn't that funny? And
instead of paying attention to getting the information, the readers are instead remembering
another story and getting the wrong mood applied to your story. That's why a villain monologue
is generally a bad idea now. Now, of course, it was probably always a bit of a bad idea,
but it's especially a bad idea because of the cliche. So if you're asking, how do I prevent
a villain from being cliche, this becomes you asking yourself, all right, what has the cliche
been replaced with? What was the original intent? What is now what's going on? If the villain is
cliched, because a lot of villains these days, if you would say, why are they cliched, it is because
they are one note. They want only one thing. They don't have a lot of time in the film you're
watching for this villain to have multiple character traits, so they focus on the one.
They want some MacGuffin, whether it be a Motherbox or an Infinity Stone, and they are spending
all of their time getting this thing and don't really explain why they wanted it except for
nebulous power. This is generally the most cliched type of villain. That's pretty easy to undermine
or to subvert by spending a little bit of time giving the villain interesting motivations
for this thing. Spending all this work that we've talked about building characters
devoted to your villain is going to take more time. Taking more time and more screen time on the page
can be difficult, particularly if you don't have a viewpoint for your villain,
but these are the sorts of things that you want to practice if you want to stop being cliche.
And in villains it's particularly difficult because of a couple things. One is screen time.
If you are not writing a lot of viewpoints from that character's eyes,
it's going to be harder to give them motivations. But it's not impossible,
particularly if you have one of your main characters spending a lot of time with this villain
and you present one motivation and then you add complexity to it for future scenes.
Readers really like this. I, as a reader, love this when I'm presented as a villain
that says, I need the MacGuffin, and you're like, oh great, this is what the villain does.
And then the next scene, they are, I need the MacGuffin because my family is being held and I
can use it to get my family back. Suddenly more motivation. And the further you go with that
villain, the more, of course, I did pick the most cliched way to give depth to a villain. But
you see what I'm talking about here. More time, more diversity of this character's
perspectives and opinions, and foundation of their motivation is just going to serve you
very well in this regard. You make a villain not cliché in the same way you make any character,
not cliché. All right. I'm going to jump to some of the questions from last week.
Let's see. These are not formatted quite as well. So...
I do have some questions that came in if you want to go. Just let me know.
Okay. Let me do a few of these. And then,
how do I make two characters who have opposing goals equally sympathetic,
especially when one of them is clearly on the road to villainy?
So we talked a little about this right now. I want to dig into this idea just a little bit
more and say putting them at contrasting goals is really, really handy. This is just a great
way to make a villain. But you do ask the question of, how can you make them both sympathetic?
They should both want what they're going for and make the achieving of it mutually exclusive,
meaning if one gets it, it's a zero sum. The other one can't get it. And then you just show
why they both want it. If you show their motivations, if you let us see why they need this thing,
then it will work for itself. It'll work itself out if we understand their motivations and their
motivations are sympathetic motivations, meaning there are motivations that a normal person would
have. One of the reasons that villains get cliched is this sort of I want power, which is kind of
nebulous. Yes, people want power, but really in our lives, what we want is I want this promotion
so that the work I'm doing, I'm respected for. Yes, getting the promotion does give you more
power, but then there seem to be very few people who are just like, whoa, I want power. The more
they're along the lines of, I could do this job so well if I just could cut through the red tape.
If I can get to a higher level, if I get this promotion, the red tape goes away and I can
make it done the way I want it to be done, and that will be great because everything will run
more smoothly. That is a realistic motivation as opposed to I want the promotion for more power,
and spend a little bit of time and ask yourself why a person would want to do this,
and two characters going for the same promotion. One of them wants it because they feel like they
can legitimately just make the world a better place, and the other one wants it because they need
an expensive type of surgery that if they can't pay for they will die. You have two contrasting
motivations. Only one of them can have the promotion. Obviously, there are ways around this,
but you see what I'm doing. Suddenly, we're sympathetic for both, but there's one that
we want to succeed a little bit more. This is how you go about things.
Let's see. How do you know which metaphors are appropriate when you're writing about a fantasy
world that shares elements, shares many elements of the real world? Oh, you've got a problem ahead
of you here. Well, it's a problem in that I can offer you solutions, but you're going to have to
make some difficult decisions. This is the translation problem, is what we call it. Basically,
you're asking, when readers are reading my book and you have your character put their feet up on
an Ottoman, do you call it an Ottoman? When the Ottoman Empire never existed in this fantasy
world, even though the fantasy world is very similar to earth in a lot of other ways.
You ask yourself, can you say it is the straw that broke the camel's back without people saying,
wait a minute, that's a saying in our world. I know they have straw and camels in this world,
but did they really come up with the exact same metaphor? It's even worse if there aren't camels
or you haven't introduced them and they're like, wait, wait, wait. Are there camels in this world?
I guess there must be, but that's just very, very weird to me. You have all kinds. You can go down
a rabbit hole in this. For instance, in Mistborn, I use a lot of Greek and Latin word derivations
in order to create the fantasy words that I'm using for the names of the magic systems, because in
our world, we use a lot of Greek and Latin. You end up with something like alomance, which
Nancy means to see the future. It also is a thing that sounds like a fantasy magic.
And so when I use the word alamance, am I saying that Latin exists in this world and that that
alamance actually means what the Latin means? Or am I, you can go down a rabbit hole.
You'll have to make your own decisions here on what you decide to do. I use something that Tolkien
said, and I'm paraphrasing him horribly, but basically the idea was the books are translations
from an original tongue, and the translator has interpreted sayings into things that a modern
Western audience reading in English would understand. And so if Bilbo happens to say something that
you're like, wait a minute, wait a minute, there's no Ottoman Empire, that is just the translator
who has translated it into English and therefore using the word that is most similar. This is what
I usually use as my excuse for this. It's being translated in English, and the translator is
Brandon Sanderson, and he is going to use some terms from our world now and then. But even in
saying that, you have to be careful, particularly in a fantasy work, with how much you kick the reader
out. Yes, they can go through the thought process of that. The one that has kicked people out of
the books the most is when I used the term homicidal hat trick for a character who had killed three
members of another character's family. And I just love the term so much I put it in even though my
editor's like, this will kick people out. And I'm like, yeah, but I like it. And then indeed,
it is probably the phrase that has kicked people out the most because they sit and they think,
all right, hat trick means this. It's a sports term. Do they have sports on this world? What are
they doing? Where did they come up with this? That sort of thing. It's one of those things
that even if you're in the right, right, there is no right. It's a fantasy novel, right? But even
if you're in the right, there can be the question of if you kick your audience out or a significant
portion, great, you're right. Your story still works worse than if you were wrong. And so sometimes
it's better just to trim these things out. But you're going to have to make that call yourself.
Adam, let's get a question from the audience. Okay.
Shannon asks, how do you know you have the right character for the right plot
in the early stages of telling a story, or developing a story?
Right. Right character for the right plot in the early stages of developing a story.
Boy, I do a lot of this on instinct. I'll try to break it down for you.
Generally, I am doing in the early parts of my writing some free rights from the
characters' viewpoints. Sometimes these end up in the book, sometimes they don't.
I posted for you the beginning of Skyward where I did three different introductions to this
character. And this was me searching to make sure I had the right character for this plot.
Almost always, as a writer, you can make any plot interesting with any character
with skill. It is very rare that I sit down and after writing for a while say,
man, this is the wrong character for this plot. Because if you're doing your job right, then
the plot is often catching people who are not well suited to the story that they're in
and forcing them to go on the adventure anyway. That's what a lot of stories are about.
You are a fish out of water. You are the person who has to save the world,
but you don't fit that narrative. And as you write, who the character is will influence
how they decide to go through this story. And if you're doing your characterization right,
the reader will be like, yeah, this totally feels like how this character would go about
saving the world. And that back and forth is what makes writing stories really fun and engaging.
So I would worry about this less than you probably are, considering you're asking a question about
it. That said, once in a while, a character doesn't fit. They are the wrong character.
This happens when a character, for instance, is distracting from another plot. They are so,
usually it's somebody who's very gregarious. Their plot is super interesting,
but it doesn't align with the main plot, and you bring them into the story, and suddenly
every reader wants to read about this character instead. And they're not focusing on your main
story. That's when you have decision points. You're like, maybe this character should have been the
hero from the beginning. Or maybe this character needs their own story, and I need to put someone
in that role who better folds into the group dynamic that I am creating for this ensemble cast.
That definitely does happen now and then. But it's almost never do I think, oh, the character
is the wrong character for the plot. The most I've ever done is do what I did in Way of Kings,
where I split a character in half and made two different characters out of them,
Dalinar and Adolin, as I've talked about before, so that they could split apart the motivations
for the characters and the goals of the characters and have them in conflict with each
other instead of the conflict internal in one character. So let me take another one of these.
This is harder because my TA didn't have time to get to it this time, so it's harder for me to...
All right. Can you give us advice on how to submit to a publisher? Basically, normally I get all
the questions separated from all the likes, and now they're all together in one form, so I'm just
going to have to scroll through. This will be next week. Next week we will do a big rundown of all
the publishers in science fiction and fantasy and some of the publishers and children's. We will
talk about how to submit to them, and we will talk about publishing in a traditional publishing
sense. Theoretically, the next week we will do some brief indie publishing sort of things. I have some
students in the class who are successful, full-time independent writers, and they've given me some
notes. We were going to have them talk to you, but this whole format, we're going to use their
notes instead, and I'm going to share some of those things with you and some of my own, because I
have done some indie publishing. So next week we will dig into it, the big publishing lectures,
and those are Firehose lectures, so I'm sorry about that.
Let's see. Does every conversation need to be an info dump that's strictly centered around the plot?
That's a good question, and the answer is obviously no. You're asking for me the right place.
Every conversation should do something. Hopefully every conversation does multiple things.
That does not mean that they have to be an info dump, which is one of the things
that conversations do, or advancing the plot. There are lots of other things that
conversations do. For instance, some conversations in books exist solely to show
that these two characters have a background together. This is when you have the character
meet another character, and they share a joke about Budapest. This happens in the Marvel films.
These characters have banter, they have a history, they know each other and are friendly to each other
and go. It can be also conflict driven, where these characters have not gotten along in the past.
Dialogue can achieve that. Dialogue can be there just to make the reader laugh,
or to make the reader cry, to expire an emotion in the character. A lot of characterization,
or a lot of dialogue in films is there to just be a joke. Now, this is often doing multiple
things. It's making the reader laugh. It's often advancing the relationship of the characters,
and it is often providing a break in the pacing of a tight action sequence or some other thing
to give you a chance to feel another emotion for a while. Because one of the things you want to
avoid in your stories, generally, is you want to avoid always being at a 10. This can be a big
problem. I suppose I can write, because we did all this stuff on the board. If your story is
always like, this is your character's emotional graph, and this is time, and this is how emotional
they are on this topic. Your story is like this. This character is angry, and they are always at
a 10. This is going to have, it's going to be bad for your story. This is going to lead to that
one note character problem that we talked about a couple of weeks ago. It's going to lead to the
reader feeling fatigued about this character and about the high emotions that are happening in it.
You are also going to feel the story is stagnating because there is no motion. Now, of course,
if this character is having a time where something makes them a little angry, but then they get over
it, but then something worse happens, and they try to get over it, but then it spikes up, and then
this is where Hulk smash. Your story has motion. Your story has ups and downs. Your story is going
to work better. This is the same sort of thing with action. If your story is at a 10 for action
the entire time, you're going to have fatigue. In fact, it generally is even the same way for
tension and pacing. Now, on pacing-wise, I will say that I have read shorter books that keep the
pacing at a 9 or a 10 the entire book, and it works for me because I read it in one sitting,
and then I'm done, and then I'm like, that was a page turner. Those books, if they ever get long
enough that I have to put them down, at the end of it, I feel unsatisfied because I've been at a
10 or a 9 the whole time for characters. This happens a lot with thrillers. Put it down, come
back, and I'm like, oh, it's still at a 10. Right. This is getting old. This is just not working.
So that's a matter of length of story. I often feel like I can keep the pacing as a writer
faster and the emotion higher in a shorter work than I can in a longer work. In a Way of Kings
book, I'm trying lots of ups and downs. I'm trying a steady ramp of a lot of these things,
but then lulls where we have scenes where characters are just sitting around the fire
chatting and having fun and remembering how much they enjoy being around each other
to give us a relief from some of the moments of tension. Do you have another question for me?
There have been three questions about writing humor, specifically how to avoid
running cliche or falling into the jar jar being stuck rabbit hole.
Right. Okay. All right. Let's talk about humor. I would recommend to you that you go to some
humorists and listen to what they have to say. Howard Taylor, my friend and writing excuses
co-host, talks about humor in excellent ways, and he is a better source than I am,
though I do know enough about this to start talking about it a little bit.
And so let's talk about humor. Humor works best either as a relief from some other tension as a
way of creating character familiarity or division between characters, or particularly humor works
best when there's a lot of different types of humor. Humor is tough because humor is one of the
most subjective things you will put in your book. What you find funny is going to often be more
distinctive to you than what you find exciting. Generally, excitement and some of these emotions
are more broad based. Humor tends to be a little more individualized. And the other thing to keep
remember about emotions, humor included, is the reader's investment in your story
has a large effect on whether something feels melodramatic, meaning overly sentimental,
or dramatic, just regular dramatic. You can see this by picking up a very dramatic story
and reading only the ending. And when you don't have connection to the characters,
it will feel way more sentimental to you a lot of times than if you are reading the book,
and it's a well-written book, and you are getting to the end and you've been on the
journey with these characters where you're like, wow, this emotion is earned. Therefore,
I'm going to let myself feel it. Humor doesn't need to be earned as much as the other ones do.
So let's talk about a few aspects of humor. So there are a couple of broad categories of
humor you can use, and these tend to be good to add a variety of these.
So one of the large categories is what we call the comic drop.
The comic drop is where you are taking a person who is at a high level of respect, competence,
self-respect, arrogance, you might say, and you are dropping them through a comment made
by someone in the story or by a situation. If you've ever seen a story where someone talks,
where a character's like, I am so great and awesome, I just succeeded, they didn't even
say that. The character holds up the trophy that they have won, and then an egg hits them in the
head. This is like complete undercut of the emotional moment by dropping that character
from a place of security and strength to a place of being laughed at. And the comic drop
is one of the more useful types of humor you can use. Understand, though, that if you drop
somebody who's already low, that will actually drop the person making the joke more than it drops
the person. This is what we call about punching up or punching down. When the person is standing on
top of the podium and they have been victorious and they get an egg in the face, that is very
different than the person who is walking away, slumped because they didn't finish the race,
because they tripped and fell, and then someone throws an egg at them. That character is being
dropped a little bit, but the person through the egg is the one who is really going to get our ire.
So where you use your comic drops is one of the things that you can control. You can also
show banter between characters. A lot of banters between characters involves a
comic drop of some sort. It involves a character laughing at another character and then coming
back with a nice comeback that drops them a little bit, but in a way that makes everybody smile,
even the character smiling. So you, the reader, can feel like you're in on the joke. You're all
together and you're having fun. When Lopen glues his face to the floor and everyone laughs,
Lopen has dropped himself. This is one of the things Lopen does. This is why one of the reasons
he's an endearing character is he's willing to drop himself and have fun with it and laugh at
himself. So in some ways he's doing a comic drop, we are laughing at him, and we're liking him more
in the same situation. So another sort of humor is the juxtaposition.
So things that don't belong together juxtaposed are often very funny. This is the source of humor
in a lot of the movies that you'll see about he is a strong tough cop and his companion
is a six-year-old in a Tinkerbell outfit or whatever. The idea of these two things alone
are not necessarily funny, but these two things together make us laugh. Your comic juxtapositions
you do have to be careful about because a lot of comic juxtapositions are going to buy their nature,
make your story funny, rather than making your characters funny. A comic drop is generally
done by the characters or people in the story, and it's humor that's in the story. But for
instance, that story I told you, you would not expect that to be a really tense drama about a
character getting over some difficult thing in their life. You'll probably add a little bit
of that, but you'll understand that the reader is mostly going to laugh about these two paired
characters who do not get along. The comic juxtaposition can just be used in joke form as well,
but again, the more you use it, the more jokey it can make your entire story.
Again, I am not an expert in this, and so a lot of things I'm going to be saying
don't fit into the big theme. There are people who can talk about this thematically a lot better,
but is the rule of three. This goes along with a juxtaposition that a rule of three,
the idea for that, I should stand away from it so that you can actually see it on the board,
the idea of rule of three is that when you show things happen in a sequence,
you are going to be expecting some sort of tying together of these thematic elements
and or some sort of reversal for the third one. So for instance, you can use the rule of three
to have a list of things where the third one is a juxtaposition, or where the third one is a comic
drop, or where the third one is something that is finally the expected one. An example of this,
see if I can find an example. An example of this, there is an old Bruce Willis movie that is really
weird called the Hudson Hawk. So weird. They tried to do a really comedic action thing,
and they strayed a little bit too much into juxtaposition and comic drops on Bruce Willis'
character to the point that nobody knew how to take it. It played a little bit like The Last
Action Hero, if you've seen that where I actually think Last Action Hero works really well,
whereas Hudson Hawk is fascinating. But one of the running jokes in this is this idea that he
wants a cup of coffee. Every time he goes to get his drink of coffee, something happens to the
coffee. This kind of plays into a play on the rule of three and is repetition.
Repetition with some little variance in the repetition is innately funny to us. So Bruce
Willis goes to get a cup of coffee, and the first time something mundane stops him. I can't remember
what it is in the story, so we'll just make up our own. The first time he gets his cup of coffee,
he accidentally leaves it behind. The second time it's a little sillier. He goes to get his cup of
coffee, and this time someone else walks by and takes it and starts drinking it. The third time
you do something completely ridiculous. I do know this one is in the story. He picks up his cup of
coffee and someone shoots the cup out of his hand, and it explodes. And so because we've done the
repetition, Bruce Willis can't have his coffee. And because we're seeing this idea of the
rule of three, I don't think the copy thing in that movie is actually with you. I think it goes
far beyond that. But the idea is that escalation makes humor. The more you escalate this thing,
the more interesting it becomes. And one thing to be aware of with humor is
that you want to start small with this escalation for the same sort of reason that
if it's always up here, it's always completely crazy, then you're not going to enjoy it as much
as if it starts normal. A lot of times, if the situations are really crazy,
at the end of the story, your buy-in is much lower. But if it starts normal and then gets
ridiculous, by the end you are buying into very, very insane situations. A lot of what we kind
of call the comic farce, like the Chevy Chase vacation movies, the way these work is by starting
with a small little thing that is going wrong. And then the character's bumbling inability to deal
with it escalates the situation to something that seems normal, then it seems a little less normal,
and then seems completely outlandish. But since each step is very small, we are laughing at how
Chevy Chase is able to top how ridiculous the situation is each given time.
So a couple of things to help you. I really would point you toward other humorists.
Do realize that there are also kind of general themes of humor. There is what we would call,
let me erase this guy. And I try to, in my books, have a little bit of each of these. So there's
what we call character humor. Character humor is our humor that is often,
a character is just innately a little odd. This is Lopin glues his face to the floor.
Lopin is really interested in using the magic to get women. Lopin is fun because he's got very
relatable sort of issues. He wants to get women. But his way of doing it is they'll really like
me if I can glue my friends to the wall. They'll think that's great. That is character humor.
There is relationship humor. This is when two characters' quirks play off of it in a way that
it exaggerates their quirks, that it juxtaposes their quirks, and in this type of relationship humor
is just fun to watch. This is generally good for building camaraderie between a team. This is
where your banter comes in. There is a related one, which is the insult
humor, where someone is calming, dropping someone else and making you laugh at it.
And then there is textual. These are dad jokes. These are your puns on the very nature of
your standard jokie joke. I love these. I am a dad, so it makes sense. But generally a good book,
long book, is going to have a little bit of each of these going on in the story.
And that variety makes sure that somebody's going to laugh. Everyone's going to laugh at
something in your story, even if they find some of the humor to be grating and not work on them.
All right. What time are we at here? We've got 20 minutes left. So let's see.
I had a good time in person for the first time. Well, I'm glad. Let's see.
When is introspection good for characters? This is actually a great question. Introspection
is one of those things that's generally good for all characters, but is generally,
you generally need much less of it than your instincts will want you to use.
And so all characters need a little bit of introspection, I feel, unless you're writing in
some interesting cinematic form where you're not being inside of anyone's heads. Every character
is going to at some point think, man, that just sucked. I can't get over how much that thing
that happened to me just sucked. By having them think about something like that,
it just makes them feel like a real human being. Now, one of the things that you may
run into is that some people, I am one of these, have a narrative in their head. They think to
themselves. I think to myself, that just sucked when something happens that sucked. Some people
do not think like that. It's more of an emotion or impression to them. And so they aren't having
a constant narrative of voice in their heads. And writing different characters in different
ways like this could be something you could try. It's very difficult to do.
Another question from over here. Yeah. Liam wants you to talk about the
Sander Lanch, specifically how you converge multiple plots and subplots without feeling
rushed, slow, or forgotten. Okay. Sander Lanch. So how do you converge
all of the different plots? So this is something I love in stories, if you can't tell from the way
I write my stories. A spectacular ending where multiple plot threads come together at once.
It's just, this is what I'm in it for. This is why I love it.
Some tips. So early in my career, before I got published, I started using these
Sander Lanches very naturally. And I found, actually, that it was easy to lose track
of some of the smaller climactic moments when you were constantly one-upping them
with multiple other moments. And so it became one of the things I had to practice was learning
which moments together in an avalanche could be not forgotten. And this is a matter of,
if we kind of go back to what we were talking about before, this idea of
making sure that everything's not at a 10 all the time. You can imagine your character emotions
on this thing. And you have three characters who are all kind of, let's grab a couple different
colors for this. You've got three characters. And they all have emotional journeys that one
looks like this, and the next one starts a little higher, but then falls and is not learning,
but then their emotions get high, and right at the end they spike. And then character three
has a more gradual sort of subtle, we're not doing, and then their arc is like that,
and they go like this, or actually, so they get to their height right here. All right,
let's use that. You can see how, theoretically, this character's emotional moment and journey
is going to completely be consumed by the fact that these very, very dramatic moments are happening,
where you've brought multiple characters up to a 10, where the action perhaps is up at a 10,
where things are exploding, and things like that, while as another character is maybe realizing
that all along their mother cared for them, and that's just a warm thing for them to come to
understand. This character's arc is going to be better completed, as I originally drew it,
over here, where you get to, while this character's arc is going down, have a little high for this
character, where they come to their realization, where they can shine a little bit on their own,
where these two, you're going to interweave, because they're both getting to the same heights
at the same time, and so you want this to be a one-two punch, where you're in one character's
head and something is happening, and then what's happening to this character, if you can do it
right, will relate to this character in some way, so that their plots are feeding off of each other,
and you're feeling like they're part of one great whole where they're intersecting.
This tends to work much better than having them separate. If you're going to have these separate,
bringing this one to their climax here, and this one to their climax there,
is generally going to be a better choice for you. Also remember, avoid having twists just to have
twists. Early in my career, I cut this from Elantris, but I had one of the characters turn
out to have, at the end of the book, a completely different heritage that he had been hiding the
entire time from everyone else, because I thought it was a cool twist. It added nothing to the book.
In fact, it was like something went like this, and then ramped all the way up to 10, because it's
like, oh, this character came out of nowhere having a background similar to me, and it's
really important. It's tying in, and it didn't actually. It meant nothing. It was just confusing,
and the reader's like, wait, why I can't focus on these other twists because you have too many
twists happening. Twist for twist's sake are generally not going to be as effective as making
sure that it adds something to the character dynamic, and that it reveals something about the
plot and setting. So there are some tips for you.
Any says, if a character is not going to get a happy ending, what promises do you give at the
beginning of a story so that you don't give too much away, but also don't set the reader up to be
dissatisfied? This is an excellent question, because you can write a tragedy where a character
does not get a happy ending, and where you are left sad. That is kind of the point of a tragedy,
is you did not get what you wanted to get. This can be very unsatisfying in a good way sometimes.
That's what you tried to do. Most of the time, you want to give an indication
that this is possible in the world. You do this by raising the question. If the character is a,
you're having a classic tragedy, the character's flaw is going to prevent them from making the
correct decision at the end of the story, or their flaw early on is going to snowball to
cause them to have consequences. This is very easy to foreshadow, because you are showing the same
story you would as if they succeed with the same sort of foreshadowing, except at the end,
they make the wrong choice. If it were tense in the book where they made the right choice,
then your foreshadowing would have been in place that they could have potentially made the wrong
choice. Now, I would generally recommend adding to this something else to balance it out,
generally a character who makes a right choice as a contrast, or showing early in the story that
this is a story that is a world full of tragedy. You are watching to see that tragedy unfold by
giving foreshadowing by showing some characters have tragic ends earlier in the story. Another way
that you can do this is, of course, the sort of good version of a bait and switch where you show,
you give an early promise, and then you show through the course of the story that the character
doesn't deserve that, that at the end the reader is supposed to be rooting for them to not get
the ending because they don't deserve it. They weren't worthy of it, or flipping on their head.
The thing that the character is told they're supposed to want, the character by the end of
the story is realized that they don't want. Therefore, when they don't get their happy ending,
it's happy in a different way because that character has learned that they want something
else more. This does happen a lot in your, again, if we go back to the classic Hollywood action ending
where what does the character want? They want to be in love and be with the person they love.
But what do they need? They need to save the world so that person that love doesn't die.
So in the end, this character makes a heroic sacrifice, does not get the happy ending to be
with the character that they want to be with, but also at the same time has achieved the need
that the world needed, which is saving the world. This is kind of a classic, bitter,
sweet ending for an action hero. So lots of different dynamics you can take here,
lots of different directions you can take it. The tone of your story is going to influence
this a great deal. But make sure that you're giving that promise that it could be a decision
that the character might not get what they want, even in a story where they do.
Braden says, how do I know when an arc deserves multiple books,
and how do I know when and where to break a story into multiple books?
Okay. Great question. How do you know if a character's story is going to need multiple books,
and how do you know where to break that story? So worrying about multiple books is one of these
things that I find new authors do too much. Because in general, you will be better served
as a new writer if you pretend you need to do the full arc for a character in a single volume,
and give your best and your all to it. Obviously as experienced writers, and some of you are
obviously already experienced writers, or want to try something a little more difficult,
know that characters having arcs across multiple books is also very important.
One of my rules of thumb is make the first book as satisfying as you can.
Make sure that there is a complete arc for a character. You generally do this if you're
going to be splitting up your character's arc by splitting it up into multiple steps.
For instance, we can go back to Star Wars, the prime example that I often use,
the original trilogy of course. In Star Wars, Luke has an arc in three parts,
and we are presented only with the first version of his arc early in the story. The first version
of his arc is he wants to go off into the stars and have an adventure. Then later on, when he makes
Obi-Wan, Obi-Wan presents another step in that arc. You are going to have to learn to become a Jedi
master. During the course of the story, the eye go off into the stars and have an adventure,
goes through a complete arc. While you have to go and become a Jedi, goes to step number one,
learning to trust the Force. If you were plotting this story ahead of time, you would say,
okay, step number one, learn to trust the Force. Step number two, control your rage and your emotions.
Step number three, confront your father figure and redeem him instead of killing him. This is your
journey as a Jedi. So, movie one, he learns to trust the Force. Movie two, he has trouble trusting
his emotions and fails at it. Movie three, he has learned to master his emotion, goes to the end,
proves this by redeeming his father instead of killing him. If you came up with that arc,
and you in the first one said, I'm going to make this first one, learning to trust the Force,
I'm going to give it its own full arc in the story. Luke is going to fail to trust the Force and
get shot by the little thing flying around him. He's going to have a contrary opinion that says
this is all bunk. You shouldn't listen to any of it. He's going to have a challenge at the end
where he has to decide if he's listening to the guy who said blasters are really cool,
don't listen to the Force, or his ghost dad who says listen to the Force, Luke. He's going to
choose between those two, learn to trust the Force, and be rewarded by being able to make
the shot that is impossible, that the targeting system has already shown that another character
was not able to use to make the shot. So you have a full and complete arc of what is step one.
So if you get good at this, what you're going to decide you're going to do is you're going to say,
how can I make step one in this character's journey completely fulfilling in and of itself,
using all the tools that a writer uses to make something fulfilling? If yes, do that arc and
write that book and then take the next step in the next book. If you're worried about this though,
a lot of times doing the full arc in a story for a character can be very,
can be great practice. It can make for a stronger story. And afterward you can say,
all right, the character is here in their life. Now what other challenges can I give them now
that they feel like they've mastered this one arc? How can I put a challenge in front of them
that makes them uncertain that they can continue and persist in this? How can I
make this character have to prove that they can hold on to and do some enduring to the end sort
of stuff? You can always, with a character, find something more to explore in them. Just do be
aware that the longer your series becomes, the more difficult this becomes for the reader to
continue suspending their disbelief that this character is going to go through 14 different
arcs and 14 different stories. And that is a real and difficult thing to deal with. But
there are very few models of how to do this, and you're going to have to find your own way
in doing it. So if you're planning a 14 book series, which right now I would say just write
the first one the best you can, and then sit back and ask yourself, all right, can I now plot
more books for this character where each one is going to be fulfilling and I'll break it up?
Nathaniel says, how do you develop characters, heroes, villains, heroes, failing heroes,
etc., off-camera so that it's a surprise? All right. How do you develop villains off-camera?
Billions, characters. That is a surprise. Okay. So you do need to do this once in a while. Develop
characters off-screen, off the page so that when they show up, it's either a surprise or it's
an interesting reveal. You don't have to do this often, but you do have to do it. What I think you're
talking about is where, let's see if I can find a great example of this in cinema or something
like that, there's an old movie called Mystery Man where they talk about the coolest superhero
who ever existed being this guy who can cut guns in half with his mind. And this character is not
on stage until midway through the movie where someone shows up and a bunch of guns get cut in
half and they're like, oh, it's the dude who can cut guns in half with his mind. That's so cool,
because the rest of us have lame superpowers and that one's actually useful. And it works very well
as a reveal in that movie. This is, I think, the sort of thing you're talking about. You're developing
a character by their lore. And this is generally what you're going to want to do, is you're going
to want to have characters talk about this other character. You're going to want to have characters.
This character has had an influence on the world that is plainly visible. And you do this with
all the stuff that I've been talking about with other world-building elements. This person becomes
a world-building element until they step onto the page and becomes a character. And at that moment,
you're going to have to transition them out of legend and myth, which is going to be a little,
by nature, tropey, and into person. And that transition is the hard thing. Building up the
lore of them is not necessarily that difficult. Again, treat it like any sort of world-building
element that you would use. Last question? Yeah.
Yeah.
Dave says, how do you balance that plot progression as seen on the graph with the
impression of characters controlling their own destiny?
Oh, great question. So how do you do this graph while also making the characters have autonomy?
And so that is really great. You are going to want to make sure that your characters are by
this point. Like, what is this ramp up? This is generally the point where a crisis is happening
for the character, and they are knowing they're going to have to make a decision. And this point
should be a decision by the character one way or the other. In here, you generally want to show
them making small decisions along this way in either failing or succeeding and then bearing
the consequences. For instance, if your arc is the character needs to be more brave and needs to
grab the sword and charge the enemy army to inspire everyone else who's too afraid to do so
to join in with them. So if you were going to do that, you would earlier want to give them a chance
to make that decision and either fail or make it correctly and then have terrible consequences on it
so the reader is uncertain if they'll make it again, this sort of thing. Having those decision
points built along that where the character's actual actions change the plot in the course
of the story, that needs to start happening way earlier in your story than your climax.
And so the character failing to pick up the sword and go charging for whatever reason
should have a consequence that the reader notices and feels as a consequence. The character has
autonomy. It's just the sort of thing where you're like, man, this is a kick in the stomach.
This sort of thing, giving your characters an influence over the plot, is really important,
particularly after about the first third. Generally, in the first third you can have the
character be inactive. Some stories may just make it go through two-thirds. If you're doing this,
make them have control over small aspects of their life, even if they can't have control of
the large aspects of their life. The more and the sooner you can move the character into making
decisions that are really relevant to the story, the better. This is generally something you want
to do more of, not less. All right, guys. We will come back next week. Leave us some feedback
if for some reason this didn't work digitally for you. And next week we will talk about the
business of writing. I'll have two firehose ones for you. We'll talk about that, and then we'll
do another Q&A to wrap it up on business. All right. Remember to take your tests, or your quizzes.
Thanks. Bye-bye.
