Hey, everybody. Welcome to class. This is our next to last class. This will be another
Firehose session. I apologize for that, but it is going to happen. We will slow down next week
for our last week, where I will do Q&A on publishing questions from you. So hold your
questions, and then please write them into the forms that you are going to fill out,
saying that you were here for this session. And I will be using that list and last week's list
to answer what you guys need to know. This week, I want to thank in particular Jennifer Peele
and Becky Monson. These two are the students I have this year who are professional romance novelists
who took the class because they wanted to try something new and learn some fantasy and science
fiction. They are both indie published, and they have been an enormous resource for preparing
this lecture. They were going to give this lecture in class, but with social distancing and things
like that, we just decided to have them send me their notes, which I am going to incorporate
into this lecture. It's really handy to have notes from people who are doing it in the trenches
right now. So let's talk about indie publishing. This week, by the way, our main topics will be
indie publishing and then what contracts look like in traditional publishing along with royalties
and things like that, which we'll be comparing to how things work in indie publishing.
So brief and overly simplistic history of indie publishing. Back in the day, if you wanted to
be independently published, it was really hard. Some people still did it and were successful.
Famously, The Christmas Box was an independent book back in the day. Aragon was an indie book
back before the big change over happened in about 2010. But during these days, most of the time,
indie publishing was synonymous with what we call vanity publishing,
which the two are distinct, but the line blurred a lot more back then.
Vanity publishing would be, you go to a press, you pay a bunch of money, your book is published,
but you get 5,000 copies, which you store in your garage and occasionally give away or maybe sell.
I had somebody who was a friend of my parents when I was growing up who had done this. They were a
newscaster who had a story about a golfer they wanted to tell. They wrote it, they got it,
vanity published, and then they sold 300 or 400 copies of the 5,000 copy print run that they
paid for, and the other 5,000 copies sat in their garage. This was unfortunately the
average story for someone who tried to indie publish back in the day.
The problem being that warehousing, shipping, and distributing physical medium is really hard
and requires a lot of connections or a lot of fame or your own model. The people who are most
successful with indie publishing back before the digital revolution were people who had
a way to sell their books themselves. For instance, they were giving lectures or seminars on
something and they would have their book for sale there. They will have indie published their book
and then would sell it there. Or they were someone who sold at an expo doing something else and also
had a guidebook on the thing that they were doing. I knew somebody who sold alpacas in alpaca wool,
who had indie published their book, which was a fantasy novel about talking alpacas,
and sold it at their same booth. These sort of things could be successful, but for many years
it was really hard. And because of that, it also picked up quite a bit of stigma, a stigma which
was likely undeserved then and is very undeserved now that indie publishing was not real publishing.
Well, something happened in 2010. The digital revolution finally hit books. Now,
this was a long time coming and long enough coming that people were uncertain if it ever
would actually hit books because it had hit music, it was hitting television and film,
people were moving to digital for things like music, but people resisted that and continued
to want print books. And then The Kindle launched and in the space of a year the whole landscape
changed. Everyone had been waiting and holding their breath and they'd start to think, well,
maybe, and then it just, it all came rushing through. So what happened is you can actually,
I could see it on my royalty statements. My royalty statements went from a handful of e-book
copies being sold a year, just tiny numbers. They're like, your e-book earnings this quarter
were $53 to suddenly 20% to 30% of my business moving digital in one year. This was a huge
revolution in the industry. It has continued over the years, though e-book versus print has
stabilized across the last three years or so with the only growth segment of it being audiobooks
right now. Audiobooks are still growing. Print and e-book, meaning audiobooks is still swallowing
a bit of the print and e-book percentages, whereas print and e-book have hit about a stasis.
Now, this is going to vary widely depending on your genre. For instance, books for middle grade
readers sell far fewer e-book and audiobooks than print books, whereas big, long books tend to do
better in digital formats and in audiobook formats. This is because the number one, they get hard to
hold. And number two, because of audible subscription method, one credit buys you a book whether it's
55 hours worth of listening or nine hours worth of listening, and people tend to save their
credits for the very big books. So the longer your book is, generally that is an advantage,
particularly in audiobook, but also to an extent in e-books. And the more tech savvy and likely to
have digital devices, your audience, the more likely it is to move to e-book. And then kind of the
third factor here is how fast of a page turner it is. So this kind of fights with the length.
A lot of the best page turners are shorter books. But those tend to, the ones that when you finish
it, you immediately want the next one. Just really quickly want to be able to click the link and say,
all right, I'm going to read the next one. I still have a few hours left tonight before I have to go
get up and go to work. I'm going to read this book. And so these three factors kind of push things
right now with my latest book being Skyward Sequel, Starsight. Starsight was only 17% print.
Okay. It was 83% audiobook and digital book in its opening weeks. I haven't seen the final breakdown.
This was just the first two months. And of those audiobook, it was the first book of mine that
audiobook was larger than the e-book numbers, I believe. So this is a big revolution. And
in 10 years, we have gone from less than 1% digital in my royalties to only 17% print.
This transfer was offered a lot of opportunities to the indie published authors. And this revolution
meant that the indie published authors could do a lot of the work that the big publishers were doing
and did not have to deal with distribution chains, warehousing, and things like this.
And today, indie publishing is almost exclusively e-book and audiobook. Now, you will generally,
as an indie publisher author, have your books up for print sale, but they are usually print on demand
with very small royalty rates, just there so that people who want print copies can buy them and put
them on their shelves. Most of the time, you're not making very much money off of that print on
demand because it costs like 19 bucks to print a copy and you sell it for 20 or something like that.
Probably a bit lower than that. You're probably printing it for like 12 and selling it at 15.
People who just aren't buying a ton of those and the printing costs are expensive. And so
most of your sales will be digital indie published. What happened in 2010 that really started driving
this is a few authors. In particular, some romance authors and some thriller authors who are writing
fast-paced, what we would once called pulp genre fiction, which means it's very solidly
inside a genre. It's romance with a capital R focused on the romance that is shorter and faster
paced. Usually in some sort of series, sometimes in romance, the author's name becomes the series.
This happens in that genre. Same thing in thrillers. Often Dan Brown thriller is a genre,
rather than them all being about one character. But sometimes they are. A lot of Dan Browns are,
for instance. A lot of John Grishams are not. But either way, fast paced, shorter books,
real page turners, priced cheaply. We're talking books for three, four, or five dollars
that people could immediately click on the next one at the end of buying one and just says,
click here to buy the next one. And they would just rip through these. And the indie publishing
market just exploded to the point that you can find percentages. But there is a significant.
I don't have these numbers off hand. I didn't look them up. But often it's something like 40%
of what's being sold on Amazon is independently published, which is a huge, huge chunk of the
market. Now, let's point out that JK Rowling is a not insignificant number of that 40%. She's like
2% or 3% by herself because she kept all the digital rights to Harry Potter for the audiobooks
and the e-books, and she self-publishes them. So jumping back to Jennifer and Becky here,
they are excellent examples of authors who are doing very well. I asked them just so I could
let you guys know that they weren't just starving artists for some ballpark numbers.
So this isn't them bragging. This is me pushing them to let you know. But Jennifer has published
30 books so far. She makes six figures. You can find her books in a lot of local physical media
at bookstores, and she's won numerous awards. Becky has published seven books, makes high
five figures in a year. She has an agent and has a movie deal on one of her books. So I would
recommend that you check out their books. They're both great writers. I have read quite a bit of
their writing in the class so far. And so I would recommend that you give them a look.
Thank you, Jennifer and Becky, who were watching for this.
Now, I'm going to kind of go down their list of reasons why you would independently publish
in today's market. And this is kind of a contrast to the traditional publishing model we talked
about last week. And then I'll start getting into some actual numbers in contracts and looking at
what some of the numbers look like. So they say that their number one reason is flexibility.
So independently publishing, if you are indie published, one of the things you can do is you
can target the market much faster and better. You also are flexible in how you publish
your flexible in determining how long your series is, how long your book is. You are in charge of
all of this. And underneath this I would say equal to this is, according to some of the things they
said, is control. So as an indie author, you decide what goes on the cover of your book.
You decide what goes on the back summary of your book. You decide the pricing of your book.
You decide when something is up for sale. You decide when it's not up for sale. You decide
what promotions you want to be part of. These things are really powerful reasons
to independently publish. If you are really worried that your book is going to have a
terrible cover that you have no control over, then indie publishing will look better to you.
Because as a new author, generally you have very little say over what goes on the cover of your
book or what goes on the back flap of your book. If you are really worried about the idea of selling
your book in perpetuity, most contracts these days for print rights are for life of copyright.
When you sign a deal to sell a book to Tor, for instance, you are selling that book
for your lifetime plus 70 years to be published by them under that contract. There are ways to
get that back, but that is what you're signing up for. A lot of the other contracts are different.
A lot of audiobook contracts, for instance, are like for seven years or something like that. A lot
of overseas rights are for like seven to nine years. But US and I believe, yeah, US, I'm not
sure about UK. I might have to look that up. But US print rights are for life of copyright
almost all the time. And in fact, I have never found someone who got them to budge on that
at a top string publisher. That's just one of the things that they know is a line in the sand.
So flexibility control. The other is they put money. When you are self-publishing,
you keep the lion's share of the money. What is usually happening is there's a 30-70
split with the 70 going to the author. In most cases where you'll be publishing,
the place, the platform you're putting it up on will take around 30 percent,
and you will make around 70 percent of whatever you set as the price. We will put the caveat
that Amazon requires those to be between $3 and $10, $2.99 to $9.99 to get that royalty.
Anything below or above that gets a much worse royalty, and basically nobody does it.
So you keep the lion's share of that money. As you can see, it will run some of these
numbers later. If you have a small but dedicated fan base that is willing to buy whatever you sell,
you could theoretically, let's say you published with a New York publisher,
and with them you're going to sell about 10,000 copies, and on your own you're going to sell
about 10,000 copies. Well, that is an excellent reason to independently publish. If they cannot
sell you a lot more copies than you would sell, if you've targeted a niche market,
you know that market really well, and you're going to be selling to them,
then New York will do nothing for you. You will make much more independently published.
If you also are really good at releasing things according to trends, quickly writing,
and writing things that are good page turners in a long serial format,
indie publishing's flexibility would allow you to do some things. I would recommend you look
up someone called Bella Forest. Bella Forest is, I believe, the best-selling indie author on Amazon.
She might have been replaced by someone else, but usually she is. And Bella Forest's model is
that she releases books that are similar to current trends in publishing. She jumps on them
much faster, and then she releases long serialized stories about them. Her biggest series is A Shade
of Vampire, and this is a series that is very similar to Twilight, romantic urban fantasies
with vampires. There are something like 50 entries. She releases a new one every six weeks,
and she sells tons of copies. She is often chasing at JK Rowling and some of those
right underneath them at number three or four author on all of Amazon.
Recently, I've looked and she's dropped down to number 10 or 12 or 15, but she has other things
that feel a lot like Hunger Games. She has other things that feel like Nicholas Sparks books,
basically, and she's releasing a book every two weeks. And that flexibility and that speed of
publishing is just not something you can do in traditional publishing. It just does not work.
So one thing they wanted to point out is that you can get everything
a print book is, or a trad pub.
So by this, I mean, sorry about that terrible handwriting, guys, by this what they mean is,
if you want to get your books in bookstores, you can make it happen. It does happen. It's harder.
If you want movie deals, it can happen, generally harder, but it can happen.
For instance, The Emperor's Soul that I released, I independently published the e-book,
and I went through a small press, a regional press called Tachyon, for the print book,
and they did a fantastic job on the print book and got it into every bookstore in the country,
and we got a movie deal offer on that. That was an indie, it was a hybrid,
but I did a lot of the indie publishing for that myself.
You can get, they write, into the major bookstores. You can get movie deals,
pointing out that The Martian was indie published, which indeed it was.
You can get book signings. You can get speaking engagements and teaching opportunities.
So those are your arguments for self-publishing, and they are legit. If you are watching this retain
any sort of bias against Vanity Press or things like that because of the way the industry has
talked about it, you should abandon those very quickly. This is a realistic and, in fact,
a growing segment of the market, and it is something that you should seriously consider
as a writer right now trying to break in. So let's talk a little bit about how
one breaks into indie publishing. So I have generally, and they talk about
these things a little bit, though I'll try to write up their notes a little bit later,
I've generally heard two general schools, generally general, I've heard of two general
schools of thought about breaking into indie publishing. School of thought number one is
this idea of becoming what is called a platform writer. A platform writer, which I think is mostly
my term for it, others might call it something else, is somebody who has a really great platform
that draws a lot of attention, and they use that as publicity to market their novels. Larry Korea is
generally held up as a poster child for this. Larry Korea, if you're not familiar with him,
is an avid gun nut. He is a right-wing commentator and things like this, and loves his gun rights
issues. And he broke in right before the big indie publishing thing took off by indie publishing
on his own by running a blog where he talked about all his gun, all the stuff he finds fascinating
about guns and politics, and then he wrote books which accurately used firearms, and people who
knew their way around firearms as a contrast to a lot of the media he was reading, where people just
didn't know what they were doing. And so if you wanted to read an action adventure story with
people who knew their way around guns and who presented the world in a way that Larry Korea's
fan base would really enjoy, then these were perfect books for you. He then had his blog to
kind of funnel attention toward this. He was active on a lot of gun forums and said, hey,
you guys know me. I've been participating for years here. I've got a good reputation. Here is
my book. Maybe check it out. That funneled a lot of attention toward his books and turned them into
bestsellers even before he got picked up by a traditional publisher, which he eventually did.
He eventually he picked Bane, which is kind of a almost, it's like a traditional big publisher,
but works like a small press. It's kind of an interesting case. But anyway,
there are still a lot of people who are platform writers. Talking to a lot of indie writers recently,
they have said that platform writing is very hard to cut through the noise on, and that they recommend
method number two, unless you have some really good platform already or something you know
really well and are good at writing blog posts and stuff, and that is the
publish as much as you can as quick as you can model. They say that your next book is usually
the best piece of marketing you can make for your previous book. This stands in traditional
publishing as well. It is a good rule of thumb that generally making sure your next book is coming
out in a timely way is more valuable to you as a marketing tool than anything else you could
be doing with that time. Once you have that book coming out and you have extra time, that's when
you add on doing all of the other stuff, the going on the social media sites, the doing guest posts
on other people's blogs. People won't read blogs anymore, but that sort of thing. All of this is
secondary to making sure the next book comes out. And if you're indie published, that may mean
your next book that you're releasing in four months. It might mean the next book you're releasing
in a year. It depends on your publishing schedule. So what do you do? They recommend the following,
and I'm not going to write these all up because some of these are a bit longer. They recommend
joining online groups and forums like 20 books to 50K. These groups provide a wealth of knowledge
into the indie publishing world. Go ask people who are indie publishing right now
where they found their information. I can't give it to you because I exist in a very different
realm from this that even when I indie publish, I have a platform. And the platform is that I am
a well-known and reputable fantasy writer already with the marketing budget of a big five-press
behind me. At 10 conferences run specifically for indie authors, or which include indie authors
like Storymakers. Storymakers is a local convention here to Utah. It is fantastic,
one of the best conventions I have ever attended. Point number three, you must run it like a business.
You must be willing to put in hours and invest money. We'll talk about that in a minute.
You must write a killer book or more than one before you release. Rapid release can be your
friend. It gives you more ways to market. So what happens a lot in indie publishing I've seen
right now is this Blitz method. I have a good friend who sometimes has taught in the class before,
Jancey. And Jancey has done this thing with a co-author recently that I see commonly happening
in indie publishing, which is where they spend several years writing like 12 books in a series.
And then what they do is they save those all up and they release them in a Blitz one a month
for a year. You might be saying, I don't have any idea how Bella Forrest can release a book
every two weeks. I don't know either. No idea what's going on over there. But I do know that
a lot of my friends would not be capable of releasing a book a month,
but they can take three years and write 12 books and then Blitz with a book a month for a year
so that each one is building on the previous ones. Either way, quick releases do tend to be
very advantageous in indie publishing. Do everything to make sure it doesn't look
like an indie book. This is their next point. This is really important. This is the one where most
people mess up. You need a really good cover and you have to pay for a good cover. When I've
indie published, we're usually spending a couple grand on a cover. You don't even have to do that.
But you do have to be spending good money. I've heard that you can get a decent cover for $500,
but you don't want to be doing the covers that cost five bucks off of Fiverr. You just,
they will look really, really cheap. You want to be paying for editing. And hopefully,
this is information I didn't have, Jennifer and Becky have included what the rates are
that people charge. So let me write these up on the board so you have them and you can write
them down. So rates that people charge. Make sure that's not one. Okay. So for a copy edit,
I'll explain these in a second. You are looking at .007 through .009 cents a word.
So. Content editing. You are looking at around 1.2 cents to 1.25, sorry, .0125 dollars.
A word and proofreading is around .003 a word.
So. Apologize again about my handwriting. But basically, these are rates that you'll be looking
for paying by word. A copy edit is kind of like a continuity edit. This is where copy
editors like a better proofread where they will also kind of look at style guides sort of things
and try to apply a style guide if you have one, if you're like, make this look like
Chicago manual style or whatever. Or watch out for if a character, eyes are one color and
one scene and a different color in the next scene. Copy editors kind of catch that stuff.
Content editing is like an editor who's giving you substantive feedback about the plot characters
pacing, these sorts of things. And proofreading is just the only looking for typos. When my
editorial director, Peter, does proofreads and copy edits, he often reads the book backward
just so that he's not focusing on content type stuff. He's only looking at the words and things
like this. But yeah, you need this stuff. You need to be paying for editing. You need to be paying
for a cover. You may want to pay someone to lay out your book for you. This makes
certain means it looks aesthetically pleasing on the page. If you're e-book only, you don't have
to worry about this nearly as much because people resize the font and things like that. And so the
layout on the page is much easier for a lot of e-books. So they say search the internet and
asking groups and forums about how authors find good freelance editors and cover artists.
So just to kind of quickly talk a little bit about, well, let's actually go to
talk about the nuts and bolts of how you self-publish. And then we're going to talk about the nuts and
bolts of traditional publishing looking at contracts. And then if there's time, we'll talk
about what they've written about advertising and branding, which can be basically the same
regardless of which way you're going. So they suggest there are two main methods.
There is the Go Wide method or the Amazon Exclusive method. So what they're meaning here is if you
are willing to sign up for Amazon exclusively, you get a better deal generally. They put you on
Kindle Unlimited, which is the kind of subscription service on Amazon where people subscribe to it,
pay a monthly fee, and then Amazon pays you based on the number of words they're read.
This can be really helpful for a lot of indie authors because a lot of traditional published
authors are not in that. So you are competing only against people who are in that program.
It works well for romance, fantasy, and mystery genres. People who are going to want to rip
through an entire series, sometimes going exclusively on Kindle can be good for you.
Going wide means you're putting it not just on Amazon, but on all the different platforms,
which can give you a wider net, but a slightly worse deal and not quite as good of marketing
from Amazon. So if you choose to go wide, you can use platforms like Draft2Digital to upload
your manuscript, and they will distribute it to Barnes & Noble, iBooks, Kobo, Amazon, etc.
But always upload to Amazon yourself. It's easy and gives you more control and more money.
This is what we have found as well, indie publishing my books. That's how we do it.
So on Amazon, your price must be $2.99 to $9.99. Don't price it anything above that. You can sometimes
go lower than that and price your first book at 99 cents. You'll get a terrible royalty
because you'll get like 35 cents a book because you get a 35% royalty on a dollar.
But for a while, giving away your first book for free or cheap was a method to get people reading
the series. Readers have kind of come wise to this, and it happens it's, it works a little less now
than it used to. It used to be the kind of the silver bullet, put your first book up for free
than the rest of the series. Then Amazon stopped liking people doing that, and they stopped letting
them put them up for free, and would give them periods where they could be free. And so people
started charging at 99 cents. And you would have to ask the current indie authors what Jennifer
and Becky say, be careful how you price your books and train your audience. If you train
them to get your books for free or 99 cents from the beginning, they will expect that of your
future books. Paperbacks just do through their self-publishing thing until you get big enough
where you may want to do a small print run of your own and sell them at conventions and things.
It's not a huge part, but they say it's useful for getting into particularly your local bookstores,
which you can do if you have enough sales, and you have print books that you can give to one of
distributors to put through. They make two notes at the end here, which I think are really smart
notes. One of them is that there are a lot of scams out there for trying to prey upon indie
authors. There are a ton of these. And one of the best things you can do is remember that
be very skeptical of anyone asking you for money. Now, this doesn't include, obviously,
you're paying people for cover and for editing and things like that, but be very skeptical if
someone says, I will do all the work for you, just give me this much money. A lot of those are
scams, not all of them, but a lot of them. A lot of them are vanity presses, which you don't need
these days because you can do this yourself. The other thing they mention is that landscape is
constantly changing and that you need to keep up to date on it. And yes, you do. One of the big
changes, I've talked about this a little bit before in class, but one of the big changes is Amazon
over the last couple of years has become a pay-to-play location. Wrong turn. Market. Meaning
that Amazon charging authors to advertise their books on Amazon has become a major source of
income for Amazon. And in the beginnings of the indie book revolution, it was all of Amazon's
recommendations were based solely on what did people who read this book also like.
You went to a Brandon Sanderson book page, they would serve you ads only for books that people
who bought my book then bought another book and really liked it and rated both of them highly.
And it didn't matter to Amazon if you were indie, if you were traditionally published,
they were simply looking to sell you the best book they could to keep you reading books.
I think it is a mistake and short-sighted of Amazon, but recently they have shrunk and contracted
that recommendation system and have greatly expanded the an author paid to be on this page
recommendation system. If you go to The Way of Kings right now, you will find the similar books
that other people liked thing on there. For a while they moved that all the way to the bottom,
now they moved it back up. But you also find an advertisement on the page just right to the
right of my book that is paid to be there. You will often find a banner ad for something that
is paid to be there. And then you also find sponsored books in a big long list paid to be on
this page. And asking Jennifer and Becky, they nowadays are paying thousands of dollars a month
on advertising on Amazon in order to keep selling books. Basically, this 70% royalty
looks a lot worse than it used to when you're having to invest 50%,
investing 50% of what you make back into pay Amazon to advertise your book. And if you don't,
they just don't appear on anyone's pages, you don't sell them. I think this is terrible for
indie publishing. I think it's terrible for books in general. But it is what Amazon has decided to
do now. And they are the big player in the market. They are something like 80% of all e-books.
And so if you are going to be independently published, you either are going to have to
have a platform that is driving people to those books pages, you are going to have to somehow
get popular enough that people are looking for them directly or you're going to have to pay Amazon
thousands of dollars to advertise them in order to keep selling books. And this is, I think,
very unfortunate. But it is the way the world works right now.
Double-check me on that by talking to other indie authors. I've asked five or 10, and this is the
answer they've given me. But I might be getting a disproportionately represented segment of the
market who is paying a lot for ads and having that work, and so they're continuing to do it.
Maybe there are other ways. Maybe it's this, probably this ad payment has a ceiling on it.
So once you get to a certain amount of ad spend, then you make more and more. So once you hit that
threshold, it becomes a smaller and smaller percentage of your take. But be aware that
that is part of the market right now. All right. Let's talk about contracts. How much time do we
have left? I don't have a clock in here. 40 minutes. 40 minutes. Great. All right. We're
going to talk contracts. Sorry again about the fire hose. Let's jump over to traditional publishing
because talking about contracts and your take here can help you compare and contrast indie
publishing right now. And I'm going to switch markers because I think this one was writing
better. All right. So in publishing, a lot of the royalty rates are fairly standardized.
So in traditional publishing, in traditional publishing, here's what you're looking at.
Almost all books have between 10% and 15% of cover for hardcover.
Almost all of them have between 6% and 8% of cover for paperback.
And all of them have around 10% of cover for trade paper.
All right. I'll explain this to you. So all the print formats are based on a cover price
calculation. These stretch back decades, maybe over a century, that basically whatever the
publisher charges for that book, they are going to pay to you a percentage of that once they
get it in. It does not matter what the book actually sells for. So for instance, usually
bookstores are getting the books at around 50% off. If they decide then that this $20 book
that they are going to sell for $12 to put it on sale, that is them deciding to make a profit
of $2 instead of $10 on your book. They are still paying $10 to the publisher. And out of that,
the publisher is still paying you 10% to 15% of the cover price of that initial $20 as a royalty
payment to you for every copy sold. Same thing for paperback, 6% to 8%. Same thing for trade
paperback. Trade paperbacks are the oversized hardcover sized paperbacks. Whereas when they
say paperback, we mean the pocket edition. These are the US royalty rates. They vary a little bit
in the UK. So basically what's going on here is these, you're like, how do I determine if I get
the 10 or the 15%? Almost every contract I've gotten had a break point of something like this.
10% on the first 5K, 12.5, second 5K, and then 15% after on the hardcover.
So what this means is if I sell 100,000 copies and you sell 100,000 copies,
we probably both have a very similar thing in the hardcover thing. We both make the same amount
of money. This is pretty nice. This is good to know that there isn't a lot of room here. Now,
there are rumors of people getting more. The most I've ever heard is that the rumor, and I don't
have this information so I could be wrong, that LucasArts was getting 22% of hardcover
on their Star Wars books from Del Ray or who it was one of the Random House imprints that was
printing them for years. I don't know if that's true. I have never met an author personally who
got higher than this without doing a drastically different deal with the publisher. There are
drastically different deals where you profit share, and instead of taking advance, you take a larger
chunk of the percentage later on, Stephen King famously has this as a rumor to have this. I
don't know Stephen King's contracts as one of his deals, and I do profit share with some of my
publishers as well. Basically, no advance, higher royalties. We're co-publishing at that point,
that sort of thing. But generally, what you can change are in your negotiations these breakpoints.
Usually, they don't change these percentages as much as they change the breakpoints. For instance,
some of my teen books, the breakpoints were like first 10K or something, and then you shrink that.
Same thing here. I think my e-book started at 6% for the first 75,000, or my paperback,
6% for the first 75,000, and 8% thereafter. For some reason, 7% almost never shows up,
but it's one of those weird things. And trade tends to, I've seen it fluctuate just by a
percentage point or two. But basically, this is what you're getting. This is a fair deal.
You may say, wow, I only get 15% of that. Do remember that you're really making more than
that because this is retail, so about half is going to the retail establishment. So on a
$20 book, the publisher is getting $10 back, and you are generally getting on that to $2.50,
so you're taking about 25% of what the publisher is making. That could go higher,
but considering the way that they take risks up front, this tends to be a fairly fair model,
which is why it's been negotiated over decades and has landed where it does.
What hasn't been negotiated for decades, in fact only been negotiated for around a decade,
is where the e-book and audiobook royalties will end up landing. And so e-book and audiobook
are different. They are calculated on net. That should scare you a ton, but fortunately the net
is very clearly defined and does not include costs. Net on e-book and audiobook is defined by
what the publisher gets from the venue selling them. This is usually 25% of net, where net means
the 70% of actual price that the publisher gets. So what does that mean? Well, let's say that the
publisher, the book is sold on Amazon for $10. The publisher is getting 70% of that,
the same percentage that the indie book author is making. Then they are paying 25% of what they
actually got to the author. If this goes on sale, then your percentage shrinks. It's no longer
paid on cover. So that's a very big difference. This number is starting to stabilize. It is too low.
A lot of industry advocates and author advocates have pointed out that this, if you,
I'm not going to run all the numbers for you right now, that this really should be somewhere around
35% probably, or even a little higher, because the publisher, if you run all the numbers, which
you don't have time for, the publisher is making more off of each e-book sold than they make off
of the print book, and you are making around the same. They are taking a slightly higher percentage
cut, a higher net cut at the end than they need to be taking. These, I haven't seen this get
negotiated up, because a lot of authors have what are called most favored nations clauses.
What this means is, if one author gets it negotiated up, the other authors who have most
favored nation clauses all should automatically get it as a matter of legal requirement in their
contract. So publishers have been very, very resistant to change this. Basically, to change
that number, you have to do some sort of profit share or something like that, which requires
given takes from you by giving up advances and things like that. That's been my experience. Your
mileage may vary. It could change in the future, and there may be people out there who have negotiated
different deals than we've been able to. This is kind of where it sits in audio, 25% of net,
though I have, this one has been more negotiable. I've gotten as high as around 40%
of net with certain audiobook publishers. This has started to stabilize back at the 25%,
and has been going down with the advances going up. But that's not necessarily a bad thing,
because a lot of these audiobook contracts are for seven years, and so if your advance gets
sky-high, your percentage goes down. It is possible for an advance to get so high
that it effectively gives you a higher royalty. Let's talk about that. Oh,
there seems to be confusion in the chat between Indian self-publishing. They are the same.
We use both of those terms. Indian self-publishing are the same. The only thing that's different
is fantasy publishing, which basically doesn't exist in its same form anymore, and you should
ignore it. Indian self-publishing, words for the same thing. So you also ask about small presses.
I'll talk about small presses if we have time. All right, so advances. All right,
so remember, this is all against an advance that you get upfront. So I'll try not to spend too
much on the boring numbers here. This stuff is interesting to me. I know it might bore some of
you, but let's say on your audiobook, you get paid a million-dollar advance, right?
And the audiobook publisher has looked and figured out across the seven-year life of the term
that you are going to, under a standard royalty, earn around 800K,
right, from that 25% of that. They've figured it out. They aren't giving you a higher royalty,
but by offering you that one million, they're basically giving you a higher royalty because
they're giving you $200,000 extra, and you could run the numbers and basically sense that license
is going to run out in seven years anyway. You don't have to pay back the extra money.
They all ran the numbers. It is possible for a book to not earn out. Earning out is where your
royalties match the amount they gave you upfront and still be successful. This is how a lot of
very powerful authors, a lot of the politicians, for example, and celebrities get sky-high advances
higher than sales would indicate their royalty should earn, but because the price per copy is
down so much and because the book is going to sell enough copies, they can effectively give
the author a higher royalty rate without changing the royalty rate in the contract.
Deciding what the right advance is for a book is a very difficult process that involves a lot of
guesswork. Most of the time, you want your advance to be of a size where you're going to earn that
out in a couple of years. Usually, I look for, I'm like, do you earn this back off of the hard
cover in like two years of the paperback run? If so, pretty good advance. That's about what you're
looking to get. Sometimes it's viable to get higher than that, only if your book is going to go to
astronomical high sales numbers. But let's just kind of look at this number-wise to kind of compare
it to indie publishing. And I did run these numbers earlier so I can write them out exactly.
We talked about keeping a larger percentage of the cut. One of the other things that
indie publishing is very good at doing is undercutting the market because they have
more money to work with. Now, slowly what's happening, more money to work with is the wrong
term. They have more flexibility on pricing. What has happened over time is traditional
publishing has pushed their prices higher and higher in the e-book market. This is because
they have a different deal with Amazon. Amazon gives them a better deal. They get the 70%,
even if they go over 999. You don't get that deal. I'm sorry, Amazon doesn't offer it to us,
to me when I indie publish. They do offer it to the publishers. A Stormlight Archive book cost $17
in e-book. This is not a bad thing. I actually wish that e-book pricing fluctuated more based
on the length of the books. I have pushed my publishers to charge less for my shorter books
and more for my larger books. They haven't always listened to me on this, but I think it is kind
of, I know it's the way the industry works, but I think it's not a good way for the industry to work
that the longer books do not increase in price. This pushes authors to release these very quick,
short books where you actually get less value for your book. And I think it would be better
if everyone's like, you know, a Stormlight Archive book is somewhere around eight times as long as
some of these short books that are being published in a series that you are paying $3 a piece for.
Well, eight times three would be $24 is what the Stormlight Archive book should cost. We charge
17. I think that's a fair price. I know some people online are like, why is this one 17 when
someone else is just three? Well, it's 400,000-word book. That said, traditional publishing is not
good on varying this length. I wish that they would charge a lot cheaper for the 100,000-word
books and a lot more for the big books, and they don't. They tend to vary like I looked up a book
that is half the length of a Stormlight book and it's $13. So yes, it's cheaper, but not significantly
according to the percentage. This is all kind of neither here nor there.
If you look at the Andy published author's books, a lot of them will be priced $299,
$399, or $499. If we take that author whose book is $13, who's a pretty, I'm not going to say the
name, but a pretty solid mid-lister kind of top of the mid-list fantasy novelist, their book is
selling for $13 as an e-book. Well, if you have your standard royalty that I talked about
earlier, that author is making $2.25 per copy that is sold by the publisher.
If you're Andy published, you can charge, if your book is $3, you are making around a $2 profit.
So if your book is $4, you're making a better profit than the traditional published author
on a book that is one third the price. This is where the power of indie authors is manifest
in them being able to charge a reasonable but low price for their books undercutting the
traditional published market. This kind of creates this dichotomy where traditional
publishing is moving more toward more expensive books that are prestige books that are by well
known authors. There is a reason why someone like Andy Weir, who self-published and was very
successful, eventually decided to go traditionally published. And you do see a lot of the people
who break out of the mid-list going to traditional publishers because they can demand a whole bunch
from them. These days, a lot of the mid-listing does work way better in these numbers as an indie
author. That said, as an indie author, you have to be willing to run the business all yourself and
do all these things up front. One of the main reasons you would go traditionally published
instead of indie published is, number one, you have a big enough name or enough expected sales
or a book that is hitting the market at just the right time in order to demand a very large advance
and to demand a lot of marketing push from the publisher. Another reason to go traditionally
published is that doing it all yourself is just not something you want to do. This sounds like
I have a good friend who's just like, I know I could do all this. I just don't want to. That's
not what I want to spend my life doing. I want to, she says, be sending books to a publisher,
working with an editor, letting them handle all the cover art and things like that and release
the book. That is a good reason to go traditionally published. It is a lot of work to even traditionally
publish. Indie publishing is even more work. Another reason to go traditionally published
would be if you want to see your book in all bookstores across the nation.
Indie publishing, there are very few who are able to get books in all print stores.
Usually you can get them regionally to your local stores, but getting them into
bookstores all around the country and all around the world, very hard to do as an indie published
author. Not impossible, but very hard to do. And if you want to be able to walk into a bookstore
and find your book on the shelf, and you probably want to be traditionally published then.
Another reason to be traditionally published is if you are writing in a genre that does not
lend itself well to the things that are selling well in indie books. I often use
a book like The Doomsday Book as an example of this. Connie Willis is a fantastic science fiction
writer who does a ton of research for her books and writes basically time travel books with exhaustively
researched historical periods where people from a future society go back to a historical period.
These books are long. They're in depth. She only releases one every four or five years,
if that often, and they win a lot of awards and they deserve them. She would be poorly placed in
the indie publishing market because she releases books so infrequently that she needs the, doesn't
need it, but it's better to have the publisher pushing the book to get a wider pickup by libraries
and schools and to win awards and to have that drive the sales between the five years that
she's releasing a new book. That's an author who's served much better by being traditionally
published. Twenty minutes? Great. So let's break and talk briefly about marketing and self-promotion
and then maybe get to a few of these questions which are popping up on the screen that I can no
longer see. So that is good. All right. So let's get to the last part of what Becky and Jennifer
put here, which is advertising and branding. They note, you still have to do a lot of this,
even when traditionally published, especially for first-time authors, and yes, you do.
So one of the advantages of being traditionally published is you get to take advantage of their
distribution chain. This means that you have a lot of people going to the various bookstores
and convincing them to carry copies of your book. For a new author that does not have a
particularly large advance, this is basically all the publicity you will get. They're not going to
buy a lot of advertising, maybe a little bit. They're not going to spend a lot of money on
Amazon advertising. They're not going to spend a lot of money on Facebook advertising. They'll
spend a little bit, but not a ton of advertising, those things, unless your book is considered
like the big release by a new author that they're pushing very hard. Because of this,
you, with a smaller advance, often have to do a lot of this yourself.
What they recommend doing is social media pages. Again, this shouldn't take precedent over
finishing your next book, in my opinion, but having a social media and a website presence
is good if you can maintain it. Here's the thing. A webpage that never updates,
but has a blog on it that has, if you go to this website and the last post that was posted is three
years old, that is worse than having no blog on your website. Better to have a static page that
just has your book and sample chapters, drawing that around, and things like that than it is to
have something that doesn't update. Same with your Twitter, your Facebook. They mentioned, by the way,
that Facebook and Instagram works for them and Twitter doesn't work much for them anymore.
I know other people have been very successful with Twitter, but you're going to have to pick
some social media platforms and do a good job with them. This can be tricky because a lot of
people aren't looking for a marketing feed in their Twitter feed. They already get a lot of
advertisements from the big companies. If your Twitter feed looks just like a marketing feed,
then your Twitter feed is perhaps not going to be that useful to you. Same with your Facebook and
things. You have to dedicate time to actually making that a place where people want to go and
discover things. Now, if you have a fan base, if you're starting to grow one, posting about your
life, that can do it and things like that. But just be aware that a Twitter feed that just lists
when your book is on sale, probably going to be of no use to you. Have a professional website.
Yes, have a website that looks professional, and if you're not going to update it often,
make it look nice without a date saying when things were posted.
This is one of the best things you can do for your time is just have a good website. So when
people Google you, like some of you might Google Jennifer and Becky, you land on their page and
can find out about their books. They suggest bloggers and blog tours. I have no realistic
understanding of how valuable these are. A lot of people do them where they all share posts on
different people's blogs. This is a very common practice. It really got popular after I had broken
in, and I don't know how useful it is. The fact that they mention here means it probably is at
least somewhat useful, and people continue to do it. This is where you write a really good
blog post for someone else's blog that they can post that'll be of high value to their readers,
that'll make their blog a destination that people want to visit. And so they go and read about
your post and also about your book lending you their audience. How you do those, by the way,
is by making contacts at conventions and things like that and having a good blog of your own
so that you can say, hey, go look, this is the sort of thing I do. Do you do blog exchanges?
Would you let me do a guest post for you on your blog about X, give them a proposal, say,
I could do a really great blog post for your audience about this thing that they'd be really
interested in. I don't know if Larry does these, for instance, but if you were indie published and
going to Larry and say, I know about these new assault rifles, I've shot them out on the front
lines, I can do a really great post about how awesome they are. Maybe someone like Larry would
let you do a blog post. I don't know again. But that's the sort of thing we're looking at.
Paid advertisements, we talked about those. Author cross promotion. Basically,
doing events with other authors, particularly when you knew, I have found to be very effective.
When I was new in my career, book signings were almost useless. But a book signing where three
of us got together were way better, because if each of us drew like five people, then we had at
least a respectable audience. Plus, we were kind of cross promoting to each other's audiences at
that point, and a lot of people bought all three books. Build an email list. Let me emphasize
this one. Email lists tend to be your best marketing tool as long as your email list is a
good one, that you're not spamming people with it, that you're only going to write
four blog posts a year. You may be better off having a newsletter than a blog and just doing a
really good newsletter that people are interested in signing up for and having, because this is
like a blog that's a little more personal. Generally, email lists have the best click
through rate because people have opted into them of any sort of advertising that you can do.
A lot of people in the industry say email list is your number one thing to do even before some
of your social media. This all goes for publishing and traditional as well. The only thing that you
will add is they will be spending some money, not much, but some money advertising. They will
also be doing what is called co-op, where they're offering the bookstores a little more money in
order to put your book in nice places in the bookstore. If you walk into a Barnes and Noble
and you see all those nice books for sale at the front of the bookstore, that's all advertising
space. Don't just say, oh, we'll put this one out. It's new. No, the publisher has gone and said,
if you put this one on your octagon at the front of your Barnes and Noble, we will let you keep,
instead of 50% of what you sell, you can have 55%. They make all these kind of negotiations and deals.
Bookstores do generally have a few discretionary locations where they can build an end cap or
something. If you do a book signing there, they might put your books on the end cap, which is the
end of the shelf, and things like that. But a lot of that space is sold to publishers,
and that's why they end up there. So that's all advertising space, everything, but just
basically being on the shelves. Even a lot of times, if you see a little thing that says,
hey, if you like this, you might like this, shelf talkers, what they call them,
a lot of those are paid for. Not at the indie bookstores, but a lot of the Barnes and Noble
some things, those are things that are kind of cooperative, they call it, publishing agreement
with the publisher, where they're both trying to sell more books, and the bookstore gets to keep
a little bit more of the money in exchange for that. The last thing they will do is they might
send you on book tour. Book tour, book tours are weird in that bookstores do not make money.
You can just run the numbers. A really great book signing, like the biggest book signings I get
when I'm on tour, maybe 1,000 people, that'd be amazing. George can poll around 2,000,
it's George Martin. I've heard of celebrities, like the biggest book signing. I asked one of the
bookstores I went to that they ever had was Ozzy Osbourne at the height of the Osbourne's,
and he had like 9,000. But let's say you do one of my book signings and it's 1,000 people.
Of those 1,000 people, statistically around 10% of them will buy the book and 90% of them
will already have the book. And so the signing, if you magically could make it so that all 100
people that went to that book signing are people that wouldn't have bought it otherwise,
but bought it because of the book signing, then what is the book signing done? It has sold 100
extra books, which equates to earnings for an author on the 15% thing for around is going to be like
$300 to $400. That might sound good to you, but for an entire day's work where you have to fly
somewhere, where you have to be put up in a hotel, where you often have to have drivers or
media escorts whose job is to get you around, it can cost three or four grand to put an author on
tour for a day, depending on the author. And even the publisher selling an extra 100 books,
making an extra, what is that, $10 a book, they're making a thousand books,
just not make any money for them. It loses money. So what is a bookstore good for?
Wow, or a book signing. A book signing is to meet the people at the bookstore as the author,
and have them be like, wow, the publisher is actually sending this author on tour. It must
be an important author. Maybe I'll read the book to get some extra books in that bookstore.
The publisher, the bookstore will usually order like 50 copies or whatever, depending on the
author, and then put them out on nice shelves, and you will usually sign a bunch of those books
and leave them, and they'll use their discretionary space to put up an end cap for you. Like,
author, who came through? Here are their signed books. So you might sell extra books like that.
You might get more velocity. Selling books in the first week of release is way more useful
than selling them in the 12th week of release. If you sell a bunch of books in the first week
of release, all the bookstores say, wow, this is a very big, important book. We better order more
copies. It also places you on the bestseller list, which a bunch of sales at once is better
than sales spread out for that. You appear on the bestseller list, and then there are special
places in the bookstore which aren't co-op space, which are the bestseller lists that you get on,
basically as free co-op, which markets and sells your book more. If you do really well,
you end up on the bestseller list in the airports, which can be huge exposure for selling your book.
These things are all intangible things. Plus, you start building an audience. They start seeing
coming out to see you as an event, and then it's a way to meet the fan base and things like that.
All of these things are intangibles that are hard to quantify. Books signing should not be done to
make money, at least upfront money. They should be kind of long-term sort of things. Early in my
career, I'll just give you guys a tip. We ran all these numbers, and the publisher was just not
going to send me on tour. A guy who got $10,000 on his advance that they're expecting to sell
like 5,000 copies of or whatever. The books signing, there was no way I was going to get on the list.
There's no way I was going to make the money back. They just were not going to send me on tour.
I went to them and said, what if I went on tour with another author that you were thinking of
sending on tour, and the two of us shared a car and drove instead of flights, which saves a bunch
of money? What if we just drove around the west coast where we live, kind of the west coast?
What if we shared a hotel room? I was going with Dave, who's a buddy of mine,
and we kind of ate sheep. Dave and I went and pitched and said, you give us $1,000 each. This
was in 2005, so $1,000 went a little further. We will do a 10-city book tour, and we will bring
it in under that $1,000 each. They're like, you can't do that. We're like, yes, we can. They're
like, all right, here's $1,000, whatever. It takes 2,000 to put an author on tour for a day. We'll
give you each $1,000 for 10 days, and we made it work. We did three tours like that before my
book started exploding, and the publisher started saying, no, you can't do that anymore. We need
to send you on a big real book tour. But that was very effective for me. Your mileage may vary
in convincing a publisher to let you do something like that. All right, Adam, what do we got? 10
minutes? Okay, turn that over, and let me hit a few of these questions. How do you know if you're
a niche genre? This is hard because niche genres tend to be genres that are mashing two or three
genres together. A lot of times what happens is you have a Venn diagram of genres, and it's hard to
tell when you're going to get, for instance, let's say you have mysteries and romances, right?
Well, sometimes when a book comes out, it grabs both of these audiences. In fact,
SF, science fiction fantasy, Charlene Harris, who did the True Blood books, somehow grabbed
some of each of these audiences, and it worked really well. And I think they shelved the True
Blood books in sci-fi fantasy, which makes some sense, but they were mystery, romance,
science fiction fantasy. They were basically vampire romance mysteries. Sometimes you grab that whole
audience. Sometimes you only grab this audience, and it's hard to tell. I have a friend in the
industry who published what looked like a book that was going to grab great big audiences. It was
basically military lawyers for a space fleet, basically Starfleet's military lawyers, right?
Where they've got this big military science fiction thing where there's wars going on,
and they're going to do the trials of the people who violated whatever, and they're going to be
very action-adventury, but also with the lawyers. It's like law and order meets Star Trek, right?
And those books flopped hardcore despite being great books. And they only hit the Venn diagram.
People pick them up and be like, I like science fiction, but I don't like lawyers. So they put
them down. Other people pick them up and be like, I like lawyer fiction, but the science fiction stuff.
We don't know, right? If publishers knew how to market a book perfectly to the broadest possible
audience, they would do it every time. They don't know. Nobody knows what's going to hit and what
isn't. If those books had been published online, there might have been a thousand or two thousand
people who are like, wow, I was in the military police. I love science fiction. This is just perfect
for me. This is like the best thing ever. And you get that audience who just becomes a really
dedicated fan base. That is what I would call a niche genre, right? Kind of this melding of two
genres that doesn't grab the whole Venn diagram, but gets a narrow group who are very dedicated to
it. Any publishing can be great for that. Fortunately, that story has a happy ending,
because he re-branded himself and published the Lost Fleet books under the name Jack Campbell.
His name is John Henry. He's a great author. I really like Lost Fleet books, but he took out
basically the lawyer part and just did great military science fiction books. And the books
took off and sold really well. And so that has a happy story. The publisher, we really believed
in them. They all knew the books were good. They just didn't hit the audience. So he got
another chance at it and ended up working for him. So do short stories sell well when
indie published? No. Short stories do not sell well indie published. Short stories do well
free. There are places where free short stories do very well. I have a student in the class this
year who's done very well on No Sleep, the Reddit short story horror subreddit,
and gotten lots of views there. But generally that price point is very hard for a short story.
Novellas do sell. A novella is 17,000 words and above. As long as you can hit that magic
number of realistically charging $2.99 for it on Amazon, then suddenly it becomes viable.
Anything under that $2.99 is just not viable monetarily. That said, short stories can be
very popular. They just don't work right now, paid wise. Your mileage may vary. Ask some other
people about what they've done with short stories. I see collections now and then selling. Most of
the short stories I see people put up for free just for advertising, or they try to sell the
magazines for prestige. Are there indie small presses, publishers that specialize in Novellas?
Yes, tour.com and several others. Tour.com generally prefers diverse books. That's one
of the ways they have made their name right now. And so they have a very narrow application
submission guideline window, and they tend to be looking for diverse fiction. And so
do be aware of that. But indie publishing with Novellas work, and there are some other places
like tour.com, for instance, Emperor's Soul, which was published with Tachyon, went with a small press
for the print that was big enough to get the book in bookstores, but which was
small enough that they were willing to take print-only rights and leave me with e-book
rights to sell myself. How would one go from indie publishing to traditional on their advantages
of doing this? Yes. I guess we'll end here. What, I got like five minutes left, Adam? Three minutes.
We'll end here. If I were me trying to break in right now, I would try going hybrid, meaning
I would write some books, and I would then decide, are these best traditional or these best indie?
If they're best traditional, I would start submitting to the traditional publishers.
And if they're best indie, I would just start with indie. At the same time, I would be looking
for something targeted at indie publishing that would work really well. I would be like,
you know what, I can write, if you guys are fans of my books, the Wax and Wayne books,
the fast-paced mysteries, detective thrillers is really what they are, that are shorter,
are a better match for indie publishing. Maybe if I were not well-known and not broken out,
I would be like, I'm going to write six of these across the next few years, just in between other
books, save them up, and then I'm going to launch them indie published. After books, then go through
the traditional publishing route, and if they all got rejected, I would hold them back for when I
did an indie publishing push, so I could slot those books in at the end, the big epic fantasies,
to be like, if you liked my fast-paced ones, maybe you will like the longer book that has more lore
that is using the same world. And so I might try to break out that way.
I think considering both as viable methods of breaking in is just the wisest way to go right
now. Talking to a lot of authors, both traditionally and indie published, finding out what's working
for them is a great way to go. Don't close any doors. Do your research. This is just an overview.
I couldn't get into a lot of the depths of it. I will next week, if we have time,
during the questions, try to outline the Big Five publishers and who they are to kind of give you
a head start on submitting to them. But for now, do your research, take this,
and hopefully you can expand it into something that will help you get published.
Thank you, guys. We will see you next week for the last of our classes.
