All right, guys. So today, we're going to answer questions. Yay. So the things that you guys have
written down for me about plot, we're going to talk over. And then, if I get bored of that,
we'll do a maybe a short lecture, maybe not. It depends on how bored of answering your
questions that I get. So I'm just going to go down this list that my assistant has given me,
and I'm going to cherry pick some questions. If you have other questions about plot you want to
throw at me, or if I don't get to yours, then we will do time for questions from the audience
today as well. So how long is too long for introductions is the first question. So this
is an interesting question, because like most writing questions, the answer is it depends on a
lot of factors. Novels are not like screenplays, where it's very easy to pinpoint the number of
pages you should spend doing a given thing, that because a novel's length is going to vary widely,
and your structure is going to vary wildly, depending on your own preferences and the genre
you're writing in. So while you can get a screenplay format book that's going to be like,
on page six you should have done this. I can't tell you that for your novel. I can tell you this.
You generally want to go a little faster into it than you are comfortable as a new writer. The sooner
you can introduce the tone of your story and your character's main conflict, maybe not the main
conflict of the plot, but how the character is going to relate to it, the better off you're going
to be. What you want to really do is you want to sell us on being in this character's head,
and that is your, if you can do nothing but sell us on the character's personality in the first
couple of chapters, you can coast a long way on that in a novel. And this will also depend on your
genre. And unfortunately, or maybe fortunately, how famous you are. Let me explain. Readers going
into a book are going to come into it willing to give you a certain amount of leeway. If they have
read previous books by you that have had excellent payoffs by the end of that book, then they will
give you longer to establish your introduction because they know that the payoff will be worth it.
This is the advantage you get when you release a number of books, and it's why I can get away
with Way of Kings more easily than you could get away with Way of Kings. I still would recommend
you follow your passion for telling the type of story you want to tell, even if it is something
like Way of Kings that is going to have a steeper learning curve. Do your thing, but understand
there's this way I talk about stories and people picking up stories. And it's like every reader
has a certain number of, like a threshold of crap they'll let an author get away with, right? And
everyone's threshold is different, and the things they count as crap that they have to let the
author get away with is different based on the individual. For instance, some readers might pick
up a book like this and that's immediately, all right, I'm skeptical, Sanderson, right? Like,
I have read big books like this before that have meandered a ton and then haven't had a good payoff
and because that's my experience, that's crap that is going against your stuff I have to put up with.
You already have basically a red mark against you. Other people pick up that book and be like,
oh, I've had wonderful experiences with the big books. It is way cheaper on my pocket book to buy
this with an audible credit instead of this with an audible credit. Same price. One gives me nine
hours, one gives me 55 hours. If you want to know why Oathbringer was the single most preordered
book in the history of audible, 55 hours, right? So you can see how that reader desire and expectation
plays into giving you a red mark or maybe, you know, a green mark, you know, something like that.
And readers all have different thresholds here, but generally you want to have as few red marks
as possible for the story you want to tell. The story you want to tell is more important than
getting rid of all red marks. If you try to get rid of all potential red marks that anyone could
have against your book, your book will probably turn out to be bland and uninteresting and nobody
will love it. And so you're going to have to take risks. You're going to have to do some things that
are going to turn off some readers, but that are going to become selling points to other readers.
That's why we, you know, let's way have genre sections and bookstores because certain people,
that corner of Barnes & Noble is the, you know, the danger zone of nerddom and I will never walk
over there and others of us are like, all right, where's the sci-fi section here, right? That doesn't
mean that we wouldn't enjoy other types of stories, but we have enjoyed enough stories in the past
of this sort of thing that being sci-fi-fantasy immediately gives us more of this, you know,
green mark, so to speak. It gives us more threshold. We're like more willing to buy in.
So this is a long way of saying how long is your introduction. Make it as short as possible
to achieve your goals for the type of story you're telling. Okay? Get as soon as possible
us into the main character's head, the main character's conflict, and the proper tone of your
story as soon as is possible for the type of story you want to tell. Okay? You will rarely ever get
feedback that your book started off too explosively and too interestingly, and I was too interested
in the character. Never going to get that feedback. You might get feedback that they're like, it then
progressed so quickly, I didn't have time to get to know the character, and I got whiplash or things
like that. That can totally happen. But, yeah. So how do you reverse engineer good stories to rob
them for their parts? And another question from the next week's was, can you give us a big master
list of all the prod archetypes that are out there? Pretty please. There were a bunch of you
that wanted this. I can't because I haven't been able to find one because I'm not sure how if people,
like I know a lot of people, like, you know, I shared the story about Joe Russo because I'm like,
okay, I know other people do this, right? I met someone else that does it, who's able to describe
this way. I'm sure there are lots of people out there that do this, but I don't think anyone's
made a list because if you look for what are the basic stories, they will boil it down a little too
far. And you'll end up with rags to riches or, you know, that plot archetype, which is fine,
but rags to riches, they're like, here are the seven stories. I don't want the seven stories. I
want the like 200 stories that are very commonly used that you can adapt and create a framework.
And I have not found anyone who has a good list of that. But writing excuses, elemental genre
season, which I think is season 11, we spend all of that year kind of breaking down Brandon's philosophy
on this story structure thing. And we look at something like, here's a thriller type of plot,
here's how you build one of these, and here are some examples. And that might be your answer
in kind of long form. I don't have just a list of them, I'm afraid. And so start making your own
list. When you go and you watch a movie, the Marvel movies are actually really good for this,
because the Marvel movies are all superhero movies. But one of the things that they have done
is they've said, well, we're going to make each of them a different genre of film. And so, for
instance, Captain America, the Winter Soldier is a spy thriller, right? And it kind of very hits all
the beats of what a spy thriller is. And you can compare that to several of the Mission Possibles
and to other spy thrillers and be like, all right, spy thriller type thing. Whereas the Ant-Man
films are comedic heists, right? And you can be like, oh, here are the heist beats for a kind of
comedic small crew heist, as opposed to a large crew heist. And you can just kind of look at each
of those and be like, all right, here's Thor, it's our epic fantasy. And here is, you know,
this, you can just start splitting them up. But start watching the movies you
watch in a different way. Start reading the books you read in a different way and say,
can I boil this down to some similar themes and similar plot archetypes to others and
build your own? Because I don't think there's one out there that covers all of these types
of things the way that we would want. Or at least the way that I like to talk about them.
Let's see. How can I more effectively nest plots? How do you keep those from feeling
like diversions? There were a number of questions along the lines of how do I make sure that my
subplots don't feel like diversions or that they're interesting to the reader? And how do I nest
these things properly? A really good question. Because this is something that is hard to do.
You might notice sometimes that you'll see a film and you'll feel like this portion is just
a bunch of characters spinning their wheels and not accomplishing anything. And I felt bored by
that side quest that they were sent on. How do you make the side quest relevant to the main story?
How do you make multiple characters plot lines relevant? One thing I'll warn you of is that
readers will generally pick their favorites out of a cast of characters. And I've found that
generally they will gravitate and pick a least favorite, a most favorite, and a I don't care
if there's like three. But there's always seems to be this balance of this is my favorite.
And the further you write in your book, the more that that weight will actually,
a lot of readers will just kind of pick up momentum on that. Oh, this is the character I
don't want to read as much. And it becomes kind of a self-fulfilling prophecy. It is one of the
dangers of large multi viewpoint books. Of course, the advantage you get is the variety
it's itself a big green check mark for a lot of readers, where they would rather read even
some characters they're not as interested in occasionally to keep the story having a lot of
variety and to have the epic scope, which is why we often like to write these big epics.
But I will warn you, sometimes that's going to happen. And sometimes it's inevitable.
At least if it's not inevitable, I haven't yet found the method of making a large cast dynamic
with multiple viewpoints that people don't start polarizing about their favorites,
as they compare them. Perhaps there is a way to do that I haven't figured out yet.
But how do you make your side plots relevant? Well, there are a couple of ways to do this.
One of them is to make sure that we are really invested and engaged by the viewpoint characters,
and we understand their motivations. Not to pile on the last Jedi, because there are a lot of good
things about that film. I'm impressed with a lot of what Ryan Johnson was trying to do in that film.
But one of the things that a lot of people say is the plot with Finn and Rose felt very,
it didn't connect with a lot of people in the same way. And this might have to do with promises
and connecting to the character. For instance, Finn is introduced in that movie
in a way that if you haven't seen it, this is a character who had an interesting relationship
with another character in the first movie, and then is introduced in the next movie saying,
I need to get to my friend, and I need to help my friend. And instead of doing that,
the story sends him on a side quest. And this is very much the same problem I had in the original
draft of Oathbringer, where I say, here is your promise. This character is really interested in
and all the characters are interested in going to X. And then I sent them to Y. And the initial
draft, everyone's like, yeah, but this is the side quest. I know this is the side quest. When
are you going to get to what you told me was the main story. So Finn coming out and saying,
I need to get to Rey, my friend, and help her some way, but somehow ends up on this wacky adventure
riding horses and things, where all the while you've been keyed in your head to be like,
yeah, but even though after that introduction, they did work to try and establish why this side
quest was important, it just felt like the character wasn't achieving his motivations. And we were
not invested in what the character was doing to the extent we wanted to be. We were really invested
in the A plot of that movie, a lot of people were. And then the B plot of the movie seemed like it
was going to be involved and then wasn't. It's hard to pick apart why something like this,
a very successful movie is not something I want to sit and bag on. But I look at that and think
there's a lesson there in making sure when you're doing these subplots with your side characters,
make sure the reader is invested in wanting to see more of that character, or at least their
character arc is going to be engaging and interesting. Make sure you're making right
promises for that character and then showing progress upon the thing you promised the reader
that you were going to get. You use all the same sort of tools you use for the main plot line
on the side character. And then it is usually really handy to start showing how this is going to
combine to the main story, how it's relevant to the main story in some way. Now,
this isn't an absolute must, right? Particularly in a lot of epic fantasies,
you start with, here are four characters in different parts of the world and they are doing
their own thing and you're not quite sure how they connect until at the end of the first book or
maybe not even until later volumes. And in that case, you have to treat them each like their own
book rather than like side quests, which means do all the things that you're doing with the other
characters. Make sure people are invested, that you have plot progress, that you have plotting
and these sorts of things. If you do your job right, people will be invested in that character
to the point that it won't feel like a deviation from the main plot. You will feel like its own
secondary plot. Those are separate from the stories where all the characters are together
and you want to start to express sub-themes and sub-characters. And this sort of thing
just kind of comes down to making sure you're keeping good balance. It's much easier if all your
characters are in the same place. The reader's going to give you a ton more leeway if your
characters are all together, at least at the start of the story. Guardians of the Galaxy,
the second Guardians of the Galaxy movie, is a good example of giving a lot of sub-plots to a
lot of different characters and introducing them while they're together. And then some of them
split off a little bit, but the idea is you're invested in this whole, you're invested in the
story, and then because so many of them are together for so much of it, taking a little bit
of time away to find out why this character's this or why this character's that, and then wrapping
up those arcs, can feel very satisfying when everybody kind of has their own little mini-arc
through the course of the story. You have an advantage over a filmmaker in that you have
way more pages to play with. You can take a chapter or two now and then for a side character,
and particularly if they're all on the same place in the same quest and you are still, like,
what you'll want to do is you'll be like, we're going to see through character
desise for this chapter. And this character's perspective on what we're doing as we go on
our quest is going to add a new and interesting view of this quest, and we're going to see
they have this sub-plot where they, you know, are in love with this other character,
and they haven't expressed it openly, and you say, oh, that's really cool, but you also still get the
main plot progressing because you say you're on a travelogue, they arrive at this next place,
you're still progressing your main plot while showing the world through a different character's
eyes. Way easier in that case than if you split them up. But like I said, if you do your job right,
if you treat them all as when you're in their eyes, they are the protagonist of their own story,
then you're going to be much, you're not going to have problems with this as much as you might think.
Sometimes twists can be cliche because some writers just write twists for twist's sake.
How can I avoid that? Excellent question, and this is a relevant thing to be asking yourself
and to be thinking about. Early in my career, particularly when I was unpublished, but getting
really close to being published, I started to find that I was doing this, that I'm like,
there aren't enough twists in this book, I'm going to put in more, and I had to step back
and start asking myself, why? What emotion is this twist adding? What is the purpose of it?
And there are totally valid purposes for twists. Early in a book, when you kill off a main character
in a way that is unexpected, it can add tension for the rest of the story, the rest of the series.
Game of Thrones did this and earned a huge amount of tension-building ability by giving the idea
that main characters were not safe from being killed. In fact, it became the big selling point
for the series is it's a series where characters are not protected from the consequences of their
actions, which is why many people were upset later in the series when it started to seem like people
were being protected from the consequence of their actions. It became the selling point. So that
twist, that idea of taking the reader's expectations and turning them against the reader, that subversion
serves a real purpose in that story. And you can ask yourself, what does this subversion mean?
But let me tell you a story I often relate in this class that I haven't done this year yet.
And this is about, so forgive me if you've heard this story. I have a friend who released a first
book around the same time that I did. And mine really took off and this friend's book series just
did not take off on the same level. And one time we were sitting and chatting and I had read some
of this book, but had decided pretty early on it just wasn't a book for me. It was not poorly written.
It was a perfectly acceptable book, but it just didn't quite work for me. And he was asking,
so why was that? And I'm like, well, it felt like a very kind of standard
quest fantasy, a very Terry Brooks-esque standard quest fantasy. And I really enjoyed those when I
was younger and read a bunch of them, but I'm, as a reader, just kind of bored of that story. I've
read it enough times that I just don't want to read it anymore. And I'd heard a lot of feedback
from people about this same idea. And he said, but that's the thing about the three-quarter mark.
You realize that it isn't a standard quest fantasy. It turns everything on its head. It inverts
all of those tropes. And it undermines everything you've been thinking. It does this really cool
new direction for the story. Now, I didn't get there, so I can't speak to whether this is true
or not. But it set me thinking a lot about this idea of subverting expectations and twists as
stories go. And his book seems a perfect example of why simply subverting expectations is not
itself necessarily a virtue. This is because if you wanted a classic quest Terry Brooks fantasy
and you read this book, what is your reaction likely to be? Hey, you gave me three quarters
of the book full of promises of a certain style. And I'm the person that wanted that,
and then you took it away from me at the end. Now, if you're a person who loves subverted
expectations and you love the idea of taking classic tropes and twisting them and mangling them,
what happens to you? What's your response to this book? I don't get to the part that I would enjoy
because I'm bored by the first three quarters of it. So whether or not the book actually did this,
this is an interesting object lesson I think for you to take where not giving like not fulfilling
on your promises is not a virtue. Now, if you can do a subversion in a way that gives the reader
more than they expected, better than they expected, or if you spent a lot of time convincing them
they actually want something else, then you give them that, then those subversions all work, right?
And if you can use a subversion to expand the reader's desire to see more, if you can expand on
a character, the classic example of this is at the end of the second Star Wars movie, well, the
fifth, you know what I mean, Empire Strikes Back, when we find out that Darth Vader is Luke's father,
right? Now, this was not necessarily something we were wanting. So you could say, well, this wasn't
promised, though it kind of was because you had foreshadowing with the cutting off of Vader's head
and there's Luke's face in it and during the training, so there are those little clues. But
you could say, no, no, I wasn't getting into this story to have a huge reveal at the end. So why does
that work when this other pull the rug out from underneath? Doesn't. And the reason mainly being
that this story is about Luke's quest, it's about his journey as a character, and this thing at the
end, he lends us huge investment in his character as it develops. And you knew something was going
to go wrong because you don't have the main character ignore Yoda and have it turn out all
right, right? Like that is totally set up. And so you knew something, you were prepped. You have,
you know, this dangerous scene where he's training Yoda, he disobeys his master, he goes off,
everything's going wrong, and you know that the other shoe is going to drop. You've been promised
that you're really kind of wanting it, right? You're wanting, oh, Luke better pay for this. And
then he finds out about this whole thing and it's earth shaking and it's incredible and it expands
your understanding of the character. It introduced new conflict that's going to be really interesting
into this relationship. It is not so much a subversion, though it is slightly, as a really
great escalation of the, of the conflict. And so try to do that if you can, escalate instead of
completely undermine. So all right. Well, Spencer and Jordan ever get married with lots of eyes.
Can a story be sort of episodic and still keep you turning the page? So yes, you absolutely
can. A story can be episodic and keep you turning the page. Most of the time, the secret to episodic
page turners is to have a good hook at the end of your episode to promise what the next episode's
going to be and make that really interesting. One of my personal philosophies is if you're going
to do this, there are two ways that you can give a twist hook ending to a chapter or an episode
of something you're doing. One is to say she went to the door, the knot came to the door,
she went to it and opened the door and cut, right? And this is kind of a classic mystery formula
hook at the end. And then you turn the page to find out who's at the door. You can do those.
It's kind of a dirty trick, but we do dirty tricks in writing all the time. If you can,
instead, have her open the door and it is her father that she thought was dead and then cut,
that is a better hook. What, because that hook only works if you have properly set up who the
character is so that the reader can infer what this twist means. And those twists at the end of
episodes are going to be just far better, far, far better if you can come up with them. The problem
with the open the door and you've probably read books like this. If you haven't, you probably
actually haven't, you didn't notice. A lot of them is they open the door and start the next chapter.
It was the pizza delivery person. They got pizza and then, right, like I'm exaggerating, but a lot
of times the authors know to put this sort of hook at the end of a chapter or the end of an episode,
but they don't actually know how to make the next thing interesting. So they use the cheap trick to
get you to turn the page, but once you've read another page, you're kind of committed to another
chapter and so you keep reading. Avoid those if you can and instead make them legitimate
moments of crisis or curiosity to the reader to get them to turn to the next episode. That is how
you get a page turner out of something episodic. And television does this a lot. This is the main
television format is to try to give you a stinger at the end of an episode to bring you back next
week. And again, some of those are dirty tricks and some of them I don't like, but you can learn a
lot from that method. So if you are writing something episodic, looking at great episodic
works like some of the better television shows will teach you how to do this.
But yeah, you can't have page turners. And then after that point, once they turn
that page, you're over the big hump. The big hump is, will they start the next episode? Because
once they do, you have a chance to hook them with character, with conflict, and with your
expert storytelling again and keep a hold of them. All right. Let's see. That's a spoiler.
Is there always a twist? There does not always have to be a twist. Now, it depends on your
definition of a twist. They're usually, in fact, almost all cases should be an escalation.
An escalation does not have to be a twist, but it usually fills the same role as a twist.
An escalation is when things get worse. The status quo has changed, but it is changing in the wrong
direction. This is why most, you know, romantic comedies, even though you know they're going to
get together, everyone knows they're going to get together, has a breakup scene somewhere around
the three-quarter mark of the story. You could call this a twist, and it can happen because
of a twist. But a lot of times, it's just the two characters' personalities. You've seen the thorns
all along. Remember how I told you about Dave braiding roses? You've seen the thorns, and you've
started braiding them, but right near the end, two thorns just jab into each other. You knew it was
possible. You were kind of waiting for it. It does. And now, oh no, everything's gotten worse,
because she knows the worst thing about him, and he knows the worst thing about her. This can be
handled very expertly. It can be handled very poorly. I'm sure you have seen both, but the idea
is that there is an escalation. Problems are being introduced. More obstacles, things are getting
worse. And like I said, those fill the same function. A twist should generally fill one of
those same sort of functions. When the twist happens, it should escalate the problem. It should
make you reassess goals. It should make you look at the story in a different way, and in hopefully
a way that makes the reader more excited and more interesting. Discovering that Luke is Darth Vader's
father is a great escalation twist, right? Yeah, backwards, yeah. Luke, you know, it's Lucas. Who
knows, right? But yeah, Darth Vader's Luke's father, that's a great escalation, because
these two characters are already in conflict. The story has been introduced that they're going
to be in conflict. The story is building to a confrontation between them, which you now know
Luke has lost, and then you are given a twist, which expands the scope of their conflict to new
and unforeseen dimensions that also puts Luke in conflict with his other father, right? Obi-Wan,
who now lied to him, right? And so suddenly it just, it's a twist that expands the conflict
in beautiful ways. It is the picture perfect way to manage a twist in your story. Try to make your
twists escalate, but you don't have to have them. You can just have the problems mount and mount and
then people overcome them. Don't particularly twist endings, get hung up on twist endings too much.
Being satisfying is generally better than having a twist. Generally, if you can have your twist
also be satisfying, it's going to in general be better than either of those two former options.
But if the twist makes your ending unsatisfying, then you have to have a very special story for
that to work. Can work really hard, right? Like I often bring up into the woods things like this,
which are stories that are about deconstructing a story and about the reader having a miserable
experience in some ways and enjoying that miserable experience. Those sorts of stories can work with
twists that is not satisfying because there's a kind of native satisfaction in the, oh, you got me.
You got me. I thought I was going to be happy and now I'm sad. And that makes me so happy,
but I don't want to talk about it because I just want to be mad at you. Like really tough to pull
off but possible, obviously. All right. How can I tell if it's my character or my plot that needs
to change? There's a couple different ways for me to read this. I don't know if I talked to you
guys about the idea that a lot of times I think this is building off of the idea that sometimes
I'm writing a book and I tend to discovery write my characters, right? And so they grow to be something
that isn't going to fulfill what the plot of the story would indicate. And at that point,
you kind of reach as a writer at crisis moment. You're like, all right, I've built this cool plot
for the character to go on. You discover writers. You're like, I don't do that. So I don't have to
ever hear about this. But maybe you're writing along and you get that sense. The more you write,
the more of an instinct you'll have when things are working and when they're not. This starts to
build as you finish multiple novels or multiple short stories of your short story writer. If you
haven't finished multiple, you probably don't have this instinct yet. You might think that you do,
but you don't. Because this comes from a familiarity with your own process and you
trying things that have worked in the past and then finding out they're not working this time.
That is different from what is probably happening if you're a newer writer, you haven't finished
multiple books or stories, which is you get to the middle, you've never written the middle before,
middles are hard, and you get writer's block, right? That is different from you finished eight
novels. You are three quarters the weight of your book and you know it's not working. You know
something is fundamentally broken and that all the things you've done in the past that have worked,
you have tried and this time it's not working. Two very different problems, right? And the
latter one you can really only figure out by instinct. If you are a newer writer, my recommendation
is that most of the time finish the story. Don't stop even if you think something is
fundamentally broken because the mere act of finishing the story will start giving you the
tools to fix that story. The best cure for most writers, writer's block in my experience has been
to write anyway. Nobody's taking your pen away. No one's unplugged your laptop. When we talk about
writer's block it usually means my subconscious feels something is wrong with this book and I
don't know what that thing is that is wrong or my subconscious is terrified about the fact that I
don't know where this is going and I feel like I should so I'm a fraud and so I can't keep going,
right? And as a new writer those two things can be very paralyzing and all of their cousins
that work like that and the answer to both of them is remember that your job in writing right now
is not to create a perfect book. Maybe you will. Maybe you're Pat Rothfuss and you'll write a
brilliant first novel, right? It happens, right? Harry Potter was a first novel. 13 drafts I think
she said but a first novel. It's possible but most likely your job right now in writing is to
turn yourself into a person who can write great novels not writing a great novel because you
just don't have the skill yet to do that and even if you do you're probably going to have to revise
many many times and you need a finished product to do that. The best advice for most new writers is
just keep writing. Do something. Have something happen. Go ask your roommate, your spouse, your
kid whatever say, hey what should I do? If you're a kid they're gonna be like they go play Fortnite
um so your characters go play Fortnite or whatever um have something you know just do something
even as an established professional who has written a lot um my go to when I have this
feeling that something's wrong is to write anyway and see if it persists across a couple of chapters
because even still more often than not writing that chapter the wrong way will put it into my
subconscious and across the next day while I'm thinking about it my brain will say ah now that
we have a finished broken chapter I can fix that. I have all the tools from you know from studying
writing for so long that I can look at something broken and say you had the wrong viewpoint for
this chapter that's why it's wrong. We need to be in this character's head and make this revelation
which will turn the plot the way that we want it to be going. Nine times out of ten the next
day I set that chapter aside I write a new one and that one goes in the book and it works even
still. Once in a while there's a bigger problem than that and this is when I dig out all of the
writing tools that I talk about in class that my friends talk about using that I see in books on
instruction and writing I say all right let's break this down to things like where are my motivations
for my characters what are my promises what is you know my plot archetype and my trajectory
how am I pacing how am I doing all and I start digging apart the story and looking for where the
problem is using all of these tools and almost always I then find the solution sometimes I don't
I had a book a couple years ago the apocalypse guard I still don't know how to fix it I could
identify that something was wrong my editor agreed it wasn't just that I was having an off time
but the book just didn't click didn't come together and I still don't know what was wrong with it I
had this same problem with the way of kings in 2002 I managed to spend nine years no no eight years
thinking about that book in the back of my brain came to the decision of what I had done wrong
fundamentally in the story wrote it again I guess it was 2009 I wrote again because it came out in
2010 so seven years of time later I knew what to do when I started from scratch and the book worked
that time that's maybe not what you want to hear because it's well take take seven years maybe
it'll work out but yeah all right let's ask for any questions from you guys and then I'm gonna
jump into the the next week's questions anything you guys want me to get to all right we'll go over
here yeah right good question yeah so how can a very character driven plot work using name of the
win is an example because it is basically it is a series of vignettes tied together by a character
and so how can that work that actually brings me into if you guys will let me deviate for a minute
and talk a little bit about what I want to talk about today where are our markers right here oh
there we are all right let me let me do a short little lecture on viewpoint right viewpoint
because the answer to this is deeply connected to viewpoint and what we're doing so viewpoint
there are three standard viewpoints that you can use of which two are really the the ones that
people use so we have omniscient omniscient I can spell that right we have first person
and we have second person yes of these you're probably going to use omniscient or you're
going to use first person second person is used you did this you did that so choose your own adventure
novels are usually in second person or some version of them Nora's broken earth trilogy
uses second person quite extensively it's usually very literary and very difficult to use or very
pulpy at very you know choose your adventure second person generally I would recommend
don't do unless you want to make it a major selling part of your story and you know what you're doing
so that brings us down to our two main viewpoints now the nice thing about these viewpoints is
there are a lot of different models you can choose among these each of them break down to a couple
things first person has what we call a pistol area I think I spelled that right I don't know
so a pistol area is some is where all of the story is being told through ephemera or pieces of
writing that someone has found and collected so diary of a wimpy kit is an epistolary story it
is written in diary form where the character is writing it down Dracula is a classic example of
this it is mixing letters and people's journals together to create a narrative there was a really
cool one that came out a number of years ago now like five six years ago called Illuminae which was
told through redacted documents that an agency had gathered together that had all the redactions on
them and stuff and it's like you know text conversations and letters and emails and things
constructed into a story epistolary can be very fun another famous example from from sci-fi fantasy
is sorcery in Cecilia which I believe I could be wrong on this but I believe was the the authors
that wrote it were just exchanging letters as if they were their characters and then they published
that as a novel which is great right that's just a really cool way to write a book you know here's
what happened in my life here's what happened in my life you know and then they being professional
writers they like work in these connections I think that's where it went I might be thinking of a
different one but these sorts of things can do really fun things with epistolary we have
kind of another one these are kind of more my terms for them you won't find these online
necessarily but we have the what will I call it today I call it something different every year
we call it the the flashback yeah this is your classic first person so your classic first person
is your flashback narrative where someone is telling you a story the character basically
is two characters they are the person they were in the story and they were the person
that they are now this is name of the wind right name of the wind is a the character now telling
you about the story of how they became who they are classic first person storytelling method
this is in many ways this is actually what the hobbit is though it actually it's kind of a hybrid
between this and omniscient present narrator because bilbo pretends he's not writing the book
even though he is even though Tolkien so Tolkien is pretending to be bilbo he's pretending to
not be bilbo writing a book right um yes um and so but flashback sci-fi fantasy versions of this
the the far seer books by robin hobb are told as first personaries they're kind of separated
from epistolary in that you get the sense that yes this is the author telling the writer telling
the story that the narrator the person but it's not actual necessarily have to be ephemera right
like a writer doing a flashback type of story will include way more detail than someone actually
writing in their journal would it reads like a novel just someone telling you the story and
that's part of the affectation of it is it's you know someone's going to tell you their life story
but it comes across like name of the wind takes like 40 hours to listen to but they pretend he's
telling this story in one sitting or two settings or something like that like you know that's
actually impossible but it works right um and so that that's a flashback story and then uh the third
is the uh i'll call it cinematic uh this time um there are diff i've used different terms for it
the definition of this one is this is the the kind of the standard for y a right now which is
it's being told in the first person but kind of as if the character were narrating their life
as they're right as they're living it right now it's not being written down it's not actually
being told to you but you are instead like you have like a little um like you've embedded an
implant into their brain and that implant as they are thinking is framing all of their thoughts
into first person and they are living their life this way there's no expectation that there's going
to be a frame story or any sort of thing telling you that this is a journal there's no epistolary
things it's just a first person story told in kind of an immediate sense i often call this immediate
first person um usually that one is in present tense uh while usually the other two are in past
tense um so these each give you something they each give their each tools that you can use
omniscient has similar ones we have what we call a present narrator
and when we say we call it i call it today present narrator so present narrator what is this
well this is where there's a storyteller telling you a story and it's a hybrid between first person
and omniscient where while in the story you are not in the any one character's head the
narrator is jumping all around and telling you things so basically you have a first person frame
story of the of the person jumping into an omniscient narrator telling you a story uh a lad
and kind of uses this sort of thing right a little bit even though it's cinematic so it's not in
anyone's head uh what's some some good examples of this the hobbit is a good example of this in fact
quintessential example uh the idea is that you know bilbo is telling is writing the story down
but while he's telling the story he's jumping into other people's heads and giving you their thoughts
even though when bilbo himself was in that story he didn't know them any time like a writer writes
the words they didn't know it at the time but that's usually some sort of present narrator um
you see this a lot in comics with the present narrator where there's like an omniscient narrator
who's telling you the story stuff like that um then you have true omniscient um which is you are
going to write an omniscient piece where there's no necessary narrator but you have as the reader
access to everyone's thoughts and emotions concurrently a given paragraph could be an
any viewpoint at any time and the author will decide um this but the author is generally
not going to withhold any information from you uh dune is the classic sci-fi example when someone
walks on a stage it's going to betray them you jump in his head and he's like boy it's going to suck
when i betray these people right like you as the as the reader are being given all the information
this is why david lynch yeah who made the film um if you watch the original cut of dune even the
even the theatrical cut of dune the original movie you are often getting the character's thoughts
as voiceovers when they're sitting there because the book's an omniscient and they're trying to
find a way to do that cinematically uh and it's really weird um i don't need to say that about
lynch's work but uh that's that's taken for granted um and then you have limited
so third limited is um of these i would say the most common that you're going to do are going to
be this one this one and this one um 90 plus percent of all books published are one of these
three limited is for a given scene you pick one character's viewpoint you see through only their
eyes you only see and understand their thoughts and everyone else is any any thoughts they might
have or the character interpreting saying it seemed like they might be wanting this or something
like that so you are very sanly rooting someone in someone's head but as soon as you change scenes
you can change to a different head to be in um and so uh when we say third limited it's uh why it's
under omniscient is because you can be in anyone's head but only one at the same time so um the reason
this lecture this thing came out when you asked about character driven stories is these styles
tend to involve advantages and disadvantages and one of the big advantages of first person
is that if that character's voice is interesting then you can get away with a ton of stuff that
you can't get away with in uh particularly a third limited if reading the character's voice
they are beautiful poetic um or funny or sarcastic or something like that it covers a whole host of
sins that otherwise the story would feel boring because of um info dumps in first person are a
lot easier because since you can put them in the first person character's perspective and tell a
funny joke or give a really lush and interesting poetic paragraph uh as the description that
itself becomes such a selling point that you kind of want to linger and you want the info dump to
maybe go a little longer because you're learning so much about the character and having so much
fun with them um and that dynamic is a huge part of what makes name of the wind work uh name of the
wind does the reverse of a lot of stories in that a lot of stories we use the present narrator
and kind of have this frame story um and things like that the frame story is third limited
in uh name of the wind and then the first person narrative starts up as he's sitting down to tell
his story to the person who's come to collect his story uh which is a really ingenious frame
story it works really well and because of that you you get all these sorts of things you get his
voice being a drawing point or a selling point for the story and beyond that you get the sense of
a storyteller telling you a story kind of like present narrator um but done in a very strict
first person uh flashback sense um and you are really interested in this character and so
almost all the plot progression can be character motivated so instead of we need to go to the
place and get the thing being the the way your progress is you are shifted into thinking how is
my character changing as they go to the place and get the thing getting the thing doesn't matter
but what it does to this character really matters and it allows you to really focus on that you
can do that in limited in fact you should be trying to do that in limited but in first person
you can really make that sort of thing sing and so while you're reading all of your progress is
character based who is quote becoming and he gives you a promise in that book
by showing you old quote who's like like what he's only a couple years older but old quote right
old quote who is beaten down depressed and has given up and young quote who is optimistic
and excited and going to take on the world your promise is right there how does young
quote become old quote you have been given right immediately a huge promise and your promise is
this is our progress it is a character losing their innocence becoming beaten down and turning
into this person which is why if you think the series is going to be a comedy and not a tragedy
you may be wrong it would be my expectation so there you go that is a large part of your question
now since we did all of this let's talk a little bit about what each of these can do and what their
advantages are and why you might choose them let me throw it to you guys let's pick a pistolary
what are in it what's an advantage or a disadvantage that you can see of doing an
epistolary story mystery mystery okay yeah mystery so epistolary has this innate built-in mystery
because um it's the uh the only real like it's I won't say only as opposed to flashback in flashback
you know the character lives unless of course it's one of those stories where the character died
and is telling you the story as a ghost which totally happens a lot so it's not that unique but
it totally can but either way the characters around to tell you the story and an epistolary
you don't know like you're living it moment by moment yeah well go ahead it's extremely immersive
it is hugely immersive right it's got you can build in all kinds of interesting lore and ephemera
that you can put build into this if you're doing a full on epistolary it can be like
here is like Watchman does this right if you're reading Watchman it does these epistolary
sections at the end of each comic which are here is one of the characters marketing plan for the
action figures that they are creating is your epistolary section at the end of that comic
which is so cool right it tells you so much about the character and the questions are do you think
I'll get my friends to license the rights for this huge deal that we have in coming up and
make mine buffer I don't think he actually writes that but you know what I mean like it you can
tell you so much about the characters to have something like that so enormously immersive
what else advantages or disadvantages of epistolary first a question would you say that like on a
like a small scale that Mistborn has a little bit of epistolary in it yes the the epigraphs
of Mistborn are epistolary yep so I often use epistolary form in the in the epigraphs the
beginnings of chapters yeah yeah you can give all sorts of cool little hints and you can in this
it is the easiest of all of these forms in my opinion to hide information from the reader and
have them not feel like you're cheating even in flashback they'll feel like you're cheating if
you're hiding information in epistolary it just wasn't in that letter right so it's a lot easier
to hide information that the character may know go ahead asking for another example is skyward
cinematic because it's written in the past yeah skyward is cinematic first both skyward and
and steelheart are done in this this cinematic or this immediate whichever way you want to call it
which you are there with the character in the moment but skyward has a third person limited
interludes in between to show other character's story this is actually
what the the martian does it's an epistolary that when it's not being epistolary it's third
limited in order to set that off and differentiate it I think it's third limited in those other
scenes if I'm right so you can a lot of times switching between one of these forms is a really
great way to kind of help the reader have some structure when there wouldn't otherwise be structure
like in skyward if you haven't read it there's a character I knew I was going to want her viewpoint
for the ending because I needed to see externally to have this great moment happen but I knew if I
dropped that viewpoint in the ending it would feel just out of the blue and would kick readers out of
the story so I set them up for it by having a viewpoint from her at the end of each chapter
to give further ways of just like looking into the world and into the characters from different
viewpoint and I set them in third limited to be like this is something different so that you know
we're going to come back to what you've been experiencing rather than just switching to another
character as you point also in third in first cinematic so so all right so epistolary if it
has limitations I'll just say big limitation of epistolary is the form right this is kind of a
rigid structure that can be difficult to work with and some people may not like it as much did you
have another yep it totally can that's one I haven't even brought that one up before but
absolutely when you're reading some of these you're like they really remembered exactly what this
person said and put it in their letter to this other person verbatim come on and if you're doing
too much of that you may want to move to flashback instead so flashback flashback has the big
disadvantage of you generally know the character lives which deflate some of the tension of course
you can use it effectively by saying the character lives but the present the person in the future
that you're saying is a very different person so you get to see how they're changing through the
course of time not always do you have a frame story this is what alcatraz versus the librarians is
and it has almost no frame story grounding you in the modern day alcatraz telling the story about
the young alcatraz but it still has two characters because the character of alcatraz is occasionally
addressing you in the present tense and that is the one who's telling the story to you not the
character that modern alcatraz is telling a story about but flashback what are some advantages
disadvantages to flashback yeah you really do in fact both this and
cinematic the biggest selling point is character voice and really getting to understand them and
in some ways flashback gives you more because it gives you two time periods to play the same character
and that contrast can be really fun the contrast between modern character and uh an early character
really interesting uh and a big selling point to this it's what you get in fact by giving away
that they live makes it really easy to tell your readers pay attention to this yeah yeah yeah yeah
the characters say you should pay attention to this it'll be important later and it's the only
one that doesn't feel like cheating when you do that even the present narrator feels a little
like cheating but when the the the flashback character says says the thing like i didn't
know it at the time if i had like you can frame it in a way that uh that makes the reader understand
this is important i better catch this clue yeah anything else yeah
so the limited and cinematic yes that's the main thing the main difference but also
it's there's a tone difference when you're using i when someone is telling you their own story it
feels more personal and in limited it feels a little more distance and what this does is limited
for instance um limited is much harder to have an untrustworthy narrator an unreliable narrator
and both flashback and cinematic is a lot easier to have an untrustworthy or unreliable even though
limited is in someone's head and kind of very much colored by the way they see the world if you are
actively lying to the reader in in limited they are going to feel cheated and in fact in Mistborn
where i have calcier i get around this sometimes calcier's got a big secret from the rest of the
team when i'm in his head he's like i can't think about that thing it's too painful right now
that is the sort of thing you'd have to do in limited to keep information and it is cheating
right it's absolutely cheating it's sometimes a necessary cheat but you don't have that problem
and and and these others because the unreliable narrator can say to you it's still too painful
for me to talk about i'll get to it in a minute and you're just like yeah i can understand that
this is really hard for you um and so um so because we're running low on time i'll just kind of go
through the rest of these these two are very similar except for whether you're going to give away
the future or not but then you lose the ability to play off of the future um their biggest limitation
is um the more heads you're in doing a flashback or cinematic which you will find books that'll do
two first person narrators or even three in a cinematic or a flashback the more you do
the harder it is for the reader to track because they aren't seeing the character's name be repeated
very often and because that personal connection you build with the person writing the story
starts to get like there's interference it starts to feel weird to you that you're feeling this
deep personal connection to five people and it just stops working and the biggest reason to jump
to limited is that number one you get that credibility right that you can say what this character is
seeing they're actually seeing i'm the narrator is being straight with you in limited even if it's
colored by their perspective and this allows you to have tension between what the character is seeing
and uh how you're describing it uh this works for instance matt coffin in the way wheel of time
he will have direct thoughts where he's like he thinks this and the description of it has completely
made it clear that's not what it is and then you get a contrast between reality and the way matt
sees the world which you can't do um very easily and the other things because they're all filtered
through their head so you have that distance between the character's actual voice in their head
still when you write limited you want every description to be colored through the lens
of how that character sees the world but there's a a trustworthiness to it that you don't have in
the other one it is much better for large casts also because allowing you to keep track of this
large cast of characters um by using their names more often and by you know having that little bit
of distance where the reader is kind of understanding that a storyteller is telling them the story
and now they're in this head this head this head you can have a one-off viewpoint in limited really
easily we're like everything else has been in this character we're going to jump in this character's
head now this is the tom clancy method right it's just like tom who is this um but it works because
it's third limited so um omniscient is really hard i would recommend studying it if you want to do it
what it gains you is you uh you you have this really interesting form that not a lot of people do
anymore and but you have to build your tension based on not mysteries but instead tension based on
expecting and anticipation something terrible is going to happen i know what it's going to be
let me see how the characters react because i've already seen the betrayal coming or things like
that um in present narrator just kind of does um these other one of these other two flavors
with adding a character who can address the reader directly in the same way that flashback does
um all right guys uh we will next week jump into probably character uh for a couple weeks
so we will see you then take care
