So, I have had a request out of my 15-person workshop that I move world building up a little
bit because they're starting new stories and the world building comes up very early.
So I'm going to do world building for the next two weeks, Isaac, Mary Robinette is coming
when?
20th.
20th, okay.
So we'll have this week and next week our world building.
We'll then have Mary Robinette come and talk to you about short stories.
Then we'll do the Q and A on world building along with some pro stuff the next week and
then we'll do the character, the two weeks of character after that, alright?
So that's kind of our format going forward.
So world building, I usually do about two lectures on this and today we're going to
do the lecture on Sanderson's Laws.
This is very fun for me to do because, you know, Asimov has laws, right?
Clark has at least one.
I figured I should have laws named after me so I did it.
Let me give you some background to what Sanderson's Laws are and how they came about.
Sanderson's Laws started when I was working on Mistborn, the first book.
And I finished Mistborn 1 and I turned it in, I was working on Mistborn 2 and Mistborn
1 was coming out.
I started to realize that I felt like I'd done something wrong in Mistborn 1.
Something wasn't working with the ending the way I wanted it to.
And I'll try to avoid too much in the way of spoilers but what happens in the first Mistborn
book is we were at the climax, the ending was happening, everything was going well,
I wrote it, I sent it to my editor and he wrote back and he's like, I feel like this
needs a little extra oomph.
There's something missing here and I thought, huh, what could I do to give it a little extra
oomph?
And I thought, well, I've got this whole sort of plot where Vin is going to start learning
to use the Mist to power Alamance a little bit because it's foreshadowing for some stuff
we need in book three.
And I thought, well, I'll just move that forward to this climax and it'll add some new and
interesting thing.
Remember, this was the first book I ever wrote knowing it was going to be published.
Even though I had written 14 novels at this time, I still was pretty much a newbie and
I had never done a lot of these things before.
This is the first time that I really worked with an editor on a book as I was writing
it, right?
A launchers had been finished years before and yes, I'd done a lot of editorial on this
but it was a new experience working on Mistborn one.
So I did this, Moshe was like, great, that works, gives it the extra oomph I need and
we released the book.
When the book was being read, I started getting feedback and I went and looked back at it
and it really feels like I just added a new power to the main character at like the 95%
mark in the book, which is exactly what I did, right?
Absolutely 100% what I did.
And I started to think about, you know, a lot of people will point at science fiction
and fantasy and they'll, if they don't like it.
One of the things they will say about it that I don't think is true and is a bad reason
to not like sci-fi fantasies will be like, oh, the author can just have anything happen
and therefore your ending lacks any sort of conflict because the author can just make
up a way to save them, right?
Now there, I am totally okay if people don't like sci-fi fantasy.
It's a flavor of storytelling and there's no right storytelling and wrong storytelling
to like and dislike.
You can dislike things, but I think this criticism doesn't actually work because any author
in any story can do this no matter what the story is.
It is not something that I think is actually more prevalent in sci-fi fantasy than any
other story.
Yes, in sci-fi fantasy you can do what I mistakenly did, which is invent a new power for a character
late in the story and therefore deflate a little bit of the satisfaction of the ending
because it involves the author using something, or the character using something you didn't
know they had access to in order to save the day.
But you can just as easily write a romance where the primary tension is that, you know,
character A is nobility and character B is a commoner and that's keeping them apart.
You could have at the 90% part a long lost uncle walk up and say, oh by the way, she's
royalty.
You guys can totally get married and evaporate the conflict.
That's a side step of the actual conflict, right?
But you're solving it by putting a patch on it the same way I kind of put a patch on Mistborn
in a way that wasn't satisfying.
You can do that in a romance just as easily.
No matter what the conflict is, you can, at the end of your story, stick a patch on it
that will be a resolution but an unsatisfying one.
And having fluency over this is really an important sort of storytelling mechanic.
And since I am a writer of science fiction and fantasy, since I love fantasy, I framed
my kind of rule I came up with for myself to help me understand why this problem existed
and how I could avoid it in the future as a kind of little scientific sort of thing.
That's what I do, right?
I don't write science, I write scientific things.
And so with some development, I kind of wrote this out themed toward building a magic system
and a fantasy book because I realized some other things about it.
So I'm going to write the first law up here.
You can find these online though, Isaac, I believe the essays are broken on my website
right now.
We've got an email saying that people can't read them there.
We will get them up and fixed.
But Sanderson's first law, and I apologize in advance for my handwriting.
This is one where I actually want you to read it so I will try to write.
You can, but your ability to solve problems with magic in a satisfying way is directly
proportional to how well the reader, you know, Isaac, I should make you write these in the
future, understand said magic.
All right.
This is a technical way of explaining what I just told you a story about.
Your ability to solve problems with magic in a satisfying way is directly proportional
to how well the reader understands said magic.
This is something I thought about a long time, how to phrase this in a way because I was
understanding something about my fiction that I hadn't before.
I had known that Deus Ex Machina is a bad thing.
If you're not familiar with this phrase, it means what God did from the machine.
Am I right on that?
It's an old Greek term for where they would have the God save the characters at the end
of a play because basically there was no other way to get out of the problem.
We use it in modern storytelling to mean the author inventing a mechanism by which the
characters are saved from the consequences of their actions in the late part of the story.
Using new magical abilities in the late part of your story in order to get your characters
out of problems will often feel unsatisfying for the same reason.
However, there's another story that goes along with this.
This was when I was at my very first WorldCon as a participating professional author.
This would have been in Boston, so whenever the Boston WorldCon was around 2004, 2005,
I sat on a panel, my first panel at a big science fiction convention.
I've been going to these for a while.
I was really excited to sit on this panel and I was put on a panel called How Does The
Magic Work?
How do we use magic?
I thought this is perfect.
This is my thing.
I love magic systems.
I love interesting magic systems.
I am ready to go.
We got on the panel, there was me and a group of other people, and the moderator looked
down the line and said, all right, a little to start off with.
What is your go-to fundamental thing you think about when building a magic system?
I thought I could just really knock this one out of the park.
They asked me to go first.
I said, well, obviously, a magic system needs to have rules.
I think I'd pick this up from Orson Scott Card's book.
I think he talks about it.
But either way, it was something that I just had fundamentally believed.
A good magic system is a magic system with rules.
I thought I was really just using the easy softball answer that would get the conversation
rolling, but the other people on the panel looked to me and said, no.
If you put rules on your magic, you ruin it.
I was shocked that the next half hour of our discussion was me arguing with these three
other people where I'm like, no, no, no, this is foundational to building a magic system.
This is like you had just told me that the 1 plus 1 does not equal 2.
I was flabbergasted that I had to argue this.
But through that discussion, I actually started to realize my way of doing it was not the
only way to do it.
And in fact, a lot of the stories I liked didn't explain the rules of the magic to me,
and maybe didn't even have rules that the author relied upon.
And I thought, well, how is this working then?
And so I started to build this second philosophy about magic, which is that there is, the way
I see it, a kind of continuum, a sliding scale that you can be on.
And on one side is a sense of wonder about the magic specifically.
And on the other side is problem solving with magic or magic as science.
And so now, don't take this as law because I bet there are people who are able to do
both.
But generally, what happens is as you move toward solving problems with magic and your
magic working more like a science, you move away from a sense of wonder or mystery to
that magic.
It's very natural sort of thing.
The more you explain about something, the more it moves to a different emotion and understanding
in you.
As I became a writer, my intersection with movies and books that I read changed.
Instead of being sort of in this sort of, wow, how did they do this?
I moved into, oh, I see what they're doing.
That's cool.
Those two emotions were kind of different emotions.
I can be in awe of a story that's pulled off well because I know exactly how hard it is
to do.
But I'm no longer mystified about how the author accomplished that.
And it's kind of this same sort of thing.
I'm not sure if sense of wonder is the exact right phrase, but I think you can get the
idea.
What's going on here is as you move this direction, you're able to solve problems in a satisfying
way with your magic.
What does this mean?
Why am I saying this?
Well, if you give your characters some tools and then get to watch the characters use those
tools to escape problems and to solve problems and escape situations, then you as a reader
will feel really satisfied about that.
It's why my kids when they were young loved to watch Mickey Mouse Clubhouse, was it?
Where they're like, here are the three tools that we're going to need today, right?
They set up here are your three tools and then as they go along, it's like, oh, one
of our tools is a jack.
Oh, our car broke down.
Which of our three tools do we use, right?
Now you do a more complicated version of this in your stories, but it's essentially the
same thing.
You are going to set up here are the tools the character has.
This character is able to teleport through walls.
This character is able to drink a potion that turns them into looking like someone else.
This character has this ability.
And then you are going to on this side of the magic, rely on the characters quick wits
to apply that tool to different situations.
It's a little bit like the heist archetype that I talked to you about a couple of weeks
ago, where you can take a certain archetype or you give about someone a group of tools,
they work on it, and then they rearrange them to use them in different ways at the end.
That's the sort of thing you're doing with a rule based magic system, but it's not the
only type of magic out there.
In fact, there are a lot of magics where they're searching for something else.
In this case, it's a magic you don't know what it's going to do.
In Mickey Mouse Clubhouse, they had a mystery tool.
We don't know what this is.
It'll solve a problem eventually.
The mystery tool or even things more mysterious happen a lot in fantasy books, and it doesn't
mean they're bad magic systems.
In fact, some of the best magic systems use what I would call a soft magic as opposed to
a hard magic.
A soft magic is you don't know the consequences or even really the cost of using the magic
and you are not certain you can predict what the ramifications or effects will be.
Most of the time, the viewpoint protagonist is not the one using the magic, or if they
are, it is a type of device that they are using or some sort of magical thing that they
can't predict the consequences.
The monkey's paw story is a nice little hybrid story that's a little bit sense of wonder.
Of course, it's on the sense of wonder side.
You know you can make a wish, but you don't know what the consequences of that wish will
be and the emotion that story is relying upon is that sense of wonder twisted on its head
to a sense of horror.
A lot of times, horror is twisting a positive emotion into a negative emotion in some way.
Monkey's paw, if you're not familiar with this story, people make wishes on this monkey's
paw and they always turn out awful and horrible and frightening.
The book progresses, you see the escalation of the wishes that are getting made and things
like this and it's just a brilliant story.
It is using a soft magic system with just a little bit of an edge toward, you know, so
you understand what the characters can do, but they cannot control consequences.
That sort of story, that sort of magic can make fantastic stories.
I'll give you two examples of stories that use both a hard magic and a soft magic in
the same story.
You can see how the contrast of the two is very effective.
The first of these is Lord of the Rings.
Lord of the Rings uses for the ring what I would call a magic that is toward the magic
of science with the ring.
It's still got one step away toward the sense of wonder or in this case also horror because
you're not exactly sure what the ultimate consequences of using the ring are and you're
not exactly sure what Sauron can do with that ring, you just know it's bad, but most of
the storytelling mechanics of the ring do a couple of things.
What does the ring do?
Turns you invisible.
Yep, but it turns you invisible, it spans your lifespan.
What are the costs?
Sauron sees you and you turn into Gollum, basically these are things.
The enemy can find you and you turn into Gollum and Tolkien is very wise to put in the story
example of Gollum showing you exactly what the consequences are.
That story is very good at showing you, look, if Frodo keeps a ring he turns into this thing.
It's right here on screen, it's actually a very hard magic system as magic systems go.
Every time Frodo is using it you can get judged, it's going to turn invisible but here are
the consequences and lo and behold in the story those consequences are usually pretty
dire but they're anticipatable, it's repeatable, it's following the scientific method and the
reader now knows the tool Frodo has and the costs of that tool.
What can Gandalf do?
Now I'm not asking the people who have read all the back material which does move Gandalf
a little bit more toward the middle but in the books Gandalf is pretty much all the way
over here, right?
You know Gandalf has power and can do stuff, you're not sure what it is and a lot of times
when he even uses his powers he's off screen, he fights the Balrog off screen purposefully
in the books, right?
You're not sure what's going on, you don't know what he's doing, you know it'll have
huge consequences and lo and behold the huge consequences are he dies and gets resurrected
as Gandalf the White, right?
You're not sure how that worked, why that worked, the consequences, you might say wait
a minute that feels like it's removing consequences from the characters but that's not the purpose
of Gandalf's magic, Gandalf's magic is not, Gandalf is not a tactical nuke that you're
using in a specific place for a specific purpose, Gandalf is there to make sure that the hobbits
feel small both metaphorically and literally, right?
That's the whole point of having hobbits in the story, Tolkien was a student of the classic
epics, he did a translation of Beowulf once and if you want to have fun thing go read
Beowulf and compare it to the hobbit and it very much felt like he wanted to write one
of these ancient heroic epics but put a normal person in the role of the hero instead of
Beowulf we get Frodo or Bilbo and in order to emphasize that though he gives Frodo a
power that's a hard magic power, he makes sure Gandalf exists in the story to indicate
this is a world of magic that is much, much bigger than anything the hobbits could comprehend
and you as readers don't need to comprehend it.
These two magics work perfectly in this book hand in hand giving both a sense of grandness
and wonder and giving a tool to the main character that he can use at certain times in clever
ways to escape problems and situations and then to have to pay for that later on at the
climactic moment of the stories where indeed the cost that he has been paying come due.
Another great example of this is Name of the Wind by Patrick Roffus, one of the reasons
Name of the Wind works so well, I won't speak about this as much but is that he also has
a hard magic and a soft magic and by including both of those he's able to contrast.
If you haven't read the books he's going to a magic school and one of the things they
do is they like build magical devices using sympathetic magic, it's a type of magic that
people believe work in our world that like effects like, it actually works in his world
right and the rules you know it gets a little soft in there but mostly it's like you do
this you get this, you do this you get this, meanwhile there's a professor at the school
who says a different type of magic, this magic is the naming of things and this magic is
explained as very powerful, very mysterious and likely to drive you crazy and of course
the main character is drawn to this naming magic in the same way that a moth is to a
flame and that's part of the tension of the story is, is he going to suffer these consequences
that this professor has by delving into naming magic which the naming magic is there to reinforce
this story being about a poet and a musician and talking about a magic that is more like
poetry and music, you can't define it, you know there is engineering class in his magic
school and there's poetry class and yes he can figure out engineering class but he wants
to go to poetry because you can't quantify poetry and so the two work very well in a
scholarly setting as kind of showing off these two different disciplines and the contrast
between them and these two stories you do not need to have both in your books, in fact
most books only have one, I will say that you don't have to be all the way to one side
or the other, in fact usually it's very handy to be right about here with even your hard
magics so that you have the mystery tool so that later on if you're writing a series
you can expand the magic and leave some mystery in the first book that can later on be explored
and explained, the further my books go because I tend to be pretty far on that side the more
the magic gets explained and more the holes that I've introduced to the magic intentionally
in the start start to get filled in and this is how you actually have like the ending of
Mistborn 1 could still work because Sanderson's first law is really a law of foreshadowing.
If I had spent the whole first book saying there were some Mistborns sometimes who were
able to do something really weird and we don't know how and it think it might involve this
and here's this apparent contradiction in the magic system that we think should work
but we don't know why and then later on those things are reconciled and the character figures
something out is then able to access the magic that would work. In fact most Asimov 3 Law stories
are this way. If you haven't read Asimov's 3 Laws he's thought 3 Laws Robotics this, this and this
and then a robot is acting weird. It's running around a big circle instead of doing what it's
supposed to do. What's up? Well let's go look at how the 3 Laws interact with one another
and we'll find out why this robot's programming has a bug that is causing a contradiction between
the 3 Laws and therefore they're acting this way and that is kind of one of Asimov's go-to
storytelling devices. Of course he also has the robots develop some weird sense of wonder thing
we don't like it so we destroy it so he does have sense of wonder stories as well. But yeah so
this is a law of foreshadowing. The way, reason I say in a satisfying way I want to point out
before we do questions about this one is sometimes you don't want to solve problems in a satisfying
way because you are doing something else with the scene. The example I often use for this is
you've probably seen a lot of stories where the characters in the first third of the story
get into desperate situation. There is no way out of it and then out of nowhere someone comes and
saves them. Right? Probably seen a lot of this. It's done all the time in Hollywood films. Why is
this done? Usually to introduce this new character. That's one of the things right? You're like we
want to have a dramatic introduction to this character. We will have them save the other
characters and show off their cool abilities and act one when the characters couldn't possibly have
survived. There are other reasons that narratives do this. Some of them are kind of lame. I'll admit.
Some of them are quite legitimate. Introducing a character in act one to save the day is very
different from having an unnamed character show up in act three to save you at the end.
Right? Han works because it's foreshadowed but Han if you show up in the first third of the story
could just show up and save them and be like oh yeah this is my friend Han. Now you know how cool he is.
So understand that these are all tools. There's not wrong ways to do this and in fact
Sanderson's laws. I call them laws because it sounds cool and that's basically the format that people
use but they're not laws for you. You don't have to follow these. These are rules I made for myself
to tell the types of stories I want to tell to get the type of effect that I want to get
and they might be helpful for you to understand some sort of narrative things about using your
magic systems in a story. So let me ask any questions about Sanderson's first law.
Yeah. So this could be spoilers but the end of both of them. Okay. Okay. Okay. So I guess it doesn't
have to be that specific example. Right. But how do you make an ending that is both satisfying and
doesn't follow that. Right. So when I'm talking about this when I'm doing this right the goal is
that I am foreshadowing that something can and will happen and that you could have figured out
what was going to happen before it happens. Now I might not always get this right. It'll depend on
your own tertiary read but when Sanderson's first law is working for me it is you could have known
and figured out what was going to happen at the end ahead of time. With Oathbringer I would argue
the answer was coming down to a character's decision. You didn't know which way they were
going to decide but you knew they could decide either way and the emphasis is if they decide one
way something happens and if they decide another way something happens. The setup for this is very
different based on situation. Let me explain. I've got a good story for you to explain this.
And the story is the two Lord of the Rings films movie two and movie three. Now movie two of the
three is my favorite of the Lord of the Rings films and part of this has to do with the defense of
Helmsdeep. Now in this story what happens is characters go to Helmsdeep to defend it against
an orc or a kai whatever invasion and they know that this is kind of one of their last stands.
They're in serious trouble. The setup ahead of time is Gandalf says to them something. You guys
remember what it is? Look for me at the morning of the third day. Is that what he says? Fifth day.
Look for me at the morning of the fifth day. What's that? You watched it last night. So look for me
at the morning of the fifth day. Right? Look for me and he rides off. The setup for that situation
is if we survive five days Gandalf will save us. Now the narrative does everything it can do to
make you forget that by showing how terrible the situation is by making them fight to the very
end of their wits and the strength and their exhaustion. Right? And they are basically defeated
but at the end they go out for a final charge and then the sun rises and then it plays Gandalf's
look for me on the morning of the fifth day and Gandalf appears. They see him and then an army
comes up behind him. Right? Now you've seen this army leave so the pieces were there but the setup
for the characters was not you need to defeat these orcs or else. The setup is if you survive this
amount of time you are okay. In the third movie this setup is not done the same way. They are
defending Minus Tirith. It is set up as if we don't protect Minus Tirith we are doomed. And then
Aragorn goes off to the ghosts and then as they are about to fall Aragorn shows up with the ghosts
and save them. On a kind of strict outline basis these two are the same yet in the Aragorn saving
them with the ghosts I felt just really kind of let down. I'm like oh okay I guess they are okay.
It's still a great film. Yeah whatever. And in the Smidelfu film every time Gandalf comes up
over that ledge and I'm watching it I can barely keep the emotion in. Right? And when the light
comes down behind him and the orcs are all like ahh and it's just beautiful. And every time when
Aragorn shows up with the ghosts I'm like alright we're done having fun with Gimli and
Legolas bantering about who killed what we're done with this okay we're done. So I would ask you
what is why do I have such a different emotional reaction to number three than I do to number two?
And this is about promises and payoffs right? And so in both their Tolkien or actually this is Jackson
because they don't have exactly the same way in the book. In both of these Jackson is solving
a problem with an external force that is protecting the characters from the consequences that are
coming toward them. But in one of them they are promised if they can do this they will receive
this. And in the other one they're promised you need to survive. Oh you didn't okay we'll just save
you anyway. Now it is obviously much better done than that because it's a fantastic film even the
third one. But when I am looking for this to work it's not necessarily that you need to understand
exactly what the magic can do. You need to understand what the setup is. For instance a lot of
stories will say I feel like if I can solve this problem with the magic I will receive a dump of
understanding about everything that'll let me save the day. And if you've set that up for the reader
if they figure out this problem and then that happens the reader will be fine they'll be like
yes this is exactly what I was promised. If they fail to figure that thing out they fail to make the
decision they fail to achieve what you've set up in your narrative for them to do and then
they still succeed well you're going to need some other way to make that work and you totally can
but in that case that's where Sanderson's first law is not really applying if that makes sense. And
again I'm not perfect at this so you can totally read one of my books and say you know Sanderson I
don't think you completely pulled it off I don't think you did the setup the right way I needed
to for this ending to work. But this is what I'm trying to do if that makes any sense and that
story hopefully kind of explains how how I view this. Other questions about this yeah.
Yes so how do you avoid the dreaded info dump? Did I tell you guys last week what I was doing
with the Mistborn screenplay? No I told the little class didn't I? I didn't tell you guys. So I'm
right in the Mistborn screenplay right now. Oh yes. How close is it? It's not that close right
don't like basically me writing the screenplay is not what you want to have happen it means that I've
given up on a Hollywood writing the screenplay I'm just going to do it myself right. I am not an
expert screenwriter I've only written one screenplay before in my life so this will be number two
so I'll need a lot of help to even make it work but fortunately I have some good help from some
friends in Hollywood who are very good at screenplays who are giving me advice and I've done some
brainstorming sessions with them and so I'm approaching how to do this. One of the things I
ran into is in the book this isn't too much of a spoiler for the book in the book Kelsier takes
Vin Kelsier is the mentor figure Vin is learning the magic out into the mist to explain how the
magic system works and in a book it actually works pretty well it's like instead of sitting her down
in the classroom he takes her out and says all right let's try this and experiment with this she's
like all right we'll try this magic power we'll try this magic power and that alone takes it away
takes it several steps like one thing you could do is include an encyclopedia entry on the magic
working that's your worst choice choice number two is to have the characters sit and talk about the
magic and get it explained that's still a pretty bad choice but at least it's moved to dialogue right
choice number three is let's go out and have the character experiment and make it and having
problems making it work and the teacher instructing them and that works pretty well in the book in
the screenplay I don't have time for that and it would work less well on screen so what did I do
is I combined that scene in the scene also early in the book where Kelsier sneaks into
house venture to steal a bead of adium right and in the movie version these are the same scene
Vince followed him she's like you promised to train me he's like all right baptism by fire
come with me and we're going to try these different things while we're robbing these people right
so by overlapping those scenes suddenly there's way more tension to now you got to learn to do this
and if you don't that guard is getting alert us and we'll all be in trouble and when she you know
screws up he can help out at things but now there's a tension to the scene and the scene combines
two scenes and it gets way more active and interesting because the readers like or I guess in this
case it'll be the viewers like oh you know now there's some real consequences on the line to
this same sort of project so the same thing is happening practice same sort of practice
uh same thing is happening as happened in the book but in a situation with increased tension
and that is also a good way to make sure this happens now you have to balance that because
one of the things you risk when you're bringing it this into a tense scene is that the reader might
get lost and confused while an action sequence is happening which is generally a bad idea
fortunately on film I have all the ability to visualize a lot of this so I don't have to
explain it in the same way I do as in a book which makes that scene work one of the biggest
challenges to writing science fiction and fantasy is how you get across your world building elements
in a way that is not boring and to do this you need to construct your scenes deliberately
in a way that gives you a chance to not just show the magic working but to show character
and setting details while you're explaining the magic in some way in fact the point of the scene
might be to explain the magic but your emphasis in the scene should be making sure the character is
interesting and you're showing as much or more about the character as you are about the the
magic or at least you are providing excitement equivalent to that so try to do multiple things
at once and make sure you are keeping your focus on the character all right okay let's move on to
sanderson's second law all right so sanderson's second law comes about because
I was sitting and thinking about powers that I put in my books this one also kind of relates a
little bit to Mistborn and I was at a book signing one point I spent a lot of time thinking about
what are new powers what are new things I can put in my books that are going to be different
and someone came to me in a book signing once and they said hey I love Mistborn it's like a
whole book full of magnetos and I'm like wait oh wait that's just basically magneto isn't it
right like what are Mistborn you take magneto you mash them together with these are not the
droids you're looking for because they can manipulate emotions not quite but and you've
basically got Mistborn I'm like oh wow am I a hack right as a writer expect that question to
pop up in your head frequently oh no am I a hack the answer is no you're not because I don't even
really like that term if you're seeking to write stories the way that you would want to read them
and enjoying your stories you are not a hack but there's this thing of am I original I thought I
was original and now I realize I'm not well that's a completely different story right you are probably
going to worry you're not original too much because the end of the day the most original thing you
can add to a story is your perspective and that is unique to you now the more you write the more
you will realize how to not be derivative because you when you start off you will be derivative
and that is generally a problem and something you want to avoid the more you write the more
you learn to put your own stamp on things but generally experienced writers worry about being
derivative well past when it's not even a consideration for you at all okay so if you're
worried about it see if some early readers say you are learn how to tweak things to make them your own
a little bit more sanderson's laws might help you but don't stress this as much as perhaps you might
but what I realized is I'm like well how did I come off of alamancey why did alamancey work
why did I enjoy it so much and one of the things I landed on was this idea that alamancey like if
you haven't read the books you can push on pieces of metal and they'll fling you up in the air right
so basically if something's heavier than you or if it's attached to the floor and you push on it
you go the other direction so it's a it's vector physics used as a fun magic system right if you
push on a coin it flies away from you but if it hits something heavier than you then your launch
backward equal an opposite reaction right this was really fun to write why because of sanderson's
first law sort of stuff right making the character stretch with the tools they have rather than
solving the problems externally was a real blast to write and it made this writing more exciting
more interesting to me thinking how can I use how can I use this tool in a way that readers
not expecting but they could have anticipated is very fun to me and so I spend a lot of time kind
of in that space and I realized though that alamancey is just a really lame form of flying right
like if you could fly then that would just be strictly better than launching off of off of
something and if you had like full telekinesis so you can just move things around wherever you
want it that just be a better version of alamancey and yet I've read books with that and the magic
systems have been less fun so why is that and that was kind of sanderson's second law sanderson's
second law is that flaws or limitations are more interesting than powers doesn't mean the powers
aren't interesting like the question of what if you could do this is a great story starter right
what if you could fly where would you go with that but in developing a magic system building
in the fret cross flaws limitations and I'll say costs is generally more interesting and creates
more storytelling potential than the powers themselves for instance if I said to you you
can fly that might send you along some interesting paths and telling a story if I said you can fly
but only as long as your parents are both sleeping then suddenly you're like oh it's a very different
story right this suddenly takes us to a different direction I do I might parents both need to be
alive but they both need to be asleep do I now move to the opposite side of the world so I can
consistently be a you know during the day when they are sleeping you know or come up with whatever
flaw you can know you can have the you can have the the classic like what is the one that Scott
Card uses his book you can use the magic but if you do one of your little living relatives will be
killed right suddenly that's what the story is about the wheel of time has a great example of this
right all these mystical wonderful powers but the more you use them the more likely you are to come
become insane and kill everyone you love and in fact we start with the prologue showing someone
who has gone crazy and killed everyone they love so you understand the stakes and consequences right
from the get go which was a brilliant move it's the same thing is putting golem in your story so
you can see what the character will become but the flaws and limitations and the costs are where
generally your story happens superman has classically been a very difficult character for people to
do films about we had one and a half really great superman films and then we've had several films
that have had really great parts but the authors of the films have struggled with making those
superman films click with audiences right and this kind of comes down to the fact that people
like superman has too much power right it's so hard to write a story and yet i watched as a young
man an entire series about superman that i loved and i still think is really fun even though it's
it's a 90 show so it's way campy that's lois and clark right and you'll see that superman works really
well in the small screen there have been adaptation after adaptation of superman or supergirl that
have been really fun stories to tell and that generally is because the people telling the small
scale story have such limited special effects budgets that they can't make a big spectacle of
superman punching someone harder than that person can punch and so they have to say well what else
can we do and superman stories generally fall into one of three categories the first one is what i
just said someone has shown up who can punch harder than superman oh no right and that's where the
movies tend to go um a lot what is the other superman story somebody has kryptonite oh no i don't
have my powers anymore right and what is story number three i am unable to use my powers effectively
to solve this problem either someone who is weaker than me is in danger so my powers now they don't
have the powers or i would really like this person to fall in love with me my powers don't give me
that ability except at the end of the second film which is why there's one and a half good superman
films um right or i guess no that's the kiss of forgetfulness right but you know what i mean
superman two has some goofy silver age stuff in it i still i still love it but uh it has some
goofy superman okay story time early in my career this has nothing to do with anything
either with my career um i was guest of honor to con up in like north salt lake or something
and they're like the local news station wants to have you on the news in the morning show i'm like
wow this is really cool i've never been on the news before that's great they're like yeah they're
gonna invite uh several other people and you're all gonna be like beyond tv and like i'm brand new
i'm like beyond tv so i show up and who's gonna be on it's me and ursa the superman two villain
the one that's a woman and a group of stormtroopers and the nose thing was us just standing there
being they're like look at these weirdos at this science fishing convention you should go meet them
um and it's actually a fine experience but i'm like wow my now claim to fame is being on tv with
this the villain from superman two uh not that one not that one but that one um and some stormtroopers
um so somewhere someone has that clip of me standing there awkwardly being like
oh yeah i guess we are the the zoo has come to town and we wear stormtrooper armor um
she was very nice by the way um but that's the end of there the stories that people look to tell
about superman i think are instructive to us because generally they are looking to tell stories
about things that superman's powers don't really influence in fact my favorite episode
they're a member of lois and clark was like there is this robot who had like kryptonite right and
they're like we're powering it by kryptonite so if it punches superman it'll take away all his powers
and stuff right but the whole rest of that story this robot's here he's dealing with something with
lois which is really engaging and interesting because it's character relationship stuff and his
powers come into play almost not at all they do this they have this thing and at the end of the
episode they're like oh yeah you have to go fight this robot he's like oh right i can fly and i have
laser vision so he flies up and he lasers the thing and then he flies away and it takes like
10 seconds right and that is writers who understood that superman punching harder than
something is not as interesting as the fact that he has galactic scale godlike powers
but can't interact with the human world uh with you know he's still just a nerd who can't make
character uh make relationships work um and that's why that show worked now what does this
have to do here well when you're developing your magic naturally a lot of your stories are going to
air toward conflict so they're going to air toward one of these kind of three stories either the
character is not skilled enough at their magic yet and needs to level up or they need to find
something that's not working in the magic and fix it so that they can then use their magic the
correct way right or the magic is not working right now what do i do or the magic can't solve this
problem it can maybe help me with the surrounding things but i need to then find a way to solve
this problem using my other attributes not just my magic and those are going to be your
three paradigms for telling stories about magic there are others but those are kind of the three
catchalls and all of those kind of deal with this idea of your flaws and your limitations
are a big part of why those stories are working um so i view these three things as kind of three
different things and i also they're just my definitions that we'll talk about but i also
in view view them as kind of larger storytelling rules just like the first one's really a rule
of foreshadowing this is kind of about your characters also right your characters flaws
and their limitations and the things they're willing to do and not willing to do um and the
costs of certain actions are where your stories are going to happen about your characters flaws
basically are things the character could change or things the magic you don't understand yet
and with more application of effort or character change you will be able to fix for instance i will
see a flaw as um in a launchers the whole story is about a flaw in the magic the magic stopped
working 10 years ago we don't know why people used to get divine powers now they get cursed
for eternity right and they become zombies um and the whole story revolves around there's
a flaw in the magic and we don't know what it is something's broken right and that flaw is what
i build my whole story on but in a lot of stories there's also this flaw of we don't understand
this part of the magic or you are not good enough at the magic yet to do what you need to do you
need to practice if the character applies themselves if the care people apply themselves
there is a solution to this problem somewhere in the narrative same sort of thing with a
characterization thing right a flaw in your character is um your character is doesn't trust
people your character has good reasons for not trusting people but they really need to learn
to trust their thieving crew because these guys are actually good um and through the course of
the story you're going to learn to trust again so that you can actually have a relationship with
this guy you're falling in love with and that is you know Mistborn's theme right there's a flaw
in the character that doesn't mean again the character is responsible for that flaw sometimes
life is beating people down but it is something you can work on and fix a limitation is different
for me both for a character in a magic system a limitation of alamancey is you can push and pull
only directly away from yourself or directly toward yourself center center of gravity or center of
mass whatever um so you there the the narrative is not making you think i need to the characters
need to figure a way to fix this problem it's just a limitation of the magic you work with it rather
than you try to fix it um for a characterization a limitation might be something like you were born
with one arm right the narrative now you couldn't imagine narratives where this character's on a
quest to get a robotic arm or something but most narratives like you've been born with one arm
you want to play in the nfl you have a limitation you're going to have to work with you don't there's
nothing to fix right it's not that you know the if only you've been a better person you wouldn't
have one arm instead of two like that's not the theme of the narrative the narrative is about
this person who has a handicap needs to work within this handicap in order to achieve what they want
to do magic systems are the same way magic system has this handicap this limitation you're going to
work with it um and then cost cost doesn't play as well with characters it does with magic um it's
just kind of a good rule of thumb to ask yourself what is your magic cost but you can also deal with
this in character by saying if character takes this action what is the cost to them emotionally
physically mentally these sorts of things you can set up that if character makes this decision it's
going to be very difficult for them and cost them something and that's really good tension the same
way with the magic system the magic system where um if you you know you have this magical power but
every time you do is it use it one of your next of kin dies um that is a really steep cost and you
can vary these costs depending on how much you want the magic to be used and what your role of the
cost is in the magic a lot of times and this is just fine but a lot of times magic systems will
write the one of the costs as being equivalent to the bullets in a gunslinger's gun the it costs
using this resource and the character will run out of it when it's dramatically appropriate that they
do storm light um um that sort of thing very common to use a cost like that um with the magic the
reason that those sorts of costs are fun is because they can add narrative tension but also you
usually can tie them into the economy really interestingly and you have a legitimate reason
if you want to tell story number two character doesn't have their powers you don't have to
invent a reason why they don't have their powers you just deny them the resource and now getting
the resource can become part of the narrative where you can set up your story as if we can get
this stuff then i can solve the problem and then of course you're really telling generally in those
cases a different story about the character's journey and the getting the stuff just becomes
in the guffin for the plot um but it it leads to a very useful method of being able to tell
versions of story number two um with uh with the magic but it also can tie things into it
economics and you can add a social dimension to it in that case where rich characters are able
to use the magic more wow theme um and so there's all sorts of things there but you can also come
up with very strict costs which themselves can be really fascinating stories you have three wishes
you're going to make all three wishes but they're all going to go wrong horribly wrong in some way
go well okay we have a very strongly limited magic that also is leading to a horror story right um and
so you can vary the cost to depend on how you want your story to go but a lot of times your story is
going to be about your flaws limitation and costs either in character or in the magic system any
questions about rule number two um so with like limitations like not being good enough how do you
do story about that versus like something about like if they don't have enough with the resource
so it depends on the type of story you want to tell um it kind of depends on the character
arc the character's on if the character arc is you need to get better at this i frame it in the
story as a um as a flaw not a limitation i narratively structure it as if the character will do x y
and z they will overcome this ignorance that they have and be able to succeed usually you tell these
stories in the i showed up to fight darth vader and guess what happened i lost my hand and now um my
entire you know parent you know my entire world is shocked i'm going to go train some more so that
next time i can fight darth vader and i'm going to train in a way that isn't just about battling
the sword i'm going to train a way that i you know that i use the revelation so that third movie
works because a flaw has been overcome in luke where he realizes that just slamming his lightsaber
against darth vader is not the way to win that battle um but it could also be couched as a limitation
um i use this one in the rithmatist in the rithmatist certain people have magic certain people don't
and someone who loves the magic doesn't have it and the story is framed as a you aren't going to get
this thing because unfortunately life isn't fair and the people who might be really good at something
sometimes just aren't bored in the the privileged situation where they can use it
like you weren't so let's find a way that you work with that limitation that is satisfying
that story is not about the character overcoming a flaw it is working with a limitation and we
i tell very different climaxes for those two stories even though they're basically about the
same thing right um so that would be my response to you how do you what do you want the character's
journey to be what do you want your climax to look at uh look like how do you want your stand
up in sheer moment or your sit down in cry moment to feel right yeah yeah uh i'd like your opinion
on low cost that make a character more quirky low cost that make a character more quirky do you
have an example let's say luke could use the force which is obviously one thing let's say that you
could throw in that he never loses in that space chess game right luke never loses in his space
chess game he's got a quirky uh so um so you're asking can i give someone a power that doesn't
really have much of a cost or limitation but it's just there to be fun absolutely in fact it also
depends on if you're looking for like that's doing something more like sense of wonder you're
characterizing with this thing and you're using it for humor for emotion and things like this and
not for problem solving and in that case great if you you're gonna run into problem where if your
story then comes becomes about whether someone can win the big space chess game and luke isn't the
person they choose to go play in that space chess tournament that's where you have problems right
sometimes you give someone these quirky powers and then as the story progresses the readers start
to ask more and more wait a minute why aren't the eagles flying them uh to right um right um and
you know there are explanations but the fact that a lot of people ask that question means that the
explanations were not satisfyingly presented and that was given you know it's more of a
quirk of Gandalf he knows the eagles it's more a sense of wonder but then those two things intersect
and people start to ask wait a minute um and that's your problem with that does that make sense
all right let's go ahead and move on to rule number three there's three of these in a zero
ball so all right law number three law number three comes from me when i was working on trying to
build the stormlight archive now the history of the stormlight archive um if you're not familiar
with it as i think i told you guys about it before but i wrote the book in 2002 uh before
i sold the launchers and this book i failed in writing it uh for those who haven't read the
book the stormlight archive is a large epic full of a large cast of characters with a very different
world from ours and there is a lot of bringing bringing people up to speed on the world building
there's a very steep learning curve there's a lot of information to get across plus i wanted to do
some big thing where i had tons of characters i've been like reading the wheel of time i'm like
yeah so many characters i want to do something like this um and the first draft of way of kings
was way too expository meaning i was just dumping information on you and it started the character
arcs of multiple different characters and didn't finish them because the book if i'm trying to
do 10 character arcs or whatever it is i ended up doing and i only got through like 10 percent
of of each of them instead of picking a couple characters and getting through their arcs it
made for a very unsatisfying book um but in uh 2007 a very large freight train called the wheel
of time smashed into me unexpectedly and you know carried me with it on a long journey um that i had
not been expecting mere days before um and so that changed my career dramatically and tor as i had
finished up warbreaker and turned it in was like what are you going to do next i'm like this feels
like the right time to do way of kings if i can fix it um and so i sat down and i rebuilt all the
world building scratch trying to you know improve it trying to work with it and i kept running into
this problem you see i would go to signings and people knew that mistborn had three different
magic systems that's part of what made mistborn work right book one if you haven't read them
focuses on alamancey book two focus on a different magic that's hinted at in the first book and book
three focuses on a third magic that is hinted at in the first two books right um and you start to
learn about the mechanics of each of them it worked very well for the structure of that series to
dig into a different magic in each series so there was always something new to be exploring i didn't
explain it all in the first book and left some sense of wonder for the future books um so people
started to ask me they they learned about the way of kings they learned that i had written this book
and hadn't released it and they found an amazon listing for it somehow i still don't know how
this happened by the way because i never signed a contract for the way of kings i signed a contract
for launchers and mistborn but initially mosha had offered on a launchers and the way of kings
so somehow someone in tor told amazon this author was releasing these two books before
a contract was signed and they put up a listing for both of them and then left the one up for
the way of kings even after we didn't put that in the contract and fans found it and then they
became fans of mine uh well at first they became fans and they found this and like we're gonna
pretend we have this book and so they started taking fan pictures of themselves with a book with a
fake cover that had Elvis on it and a quote from terry goodkind that said a hunkah hunkah burning
good book um and they started to put fake quotes on the back of it and amazon just let you upload
your own photos and information they were doing like a wakipedia thing back then so there's all
these wonderful quotes uh from made up people talking about loving the book and there's a
bunch of fake reviews of people loving the book and talking about you know the killer penguins and
all this stuff um uh regardless tor did eventually make that page vanish i'm sorry um but yeah i do
have records of it somewhere i'm not sure where they are i know fandom has some too um we have a
copy of the book i think that they printed off the fake cover and put on for us after it was
published or something um but uh regardless the way of kings was known in fandom right and they
started to ask questions about it because they knew it was going to be my big epic i'd always
planned this to be the biggest and longest of my series it was the one that they knew the original
first draft of was the 300 000 words which was way longer than any of my other books on the published
version 400 000 words um but they started to say to me brandon how many magic systems will this book
have and i started to say 30 right uh right because i'm like i'm going to develop 30 different
magic systems i'm going to have um 10 magics based on each of the surges and i'm going to have 10
magics based on void binding and i'm going to have a bunch of different magical mechanisms for um
for the uh fabriel science and i'm going to i'm going to explain these as 10 different magic systems
and all this stuff and i started to get caught up in the hype of bigger is better right and this
when i went to my world building is what i realized had ruined the first incarnation of the way of
kings the thinking that bigger is better because it's not right now there are some cases where
bigger is better it's not strictly true it's not strictly untrue if you love a book already you get
into it oftentimes you're like wow i'm glad there's so much more of this book to love and if the
storyline you're trying to tell is improved by having a large arc in the same story like the
way of kingson book big is better for that book in that instance but big is not strictly better
and in fact with world building i think it is usually worse and so sanderson's third law is
where i realized that before adding something new
to your magic
magic and i will put your setting in general
see if you can instead expand what you have
so there's a game series that'll uh called the elder scrolls which i love and a lot of people
believe reviews on some installments of this because the elder scrolls has always been about
using a vast setting as a way to engage you in fact the first one i played was called dagger
fall and the reason it hooked me people said you've got to play this there are like 10,000
different dungeons and they are all unique they use procedurally generated dungeons to create
dire fall um and i played it and then i realized that those 10,000 dungeons were the same 10 assets
recombined and enough ways to make 10,000 whatever like 10 10 assets but you know a number of assets
in fact people started reviewing the game saying they are an ocean that is an inch deep right um
and this was one of the big criticisms for the series and in fact one that they kind of tried
to fix in um in the most recent one um skyrim by saying we're gonna back away from the procedural
generation and make some of these dungeons very have a lot of attention to detail particularly
the ones you're most likely to play through so that they're interesting engaging and indeed
having 10 dungeons in a game that are really well made turns out for most player experiences
is way better than 10,000 dungeons that are basically all boring this is what you run into
with your magic systems and your settings if you start to say wow sanderson is doing a 10
book epic with all of this stuff in it in order to write an epic fantasy therefore i need to have
my languages all built ahead of time i need to have the lore going back 10,000 years
i need to have built all of these different interesting religious systems and governments
and magic systems and oh no i need 10 phds to write this book right the danger here is that
that's not necessarily better now certainly having an expertise and applying it to a book
or even having making sure that you're doing a wide variety of different things in your book
can be very handy but most readers will latch on to one idea done really well as better than
they will latch on to a hundred ideas just barely touched on and way of kings the original
instead of taking and trying to do 10 different character lines 10 percent of the way done
if i instead picked three dalinar caladin and shalon and i told a really good chunk of their
stories turns out the book is way better because doing a really good job with three characters
and having a bunch of side characters who all have interesting hooks and they'll get their own
books eventually but in that first book making sure really the first book is 50 percent or more
caladin and doing his story just as best as i could do it with dalinar and shalon just being
there enough to get you interested in them because you knew they were going to have
more extensive arcs later and that book worked and you should apply this in many cases to your
world building if you're asking yourself all these things i need to do if you instead say
you know what i'm really interested in religion if i create three interesting religions that all
come off of the same branch like christianity judaism and islam branch off of kind of the same
core theology long ago it creates an interesting relationship between these three religions
if they're all taking a different perspective on it um and i dig into that perspective and maybe
i relate that to a magic in the world you are going to have a better book than if you say
there are 50 religions in this book it's so diverse and interesting you're going to love it
that book with three religions done well almost always going to be a better book
and so this is about learning to dig deeper into a concept and explore the the different
ramifications of it instead of just throwing everything you can think of into a book this
is really important for fantasy and science fiction because we are coming to fantasy and
science fiction because of the world building and in general we want to come to this world
building that transported to a different place and so it's very common for the reader to say i'm
going to take or the author say i'm going to take you to a different place i'm going to put all this
weird stuff in but then not leaving the reader with something to latch on to that is really
interesting that presents itself an interesting problem or an interesting hook that interesting
problem or hook related to the world building is way more vital than these other things next week
we'll dig into all the different types of things you can put into a fantasy novel and it will feel
like oh no i need a hundred phd's to write this book the whole goal of that lecture though is to
kind of push you to expand what you view fantasy or science fiction to be and to try to find where
your niche for a given book might be latch on to it and do it really well if you are writing a big
epic fantasy you probably need to be doing multiples of these and in fact you need to learn a skill
which we'll talk about as the iceberg theory of world building when i first became a writer
i heard a lot of authors on panels talking about how world building should be an iceberg the classic
iceberg theory right here's the iceberg here's the water and there you know this is huge body
of world building underneath the iceberg underneath the ice that the reader should be able to tell
that you did but you're not going to show them on the page right well this is usually wrong this is
not what we're doing most of the time pulling the the drapes back and showing you the wizard behind
the screen most of the time what we're actually doing is we're doing that it is a hollow iceberg
that we've done just enough work so that you look down through the water you're like yep it goes on
that would flip over by the way in real life so i understand that um
yes with a steel bottom um but what we're really doing is this because unless you're grandpa tolkin
and you can take 20 years and agree in linguistics to create world building for 20 years what's by
the way there's nothing wrong with and that's what you want to do great but remember this
class's job is to assume you want a profession a little career and sci-fi fantasy where you're
releasing books consistently because that's what you'll need to do in the market today as have a
book every few years you don't have time to do that iceberg that people are talking about so what
you do instead is you learn to fake it writing books is like being a stage magician if you want to
surprise people with twist endings it's all about making pay attention to this hand while you're
slowly giving them the information they need so you can punch them in the face later right um
if you are doing world building you are doing only what you absolutely need for your story
and you are hinting that the rest is there in a way that lets the reader say oh they've done all
that they have it all in their head i can trust them and i can just let myself enjoy this world
oftentimes that's by doing things like saying you know mentioning there's this thing and this
other uh that these people know about but the main characters don't and okay or it's done we'll
talk and when we talk about pros it's done by getting small details right so the the um the uh
the reader is allowed to just assume you got everything else right or it's about doing one
thing really well that the reader knows you've done well so that they trust you that all the rest
of it is there when you tell them by the way it's all totally there we have uh we have 10,000 worlds
of uh our years of history built for this but you don't need to learn it because it would bore
you right now and the readers like yeah it would thanks i'm glad you did all that work when really
you did none of it right next week we'll talk about how to do that um but let's end with
sanderson's zero law sanderson's zero law is very quick sanderson's zero law came when i was doing
all of this and i started to ask myself how often is this where a story starts for me
and the answer is not very often now the sanderson's three laws are generally have a lot to do with
my building of an outline and they have a lot to do with how i do my revisions and write my story
but sanderson's zero law is where stories begin and sanderson's zero law is always air on the
side of what is awesome this is because i wanted to be very clear with myself that most of my ideas
my idea for way of king where did it start it didn't start with all this cool stuff it started
because i wanted to tell a story about knights with magical power armor that is the origin
well one of them there's a lot of different threads that became the way of kings but one of
the main origins was wow power armor is cool i want fantasy power armor how can i make that work
well big enormous cool magic swords are cool um but they don't make any sense really narratively
in most uh settings how can i make a setting where giant magic swords would be the thing you'd
actually want to have like that is where i start was with the cool idea and then i work backwards
so i'll just leave that with you remember that making a great story is the goal and if these
rules help you do that great i'm glad i shared them with you if they don't throw them away we'll see
you guys next week
