We were wrong, Tony.
We were just straight up you especially,
but I was also a little wrong.
In January, we made a podcast about AI
and we said it was gonna take a while for it to get here
and we were so wrong because between January and now,
just a few short months, it's already changed so much.
AI is here, it's here to stay,
it's changing photography.
Photographers and models have already lost their jobs.
I think it's here to stay
and I don't want you to get left behind.
So we're gonna tell you how to integrate it
into your photography and where we think it's going.
First, one of the best ways you can improve
your photography career or videography career
is to set up your own portfolio off of social media.
Go to squarespace.com slash Chelsea.
Set up a beautiful website
that reflects your own sense of style, your own brand
and bring customers into something you own.
They can book appointments, they can leave deposits,
they can buy prints from you.
It's all possible at squarespace.com slash Chelsea.
Try it out completely free, no credit card
and when you love it, the coupon code Chelsea
will get you 10% off.
Thank you, Squarespace.
Let's get into our wrongness, Tony.
We tried AI and it just,
we just thought it didn't look very real.
It was in the uncanny valley.
Yeah, this is like three months ago.
It was very glitchy, things were coming out
just kind of silly looking and it was cool
but I just thought I think this will take a while
before we really integrate this.
Yeah, I've been in tech my whole life
and I'm always trying to make predictions
and when things will come about.
And I think I said, maybe in five years
this is gonna be useful.
That was a big mistake.
It was three months.
Three months that it took to make a new version
of Mid Journey, the only real AI imaging app
that I considered to be useful at this point.
Mid Journey has existed for one year.
Version one was released in March of 2022,
version five alpha March of 2023.
And I generated a bunch of images
with both engines using the exact identical prompts.
These are the results and look at that drastic difference.
Can you imagine anything learning in one year?
What app, what code, what camera,
what electronics device improved this much
over the course of one year?
It's incredible.
Look at the eagle on the left.
It's like pretty disturbing and upsetting.
And the one on the right, I think passes at a glance.
Yeah, like the grip isn't quite right.
If you really squint, you can notice some tiny little flaws,
but it is good.
It is real good and most people will not notice.
This one's especially very good.
So we've seen huge leaps.
As you can see, this is applicable now.
People can use this.
And so we wanna talk about how people are using it,
how it can benefit you as a photographer
and how to integrate it into your workflow if you want to
so that you don't get left behind
because we've seen these changes in photography before.
But let's just first start by saying
that mid-journey is not perfect, AI is not perfect.
It still has flaws.
Yeah, here in April, 2023, there's no free trial,
so you have to pay for it.
We both subscribed and we're using that like crazy
because we have like a hundred images.
It's fun.
And it can't handle text, I think,
it's the single biggest flaw.
So anytime you render a product
that might have a brand name on it
or you made some movie posters, the text is not good.
This is my movie poster for a karate hamster
that likes to steal cheese
that I was gonna call ham and cheese.
That's good.
Isn't that good?
I look at the text, it says like,
has a tea, me a sea, has me.
And my favorite, fama, me a sea.
So the words, it's still not great at generating text,
which is funny because we have like chat GPT
that could generate text.
But this does not do that.
There are other AI engines that do generate text.
I think stable diffusion, you can give it text
and put this text on a sign or a menu or something
and it can do that.
But I think mid-journey could change this tomorrow.
Yeah, that's probably a version six thing.
A tool I think will be important to portrait photographers
is the ability to take a source image
and accurately reflect that person in AI generated image.
So you could take a snapshot of somebody
and put them on a beach in Morocco.
So I fed it an AI image of me and asked it to make a portrait
of me in front of a wall of vintage cameras
and this is what it produced.
And I can-
Some other guy?
It kind of like me though, right?
No.
I was not even wearing glasses in the original picture
but the hair is kind of the same,
the skin tone is the same,
but it's like a male model plus me.
And it's interesting because AI is clearly using images
that are on the web and there's a disproportionate number
of images of models posing.
So right now everything kind of gets blended with a model.
So it's weird.
I wouldn't complain about that for me.
Well, here you go.
Because I had it generate wedding images for us.
We did not get pictures of our wedding
because we eloped and did it on a beach.
And as a result, two photographers did not get proper pictures
and at some point AI is gonna be able
to make wedding pictures for us.
But that is not us.
But this is not us.
But you can see what it was doing.
I look better though.
Most people would take a glance at this
and think that it was real.
I think it's pretty uncanny, it's just not us.
But version six, version seven,
which is going to be three or six months from now,
we'll probably be doing it accurately.
I also think AI does not understand some things
about being a human that are subtle.
Like that's too many birds.
I'm uncomfortable.
What's going on?
At some point you're cowering
and you don't want to be poofed on.
It's like a horror movie.
And then also there's someone in the background
photo bombing you but you would edit that
out of a wedding photo and there's like barriers
in the background for a parking lot or something.
So it's like AI knows those things exist
but it doesn't know that humans would not want them
in their wedding photos.
I have to say we've been talking about mid-journey
and I want to make the point that not all AI is equal.
I found that mid-journey produced the best results
but was the most difficult to sign up for
and you had to pay for version five, the better version.
But I thought Dali worked pretty well
but you can see the difference.
Mid-journey version five, I put in the same prompt
for a Joshua tree in front of a sunset.
And you can see that like Dali is okay
but not as stunning as the mid-journey one.
But if you put it in a person's face or something,
mid-journey leaves it all behind.
Like Dali looks terrible with that kind of thing.
Though I noticed your mid-journey picture
has a watermark on it.
Again, it's stealing watermarked pictures
and so it keeps adding in watermarks and images.
It's not good at hiding stealing.
It's been caught red handed.
In January when we made our podcast,
I thought that it was a long way off
that people would be using it in a practical way.
Even though I knew some photographers
who were using it a bit,
I wanna talk to you about the ways that photographers
are using it right now
because I've seen it become far more prevalent
with well-known photographers.
So one thing that photographers are doing
is they are rendering details for photos.
They're rendering birds and putting them into the background.
They're rendering like a field of flowers
or different clouds or a different sky
and then they're comping it in.
So we've been doing this type of comping
for a very long time.
But I have done comping by buying stock photos
and comping it in or by going through my own photos
and finding something that I'd like to put into another photo.
So this is already happening a lot.
I rendered this dove and it's not that easy.
It took like 15 minutes and six different tries
to get this dove,
which Tony pointed out has two sets of wings.
I didn't notice that.
It's funny how you don't notice stuff.
And I rendered it into this photo.
It's a quick job.
I'm not saying this is gorgeous,
but you can see how it would be used.
Another way that photographers are using AI
in a practical way is to test ideas for photo shoot.
So we've been taking pictures of our car
and they're not quite coming out the way
that we want them to.
So I went into mid journey
and I rendered an idea for a rainy day shoot
and this came out.
Now I really want to take pictures of our car
in a rainy day with the headlights on.
Right.
And I did some too
and I found a nice fog in the background is nice.
So we have to kind of have a fog plan.
I just want to point out,
if you look at the picture,
it can't manage to render the Porsche name
on the back of the car or the license plate.
But everything else is like literally perfect.
But it just comes to some letters
and it's like, I have no idea.
Another way that photographers are using it
is by rendering props.
So let's say you want to do a photo shoot
and you want to flower crown.
That's actually quite expensive.
If you went to a florist, it could be over $100.
So you go into mid journey
and you render one there and then you add it.
And that's what I did in this picture.
Again, I did these very quickly
to show you an example
without using other people's pictures.
Another possibility is to give mid journey
your original picture
and you can control it with the parameter IW
which is image weight.
And that tells it, take this image
and then either use it as a little bit of inspiration
or stick very closely to the original image.
So here I pass it that same picture.
And I told it to stick closely to the original image
but add in some birds and a lighthouse.
And this is the image that came back.
All the same elements are there.
And in fact, it's like a little bit more perfect.
Like the dress is a little bit more sheer.
The angle.
The angle is pretty much the same.
It's better.
It is better.
The lighting is better.
The lighthouse looks good.
Yeah, the birds look weird.
It's not good at birds yet.
It's failing the bird community.
There's still some room for improvement.
What I'm hearing a lot in the photo community
is that photographers are pushing back against this.
I've heard people say that it's not real photography,
that it's cheating, that they don't like it.
And I think that's all understandable.
I've been through all of those feelings, I think.
But I've been talking to other photographers
and one thing that someone brought up
was that it really is kind of the same
as other photography technology
that we've seen in the past.
So think about when the camera first came out
and it wasn't really respected
because it wasn't a painting
and people didn't think it was real art.
And then when we went from film to digital,
people did not think digital photography was valid.
They thought film was real photography.
Digital wasn't valid.
In fact, recently in our DP review video,
you said that you went to DP review
because other photo communities and forums
were saying that digital photographers weren't valid.
So you went to digital photography forums specifically.
So it's a tale as old as time.
The same with darkroom to Photoshop.
People didn't respect Photoshop.
They thought it was cheating.
The same with traditional cameras,
the smartphone cameras.
A lot of people watching this
still don't consider smartphone photographers
real photographers.
Manual focus versus AF versus IAF versus high frame rates,
people making fun of spray and pray.
My point to you being this might feel icky and fake
because we've been doing photography for a while
but I really think it's just gonna become
a part of photography forever
and that we can either figure out what's going on
and try to learn or get left behind
and become one of those cromudgingly old photographers
that's like, that's not real.
And I wanna try it out and see if I like it.
What's the harm of trying?
We've talked a lot about still photography
but recently AI video has been in the news a lot.
Like there was a short movie 10 minutes long
called Last Stand that was presented as an AI movie.
I dug into it, I found out the video itself
was not rendered by AI and in fact AI video
I think is still, I wanna say several years away.
Anyway, it's nowhere near ready yet
because it is exponentially more difficult
because video requires 30 pictures per second
instead of just one picture period
because it requires object persistence and permanence
between those separate frames.
Like continuity too, like someone drinking
a glass of water that could turn into coffee
with AI or something.
Yeah and if somebody turns their head
you need them to have the same face
throughout the entire thing
and that's actually, these are really big challenges.
So it is exponentially harder
than creating a single still image.
So we should come back in three months
and say how we were wrong about this or what?
It's a distinct possibility.
But this is reassuring for people making their living
as a professional videographer
because you are safe for the time being.
If a restaurant needs a video of somebody pouring wine
you cannot replicate that with AI at this moment.
You need to go actually hire somebody
to capture that video.
There is an exception.
There are many companies, at least eight or so
that are doing talking head AI video
that seems to render perfectly.
So what you can do, you can create a text prompt
or have AI generate a block of text for you,
something that you want a person to read on video.
And AI will have an avatar that looks exactly human
and you can pick from a hundred avatars
and a hundred voices and match them up
and it will speak it and it can translate it
into different languages.
And in this way you could essentially,
instead of hiring an actor to read
your corporate training monologue,
you would have AI generated in just a couple of minutes
at a small fraction of the cost.
So that aspect for both actors and videographers
and audio people and video editors
that is already going away rapidly.
I think we think about what's going away
but that also means that there are job opportunities
because like I said, making that simple,
ugly dove with two sets of wings took me 15 minutes.
Trying to refine the idea for a photo can take you hours.
And if you go into mid-journey,
it's set up like a chat room kind of a forum in real time
and you're seeing people put in their prompts
and then it's generating their photos.
It's kind of like a group effort.
You're seeing what words they're using
that are working for their pictures
but you're also seeing that they're building something
brick by brick, almost like a little Lego castle
or something.
This word worked, this one didn't
and people are in there for hours creating one image.
My point being that if it's a skill
and it takes time to create something beautiful,
in the future we may see people who are AI prop creators
and it takes so much time,
it might not really be your thing as a photographer
to make AI props, you might hire someone else,
paid $10 for the flower crown and AI
instead of 100 to a florist.
So it's just something to think about a possibility.
You know what is so easy to make
that you don't need to hire anyone?
I can't imagine.
I can imagine, it's a Squarespace portfolio.
We have them for our photos
but people use them for other websites as well,
whether it be your business, if you're a dentist,
a contractor, whatever.
It's so easy, you can drag and drop
into their beautiful templates
and make a professional looking website.
I have galleries, I have places where my clients
can proof their photos and tell me which ones that they like
and it's just fun to do honestly
and it's totally free to try it.
You don't have to believe me.
Get the 14 day free trial, no credit card needed.
Drag in some photos, you're gonna be like,
dang, am I a pro?
Cause this looks so good.
Thank you Chelsea, hallelujah.
I hope you get your coupon code.
We don't make money from the coupon code
but it makes me look good.
Get 10% off with the coupon code Chelsea when you buy it
and that just tells Squarespace we're doing a good job.
Thanks Squarespace, they're gonna love it.
I put you all to a test on my Instagram.
I put up three pictures.
Two of them were generated by AI
and one of them was a real photo
albeit a Photoshop composite.
It's the cover to our Photoshop book
but the model is real
and her actual frame itself wasn't much changed.
We took out some footsteps in the sand.
We added a little bit of splash to the water
and the most Photoshop part is actually the dress itself.
Yeah, I will also say I didn't do a great job
comping the dress, so.
Yeah, but it's not AI.
No.
It is made of real images
and I wanted to see what people's responses to this were.
How many people would detect the AI?
Would they have feelings?
Like would they be upset about that?
Yeah.
And what I found was surprising.
First, I asked people what their favorite image was
and two out of three people picked one of the AI images.
How dare you?
Right, and it does go to show you
we put a lot of work into this picture.
We hired a model, we got down to the beach at sunrise.
She was extremely cold walking into the water.
We bought a dress, we had her hair and makeup done.
It was a lot of work and it took me just a few minutes
to generate an image that two out of three people liked better.
So it felt a little deflating to me.
Oh, it felt deflated.
I will say about 8% of people in the comments
mentioned something about them being AI.
But my audience is not a random sampling
of people on the planet.
It is mostly photographers who follow us
who have probably seen our previous podcasts on AI.
So they are particularly attuned.
And I still think that's a pretty small number.
So to me, that means the vast majority of people
will simply appreciate a picture and not know
or think about it being made by AI.
Of those people who identified some as AI,
they also thought the second image was AI,
which it was definitely not.
So about 2% of people thought they had a false positive.
And about 2% of people just said something mean.
That's not relevant.
I just wanted to say some people are mean.
It's more than 2% of people,
but I think you got a pretty good ratio on that.
I think this means we need a system
to prove authentic images.
And we'll get to some widespread AI images
that have been published by big national news agencies
recently.
I was a nerd.
I am a nerd.
There is an easy solution for this,
at least technically easy.
Look at the shirt you're wearing.
I was a nerd.
This actually was featured on the IT guys show.
That's why I ordered this.
It's a doubly nerdy shirt.
So cryptography, public key cryptography,
we use that to generate digital signatures for images
when the camera captures them.
So there'll be a private key embedded
in every camera device, smartphones, real cameras.
And when an image is captured,
it will be tagged with that digital signature.
And as long as that image remains intact,
it can be validated by using the digital signature, which
has a hash of the image in it.
We create a system where half files or whatever
can contain some metadata for that digital signature,
as well as simple edits, like give it a crop, brightness,
contrast, saturation, so that the final image can
be displayed in a meaningful way,
but still authenticated by the device that
has received in this displaying that image, which
that could be the Instagram app itself,
or it could be an iPhone, depending on how
they decide to implement that.
And this way, real images that haven't
had substantial edits could have a check mark on them.
And you would know that it was a real image.
That'd be good when, like for journalistic purposes
and documenting, it also might be good for knowing what
someone actually looks like.
Because the AI we're talking about seems super advanced.
But think about every beauty filter online
where I've seen people take them off during the video
to demonstrate how much they change a person.
And they're almost unrecognizable,
which means like you're going to look back
at pictures of your family, and they're
going to be some weird, mutated version.
And people as a whole hate that.
And every time filters come out, there's another group
of people who rebel against that,
and they want no makeup pictures.
And if we had a system for showing that things were
authentic, I think most people would want that.
They would want that check mark on their authentic pictures,
on their selfies and social media.
And suddenly we'd be looking at real humans again.
This is possible, but we need a committee to actually form.
Like maybe it's the IEEE, or somebody needs to actually,
it could be ISO.
Somebody needs to create this system
so that we can view authentic images once again.
Well, people have other concerns about this,
because a bunch of experts in AI and Elon Musk and Wozniak,
they came forward and said that they wanted
to put a six-month pause on AI, because they
felt like everybody needed time to think about what kind
of rules or regulations should be put in place around AI
and what we should and shouldn't do with it.
And basically a lot of people think
that it's not going to happen.
This pause isn't possible.
We don't really have time to keep up
with legislation and laws anyway.
It's just like happening.
But it just goes to show that people
are concerned about what could happen,
and if we can keep up as people to this technology
that we're creating.
I absolutely think we cannot.
I would love to pause it.
I wish government could move faster,
because I do believe strongly it needs regulation,
but it's not happening right now.
I want to talk about how this has already
impacted the industry.
I thought it would soon be impacting the industry,
but in my newsfeed, I'm already seeing more and more
of the thumbnail images are AI-generated.
And right now it's probably one in 10.
But I would bet in six months it's going to be 50%.
Are AI-generated images as opposed to real images?
And several companies like fashion stores
and fashion brands have announced that they are using AI
to generate their images,
which means they're not hiring photographers.
They're not hiring models.
One of them had the gall to pat themselves on the back
for increasing their diversity,
because they were going to be using AI to render...
People of color.
People of color, so like they increase diversity,
but still managed to not hire people of color.
Yeah, they still aren't getting paid.
I'm sure they're thrilled.
Yeah, no kidding.
And we've also seen several AI-generated images
be accepted as genuine and be viewed by millions of people.
I fell for the Pope one.
AI images have been viral, right?
The Pope in the puffy jacket.
I thought he just got swagged out.
I was like, dang.
As I look at it, it looks flawless.
And right now I showed that AI cannot replicate
a portrait of a civilian like me,
but it renders shockingly accurate images
of just about any celebrity, including the Pope,
including here's an image of Donald Trump getting arrested,
which was widespread,
even though to me I immediately saw this as AI,
it has like a waxy characteristic to it.
Yeah, it looks fake.
But it won't look fake in three months,
because we've seen the rate of progress, right?
I just saw this, Elon Musk is known for having,
like his father owned an Emerald Mine,
and people criticize him for that,
and somebody published this image of him
sitting on an Emerald Throne,
and a lot of people forwarded this as if it was genuine,
but it's definitely an AI-generated image.
So we can see that AI is being used to mislead people
to tear down characters, and that is very bad.
And again, we desperately need a system
to authenticate images.
It is, but let's go back to the times
when photo journalists staged entire photo shoots anyway.
And we did a really big podcast about that,
how Sharbat Gula, the Afghan girl,
they said that she was an orphan,
and she wasn't, they pulled her out of school
and made up a whole story for her.
She didn't even want her picture taken.
The whole thing was a sham.
So like, same as it ever was.
Well, you're absolutely right that this has been happening
in different ways from the beginning of time,
and there is, even if you capture a real image,
it doesn't mean the story behind it is real,
so maybe it's not that big of a leap.
Maybe we've been, maybe it's even that our eyes are open now,
and we are being forced to question everything
that we see, and maybe that is good.
AI right now does impose some limits,
at least mid-journey does.
You can't do anything violent.
I wanted to make a thumbnail
for artificial intelligence as killing photography,
and it wouldn't let me use the word kill,
and it threatened to ban me.
You're too controversial.
I tried to say destroying or smashing,
none of those things can be done.
Mid-journey never told me I was too violent
for their platform.
But it scares me when important limits like that
are imposed by corporations without any sort of regulation,
because who here trusts corporations?
I do not trust corporations.
Corporations do what is in their best interests.
It is the role of the government
to actually look out for the citizens, right?
Maybe.
But the government does not move fast enough.
The government is very slow,
and this is happening at incredible speed,
so it is going to go out of control.
Also, there's gonna be people at the corporation
who hack it, who make a copy of it,
and remove the limitations.
There's massive amount of corruptions in corporations,
so this is definitely going to go out of control.
We're gonna have some interesting news stories
coming up about that.
People have talked about what if AI killed photography?
Maybe those people were us in January,
I honestly can't remember.
But one thing we were talking about today
that was interesting is that AI functions,
let's say hypothetically, it does kill photography.
No one's taking pictures anymore.
Where do the source photos come from?
It just keeps recycling old stuff.
At some point, it's gonna get dated.
So let's say it just keeps cycling pictures
of the Eiffel Tower and something happens to it.
It changes.
Maybe it won't be updating it in the correct way.
Yeah, like you had some car pictures in there.
What about when there's a 2025 model
and it's completely different?
Somebody has to take a physical portrait,
a physical picture of that new model
for AI to learn what that model looks like.
Because it can't go out in the world
and it can't get real images.
It won't see fashion trends change.
It won't see haircuts change.
It won't see biodiversity change.
So I was giving the example,
we like to take wildlife pictures
and I take bird pictures and I saw some sick birds
when we were out taking pictures.
I took pictures of the sick birds.
I sent them to the Department of Environmental Protection
locally, tagged the location of the sick birds
and then they go out and help them.
My point being, if there's some widespread bird sickness,
like there has been in the past,
photographers were a crucial part of documenting that.
Because real photography is about documentation often.
So if we're not having those source photos
for documentation,
AI could kind of warp our perspective of our world
and kind of put in this gap between us
and what's really happening.
There's also the problem which seems inevitable
of an AI feedback loop,
where if AI becomes even moderately popular,
it's going to start seeing AI images
and not knowing that they're AI
and using those to feed itself.
And so you have almost like an inbreeding scenario
where little flaws would become exaggerated
and of course it would be learning from the images
that people decided to choose and share.
So people's preferences would start to become stronger
and stronger in this feedback loop.
Everything could be karate hamster.
We just don't know.
But this is all doom and gloom,
but let's talk about if it could help photographers
because I do think that it can.
And one thing that I was excited about is that
I think it breaks down barriers
and it breaks down a lot of gatekeeping.
So going into a studio, having props,
having professional models,
all those things cost a lot of money,
but also you have to be in the right location
and you have to have access to certain people,
certain resources with AI.
If you are a photographer in a country
with not one single model,
you might be able to render one.
Or if you want a specific car in the background
and you just don't have the funds for that prop,
you could render one.
Like I was saying earlier,
if you couldn't afford flower crowns or certain dresses,
you could render one.
And so now we're giving access to more glamorous photos
to people that can't afford physical props,
physical studios, things like that.
I think that's a good thing.
So we were wrong in January.
Tell us what we're wrong about today
because I'm sure that we are,
maybe you have your foot in AI more than us.
What's going on there?
What do you think is changing?
How do you think it will be used?
And do you see the pros and cons?
We're curious to hear your insight.
I want to add some people who are mad at me
for publicizing AI.
They feel like I am helping to push it along
by giving it a voice.
But I feel like I'm the weatherman saying
a tornado is coming at you
and like I can't stop the tornado.
I'm definitely not speeding up the tornado.
We are just reporting what we see happening.
I think maybe we're advertising it
a little bit unintentionally.
Like I'm sure someone watching will try it
because we're talking about it.
But I also think that the people we're talking to
are more informed
and that they're gonna be trying it
if they're listening to this podcast
from an educated point of view.
So...
And I hope we help people recognize AI images
because knowing the difference between truth and fiction
is going to be increasingly difficult but important.
Yeah.
All right, give us your thoughts
and also just this is what you need to do.
You need to go to squarespace.com.
You need to sign up for the 14-day free trial.
Pull in your regular photos.
Pull in your AI photos.
Have the first ever portfolio for AI prop creation.
It's gonna be free for 14 days.
And then when you decide to buy it,
you can use the coupon code CHELSEY to get 10% off.
Thanks Squarespace and thanks to all of you for watching.
If you wanna see more episodes
of the Picture This photography podcast,
go to wherever your podcasts are available
or you can subscribe to our playlist on YouTube
so you see every single new podcast as we publish it.
Thanks, bye.
