So Geyom, you have 20, 25 minutes to give your presentation.
OK.
All right.
So yeah, I'm going to talk about my thesis today.
It's on probably quantum fields, measurements,
and quantum energy teleportation.
Let's go ahead and get started.
All right, so the relation between information and energy
has been of central interest in many subfields of physics
for many years.
And the usual context of study are thermodynamics,
Maxwell-Thiemann, black holes, area laws,
entropies, cosmologies, and we're working on entropic gravity.
There's holography, theories of emergent spacetime, ADS-CFT.
And today, we're rather going to be
focusing on relativistic quantum information.
In relativistic quantum information,
one of the main tools is probes.
And we probe the quantum field with a first quantized system
to a qubit or harmonic oscillator.
And that provides a window onto the quantum field's
Hilbert space.
And it narrows our focus onto a subsystem in the field
because the Hilbert space of the field is so large,
it's kind of unwieldy.
So by focusing on certain subspaces
that we couple to with probes, then we could do certain.
We're more flexible in our analysis
of the information-theoretic structure of the fields.
So one caveat is the information that you get from the field
depends highly on the type of probe you use and how you couple.
So today, we're going to try to create
unobstrucive views using qubits, qubits, oscillators,
so that we have a clear window onto the Hilbert space
of the quantum field.
And we could do more powerful things than is usual in RQI.
So an overview of what we're going to cover today,
and there's a lot of content, just follow my voice to get lost.
OK, so we're going to start with different types of probes.
We're going to see there's analog, quantum analog,
quantum digital using qubits, qubits, harmonic oscillators.
And then there's the question of which
is exactly the subspace of the field
we are probing when we couple by some local smearing to the field.
And we're going to build the Hilbert space, the quantum field,
out of a bunch of smeared observables.
And then we're going to express the Hamiltonian
in terms of these observables.
And that's going to be very useful for many calculations.
And then we're going to apply these tools
and see what we get used them for,
such as measuring the state on a certain subspace of the field,
in time to harvesting, and quantum energy teleportation
glass, but not least.
OK, so canonically in RQI, the typical interaction
we use is between a qubit and the field.
It's point-like in space and spread out in time.
But there's a certain time dependency in our coupling.
And because we're temporarily smearing the interaction
we have, we need to perform a time-ordered exponential.
And basically, we have to do a perturbative expansion.
And essentially, this is a picture of the coupling.
It processes in time.
So the imprint it gathers from the field is kind of as much.
So that's not ideal.
And we're going to do theoretical simplifications
that are somewhat physically less accurate.
But theoretically, they're more practical.
So we're going to use spatially smearing interactions
temporarily instantaneous.
And that kills off our time ordering.
And we can do fully non-perturbed interactions
and unitaries.
And we're going to do some powerful stuff with that.
OK, so we effectively coupled a single quantum harmonic
oscillator subsystem of the field.
And it's this certain quadrature.
This is a smeared-out field operator smeared with respect
to certain distribution.
We're going to assume they're of compact support very often.
So we could choose what to probe this subspace with,
either a qubit and qubits, which form a q-dit, which
is like an exponentially large atom,
or harmonic oscillators, which is my personal favorite
in this thesis.
So we're going to explore the differences
between using these different probes, first
in the context of a measurement protocol.
And we're going to build some jargon
that we're going to use later.
OK, so for a continuous variable measurement,
what I want to do, let's say I want
to measure a harmonic oscillator A using a control system C.
I could start my control system in a very narrow, sharp,
squeezed state.
And then I could do a controlled displacement,
depending on the value of the quadrature of A.
I displace, by a scalar multiple of that amount,
my control register.
And essentially, because we're a very sharp pointer
variable, if I were to project the control register,
I get a near-projective POVM, if you know what that means.
And very often, we're going to actually
skip the projective measurements
and just keep everything coherent,
because it's easier with the formalism and its equivalent.
OK, so every time I use, so sorry, this is an adder gate.
And you add the field, you displace one
by depending on the value of the other's quadrature.
So we're going to use this very often.
So the analog to digital kind of conversion,
the similar kind of gate, is the following.
And this is a very classic algorithm in quantum computing.
It's called the phase estimation algorithm.
So basically, we want an adder, but now our control system
is made of a bunch of qubits.
So we want our readouts to be a binary kind of readout.
And basically, the trick is we start with spin-ups,
and then we create, we do a Fourier transform,
which if we consider the virtual qubit that these guys form,
is this state after the Fourier transform
is a uniform superposition.
And let's say we expand our target state in eigenstates
of the observable we're trying to measure.
Then if you act a certain exponential of an operator
out to an eigenstate, it becomes a phase.
And the phase, as we all know, kicks through tensor products.
So we call this a kickback.
And so because these are controlled unitaries,
they depend on the state of which superposition in here.
Then each different superposition will pick up
a different phase.
And then when we inverse Fourier transform,
these relative phases get converted
into actually the standard basis 0s and 1s.
So essentially, this is like a shift operator,
but it shifts the binary value and gives us
an approximate value, binary readout.
And you could use a lot more qubits,
and it converges to a new project of measurement,
like the squeeze state, implement a very large squeeze.
And what's really neat is that we actually
use single qubit to oscillator interactions
and pre- and post-processing to form a qubit.
And these are kind of like on a regular sigma z
couple to field.
So very often, I'm going to use the harmonic oscillator version
because it's a simplest and the cleanest,
but keep in mind that we can always
emulate the harmonic oscillator with a bunch of qubits
this way with the Fourier transform.
OK.
So a couple, a bunch of probes, we
start with this smeared observable.
So what subspace of the field are we helping to?
Usually, we factorize the Hilbert space, factorize,
but using a maximum commuting set of observables
to field at every point, for example.
That's a very typical cartoon we use,
is a bunch of coupled harmonic oscillators being quantum field.
And we have a canonical commutation relations
with a phi and pi at every point.
And out of these operators, we construct every other observable.
OK.
So now we would like to, instead of writing
in a spatial decomposition, write it
in terms of smeared observables.
So for each phi, we could build a pi,
which is just a smeared pi with a normalization.
And we obey the canonical commutation relation.
And suppose we have an orthogonal basis
for the L squared integral functions,
then we could build out of this basis
a maximally commuting set of observables.
And we get a harmonic oscillator for every basis element.
And the Hilbert space factorizes into the Hilbert space
of the subspace of each smearing.
And often, we're going to just have a bunch of this joint
compactly supported smearing, and then
we're going to assume there exists a basis completion
in some sense.
But we don't need to work with these directly.
It's just kind of abstract formalism.
But it's very practical and shortens calculation like 10
fold.
OK.
So what's useful about this is that we could rewrite the Hamiltonian.
Usually, we write the Hamiltonian like this.
We have the derivative coupling.
If you expand the derivative as a finite difference approximation,
then you get a nearest neighbor like quadratic coupling.
Usually, we decouple.
We diagonalize the Hamiltonian.
We take Fourier transform, right?
So the Fourier transform is like the kind of eigenbasis
of the, it's like the meta eigenbasis of the Hamiltonian.
So in terms of smearing observables,
it's not diagonal.
It's more like the space.
But we have something like this.
And we have a quadratic coupling here.
And if we assume that our basis is made of
compactly supported functions, then the derivatives
are also compactly supported.
And these guys only couple to a handful of other guys,
maybe uncountable, whatever.
And so it's like a virtual lattice, just like this
is a lattice of harmonic oscillators.
So we could use this to port over some calculations
from actual lattice calculations later on.
OK.
So a quick review of ground states, lightning review.
So ground states of quadratic Hamiltonians
are Gaussian states are fully specified by where they are
and how they're squished.
And the phase space grows linearly
in the number of oscillators.
So it's really nice.
You could do nice detailed calculations of energy
and entropy and whatnot.
That's what we use.
And any quadratically generated unitary,
like the one we use for the aggregates,
preserves Gaussianity.
So we're going to be working the Gaussian state formalism.
And it's powerful formalism that allows for our calculations
to be very attractive.
OK, so the ground state of this quadratically coupled
Hamiltonian is Gaussian in terms of the smeared observables.
So that's very practical.
So more or less the central theme of the thesis
is what I call the local versus non-local duality.
So the ground state is unattangled
in the Fourier factorization.
The Hamiltonian is diagonal, so it's
a product state of ground states.
But when you have couplings, you have entanglement
across tensor factors.
And that's what we use for entanglement harvesting,
the entanglement between the different smears.
And conversely, if I do a local operation that's
compactly supported, when I take a Fourier transform,
it's non-local in Fourier space.
Something that's local in space is
non-local in the metaheism basis of energy.
So energetically, a local action is non-local.
That's what we use for quantum energy teleportation.
We use both this formalism and Fourier modes
for the calculations of the thesis.
OK, so entanglement harvesting.
That's our first application of probing.
We've done a lot of background now.
So the goal of entanglement harvesting
is you want to swap entanglement that's
living between these subspaces of the field
onto certain probe.
I choose harmonic oscillators because they're
the most compatible, in some sense, and easy to work with.
And I do a continuous variable swap gate because it exists.
And basically, if you know quantum computing,
this is extremely familiar.
This is how you build swap gates with usual qubits,
qubit adders.
But in this case, it's harmonic oscillator adders.
And essentially, we swap the state locally, here and here.
And whatever entanglement we have between these two
subspaces gets transferred onto the probes.
And you can harvest all the entanglement
that was in between these two subspaces for the ground state
or whatever state you really want.
So Gaussian interactions are easily computable.
I can do the thesis.
And again, you can swap it onto a digital registry
if you want it, and using Android interactions.
OK, so quantum energy teleportation, different application.
So this is the basic protocol.
Usually, we use a single qubit, and we
couple to a certain subspace.
And basically, we want to harness the correlations
between these two subspaces such that once we measure here,
we gain some level of knowledge about the fluctuations
over here, because we don't know much about here.
It costs energy.
When we couple, we create fluctuations.
We inject energy.
And then when we transfer over the information to Bob,
because we have some knowledge of B,
we can suppress these fluctuations.
And what kind of gate do we do?
It's just an adder gate.
But we tune the coupling in the right way.
And basically, here, I do a fully coherent protocol.
And there's a theorem that says you could do this.
You could skip.
Instead of measuring the qubit after Alice
does her interaction in sending classical information,
you could just send quantum information.
And it's theoretically the same protocol.
So just for formalism, it's easier to stay coherent.
OK, so this is the calculation I did.
It's the same protocol, but on steroids in some sense.
You have multiple sites where you measure and multiple target
sites, and you use harmonic oscillators.
And we want to use the correlations
between every pair of sites between A and B.
And we want to do this in a smart way.
So again, we use adder gates to do a measurement using
squeeze states, as we saw.
And then we carry over the information.
And then we couple each to each.
And then we suppress the fluctuations.
So it's one to one here and all to all there.
But you could split up the interactions.
And here's a circuit representation
using our adder gates we mentioned.
And you have a coupling.
You have to tune for each a coupling matrix.
And then the calculations, I found the optimum for energy
teleportation.
What you want is to create negative energy density
at the target site, which means you have lowered the energy
from the vacuum energy density.
So we can calculate this using our formalism.
This is one of the cleaner answers
I was able to copy from the thesis.
In the limit of very large squeezing,
we get the optimal energy.
Well, this is change in energy, so it's negative.
It is a correlator, in the case of the distance,
divided by some variance and some norm.
And basically, the self-variance of this is basically Alice.
That's considerate as noise.
It's like fluctuations that are not from correlations
with Bob.
OK, so for numerics, we could port over all our formalism
to actually use an actual finite discrete lattice
and write it on a computer.
And we could, well, it's not showing very well,
but we could compute entanglement entropies
and we have more freedom that way
because we have the power of Gaussian state formalism
and numerics.
So here are some plots.
There are many more.
But the most basic thing we're to expect
is that you want this to be negative for more energy
extraction, but you extract more energy
as the mutual information increases.
Something more surprising is on the right
is that you actually, when you extract energy at site B,
you increase the entanglement entropy of B
with its component.
And that's interesting because a good measurement actually
breaks entanglement, right?
If a certain subset is entangled with a bunch of other things
and you perturb it with a probe, then you break the entanglement
it had.
And you inject energy by doing so.
But when you extract energy, you actually increase the entanglement.
So there seems to be a nice little relation there.
And for me, it'd be some deeper implications.
Maybe I'll talk about that later.
OK, so other calculations.
This is just the laundry list.
Measurements.
So yeah, so for the multi-point measurement,
computed energetic costs, information gain, broken entanglement,
qubits, qubits, harmonic oscillators,
for general multi-point measurement,
it's an entanglement harvesting.
Calculated the energetic cost of swap gates
using formalism, it was a clean calculation.
Then for quantum energy, delveritation,
information gain versus entanglement breaking
for the measurements, and all the energetics
for the multi-point continuous variable case,
which we saw, the finite discrete harmonic lattice,
which was in collaboration with Jason for that mention,
the numerics.
And for clock-like qubits, which I didn't mention,
but it was a paper with Eddie and Akeem.
But I don't have time to talk much about that.
And numerical analysis.
OK, so this is the bonus round.
This is some of the cool stuff that I've come up with
towards the end of my thesis, but I had time to finish.
So the best measurement for quantum energy
delveritation is about breaking entanglement.
So I wonder, how could we break all the entanglement
in a certain region with its exterior?
Well, in general, if I have a certain entangled pure state,
I have a Schmitt decomposition.
And say I measured A in the Schmitt basis,
then I go from an entangled state and a product here
to a GHC entanglement.
And that breaks the entanglement between A
and its complement completely.
Well, it breaks a big chunk.
OK, so now let's say we have a spherical region
and it's causal diamond.
And there must exist a Schmitt decomposition
for the bipartition between the whole space of this
and its complement.
And the Schmitt basis is necessarily
the eigen basis of the modular Hamiltonian.
If you have something like this, you take a trace.
It's going to be something like this.
The modular Hamiltonian is like the log
of the reduced density matrix.
So when you do a singular value decomposition theorem
for your Schmitt decomposition, it's
kind of like optimizing the local Bogoliubov transformations.
And in quantum field theory, Bogoliubov transformations
are like coordinates, and they're
a change of basis of modes.
So I was wondering, can you construct a set of Schmitt
basis modes, because when you have a basis for a quantum
field, it's a bunch of modes.
So working backwards from some recent work by Jacobson,
constructed some modes.
And this is an example.
So usually in the Rindler case, when we have one horizon,
we have a chirp near the horizon, and then it redshifts.
But since here we have two horizons,
I have a double chirp.
That's interesting.
I have actually some geometric intuition
using path integrals and stuff.
Maybe somebody can ask me about that later in the next slide.
So the next steps are to compute Bogoliubov coefficients
and then compute energetics.
When I break all the entanglement,
how much energy did I inject?
And could I use this for some ultimate QDT protocol?
And what's interesting is that, what's
interesting with these modes is that basically when
you optimize over local unitaries,
when you find the Schmitt basis, you
kind of filter out the self-correlations
with an A and with an A bar.
You only keep the correlations that cross A and A bar.
So when we were sampling a bunch of points,
if I sample a bunch of points in this region,
if they're neighboring, then they're highly correlated.
So my information would be highly redundant.
But in this way, if I sample this way,
it's kind of diagonal.
It's like the Rindler decomposition of the state
in terms of Rindler modes.
So I get completely uncorrelated information.
So instead of having to process the information in QDT,
we did some optimize over couplings
to undo some self-correlations with an A. This just
gives you the perfect raw information.
OK.
So in conclusion, some key messages.
You can collect quantum information,
or classical, about a certain observable,
about subspaces of the field by some probes.
And you can record this information
on quantum digital, or quantum analog,
and the digital analog in a certain limit there equivalent.
You could collect quantum information
at multiple locations, and the entanglement of the field
gets swapped onto the probes.
You could perform an optimal quantum energy
teleportation protocol that harnesses
multi-point correlations.
And in terms of our main theme of energy versus information,
we've got something interesting.
Measurements seem to cost energy.
Measurement of the vacuum seem to cost energy
and break vacuum entanglement.
And when we extract energy from the local volume of vacuum,
it reinforces the vacuum entanglement.
OK.
So that's it.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
