Where is all that information? Please tell me.
We want to go out to space to look for life.
What we should be doing is looking here on Earth in chemical space
because where aliens exist is in the possibility space
of things that our universe can construct
and we can do experiments on this planet.
This is a presentation by the wonderful and impavid Sarah Walker,
hot off the press recorded just a few weeks ago
at MindFest, Florida Atlantic University 2024,
spearheaded by Susan Schneider,
who is the director of the Center for the Future Mind.
Sarah Walker is a professor at Arizona State University
of Astrobiology, and here she talks about the hard problem
of consciousness, the hard problem of life,
the hard problem of matter, alien life,
and of course, assembly theory.
Stuart Hammeroff is coming on next
and all of the talks from the AI and consciousness conference,
also known as MindFest, are in the description
as well as the link to the website,
to the Center for the Future Mind is in the description.
I recommend you check it out.
You should also know that right now there's a two hour video
on the mathematics of string theory,
which was just published.
It's string theory like you've never heard it talked about
before, the link to that is also in the description.
For those of you who are unfamiliar with this channel,
welcome, my name is Kurt Geimangel
and this is Theories of Everything,
where we delve into the topics of mathematics,
consciousness, physics, and artificial intelligence
with depth and rigor that's distinct to this channel
due to us not as chewing technicality
in favor of a wider market.
If this fastidiousness is interesting to you,
then you're in safe hands here at Theories of Everything.
All right, now enjoy this presentation
by Professor Sarah Walker.
Guess we can get started.
For our second speaker at MindFest, we have Sarah Walker.
Sarah's a theoretical physicist and astrobiologist at ASU,
she's the Deputy Director of the Beyond Center,
an external faculty at Santa Fe Institute as well,
and a couple other centers out there.
Her main focus is original life research,
constructor theory, and looking for-
Assembly theory.
Assembly theory.
Assembly theory.
But it's not my theory.
My mistake, my mistake.
And looking at, see if we can find signatures for life
on other worlds, technosignatures,
which is really interesting.
Thanks for coming, Sarah, and turn it over to you.
Great, I'm thrilled to be here.
I work primarily on origins of life,
actually not origins of mind,
but as we heard earlier this morning,
those problems are probably deeply related,
and I am interested in both.
I just think the original life is so tractable and solvable
within the next few decades
that I really wanna make it happen.
My training is in theoretical physics
as a theoretical physicist,
and I'm really interested in fundamental laws.
And so a lot of people that have approached
the original life in the past
have tried to do it from the perspective
that known laws will be sufficient
to explain the origins of life.
That is not my take on the problem.
My take on the problem is we're missing
something fundamental,
and that there are new theories to learn
about how reality works
when we're studying things like life and mind.
So I went through the whole formal education in physics,
but when I actually really started working on this problem,
I realized that there was not a particular shoe
that fit this problem.
And so I've been spending most of my career
trying to think about what would be the structure
of laws of physics that would explain life.
So that's just to give you a little bit of framing
for how I think about the problem.
And what I wanna talk about today
is this theory that I've been working on
with my collaborator, Lee Cronin,
and a bunch of grad students and postdocs
and other collaborators at Santa Fe Institute
called Assembly Theory,
which is an attempt to explain life
from a perspective of a more fundamental understanding.
And it has some really interesting philosophical properties
of the theory that I'm hoping to touch on today,
which I think will frame some interesting questions
on the nature of what minds are as products of evolution
and the fact that things that are complex
are only structured by an evolutionary process
and an informational process.
And we need to take that as part of the fundamental physics.
So when I approach the questions of minds,
the thing that I think is most interesting as a physicist
is not what a thing is, but what does it do?
And what I mean by that is,
does it have any causation in the universe?
Or are there measurable consequences for a thing existing?
And so I've been thinking about the question
of consciousness in minds for a while now,
but the kind of question I really focus on
is not the one of subjective experience,
but if there are some things that exist
only because minds exist,
and they would be a measurable consequence
of a mind existing.
And how does that actually structure reframing the question
and how we think about the nature of mind
and how we measure it?
So as a preface,
I'm not even convinced that consciousness is measurable
as a property of individual minds.
I think it might be a property of societies
that you can measure over time,
which is pretty radical,
but it's consistent with some other things I think.
So we're used to thinking about the hard problem of consciousness
and it's been excellently framed many ways
as thinking about what it feels like to exist,
at least for us.
There's other hard problems that are related to this
and may be structured in similar ways,
like the hard problem of matter,
which is kind of a play on the hard problem of consciousness.
So I think the hard problem of consciousness
is more familiar to people,
but the hard problem of matter is the idea
that we actually can't measure anything,
not just subjective experience,
but anything about an object in the universe
outside of interaction with another object.
So even matter in some ways is equally mysterious
to consciousness because you can't know its properties
except when you measure them.
And with my colleague, Paul Davies,
like thinking about the hard problem of consciousness
and the hard problem of life,
we came up with this idea of the hard problem of matter.
We came up with this idea of the hard problem of life.
And this really came from thinking about the original life.
What is unique about the original life?
What happens when life arises
that we don't see in any other kind of physical system?
And the idea we were really centered on was this idea
that information seems to play a causal role.
All right, so I might do an experiment, I won't do it.
Well, actually, let's do an experiment.
How about, can everyone raise their hand right now?
Thank you, okay.
So what caused that to happen?
It's not a totally mysterious property, right?
Somebody might give you an atomistic description,
but it seems that a better description would be
there was some informational property that emerged,
say, in minds that developed language over time,
we all speak the same language,
you understood what I said,
that's embedded in a historical contingency that we share.
And that informational property allowed me
to actually cause things that you guys just did.
And that sort of action at a distance
that information seems to have
is actually, I think, action across time,
not a distance, but I'll get to that.
But anyway, this seems to be the mysterious property, right?
Information looks like it's causal.
That doesn't sound quite right,
because it doesn't fit with standard physics,
and maybe we could explain that
by some mechanistic atomistic narrative.
But so far, we haven't been able to reconcile these things.
So I think when we're looking at these hard problems,
whether we're talking about consciousness, matter, or life,
they have some common properties.
So hard problem consciousness,
existing feels like something,
hard problem matter is that we can't observe anything
to exist outside of interactions with other objects.
And the hard problem of life,
the abstractions and information matter
in determining what can exist or what happens.
I think the last one is certainly true in the biosphere, right?
Everything that has emerged in the biosphere
over its four billion years of evolution
is the product of some information
that was selected over time.
So all of these hard problems in some way
deal with the nature of existence,
and this to me is actually the most fundamental
and interesting unifying thing about them.
And also one of the ways that it kind of confronts
the standard way we talk about things in physics
and why there might be problems.
So the nature of existence, what it is to exist,
is consciousness, how do we determine
what things exist as matter,
and how some things can be caused to exist
and others cannot, which is life.
So usually when we talk about the problem of what exists,
people like to think about all possible mathematical objects.
So this is, I don't know how many of you are trained
and how many people are actually trained in physics in here.
So I know, yeah, yeah, we're the problem children, okay?
Excellent, yeah.
So if you go into sort of a mathematical physics
description of reality, you start asking these questions
about like, why do the laws of physics
have the structure that they have?
And we actually don't know,
and most of the explanation for the laws of physics
just gets pushed outside of the universe.
So people assume their laws,
they assume they have the mathematical structure they have,
and then we have to assume an initial condition.
And so these are boundary conditions put on the outside
of the universe that no one has an explanation for.
And when we get into the deep philosophical discussion
of explaining why these laws,
one of the easiest explanations is to assume
that all mathematical structures exist somewhere.
So it's a different version of the multiverse hypothesis.
Everything exists somewhere, right?
This is also the many worlds interpretation
of quantum mechanics.
So usually our kind of scapegoat
for explaining why some things exist and not others
is to assume everything exists somewhere.
And I don't find that particularly explanatory
because it doesn't explain much about why things exist
here the way they do.
And usually it's easy to talk about
all possible mathematical structures existing
and think that that's a real thing.
But if I asked you the question again
and I said all possible molecules,
can all possible molecules exist?
Does anyone think they can?
Why can't they?
Does anyone know how big that space is?
Go ahead.
So this one's a topological constraint.
Do you mean you can't make them all
because of restrictions on reaction chemistry?
I mean, you could potentially have them
in an extremely non-euclidean space,
but not enough sufficiently flat space.
Okay.
I'm not sure I understand the argument,
but we could get into that later.
I mean, I don't think we could get into that yet.
I mean, I think we could get into that later.
I mean, I think we could get into that later.
I mean, I think we could get into that later.
I mean, I think we could get into that later.
It'd be fun.
Yeah.
So I think there's kind of a, yeah, go ahead.
The universe isn't big enough.
Yeah, the universe isn't big enough.
I know I said you had that, I had,
no one knew I had a setup in the audience.
I'm just kidding.
So we don't have enough time or resources
in the observable universe to make every possible molecule.
And actually we don't have enough
to make every possible small molecule,
like a few amino acids size.
So I think what people underappreciate
is how big the space of possible objects is,
even if you look at chemistry.
So chem informaticians have no idea,
even though they do this all the time,
how many possible molecules there are.
Not every molecule will exist,
let alone every human being.
And I'm bringing this up because I think
when people look at pictures like this
of the Hubble Deep Field, they think space is big.
And we're all taught space is really big, right?
The universe is huge.
It's billions of light years across.
There's billions and billions of galaxies
and each one has billions of stars.
And we are infinitesimal in comparison
to this huge vast space, physical space.
And what we don't appreciate
is that combinatorial space is really large, right?
So I was talking about the space
of all possible molecules.
This molecule that I'm showing here is taxol,
which was mentioned in the last talk.
It's an anti-cancer drug.
It is a very heavy, well, not very heavy,
but it's a pretty big molecule.
But if you wanted to iterate all possible molecules
with the same molecular formula,
it exists in this vast space
of other possible configurations.
And you have to ask the question,
well, why does taxol exist on earth
and not another molecule out of that space?
And it's not like there's a couple other kinds of options.
It's like there are millions of them.
It's an exponentially growing space
every time you add an atom to a molecule.
So this space is really large.
And as it turns out, the only place in the universe
that we know that most of the space is even accessible
is actually on planet Earth because we have chemists
that can do chemical synthesis.
And now we have digitization of chemistry,
which is using AI to automate the process
and allow exploration of chemical space and synthesis
of objects that would never exist anywhere else
in the universe.
So I often, I'm not giving an original life talk today,
but when I do talk about the original life,
I usually talk about the fact that we wanna go out
to space to look for life.
And really what we should be doing
is looking here on earth in chemical space
because where aliens exist is in the possibility space
of things that our universe can construct.
And we can do experiments on this planet to look for it
without having to worry about time to get there.
And this is interesting to me
because it makes it a tractable scientific problem
because you're testing a hypothesis in the lab
and you're not just hoping life is common
and you're gonna happen to hit a planet that it exists on.
You can actually start to make predictions
about where it should exist.
So this is sort of where I'm trying to go
with thinking about origins of life
is how do we actually look in chemical space
for alien life.
Now, when you think about this space of possibilities,
DNA is one molecule in that space.
Proteins are, well, it's not one molecule,
it's many molecules in that space
depending on your sequence.
Proteins are many molecules in that space,
but they exist in this huge combinatorial space
and they're products of selection.
And so I would say that information is necessary
for those molecules to exist.
They don't exist spontaneously for free,
they have to emerge as a product of selection and evolution.
So some people think DNA can just be found on Mars,
I don't agree and I'll give arguments why later in my talk.
But this idea that information is necessary
for some things to exist is not intuitive to us
when we're thinking about molecules.
Because I think a lot of people think
that any complex molecule, no matter how complex,
should be able to form in the universe outside of life.
And I would argue no.
Now, the reason I wanna argue no is for the same reason
that I think that satellites will not arbitrarily
start forming on a planet
and launching themselves into space
outside of an evolutionary process, right?
So if you think about what's necessary for a planet
to do what's called anti-accretion,
so we know a familiar physical process is accretion, right?
Planets form by gravitation accretion of more mass
onto objects that are already getting more massive
in the early solar system.
Anti-accretion is kind of a weird process.
It might happen by a fluke, for example,
if a planet gets hit by an asteroid
and injects some stuff into space.
But our planet is the only one we have no of right now
in the entire universe that has a reliable process
of anti-accretion happening from the surface of the planet.
That process is that there is a intelligent physical system
on the surface of that planet that knows enough
about the regularities of the laws of gravitation,
some kind of information that's extracted
from its physical world to build little boxes
and launch them into space, right?
So that's the product of four billion years of evolution.
Acquisition of information and knowledge
to constrain space possibilities
to build satellites and launch them.
And a feature of that is it's become reliable and regular.
It's a law-like process on our planet.
It can happen again and again.
An asteroid hitting a planet and launching something
into space is obviously physically possible,
but it's kind of a fluke-spontaneous event.
So it has a different quality to it.
And so satellites in the way that we have them,
I don't think would exist outside of evolution.
Another example, just pushing on the laws of physics
as they exist now are not sufficient
to explain intelligent things that understand
the laws of physics and what they can do.
You know, it's a very David Deutchian kind of way
of thinking about it is, you know,
thinking about elements on the periodic table of the elements.
There are some that, you know,
all the way up to 118 Agnesium,
which is the highest atomic element
that we make in the lab on Earth right now,
that are most reliably produced by technology.
So if you look at all the physical processes
that make the elements,
we might have some that were made just after the Big Bang,
some are made in the Dess of Stars,
and some are made on planets
that have evolved intelligent beings
that can control all of the mechanisms
in boundary conditions sufficient enough
to actually synthesize these elements in high abundance.
It's not that they're forbidden by the laws of physics,
it's just never gonna happen unless you constrain the space
sufficiently far to actually produce these elements,
which means that you need information
to constrain the space to produce them.
So the argument I like to make about life
is that information, this property,
that is very abstract,
and we don't know how to talk about associated to life,
and it's objects only arise
as a product of evolution, learning, and selection,
and this is what we call the physics of life.
So it's sort of like, you know, in the history of physics,
we have discovered new domains of physics
by kind of trying to think about things
from new perspectives,
and one of my favorite unifications in physics
was the unification of celestial and terrestrial motion.
So before that in human history,
no one knew those were governed by the same physics,
and now we accept that gravity is a universal physics,
it exists everywhere,
but there are some objects in our universe
like planets and black holes,
where gravity is most intense
and is like a really prominent physics
that we need to use to study those objects.
We don't really care about gravity in the atomic nucleus.
Information, I think, is a universal physics,
but I think the place where it becomes most relevant
is when we study life,
because that's where that process is most concentrated.
So we are the manifestation
of whatever this physics is that we don't understand.
Now this is contrary in many ways
to sort of the standard way we talk about things in physics.
So I was taught in my physics class
about particles and boxes,
and also how brains can emerge from particles and boxes
with very low probability.
Has anybody heard this before,
that we might be Boltzmann brains?
Do you feel like a Boltzmann brain?
I felt one like a minute ago,
but I'm not sure now, no, okay.
So the argument is that brains can fluctuate
into existence spontaneously,
because statistical physics allows it
and quantum physics allows it.
And I think there's a lot of problems with this argument
for various reasons.
One is that we've never observed it happen.
So maybe you might want to ask questions
about your laws of physics
if they make predictions you can't observe.
It is interesting cases where people try to use this
as cosmological bounds on like properties
of the universe and stuff.
So I think that they are interesting as a conceptual tool,
but I don't think it's a physical argument.
And it's interesting how the Boltzmann brain argument
has permeated logic of other arguments
that people want to make about the nature of life and mind
and how they relate to physics.
It's not like a culturally isolated phenomenon.
People really intrinsically think
the universe can generate anything anywhere for free.
And I think that's tantamount to intelligent design
because it basically says the universe has information
for every object to spontaneously fluctuate
into existence anywhere at any time.
Where is all that information?
Please tell me.
Okay, people want to tell me in the audience,
I like this, okay.
Get some arguments coming, I'm excited.
All right, so where do brains come from?
Well, if you deconstruct a brain
and look at its past history,
brains are products of evolution, right?
So they have a long lineage.
So this is a very abstract representation of a brain.
It's a human brain, but just imagine,
you know, like it needs a body.
So I'm not saying brains can be disembodied.
So I'm just drawing a picture
because I like drawing pictures, they're helpful.
It's really hard to get the art right though.
So minds don't spontaneously fluctuate into existence.
They are assembled across time
through evolution and selection.
So if you think about every step to make a mind,
to build a brain, every step takes time.
And you can't compress all of that time
into an instantaneous spontaneous fluctuation.
A mind is an object that requires time to be constructed.
And evolution is the process we know that does that.
And so part of the structure of the theory
that we're building in explain life
talks about objects as being assembled over time.
There's a particular way we talk about assembly
as a construction process.
But the idea being that every evolved object
has a structure across time as far as how it is built.
So if you start from elementary building blocks,
the way we think about it mostly is from molecules right now.
So I'm doing a big reach right now
by talking about brains,
but it's supposed to be a general theory of evolution.
And we're working our way
toward universal features of the theory.
And I have some promising stuff
while we're in both labs going on right now.
Okay, so if you think about a mind,
and you actually look at how you can construct the mind,
that is the physical structure of the mind.
And this is gonna be the argument I'm a whole talk.
It's not the instantaneous object of the brain,
but the brain is an object that is very large in time.
And I'm gonna say this over and over again,
but this is sort of my conception of evolved objects.
They're informational.
And you can't see the informational properties
because they are ones that have a size and time, not in space.
And, okay, so this is a mind.
Now, I'll explain a little bit more in a few minutes
about how we think about how to construct this kind of space.
So I'm doing it very conceptually here
in a quantitative framework,
and as far as the theory that we're building
and like the principles of the theory
to kind of do like assembly theory one-on-one.
But one important feature of this
is once you deconstruct an object in this way,
you can see that it's been selected
out of a very large space of possible objects, right?
So if I started, if I took a brain apart,
and I wanted to look at its pieces,
the molecules that make it,
those molecules could be assembled
in an exponentially growing space.
Every time I add two pieces of a molecule together,
every time I form a bond,
the size of the space gets exponentially larger.
If I get to the size of cells,
the space is even larger still.
And once I get up to brains and technological civilizations,
that space is very large, and it is so large,
I don't even think that we can even imagine
how big that space is.
So remember I said that we can't even estimate
how many possible molecules there are
with the known periodic table of elements.
So a brain actually is very deep
as far as it's structured,
but then as you're building up this space,
you see what a huge space of possibilities
that a mind exists in.
And in some sense, the brain has carried with it
that entire history is just rolled up in the present.
So it has some capability
of understanding the structure of the full space
because it's a combinatorial space
and it has some remnants of it stuck in the brain.
When you look at that combinatorial space,
there could be other minds in that space.
And here I'm showing two kinds of brains
that exist on our planet,
which exist in the same combinatorial space
and in fact, share a lineage up to a certain point
in their history before they diverge from each other.
So if you look at the causal chains of events,
of operations or construction processes
that assembled our brain,
and you looked at the one that assembled an octopus brain,
there would be a lot of overlap.
We're not that dissimilar.
But if I looked at my brain and somebody else's in the room,
we're even more similar,
which is one of the reasons we can share experiences
with each other is because we're practically the same object
when you look at us deep in time.
Now the reason for taking this approach,
when we're thinking about origins of life,
and I also will think a lot about alien life,
is we need to generalize beyond life as we know it.
I think to understand a lot of the properties of life
as an abstract feature of our universe,
in the sense that we talk about in theoretical physics.
So if you think about the sort of paradigm
of theoretical physics,
like the paradigmatic framework
of what is theoretical physics about,
it's about building abstractions that unify
as many parts of reality as possible
under a similar conceptual framing.
So motion is a good example.
I could look at all moving objects,
and I don't care about their color.
I don't care about their shape.
I care about their mass and their velocity.
So what abstractions matter
for talking about unifying motion is mass and velocity.
And those are inventions of our theories
that correspond with measuring devices.
What I'm saying here is when we're talking
about evolved objects,
the abstractions that matter are this kind of depth in time
and also its relation to other objects.
But I'll talk specifically
about concrete observables in a minute.
But the reason for doing this
is because we don't think necessarily,
at least in the staying age,
and I hope is the topic of this conference,
that the only minds that exist are biological minds.
I'm not sure that I'm convinced any AI right now
is a mind, but other people might be.
But we do care about technological minds,
and we care about alien minds.
What is the space of possible minds
our universe can construct?
I think this is a really relevant question
and an interesting question
for reframing some of the ways that we talk
about the nature of minds.
And obviously that's an important,
very pressing conversation that people are having now.
So when we think about where we exist
in the space of possibilities
and how we interact with the world
and that other things have co-evolved with us
on the same planet,
there's a whole bunch of trajectories
through this space that we don't know.
And those are maybe technological minds
that might be evolved from our same chain of events,
our same causal chain constructed over time,
or they might be alien minds
that have completely different histories than we do.
So I've been putting on this axis here, assembly time,
because I'm not really actually thinking about this
as clock time.
I think about time in a different way
than standard conceptions of physics.
It's much more like a causal time.
And it's always interesting to me to look back
at the history of physics, trying to invent new physics,
because you see that like every theory of physics
invents its own concept of time.
So why not?
So actually it's interesting
because every century invents a concept of time
and they're really strongly correlated
with the cultural narratives of that period in time
and technological inventions.
Yeah, I'm actually more thinking about like clockwork universe
and like Newtonian time is invented based on clocks, right?
So what is causal time?
I think it's because we live in a very complex world
and realizing time is not exactly linear.
It's combinatorial, which is fun.
Okay, so I mentioned at the beginning this assembly theory.
So assembly theory is a theory that is structured
to solve the problem of the original life,
which I'll talk a little bit
how we're thinking about that in a minute.
But the way that sort of the base of assembly theory
is to say that there are objects you observe, right?
Those objects we observe are physical things
that exist like you and me.
And you can deconstruct those objects
to their basic building blocks.
So let's not talk about you and me
because it's too complicated,
but let's talk about a molecule.
A molecule is made out of bonds, right?
So people think it's made out of atoms,
but if you're actually talking about constructing a molecule,
a molecule is made out of bonds.
So bonds are the physical thing that build molecules.
Molecules made out of bonds.
So if I take a molecule part and I look at its bonds,
there's a whole space of molecules I could build,
that combinatorial space of chemistry I was talking about
and it's exponentially large.
And in fact, if I had no physical constraints,
that space is super exponentially growing
with every new operation I do in that space.
So that space is huge.
That space is actually non-physical
because I haven't imposed any of the laws of physics
or operations we know that can happen in our real universe.
So we might want to add some constraints
and say we only want to do possible operations.
We only want to make bonds that actually conform.
So Lego is maybe even better.
So some of you are not chemists.
I see people scratching their heads
like thinking about how would you construct a human
and how would you construct a molecule?
How many people have played with Lego?
Lego, okay, we know Lego.
Okay, you know how they have little pieces on them?
So what are the knobs called?
Iron, two studs.
Let's just call them studs.
Okay, so they have little studs on them, right?
So assembly, the space of possible Lego structures,
if there were no physics involved,
no constraints imposed by how they have to fit together,
let's say you have super glue,
is like a really huge space, right?
You can make all kinds of weird stuff out of Lego.
And every time you add a new piece,
the number of possibilities grows.
If I am constraining myself to actually using
those little studs to piece things together,
I've constrained the space of possible objects to be ones
that are physically consistent with the rules of Lego universe.
And then the next sort of constraint you might want to add
is that you can't spontaneously assemble things for free.
You have to build them out of things you built already.
And this is what we call assembly clause
or assembly contingent.
This is an old label.
So it's actually called assembly contingent in the paper,
but that's this one.
So you've added more constraints.
And this is the feature that objects are built
along historically contingent trajectories,
which means if I want to build a Lego castle,
I build a part of it first,
and then I add that part to another part,
and then I add that part to another part.
And so this actually constrains the sort of trajectories
through what objects get built,
because once you start constraining and building things,
you can only build out of what you built before.
And so this means that the sort of trajectories
for building objects are historically contingent.
So what we see when we take objects that exist
and we deconstruct them is a particular example
of a contingent history, but it tells us something
about the space of histories that could have been,
that sort of space around it of what evolution
could have done, but didn't.
And so assembly theory doesn't have initial conditions.
It doesn't have laws of motion.
It has objects and their causal histories,
and then constraining the future based on the causation
that you find in objects in the present.
Now this gets some interesting things
because what you talk about is fundamental in this theory
is not what we talk about as fundamental
in current theories of physics.
And one of the reasons for that I think is really important
because again, looking at the history of science,
we have invented a lot of technology
in the short history of science.
And every time we invent new technologies,
what we call fundamental changes.
A good example is atoms, right?
So atoms are the things in the periodic table
and they're called atoms because we thought
they were indivisible like the Greek atom,
and then we realized they had substructure.
And now sort of the most fundamental theories
that people wanna propose are things like string theory,
which is even more fundamental,
but currently inaccessible to our technology.
We wanted to find fundamental
as the smallest objects in the universe.
The problem is when you're an observer
existing in the universe,
what you call fundamental changes
with your evolutionary history,
how much technology you've evolved,
how much you can measure.
And so a theory of evolution that tells you
about where you are in an evolutionary chain
cannot have a fixed finite object as an indivisible object
as your fundamental particle.
It can't be the fundamental structure of your theory.
So assembly theory is a theory of objects.
It's kind of funny because I got through a whole physics
education without knowing what an object was.
And then I started to think about it.
And so we define objects as having several features.
One is that they're finite and distinguishable.
So you see a basketball and a soccer ball in the universe.
You don't see a smear of every possible kind
of configuration of ball in between.
They're finite, distinguishable objects.
Objects are breakable.
I could decompose your brain into atoms.
I can decompose a molecule into atoms.
I cannot decompose an electron into anything.
It is not an object.
It's a limit of your observations.
Objects exist more than once.
This is a weird feature.
And probably one of the most unintuitive things.
But one of the key features of assembly theory
is this idea of copy number.
That things that are created by evolution
can be produced again.
And that the copies of objects matter.
So we are not identical objects as humans.
So you say like, I'm not an object in the theory.
I don't exist.
But actually if you look at us
and you look at our causal history
and you look at where we exist in the space of possible,
we're nearly identical.
We're 1% of our genome is different.
So you can follow these causal trees
building up these objects all the way to the branches.
And we're the kind of the things that are alive now
are just the branches of these trees.
Objects are lineages.
So this gets to the point about objects existing in time.
So in order to get to something like you or I,
we think about four billion years of evolution
has to happen on a planet.
And my friend Michael Lachman is really great about saying
when you ask him how old he is
that he's 3.8 billion years old
because some of the information in his body is that old.
And even in your lifetime,
you're not the same atoms you were when you were born.
So what is you?
You are the lineage.
You are the thing that keeps getting reconstructed.
Objects form via selection.
I love this website.
Sometimes I put it on my slides
that just will generate a human.
It's one of the neural networks
that's just fun on the internet.
But the whole idea is that this person does not exist.
So the space of things that cannot exist is really big.
And so you have to ask why are we the ones that exist?
Why are chairs the things that exist that we sit on?
Because they were selected out of that possibility space
to be finite distinguishable physical objects.
Selection is the mechanism that does that.
So this depiction here is an assembly space.
It is an assembly space for adenosine,
which is a molecule that is used in DNA.
And I mentioned that molecules are built out of bonds.
So the way we do it is to build the assembly space
is you do a joining operation
between two elementary building blocks.
You build something else.
Once that thing is built in the assembly space,
you can use it again to build something else and again
and combine it with other features that exist
in the causal pathways to build up the object.
But when I talk about assembly theory
being a theory of objects,
this is what we would usually call the object.
But in assembly theory, the object is this pathway.
It is an informational object extended in time.
So adenosine is this pathway.
It has all of those features as sort of the compression
of this object as a physical object
as it is constructed across time.
Okay, so I mentioned, you know,
thinking about theories of motion.
We talk about very specific variables
that appear in our abstract theories
to describe those objects.
And then we give those variables physicality.
We talk about these being the real physical features
of objects.
The things that we assign as physical features of objects
are features of our theories, not necessarily the objects.
They're features of our descriptions.
They have to have a correspondence
with the real properties of the objects.
Otherwise we're not doing physics.
But in assembly theory, we care a lot
about being able to go in the lab and measure things
because we actually wanna do the experiment
to solve the original life in the lab
using digital chemistry to explore chemical space.
And we need to be able to measure when life evolved
from a chemical soup in the lab.
So we have to measure it.
And so the two observable properties
that we have in assembly theory, the assembly index,
this is how many steps did it take to construct your object?
So this is what we mean by assembly time.
How many causal operations?
So it's a minimal set of causal operations
to construct that object.
And that set of causal operations
has various specific properties
that are unique to assembly theory.
They're not features of other theories of compressibility.
Although they have some relationship to them.
Copy number is the second feature.
How many copies of the object do you find?
If an object emerges once in the universe,
it's not necessarily evidence of selection and causation.
It could be random.
So I said brains don't form randomly
because there's too many construction steps.
I would never expect us to find a brain as a single object.
I will always expect to find brains as collections of objects
that are related by a causal history
that evolve on a planet in bodies.
I don't think minds emerge alone.
Okay.
So I've already covered some of these,
but I think they're worth just going through
a little bit more slowly.
And I think I have a little bit of time here.
So one thing I've already said is universe can build new things
only if the pieces exist already to build them.
So assembly spaces are recursive.
So the universe in assembly theory is a recursive universe.
Everything that you see is a recursively stacked object.
It's built out of things that were built before it.
And actually this feature of recursion is so prominent
that I would not expect any evolved objects,
anything selected to exist in our universe
to not have that property.
And I have really strong quantitative reasons for saying that,
that we're writing in a paper right now.
But the structure of these paths is what I described already.
So this is not showing molecules now,
but this is a graphical representation.
So if I have two elements and I stick them together,
I can make a line.
And if I stick those together and add an extra bond
by the process,
because I have to stick everything together here,
I can make a triangle, but I could also have made a square.
And then what follows subsequently
is contingent on that prior history.
So you can see how the number of ways of building things
as you construct objects becomes vastly untameable
in some sense.
But the feature of these paths that's important
and I wanna show you is that one that they're combinatorial,
right?
So you take discrete elements
and you stick them together to build things.
And they're compositional,
that you can only build on the things
that you've already built.
The steps must be in operations
that are physical and observable.
So the assembly index is a physical observable of molecules.
And we think it probably is of other objects too,
but we have to figure out how to construct the assembly spaces
in physically meaningful ways.
But this is one example of a assembly pathway.
But where it gets interesting is that this sort of idea
of building a molecule by taking this sort of minimal path
through the space of construction histories
through the molecule is actually a feature
that's measurable for real molecules.
So this is showing a mass spec
as you're adding bonds to a molecule
and how the fragmentation pattern in a mass spec
actually corresponds with the assembly index.
So my collaborator, Lee Cronin,
is rather ingenious on these things.
And so he actually developed assembly theory originally
to go in the lab with a mass spec
and try to figure out if a system was evolved or not.
That was sort of the measurement challenge.
And so he took the features
of what mass spec measures of molecules
to try to construct a way of talking
about how evolved the molecule was.
And actually it turns out it's not unique to mass spec,
you can measure it with NMR and infrared.
So it's not a feature of a mass spec measurement,
but assembly index is measurable.
Okay, so I've already mentioned this,
but I wanna state it more concretely.
Complex objects can only exist
where there are physical systems
with the information to construct them.
This is how complex objects are products of evolution.
They require objects making more complex objects,
making more complex objects,
making more complex objects.
Unless you have that whole stack of causation,
you cannot form them
because you need all the informational constraints
along those chains to actually produce that specific object
out of that huge possibility space
of things that could have existed, but don't.
That's the only way to get the information.
So we expect above an assembly threshold,
we expect to observe any object
unless it was selected to exist.
So this is one of the reasons
that we're trying to use assembly theory
for alien life detection
because we don't care about what molecules they are.
All we care is, are they a product of evolution or not?
Are they deep enough in this construction history
that there are signatures of evolution
that selection had to happen?
And so in this community,
you're probably familiar with the neural correlates
of consciousness, right?
And that people really think consciousness
is not about the neural correlates
or something deeper going on there.
In my field, the origin of life,
people are always fixated on the chemical correlates of life.
Can we find DNA?
Is it a protein?
How do I make amino acids from a prebiotic soup?
That is not the question to ask.
The question to ask is,
is this system informational or not?
Is it evidence that information was acquired over time
and how do we actually talk about that property?
So we wanna go after the actual physics,
not the objects that we see,
like what is the abstraction that explains them?
So these are two of my favorite quotes on material reality,
one from Roger Penrose who we heard about this morning.
I don't like the word materials
because it suggests we know what the material is.
And Madonna knows she's a material girl
and we're living in a material world.
Materials coincidentally are defined by our theories.
And so I think I live in a material world,
but I think the things that I think are material
are more what other people call informational
because that's actually what we need to talk about
when we talk about the physicality of objects like us,
as I talked about.
So this is kind of the image that emerges from these ideas
about the nature of life.
Life is about these lineages propagating information
about these assembly spaces.
Original life happens in chemistry.
It's actually an abrupt transition.
We have a really concrete way of talking about
phase transitions in assembly spaces and when they happen,
which will be a paper that I hope comes out later this year,
which quantifies the original life in different spaces.
New physics emerges in high dimensional combinatorial spaces.
What I mean by that is the physics of selection
is only apparent when you have so many combinations,
the universe cannot exhaust them all, so it has to choose.
I say choose in an active sense,
because we do choosing, but not in a primordial suit.
It doesn't choose, but selection does happen.
So we can use mass spec to measure for molecules
and validate that such a threshold exists.
So this is a paper that came out in 2021
in Nature Communications,
which took a whole bunch of samples of living dead,
samples blinded by NASA, put them through a mass spec,
measure their assembly,
and show that biology was the only thing
that produced molecules with high assembly.
So we can use it for alien life detection potentially.
So we're at a conference about minds, not life.
So I wanna just talk a little bit
about maybe some new philosophical structures
emerging from this theory
that I think are fun to play with
when we're thinking about
what a theory for minds might entail.
The first is that minds do not exist as instantaneous objects.
They exist within a historically contingent
combinatorial space, right?
They are this sort of assembly.
They, you know, if assembly theory is on the right track
and explaining the physics of life
when we can generalize to other kinds of physical things
besides molecules,
like the things molecules are built into,
then minds should have a size and time,
just like molecules do.
So I like this idea of thinking about hyper-objects,
things that are too big for us to conceive.
I think that we're not used to thinking about
physical objects as having sizes and time.
We see them as having size and space.
When I look at a chair,
I see the chair is a little more than a foot across.
I don't see the feature
that it took a billion years to construct the chair.
But I also don't see that, you know,
that space is, space time is curved around me, right?
So these abstractions we build from our theories
are really not intuitive.
But the point is, are they explanatory or not?
I think one of the things that this would explain,
which I rather like, is the virtualization of reality.
Because things that are informational,
why do they look abstract?
They look abstract
because we're looking at objects
that are really deep in time.
They're really deeply recursively stacked objects.
They compress a lot of time in a small volume of space.
That's why they look virtual.
And this means that other minds might be possible
in the future of the construction process.
So this brings a question of like technologies
we're building now.
Are they deeper in time than we are?
Are they flat?
I think, you know, the kind of technologies we have
are more indicative of social minds than human minds.
And therefore I don't really qualify them
as creative as we are.
But I'm happy to discuss all of those things.
But I want to go back to my initial question
after kind of bringing all this framing in
of how we're thinking about things,
which is this idea of like,
are there things that can exist because minds exist?
And they would be evidence of all of the features
that we care about understanding in a theory of mind.
And to me, the most interesting thing that we do
is humans' imagination.
We can imagine things in our minds,
we can share them between us,
and then we can build them over centuries.
And so an object that I like to use as an example
is rockets, right?
Humans were imagining sending things to space
long before we had the theories
or the technology to actually do it.
But now rockets are not just imagined objects
that we might talk about,
they're real physical objects in the real physical universe
with real physical properties.
Where does this come from?
Well, I mentioned that I think minds are small in space,
but big in time,
which means that all those combinatorial possibilities
exist in that structure that is a mind.
And the future is constructed by that combinatorial past,
making possible futures.
So in assembly theory,
the future is constructed combinatorially
from the assembly space that objects exist now.
So if you don't think an object is instantaneous,
but you think it's a causal graph
of these assembly pathways,
you have a lot of structure to build futures on.
The future is not linear,
the future is bigger than the past in assembly theory.
It's deterministic, but it's not determined
because you don't have enough stuff now
to determine what exactly will happen.
And novelty is there for possible in this theory,
which is super important for a theory of life, I think,
because life is mostly about novelty generation.
And so the future is more open,
more selection is possible for objects
that are deeper in the assembly space.
And so if you look at a structure like a mind,
it's not just that the assembly space
might define the object,
but the combinatorial future horizon is larger
for objects that are deeper in the assembly space.
And this is one of the reasons that our imagination
is pretty expansive and why technology
is increasing the size of that.
So two horizons and phase transitions might be important,
I should say might be important in assembly theory.
I think the life one,
we're pretty close to like really solidifying,
like we have a really current concrete formalism
about life emerging in molecules
and are working out various features of theory.
The phase transition part is worked out.
Mines, I think, are interesting
because they pack so much selection in time
in a small volume of space
that now they actually become active in the selection.
It's not just like selection builds up,
but it gets select, you know,
like all that information gets condensed in an object
and they're able to do things,
imagine things that weren't possible
before and actually construct them.
And I think this is the physics of minds
that I find interesting
because it's actually embedding us in an evolutionary history
and a sort of physical structure
for the reality that we live in.
I'm gonna end by just saying,
I have a book coming out later this week here,
which is like first time I've ever been able to say that,
I'm really excited.
Actually, it's the first time I've ever said that.
In a talk, yay!
Life is no unknown, but thanks to people who write it.
Cool, I'm super excited, it's been a really long time.
And then I also wanna thank my lab and my collaborators
because they're amazing.
I work with the most fantastic group of people
and they're all crazy and really rigorous,
which is great combination.
Yeah, fairy, thank you.
Thank you.
Yeah!
Do you have time for any questions?
Mark.
Thank you.
I hope you explain it really well.
Thank you.
It's hard to explain abstractions
that don't exist in a lot of minds yet.
Absolutely.
And I have a ton of questions I wanna ask you later,
but like when you talk about combinatorial time,
and emergence in that quasi-temporal dimension,
it makes me think a lot about diachronic emergence.
Okay, I'm not familiar with that.
Probably other people aren't, so it's good to explain it.
So, same chronic emergence would be
emergence that occurs at the same time.
Oh, I see, okay.
And diachronic emergence would be
emergence that occurs sort of across time.
So, if you think about an economy
and the emergence of markets in an economy,
that would be a diachronic emergent phenomenon.
Do you, would you see diachronic emergence
as being like ontologically distinct
from this sort of combinatorial emergence
that you're talking about?
Not necessarily, I'd have to know more about it,
but my sort of philosophy going into these things
is all emergent things are temporal.
Like I think the reason an emergence looks weird
in standard physics is because we think
emergence happens in space and not in time,
and it's just because the object is constructed over time.
So, you're looking at object that's big in time,
and when you like try to look at objects
that are small in time to explain it,
you missed all the time, you coarse-grained out time.
Right.
You lost all of the physics that you care about.
And when you say temporal, do you mean like temporal
in the way that we perceive time
or more like a quasi-temporal kind of?
It's not, it's not a clock time.
It's a causal time.
So, it's about ordering of events.
Very interesting.
Yeah, I knew you were gonna ask that.
Hyperobjects, the second time I've heard it is you.
Talking to Mark about it before.
Any more questions?
Great talk, by the way.
I'm gonna keep it quick.
You know, I often think about the way we actually perceive
and go about solving issues through cognition and language.
So, your theory of mind is very interesting to me.
And I'm wondering how much of getting the language
right in the way you're actually describing things
is gonna affect the way you solve the problem.
Cause I know you talk about hyperobjects.
Oh, I think absolutely 100%.
I use different words all the time and it confuses people,
but it's because I don't wanna become semantically closed.
Because I think the words matter.
I think they really matter.
And I think when you're building a new abstraction,
you're building a new language.
And so, you need to be really careful
about what words you choose, for sure.
Perfect.
Yeah, thank you for a very refreshing line of thought.
Since you use the word object a lot.
Yeah.
Where does it end?
It's a new one for me, I like it.
Where does an object end?
Oh, where does it end?
What's boundary?
Boundary in space, or space time.
Yeah.
I think the idea that they have to have finite boundaries
so for molecules, it's actually pretty easy
to define the boundary.
Because of like the sort of, you know,
like molecules have an energy potential
and things that actually give them physical structure.
One of the reasons we're having a hard time
developing assembly theory for minerals
is because it's really hard to define
what an object is in a mineral.
There's like a crystal unit cell,
but the way it repeats is not exact copies
because of defects.
So it's super hard to define an object in a mineral.
And it's also hard to define objects
in some classes of strings,
although in other classes of strings,
it gets a little easier
because there's like some semantics
about what bounds a string.
But it's, there's a couple of things
that are really hard about assembly theory.
One is defining, like constructing mathematics of it
for new spaces.
One is, what is an object?
And two is, what are the physical mechanisms
of constructing the object?
And if you know those two things,
you can construct an assembly theory for anything,
but those things are actually super hard to define
in a way that's rigorous and measurable.
And this is one of the reasons that we're taking our time
trying to develop assembly theory properly
for other kinds of systems besides molecules.
Molecules were just like a freebie.
They have these properties one off the bat.
It's really weird.
Yeah.
Disha?
Sorry, I just have one question.
If an object consists of, right,
the evolutionary time history,
what about the things that are no longer part of it?
So for an example, is a human mind part of the object
because it's part of the history
that created it of a rocket?
Yeah.
It's super interesting.
I have to kind of compress things
to be able to explain them,
but this idea of lineage as a propagating information
is really something that we've been developing
with Michael Walkman at Santa Fe Institute.
And Michael has this really nice way of talking about it,
which I really resonate with,
is we are bundles of lineages.
So you're a particular configuration
that has come together, but your parts,
like all the things you create
or all the things that are parts of you
can also become parts of other objects.
So you're not like even when,
so the example I like to give is like,
you know, Einstein's biological lineage
wasn't very creative in the universe.
He doesn't have a lot of ancestors, right?
But his creative lineage,
like the ideas he created have propagated
through a lot of minds.
So that lineage has actually been much more persistent
than his biological lineage, but they're both lineages.
And they both should be talked about
as objects equivalent in assembly theory.
It doesn't make a distinction between abstract objects
and things that we would traditionally
consider physical objects.
Well, I really like how you looked at it in the Noama piece
I brought before looking at technology as an extension
of that propagating lineage.
Where do you think that's going down the road?
For us.
I mean, how big does that space get?
Yeah, artificial intelligence.
How big does life get?
I think, I mean, the projection I have
is if we can solve the original life.
So a technosphere,
you have to emerge a technosphere
to solve the original life, right?
So a technosphere understands
where its deep biosphere came from.
And then the technosphere as a planetary scale,
living structure can reproduce on another planet.
Thinking with, you know, once you get AI able
to maybe increase that directed selection,
like you're doing right now with AI.
It's like, how quickly can that expand
and how quickly can things adapt and evolve?
Yeah.
Fun to think about.
The new technologies are kind of deeper or flat,
not as creative as we are.
Is it because the assumption into AI,
it's not keeping this new proposition
that you have in mind?
If they adopted that, the models would change?
I think it's possible to build things.
But I just think that we're in the earliest phases
of what these things are.
And I, the way I kind of see like,
you know, large language models to me are super interesting
because it's like, you took language,
which was a technology that was distributed
across many, many minds, right?
And you compressed it in a small device
so that an individual human can now interact with language
as a physical object.
That's what a large language model is to me.
It's not, so, but if you look at the ecosystems
that technologies were creating,
they might have more of my like functionality
than any individual does.
So I tend to think about more like global emergence
of technology and like,
how are these things getting integrated together?
Which I did write about in this piece called AI's Life
in Naweema.
Yeah, it's fabulous.
Where am I looking?
Sorry.
Hi.
Sorry.
I'd like to put a face with the question.
Thank you.
Thank you for the speech.
My question is when you're talking about mind,
you use brain as an illustration.
Yes.
Isolated from the rest neural system, neural system.
So I wanted to put a nervous nervous system.
I just couldn't get a good visual.
So I actually, I use my, yeah.
So this is one of the things about the semantics.
Like, which word do I use?
Brain, mind, nervous system.
Like, what do I actually mean?
I don't know.
Okay, perfect.
So.
I'm agnostic.
Next question.
The question is related.
Yeah.
What about congenitwins?
Like that have.
Oh, right.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
So they technically are the same object.
They share the same body,
but if they have two brains,
they realize themselves as two separate minds.
Yeah.
I think, I think that's a, yeah.
I mean, it's interesting why you even recognize yourself
as separate from the world.
I think that's more mysterious
than the fact that we have minds.
Like, like I, you know, I have such a,
because of the way I think about the physics of life,
I hardly think of myself as an individual
because I recognize that I'm a lineage
and like everything on this planet
is part of the same structure I am.
So that part's interesting to me,
but I think, you know, our like,
our minds are in part constructed
because of our social reality.
So I don't know if I can couple
thinking about consciousness from sociality.
And that part's more interesting to me
than the actual physical embodiment
of like, what are the individuals?
Most of my, I mean, all of my conscious thoughts
are associated with my social,
like, like communicating and like thinking about things
that I like, you know, all the non-conscious stuff
you guys don't get to know about.
And it's crazy down there.
Thank you.
Thank you, Sarah.
That was great.
I take it you're going to disagree
with my attention that consciousness came first.
My question is, what's the role,
I also believe that life, even very simple life,
requires quantum coherence.
At the micelle level, the cellular level and so forth.
Do you disagree with that also?
My philosophy on quantum physics and its role in life
is kind of similar to my philosophy on thermodynamics
and also gravity.
I think these are theories that, you know,
they describe features of physical reality,
but I don't think they're capturing the regularities
relevant to what life is doing.
And so things that life builds will have those properties
because life is a physical system.
But the thing, the abstraction we want to call life
is not embedded in those theories.
Why is it an abstraction?
But I'll just leave it at that.
Well, because theories are abstractions.
But life isn't a thing, we can have theories of life.
If you want a theory of life,
it will be an abstract description
of the regularities you associate to life.
That's what a theory is.
Well, like Schrodinger's theory of life
is a quantum coherence state.
I think he was after negentropy,
which I don't, I mean, I don't agree with his theory though.
So I think, you know, I always, I like to quip that,
like, you know, he didn't use mathematical deduction
in what is life because he knew
he couldn't actually mathematics life.
But I think it's a hard problem.
It's a really hard problem.
It's why we haven't solved the origin of life.
We haven't designed the right experiments.
Okay, thank you.
Yeah.
All right, questions?
Great, great talk.
Thank you.
I have a very basic question.
So what, what, what, what fundamental principles
do you have in a simply theory
that distinguish conscious from unconscious entities?
You know, it's interesting because people always want to,
I made a joke a few minutes ago,
but I'm like way more interested
what's happening to the unconscious than my consciousness
because all these things just like pop in the surface
sometimes and I'm like, where did that come from?
And, and so I think it's interesting
that we have experience in things,
but I'm not, I'm not sure it's the most interesting thing
going on in our brains, but that being said,
I think the main difference is in the only way
I know how to like codify it in English language
is the idea of imagination.
I think for most of biological history,
objects were built on things that, you know,
sort of existed in this like very,
like much smaller combinatorial space
because the objects don't have as large a history.
And there's something about the structure of the brain
that I think the history is actually larger
than like the space.
So it's actually seems like it's pulling counterfactuals
into existence, but it's because it exists
in a larger space than is like,
I don't know how to articulate it yet,
but that's the closest answer I can give.
Trying to work toward actually like formalizing that,
but it's really hard.
Wonderful talk, I'm sorry I didn't catch the whole thing,
but the questions that you answered,
I thought were very interesting
because you talk about you're interested more
in what is unconscious rather than what is conscious.
It's the stuff that will be conscious in the future.
That's why I'm interested in it.
Right, well, I'm interested
having a background cybernetics in Kung Fu.
I'm interested in, I look at it,
I look at it kind of like the, you know,
you have DOS and then you have windows running on top of it.
Yeah.
And if you get slapped in the head,
you get right back to DOS.
Yeah.
So in kind of the organization
of the central nervous system into the mind,
do you believe that that is part
of the assembly blocks, I guess?
Yeah, I guess I, in some sense,
I think consciousness is really interesting
because it exists in the present, right?
So there is something very distinct about the present.
But like we're hallucinating in the present right now
because our touch operates at 0.04 seconds,
so we feel the ground.
Yeah, but I think that, like, this is also interesting
because people think the present is instantaneous.
I think the present is thick.
Huh.
So like a present could take a second or a long?
Yeah, Nicholas Jizan has a really nice way of talking
about this in the intuitionist mathematics
and like the fact that like it takes time to compute numbers
and like the present actually has a thickness associated
with it if you don't assume numbers
or exists as a continuum.
Right, I always looked at dancing as an example
of how they can play with the thickness of time.
Yeah, yeah.
Awesome.
Yeah.
Psychedelics do it, I guess.
I don't know.
Thank you, Sarah, and these are great talks.
Firstly, thank you for watching.
Thank you for listening.
There's now a website, curtjimungle.org,
and that has a mailing list.
The reason being that large platforms like YouTube,
like Patreon, they can disable you
for whatever reason, whenever they like.
That's just part of the terms of service.
Now, a direct mailing list ensures
that I have an untrammeled communication with you.
Plus, soon I'll be releasing a one-page PDF
of my top 10 toes.
It's not as Quentin Tarantino as it sounds like.
Secondly, if you haven't subscribed
or clicked that like button, now is the time to do so.
Why?
Because each subscribe, each like helps YouTube
push this content to more people like yourself.
Plus, it helps out Curt directly, aka me.
I also found out last year that external links
count plenty toward the algorithm,
which means that whenever you share on Twitter,
say on Facebook or even on Reddit, et cetera,
it shows YouTube, hey, people are talking
about this content outside of YouTube,
which in turn greatly aids the distribution on YouTube.
Thirdly, there's a remarkably active Discord
and subreddit for theories of everything
where people explicate toes,
they disagree respectfully about theories
and build as a community our own toe.
Links to both are in the description.
Fourthly, you should know this podcast is on iTunes,
it's on Spotify, it's on all of the audio platforms.
All you have to do is type in theories of everything
and you'll find it.
Personally, I gain from rewatching lectures and podcasts.
I also read in the comments that, hey,
toe listeners also gain from replaying.
So how about instead you re-listen on those platforms
like iTunes, Spotify, Google Podcasts,
whichever podcast catcher you use.
And finally, if you'd like to support more conversations
like this, more content like this,
then do consider visiting Patreon.com slash Curt Jaimungal
and donating with whatever you like.
There's also PayPal, there's also crypto,
there's also just joining on YouTube.
Again, keep in mind it's support from the sponsors
and you that allow me to work on toe full-time.
You also get early access to ad-free episodes,
whether it's audio or video,
it's audio in the case of Patreon,
video in the case of YouTube.
For instance, this episode that you're listening to right now
was released a few days earlier.
Every dollar helps far more than you think.
Either way, your viewership is generosity enough.
Thank you so much.
Thank you.
