Baen o'n fan wrthwyntions mewn ysw savage ac mae'r amser wedi bod pobl yn ei lawr hempies.
Roedd am graf a fyddai'n arddangos.awn treated c ».
게ol hefyd nad oedden nhw'n mynd o gwych ni oherwydd y gweithio gyd y b bosbl yng Nghymru a bod le,
Kwbreadol tdefn Bryn i gilydd rysau f apprenticeship.
Mae'r glpicio ben다면 g risio cyngswt, yn mynd i gysydd gwbiad oGoeddon holl.
At radd, mae'r maesydd yr Ein Tynesry, ond yn ychydig y imaginad yn wedi disgwylad yn dda y Uned elektro Romanian eistedd i'w Eydon?
Cy gåledol i ni, i gyfos byddwn yn gwis Онаidd ymyasu domainol a rδή dod yn gwneud y gwened newydd o feidliaethau
au ar gy Scottish Algorithma.
Mae'ch rwm Fylo'r ysbytyn ymrwyped SOEDAnt-Act으로or i spreigion newydd diwet simple a healthier.
Yrazuened oif arnofio'r gwrs yn llwnnebydd ag substitutead,
mae ar ddrwy ad aínτ Yn DJD,
ond yn dogs'ion wirau'r cyfathi a gefisiadheadd,
neu â'n gweithio tonog o'r gwlad hynny,
teulu'r gyrs o'r llwy factoryr,
ddmygu'r lly Pow FengyGER Windows i'w chodlo'r llwnnu.
Mae'n gweithgoyr rysg, mae'n wneud arryll y potlêr hirchiad hynny.
Os yg wych...
Snifl今天t ha Adael yng Ngonydd yn ddigon.
yr edym pattern d bru gw faint,
dwi gweld ers amherwydd,
beth drwy'r bwdaeth layered Fallod hynny os ddigon o bliroedd,
ddim yn rhan o bobl
a yn bwysig yn ddigonio ar gyfer amlu
开dd ar deminesio gweithgoe
Felly mae'n lle fydd ei notreri maen nhw
fees mae'n gwneud am f Tran y bends 이후
oli y byddwr yn y munいたeth
y gwerthdraeth,
er mwynhau amsgweithio'r hysbiydol hairsi exceptionaeth e menthau oheith llullen.
Felly mae'r bwysig yna questo elinon ar eich deilig.
Why do you think this is a pattern jedw fawn sicrhau cherddau i chi'n rhesymau?
Rwy'n vaful gen wel yr oedlaeth yr yw nad yw ace oedd ychydig yn ddeifosionnig i fe allan ar-decheliaf i bwysig.
would it's the bit that helps and grasp things
I it's relatively simplistic
with me.
I
I
doesnt know what it doesnt know and it therefore neglects a whole range of things which the right hemisphere does know but the right hemisphere has no speech.
The right hemisphere contributes to language but speaking for 97% of us at any rate of us right-handers is in the left hemisphere
and so the knowledge that the right hemisphere has is not easily expressible and as we become more powerful
ним ond Father Paul wnaiff y gweithio alsiliawn hwnnw's fel Ymrhyw o'r mentallyion phobl yw hynny yn
llawer o hogywyd. Fin y gweithio o'n schARRYлав am yr afgскую.
Mae'n ddechrau d surnameau i ddechrau'n syniadau y gall Fanolau
i teimlo value으니까.
OK. Erydaf ei gweithio pen nid yn fawr ym Gyfynyddaum Heslconau,
maen nhw'n ceisio ddarcan 잔 hwn wedi siarad ydyn ni'i gweld yndyn radd.
Mae'r ddoabilau s felw pressuren, yn dyn nhw'n ceisio'da artistioel typical vine align.
felly政治 yn nischod y bydd.
Ond timdfodol Staffielol yn gastonfod
ac oes gw林 RSA собi ni wedi dd griev
fel y byddod yn y byd y mynd.
D Knights', Brin Un Highness, Binhlo,
a thoseglu ddawid Llyfr ddaeth a newid i lawr i'r gymrydarts i Heather.
Oes fydd hynny ddim ond,
rai ei CEO'r ddweud yr unrhyw iawn
y wneud yn umrważed hynny.
i capital Orange?
Beth yw'r ymddor achi dydw i wedi unrhywbeth.
可能a bod feふ racks yw~)
iawn gwior am dd вещau
mewn bywysger a should admission
mae ouros yw yr un o'r cyffWhat
mae angen peth Llywyr yn cymryd
ac mae neud roi yn cymryd
felly llygau parlwydwyr yn yr enw
allan dw i eich bod ni mai
â ddаю ti ymdîch
ac yn f Still Too
mae'n gwir caging, ac mae angen youtube'r dyfodd
digwydd
phonikwys gobl o ran 700 eich fflwrd, stanane.
Ben gweld ei hynny chi'n ferch yn y cl氷n neurol.
Tremoliion eich ffsyn Hannah Farfydd unohol fag yr Aesymethor,
wedi hyd weithio cael ei gweld mig.
Ond wedi gweld fijwwauol hwn lodge,
ame unrhyw gwaru bod yn listeig gennym.
Tych Llywodraeth y Lotzdem.
Felly pob am han tortillae
pan oedd gan ddelid i'r darel nhw,
That's the convolutions in the surface of the brain.
They have different preponderances of grey and white matter, different preponderances of neurotransmitters.
They react differently to hormones. They're just different.
And it's no good saying there isn't a difference.
Also psychologically they're clearly different because we know that the left hemisphere, for example, is the one that speaks.
It's the one that does certain aspects of language.
The left hemisphere we know has other faculties that I spend the book explaining.
So it's just that people latched on to a very simple-minded model and that model was that of a machine.
Now the question you ask of a machine is what does it do?
And if you ask the question what does the left hemisphere do and what does the right hemisphere do?
The answers that came out of pop psychology in the 70s and 80s, the left hemisphere does reason and language
and the right hemisphere does emotion and visual-spatial things is not true.
They're both involved in everything, but they're involved in different ways, in reliably different ways.
So it's not the what of the brain, it's the how.
And that's a very important question, but it's not one that scientists are so readily going to ask
because they may be interested in mechanism.
But actually it's as plain as the nose on your face when you come to look at it,
that there are these vast differences in the disposition of these two neural networks towards the world.
They pay attention in completely different ways and when you pay attention to the world you see different things in it.
And so if they do that they're going to construct two different versions of the world.
We talk a lot on this channel about the meta-conversation.
The idea that what we need is a conversation that opens up to the not knowing,
to what needs to emerge beyond and what it feels like is happening now increasingly with social media,
is people are getting stuck more and more in certainty and in what they do know.
Is that a right brain, left brain phenomena?
Well, can we look that in that way in that one of the features of the left hemisphere
is that it prefers what it's already familiar with and it finds it very difficult to shift set.
So once it's stuck into something it keeps on repeating it.
Whereas the right hemisphere, Rhamachandran, Bs Rhamachandran, well-known neuroscientist,
calls it the devil's advocate because it's able to see other things and it's saying yes, but,
yes, but is a Zen saying that I very much like.
So you can see it that way, the right hemisphere is much more able to be flexible.
And also, very importantly, although, or not although,
but just because the two hemispheres have different takes on the world,
they have different takes on their own relationship.
So the left hemisphere's take is an exclusive one.
Either this is right or that is right and therefore what I know excludes what you know.
Whereas the right hemisphere's take is a both and take,
that there's a room for what the left hemisphere does.
There's a point in analysis, but there's also a point in synthesis and imagination.
And what we are desperately lacking is that overall synthesis.
It seems to me that at the moment we officially pride ourselves on being a very free-thinking people.
I'm going to sound like a terrible, funny daddy,
but I think the intellectual world was far more open in the 60s and 70s when I grew up than it is today.
It's closed down to a number of dogmas.
The internet, which is a wonderful thing, hasn't helped
because it's possible for people to get trapped in bubbles where they reinforce the things they believe.
Without really hearing other points of view,
I'm a keen proponent that in education one of the most important things one must do
is teach people always to invert everything they believe and see the value in it.
In fact, I believe there should be in government a department of inverse policy.
So whatever the government is proposing,
there should be a department that is dedicated to seeing what would happen if we did the precise opposite.
It should be centrally funded, and I think it would be a very useful exercise,
but really it's an intellectual exercise that we all need to do.
If we start being too certain about anything, it means we've missed something else.
This brings us to a very important metaphysical point,
which is that a thing and its opposite, according to the left hemisphere,
are simply as far apart as they can be, and we move always in a linear way to what we identify as good.
Everything I know tells me that, in fact, opposites are connected,
and if you pretend that you are only having one, you don't notice the dark side.
This is terribly true in psychiatry.
It's almost a truism to say that a lot of the work one does as a psychiatrist
is helping people to see that there is a good side to what it is that they fear and dislike in themselves.
But there is also a dark side to the bits that they pride themselves on,
and that you cannot get rid of the dark side.
You accept it and work with moving it towards something creative.
All creativity and all life is creative, our mental world is creative,
our daily reality is created partly by us, not out of nowhere,
but it's grounded in something else, but we help creative.
That process depends on opposition.
It depends on a degree of resistance, actually.
As soon as you've decided that X, Y and Z are good and their opposites are bad,
and we must have more and more and more and more of the thing we've decided is good,
you end up reaping a whirlwind because the things you didn't take note of come back and bite you in the bum.
I think that what we are now seeing in the very destructive and damaging and regrettable moves
of Brexit and Trump and so on are entirely understandable reactions,
which I can perfectly well forgive from people who have just been told that their opinions are no good,
because these are things we don't talk about,
these are things that a liberal person knows that liberty, equality and fraternity is all it's about,
and the opposites don't matter.
I think we're enduring now a backlash that we could have avoided by having a mature conversation.
Yes, this is good, but also we've got to take into account that.
This is what we've talked about quite a lot on the channel,
and our perspective is that we're seeing the shadow of liberalism,
that Trump and Brexit are both the shadow of liberalism.
I didn't know that that was what you said, but it's exactly what I believe.
I mean, you mentioned a lot of different psychological things,
because I mean, Jung's idea of the shadow is a perfect one,
and at some sense it feels to us that this is the time of the integration of the shadow,
that what we're seeing through the democratisation of different forms of media
is all the things and the cracks between things that we thought we'd got rid of
are now rising up and are going to have to be dealt with.
They're going to have to be integrated.
Yes, how do we do that?
Well, of course, you're not expecting me to have some simple answer.
One of the difficulties is that we have accelerated the pace of change so fast
that the kind of changes that we require not only won't,
but simply cannot be made to happen that fast.
We're in a crisis which requires something to happen very quickly, really,
because accelerating technological advance has put machine guns in the hands of toddlers.
We have not increased in wisdom.
In fact, I believe we have lost wisdom in the West,
and yet we have gained enormously and are gaining very fast in power.
Inevitably, if you put power in the hands of people who have no wisdom,
this is a formula for disaster.
And we see it in the current environmental disaster we're facing.
We see it in the destruction of species.
We see it in the destruction of the lives of indigenous people.
We see it in the mind control that is already being put into effect in China
with enormously sophisticated AI that tracks the faces, the movements,
everything, the thoughts of all its citizens.
And we believe, oh, well, that's China, but that could never happen here.
But that is very naive.
Our kind of democracy is fragile.
It's not the norm.
It's something very precious, and it can easily be destroyed,
especially in an atmosphere where we don't know who or what to believe,
which is becoming more and more a problem.
So we have got ourselves into a very difficult situation,
and I'm not suggesting there is an easy fix to it,
but there are things that we could do to try and get away from this.
They're going to have to involve radical changes.
We can't expect to go on living the kind of lives we do with the demands on the world.
They're just not sustainable.
They're not sustainable even for us.
And now that 10 times as many people will want to claim these rights to extraordinary privilege,
the world simply cannot sustain it.
So we've been living on fool's gold, if you like.
So what are the practical things that can be done if your diagnosis is correct,
and that we're looking at a world that's ever more sort of narrow and rational?
How do we get out of that?
Yes.
Easier said than done.
And there are patients that you cannot help,
which is one of the first things you have to know in my trade.
But I believe one of the things I can do, I can't do much,
but one thing I can do is raise awareness, and I think that's happening.
So people are becoming much more aware of, in a way, I've opened people's minds
to things they already knew.
One of the commonest things people say is I had this feeling of sudden recognition
that all my life I kind of felt all this, but had no way of articulating it.
So I think that that is one thing, so of course it's just a start.
Some of the practical things, I mean we've got to begin by completely rethinking education.
At the moment it's about shoveling information into people,
not training them to think critically, to think imaginatively.
I was lucky in that in my education I was taught to think on all sides of a question.
As soon as I believed something passionately, I would be asked to defend the exact opposite position,
which is a very important exercise that I think no one should leave school without doing.
This is what you believe, speak about it.
Now speak about and defend the opposite position, and we will score you on how well you do that exercise.
That is good, but it's also about imagination.
Education is drawing out faculties within people, it's not shoveling facts into people.
That is the reverse of education.
So I think the emphasis on a cliched caricature would be, but it's not unfortunately that far from the truth,
you're doing English A level, there are six points you must make about Jane Austen.
To me that is the death of English literature.
And so is conforming it to current preoccupations, however brilliant we think they are,
filtering it through isms of political correctness.
Instead of putting all that to the side and simply opening oneself to the incredible gift of something that somebody created
which can work on you in all kinds of ways that you don't now conceive,
the more you approach things with preconceptions the worse it is.
This was really interesting watching the documentary you sent over.
You mentioned identity politics as a left brain phenomena,
that it's effectively, it's another certainty, or it can become another certainty
because what we're doing through that is, for example, you're taking a work of literature
and you're critiquing it not in the way that it reflects the grandeur of the human spirit
or the developmental journey of the individual, it's about how does it...
Which immediately diminishes it from that to that.
Can you talk about that as a left brain phenomena?
I can, but I'd also first like to just gloss your remark, because it's interesting,
I didn't actually mention identity politics anywhere in the film.
But what happened?
You say political correctness or was there some answer?
No, what happened was, and I didn't know this,
that in the film as you know Rowan Williams is interviewed.
And the way the film was made was I would go and meet somebody,
we would be film talking together, and then there was always a bit where I went out
and they just talked to that person, because then they were free to say whatever they wanted to say.
And a bit that I had never seen until the film was completed
was where Rowan Williams chose, for some reason, to talk about the angry black and white views
of people who just know what is right and won't listen to other people and want it legislated.
And he just said, you cannot create a better society by legislating this kind of thing.
We need to develop a society in which people can have, we can listen to one another
and have reasonable conversations.
And he actually made the point that by trying to stamp out certain things,
you don't diminish the anxiety behind it, you ramp it up, which is exactly what we're seeing.
Which is another psychological truth of repression?
Yes.
I mean, there are many problems here.
The one is the left hand is far too certain that it knows what's what.
It's far too clear that things are unipola, that there are just goods.
Whereas, you know, once you see something that is much clearer and oriental tradition,
that everything comes inevitably with its opposite.
You don't think like that anymore.
It doesn't see things contextually.
It doesn't see individuals.
It's not prepared to listen to another point of view.
It's just saying, this guy I have heard on Twitter said something which is now a sound bite.
You don't hear all the rest that went around it.
You don't see this as part of somebody's journey that it might be worth listening to.
You just dismiss it.
Now, I believe very strongly, once again, that it's not the what, it's the how.
If I've said that before, I'm going to say it again and again.
In life it is not the what, it is the how.
It's the disposition you have.
Now, I believe it is possible to say anything.
And I don't think there should be things that nobody can say.
I think we should have a system where anyone can say anything,
but they must say it in a way that is not inflammatory and that is open to reason and discussion.
So that applies to both sides of a political argument.
And in that same section of the film it made an interesting point that anger lateralises to the left brain
so that if we're in a sort of left brain certainty, anger is the result.
Anger and aggression, you know, people think the left hemisphere, I mean, the old view was,
well, it might be a bit dull, but it's terribly reliable and it's down to earth and it doesn't get emotional.
Well, number one, it is not down to earth, it's in a fantasy world.
Number two, it is not reliable.
There's good work coming out of Ghazanagur's lab showing, you know, he was the man who said
the right hemisphere has about as much intelligence as a chimpanzee.
I mean, that was 30, 40 years ago, but still.
His lab is now producing wonderful data showing that the right hemisphere is far more sophisticated
at making judgments, much more reliable.
The left hemisphere tends to jump to conclusions, is open to bias.
And in terms of emotion, the left hemisphere is far from devoid of emotion.
The most lateralise of all emotions is anger and it lateralises to the left hemisphere.
Lateralises just means what?
What it means is that when people are experiencing anger, there is a great increase in activity in the left hemisphere.
And, you know, the chapter inverse for that, somebody called Harmon Jones has done a lot of research into that.
But the chapter inverse will be in the master's... is in the master's hemisphere.
There was a really interesting example with birds and maybe you want to kind of explain very simply how...
because that for me really illustrates the difference between the two ways of interacting with the world.
Yes, well while the human neurosciences were busy dismissing it, the animal scientists were simply getting on with what scientists were supposed to do,
which was observing and taking note.
And they noticed that birds and animals use their two hemispheres for different purposes.
It's easy to observe in a bird because in most birds the input from the right eye goes straight to the left hemisphere
and the input from the left eye goes straight to the right hemisphere.
It's not true of humans, it's more complicated.
But at least in birds and quite a lot of animals that have eyes on the side of the head,
you can tell which hemisphere is engaged by just looking at which eye is being used for this particular moment.
And what they noticed was that birds and animals reliably seem to use their left hemisphere
for latching on to a small detail like I need to pick up that piece of seed on the background of grid.
And they use their right hemisphere, the left eye, for everything else.
For who others are around, is there a predator, is my mate nearby because I would like to share this.
All that contextual information is the right hemisphere.
And the left hemisphere is literally seeing a tiny piece of reality.
Now that was in itself an aha moment.
I can see that this, if this was in any way true about humans, it would have colossal implications
because I have a background in philosophy and I know that attention changes the world.
So if there's a big difference in attention, one is fragmentary, piecemeal, narrow,
the other is broad, sustained and vigilant, they're going to see two different realities.
And so that got me into then looking at the human issue, and lo and behold,
this difference is very marked in human beings.
So if people have a right hemisphere stroke, they can have this pathological narrowing of the window of attention
like looking the wrong way down the telescope.
And the grand theory as well is that we are in a world that has concentrated more and more and more
on this narrow, atomistic, mechanical way of looking at the world and neglecting the more holistic,
the more relational aspects.
Well it seems to me, and that's the subject of the book I'm now writing,
that actually we don't start from things and then have to work out how they relate
and how this billiard ball hits that one and so on.
But in fact that there are very broad patterns and flows in the world
and that what we call things are the sort of bits that stand out to our attention.
They're little nexuses if you like that go, oh I recognise that little familiar thing,
that I'm going to call that a, but actually everything is part of a larger picture.
And the trouble with focusing on detail is not only do you miss the overall meaning,
the overall purpose, the overall connection, the way in which this has ramifications,
the bits that are not explicit, the thing that is not in the spotlight, which is everything else.
But you also think that you can understand the world by taking one thing and putting it with another
and building it up as you'd build a Meccano set or mend the bike in the garage,
but the world is not like that.
I wrote down from the RSA animation, left abstraction, power to manipulate the already known,
fixed, static, isolated, decontextualised, explicit, ultimately lifeless,
right, individual, changing, evolved, interconnected, implicit, incarnate, living,
never entirely known.
And that reminded me very much of what Martin Buber talked about,
that we have the I it relationships or the I thou relationships,
which I found very profound, I also studied philosophy when I was at university
and that really stuck with me,
that there are two different types of relationships we can have in the world.
One, the I thou is essentially kind of, there is an unknown ability about that relationship.
Is that something, do you think that maps on?
Absolutely, and there is also reciprocity in the I thou relationship,
whereas in the I it relationship it's a unidirectional one, which is about power and inference,
whereas the other one is about a reverberative, responsive coming into being of something.
So that is a very important distinction and I relate the I thou and the I it to the evolution of language.
You won't have time to, because it's a long story, but it's in the book.
But in brief, I believe that language emerged from what you might call music.
In other words, the music of speech, the sounds,
and that denotative language is a kind of special set
of a much more richly embedded, embodied, connotative way of communicating.
And that it became necessary when we were no longer in groups
where you were largely just talking I to thou,
but we're talking about a third party or something else we had designs on.
And so that is how where language becomes very important.
I've seen your work referenced in many, many different places,
particularly by people who are talking about the more spiritual,
even an author called Gary Lachman, I don't know if you're aware of him.
So he's written a series of books about the hidden occult history of Western thought,
and he uses your work as a way of saying,
as a way of maybe giving it scientific respectability,
or at least explaining this could be a process that we're going through.
These more holistic ways of knowing have never been part of the Western mainstream tradition,
and maybe that's because of the right brain, left brain split.
Do you agree with that?
Well, I think it's not true that they've not been present in the tradition.
I know what he's talking about,
but they're very much present in pre-socratic philosophy.
As we know, something very important and I think very damaging
happened to Western philosophy with Plato and Aristotle,
particularly with Plato.
But these other aspects in the West have been more expressed in our extremely powerful music.
One thing you can say about Western civilisation,
in many ways it lacks the wisdom of oriental civilisation,
but it has produced colossally rich music.
So it also produced Shakespeare.
So I would say our art is where it has been expressed.
But when we start doing philosophy,
we're like, well, we've got to make this consistent,
and I see that and it goes in there and this bit leads to that.
Whereas you're therefore, as I say,
building things up from little certainties.
Well, the first thing is there are no certainties to start from.
You have to start from axioms.
Reason is based on intuition and it ends in intuition.
So I think there are these elements of there
that they have been sidelined and neglected.
The key thing one must remember about the left hemisphere
is that it's bright enough but not very bright.
It doesn't really see that there are things that it doesn't know.
It's so hermetic, it's world is so self-contained
and consistent and self-referential
that it doesn't feel the need of anything else
because it's not sensing that there's something bigger.
The right hemisphere sees what is implicit,
what is going on, not just in the foreground
but in the background, in the context.
In all these things that are everything that we really value,
love, art, and we used to value spiritual truths,
these things are only approachable in an indirect, implicit way.
As soon as you start to say,
well, we need to pin this down and make it certain,
you're already on the wrong track.
So I think that carries right to point to that.
It's just that I think there's more to the story.
You talked about that rationality begins in intuition.
Yes, it has to.
It begins in intuition in two ways.
One is that we can't rationally prove
why reason is a helpful tool.
We intuit that it is a useful tool.
Secondly, when we begin reasoning,
we have to begin from quite a host of assumptions.
Science officially claims to make no assumptions.
In fact, it makes quite a few assumptions before it gets started.
It has to. That's not a criticism.
The system can't work without somewhere to start
because nothing can be supported on nothing.
It has to be on something before it can get started.
So that's what I mean.
And it also ends in intuition
because the results of reasoning
have to be reintegrated into a broader picture.
It's an intermediary tool.
Reason and indeed the left hemisphere is an intermediary tool.
One way of thinking of it is it's like this.
When you learn a musical instrument,
you're first attracted to a piece of music
in a broad sort of way.
Then you start trying to play it
and you realise you have to go over and over the fingering in bar 18
and there's a return to the dominant at bar 32 or whatever it is.
Then when you've done all that, that's not time wasted,
but when you come to perform it,
if you're still thinking like that, you can't perform.
The relationship with the hemisphere is a bit like that.
The immediate grasp of something,
the overall take on it is right hemisphere.
The left hemisphere then gets to work and does procedural matters.
But then it's the right hemisphere
that must reintegrate that information that is not lost.
That process was valuable, but it mustn't stop there.
I think in our society we stop with the left hemisphere.
We don't allow it to be reintegrated into a much bigger picture
which is in touch with all the stuff that the left hemisphere doesn't know it doesn't know.
This reminds me quite a lot of Richard Tarnes.
Yes, who I'm afraid I haven't read.
No, his book had a huge impact on me when I was at university.
He told the story of Western philosophy
and said that it had become more and more isolating,
more and more a prison of the intellect
and that the way out would be to re-embrace intuition,
re-embrace direct knowledge
and that we couldn't get out until we did.
It seems that it maps on very clearly to the picture that you're painting.
Yes, that's right.
The other thing one ought to say is that philosophy has made strides
in the last couple of hundred years.
I think that there's been a redressing of that,
particularly early on in Hegel
and in the German idealist Victor Schelling and so forth,
to an extent in Nietzsche, who's a mad genius.
But mainly in the tradition of two groups.
One is the American pragmatists, C. S. Perse,
William James and John Dewey.
The other is the phenomenological tradition in Europe,
Heidegger, Merle-Ponty, Scheller, Hussle, to a degree.
The later Wittgenstein would fit with that,
the earlier Wittgenstein had not.
There was a comment on the RSA video from a physicist
who said that he found it very useful
in looking at why they were so far away from coming up
with the theory of everything,
because his sense was that they're looking at the individual details
and not looking at the whole. Does that make sense?
It certainly does, and I hadn't seen that comment.
One of the gratifying things has been the number of physicists
who have written to me saying there are enormous resonances
between your work and what we are doing in physics.
I am far too unskilled to recognise those,
although I have an idea of the shape of what they're talking about.
Recently I've been trying to equate myself with quantum field theory,
which is actually a very interesting development out of quantum mechanics.
I will try to write a bit about that in my current book,
but only after running it by some very kind physicist friends.
I think what is important is that what I'm saying, if it is true,
will apply to everything, because it's about the nature of reality.
The people who are at the co-face of reality are poets and physicists,
and they have written to me saying how much they feel are resonances.
What has struck me is that people that I didn't expect,
like lawyers and people in the world of finance and economists,
are some of my most frequent correspondents,
because they say what you're describing is exactly the problems in our realm.
I'm delighted because I never had the slightest belief or hope that this could happen,
but what I'm saying has been picked up by people in all walks of life.
Y Llywodraeth Cymru
