Welcome ladies and gentlemen.
So what I'd like to do is to show you why you should never have to memorize the unit
circle.
So if you have a teacher or a friend or a parent that's saying you need to memorize the unit
circle, please continue watching this video because I'm going to show you why you do not
need to memorize this unit circle as well as how you can actually solve some problems
without having it memorized just as quick or if not quicker than people that have the
unit circle memorized.
So first of all, you know, I remember when I first had to learn the unit circle and people
were like, hey, memorize, that's the only way you just have to memorize it, that's it.
And it was confusing.
That's just what I did.
And I, you know, kind of went through it and just went forth, memorized it based on all
the angles and all the points and so forth.
Then I got into teaching and that's of course what I did.
I just reiterated.
You got to memorize it, you got to memorize it, you got to know these points.
But the more and more I've taught and the more and more I've worked through the problems,
I realized it's just a big waste of time.
Not only is memorizing your circle confusing, you might memorize it for a couple of weeks
and then sure enough, two weeks later, you totally have forgot everything, but there's
just so much information there and it's not even all required.
The really only piece of information that you need to know from the unit circle is the
first quadrant because if you know the first quadrant as well as knowing what a reference
angle is and a coterminal angle is, then you can solve the, or you can evaluate any
trigonometric function using the unit circle.
It's much easier to memorize the first quadrant than to memorize the whole unit circle.
So again, if you don't know what the reference and coterminal angle, I'll give you just a
quick little definition and then I'll kind of work through three problems showing you
how I'd be able to do this.
So on the reference angle is basically the angle, the acute positive angle between the
terminal side of an angle and the x-axis and the coterminal angle is an angle that
has the exact same initial and terminal side.
So usually if I give my students an angle like sine of 2 pi over 3 and they have the
unit circle memorized, they can probably actually do this problem pretty quickly.
Sorry, still teaching.
So they could probably do this problem really quickly, but once I get to negative angles
or when I get to angles that are larger than 2 pi, that's where my kind of strategy starts
beating them out and it gets a little quicker.
So again, 2 pi over 3, if somebody had the unit circle memorized, they would just simply
find 2 pi over 3, which I had that erased, 2 pi over 3 and they say the sine and they
know that that is going to be square root of 3 over 2 and they'd kind of get that one
covered, right?
However, even using my system is not too bad, especially once you get a little bit more
practice.
So here's the way that I kind of break it down so you can use it for future angles as
well as speed up the process.
I'm going to take it really slow just so I can explain it.
So the first thing, if I'm graphing 2 pi over 3, I need to know where exactly 2 pi over
3 is.
If I know that halfway around the circle is pi, well here's pi over 3, 2 pi over 3, 3
pi over 3.
So I'm traveling 2 pi over 3, that is my theta, that's my angle I'm given.
The reference angle is going to be the angle from the terminal side.
So actually let's see, here's my initial and there's my terminal side.
The reference angle is the angle to the x-axis to my terminal side.
So if here's 2 pi over 3, halfway around circle is 3 pi over 3, that means this distance
is going to be pi over 3.
Now I'm just going to label, I'm just going to write these out so we can just kind of
keep track of everything.
So that's pi over 3.
Now I go to my first quadrant.
What is the coordinate for pi over 3?
So I go to pi over 3 and I can see the coordinate is going to be 1 half comma square root of
3 over 2.
However, that is the coordinate in the first quadrant.
I'm not looking for the coordinate in the first quadrant, I'm looking for the coordinate
in the second quadrant.
So it's important for me to know what's positive and negative in the second quadrant.
And in the second quadrant we know that the x is negative and the y is positive.
Now let's just write it like this, negative, positive.
So knowing all of this information, I know that my point is so pi over 3 and 2 pi over
3.
And you can see, look at these two points.
They are exactly the same.
The only difference between the two points is the x coordinate is negative.
So I just say I'm going to use this point, I'm going to use that value, but I'm going
to use the value in the second quadrant which is still positive.
So my answer is square root of 3 over 2.
And again I want to reiterate negative angles.
If you had this memorized, usually the unit circle that people memorize is from standard
position going in the positive direction.
So all I need to do is give you a negative angle and a lot of students have trouble because
that's not the unit circle that they memorized.
But if you know how to graph an angle, negative 5 pi over 4, again remember, half way around
a circle is pi.
So if we were to break this up into force, we would say that's 4 pi over 4.
And again remember, going negative direction is that way, right?
Going in the clockwise is negative, counterclockwise is positive.
Okay, so if going half way around a circle is pi, that would be 4 pi over 4 if I was
going to break that into force.
But I want to go negative 5 pi over 4.
So I need to go an extra pi over 4 up.
Then, so that's where my angle, so here's my initial side.
Here's my terminal side.
However, again, what we're looking for is that reference angle.
What is going to be my reference angle?
How far is it from my terminal side back to the x-axis?
You can see here, I passed the x-axis.
So I need to see how far is it to go back.
So if here's 4 pi over 4, I went an extra pi over 4 next.
That means all the reference angle is just taking me pi over 4 back to the x-axis.
So I'll say my reference angle is going to equal pi over 4.
That's important because now I need to go to my unit, my first quadrant, and say what
is the coordinate for pi over 4?
That's square root of 2 over 2.
However, looking back at my angle, I see that it's in the second quadrant.
Well again, what is negative in the second quadrant?
The x-coordinate, right?
So now the cosine, negative, positive.
So cosine, again, represents the x-coordinate.
But since my angle lies in the second quadrant, my answer is going to be a negative square
root of 2 over 2.
All right, last but not least, let's go ahead and do a tangent problem.
This tangent problem is 15 pi over 6.
Now, one thing I want you to look at is when we have a coterminal angle, and I'll just
kind of give you an example here, here's an angle.
If I take an angle and I draw the angle in the opposite direction, you can see that these
two angles start at the same side, but they also end at the same side.
Same thing.
I could draw another angle and do an extra loop around the circle, and I would still
start at the same side and end at the same side.
So those angles are coterminal.
The difference is they're measures, right?
They have different measures.
Even though they start and end at the same side, they have different measures.
Well, what is the difference between their measures?
Well, think about these two blue, think about our original and the one that I went around.
I basically did the exact same angle, but then I did an extra revolution around the
circle, which is basically adding 2 pi.
And to get this first one, I'm basically subtracting 2 pi.
So coterminal angles, the difference between coterminal angles is just plus or minus 2 pi.
So if I had tangent of 15 pi over 6, the first thing I'd want to do is, well, let me find
a coterminal angle then that's between 0 and 2 pi.
So what I could do is I could rewrite this as 12 pi over 6 plus 3 pi over 6.
Well, 12 pi over 6 is just 2 pi.
That's just an extra revolution around the circle.
So in reality, and then 3 pi over 6 really just gets reduced to 2 pi halves.
So in reality, I'm trying to find the tangent of pi over 2.
Because the tangent of pi over 2 and the tangent of 15 pi over 6 are going to be the same because
they're coterminal angles.
They start and end at the same side.
So again, I go to pi over 2, and this one, you're not going to need to know so much.
You're just going to need to look at the quadrant that it lies in, sorry, the x-axis, pi over
2 is at 0 comma 1.
So there is no reference angle in this case, so it'd be 0 comma 1.
So the tangent is going to be y over x, so that'd be 1 over 0, which is undefined.
So there it goes, ladies and gentlemen.
Please do not waste your time trying to memorize the unit circle.
The best and easiest thing to do to evaluate trigonometric functions for given angles is
to make sure you know the first quadrant.
Memorize it, just do enough practice, and you'll know it.
And then use your reference and your coterminal angles to identify the point or the angle
in the first quadrant, then use your quadrants to identify if it's positive or negative,
and then you're all set, and use coterminal angles to find angles between 0 and 2 pi.
And again, I just want you to notice that the unit circle, all it is is a reproduction
of the first quadrant.
When you flip it over here, the x is negative.
When you flip it over here, the y-coordinates are negative.
When you flip it into the third quadrant, the x and y's are negative.
But the main important thing is, don't memorize the angles, because all I need to do is give
you negative or coterminal angles, and it gets confusing.
Just make sure you know how to graph any angle, as well as find the coterminal and the reference.
Thanks.
