Live from St. Canard, it's a do it tonight with our guest that daring duck a mystery that Trepeon right
All right guys, what's going on? Jason so here
I'm over here and I got a
special guest with me right now. I got Mitch from duck talks with me and
Of course, we I really got to talk about the
The the latest duck tales episode which was an hour special if you guys have not seen it yet
It's on YouTube right now. So if you can watch this you can watch
that that episode and
But most importantly it was about darkwind out and I had to talk about it with somebody. So thank you Mitch for coming out here
Oh, absolutely. You know, it's funny with our current schedule and the way the show got moved to Mondays
It's been very difficult for us to keep a weekly podcast going and when we recorded our
Our review of the episode that that podcast episode which I still am editing
I'd only seen it once. So this is probably gonna be a better discussion for me than our own podcast
Yeah, actually, um
Like before today, I only saw it once and then I was able to sneak in another one
Like right before this just because I was like, oh, let me just at least like watch it again
Just so I get familiar with some of the stuff and so that way I don't like get confused with some of my own like
Oh, yeah, yeah
Yeah, but no all overall, I mean, I mean, I'm pretty sure you and I we can both say that we both enjoyed the episode
Oh, absolutely. I I can't tell you how many times I've seen it since we've I turn it on constantly and especially doing the podcast sometimes
I just turn on the
Turn it on and listen to it to pick up on some of the audio cues and some of the dialogue and stuff that because
Visually, it's so stunning. You can get caught up into it like a movie
And so um, I've listened to it quite a few times and my kids turn it on constantly
I've got an eight
Just turned eight year old and a 10 year old and they're constantly watching it because we're huge dark wing duck fans
Oh, yeah, so
actually, so uh when we were watching this like my like, uh
My son's bedtime is around
eight o'clock eight eight eight thirty
And so and the show came on at seven and like this one we I actually constantly like no
I'm not I'm gonna watch it live on the tv because I wanted that experience. I didn't do you have a nilson box
Was it do you have a nilson box?
Uh, no, but I have youtube tv. So like, you know, there's they have uh,
They have like their rating system over there too like their watch time and everything
And and and because I have youtube tv. It's now like recommending me every duck tails video known to man
Oh, yeah, um
Yeah, no, no, there are some there are actually some really good ones out there. Um, but uh
But yeah, oh when we were watching it, my son was still awake and
Normally with like duck tails and a much of the other uh cartoons that are like not for his age because he's only two
He doesn't he just runs away. He sat down for that whole hour
I mean except for like the commercial breaks, which he didn't like no like those
Um, but like he sat down like every time like they would show dark wing or torus bulba or just like any of those
characters even uh, even like scrooge mcduck like he was just sitting there. He was just like just watching and
I was so amazed like oh my gosh
What?
And he hasn't done that with nitch turtles yet
Uh
Well, he can he's got lots of lots of duck tails that he can watch so far and hopefully some dark wing duck in the future
It was a big event in my house
We were excited
We kind of we kind of had a hint that it might that the show might be available for free. So I was really excited. Um
I don't have a cable subscription that includes the shows
So I bought it through amazon, which means I get the day after which when you're running a fan site
And doing a podcast and trying to engage an online community
Man, that makes it hard on monday. Thankfully there's two other hosts and they're able to engage a little bit more
But um, so but we were expecting it to be available. We got up that morning
Turned it on and it wouldn't work. I couldn't get it to work all day. Disney now would not work
And um with that episode then it ended up being all episodes
Thankfully, um, I'm trying to think um, so that was that was on an apple tv
On a iphone and on an ipad later in the in the day. I thought
We have a roku. I wonder if it'll work on the roku and it did. Oh, that's so that evening
We piled into that bedroom and uh turned it on and my kids were just excited like it was a no dinner
Let's go watch this scenario right and uh, we had it on and my kids were laughing at all the old dark wing stuff and
And said daddy, did you catch that and I was like, yeah, I caught that but I'm very proud that you caught that
Yeah, so there's a lot of times I was like telling my wife
Like all like all like the little things I was getting like like a little excited for and like, oh my god
And then I had to explain to her like, oh, this is like reference to this
This is like, you know, like like when they had mr. Banana brain
I'm like, oh, that's quacker jack's like doll and he in the show he gets possessed by phil hartman
Like right. Yeah. Oh
but so one of things that like really caught me off guard and like
In because like it kind of affected me
Like, you know, personally because I had a bunch of my friends and a bunch of people online
They told me he's like, oh, you know, I don't I didn't watch dark wind up that much
But like, you know, what what do you recommend to watch before?
Before watching this episode and as a joke
I was like, you should watch the bonkers episode where he does like a cameo in
And I I was just like, um, that was just to just to be just a jerk
Like that real on my part. I was like, watch this. Watch this awful show and all of a sudden
He makes a cameo. He makes it. Yeah. I rolled my eyes at that tweet. I saw you respond to somebody for that
But it was it was it was it was a good call on your part. It was a very good call
I mean, you know, I know inside information. I promise you
Yeah, I was just like, man, what I'm like, you know, if the if the Aladdin episode of uh, where he turns into dark moon duck for a
For a brief second was on disney plus. I would say recommend I would recommend that one too
Right. Yeah, we um, I asked frank over on tumblr. He's not answering questions yet
Uh, but frank angona is the co-producer of the show is very active over on tumblr
And he does a lot of asks right and so that's one of the questions I've submitted is
When they watch those scenes of bonkers was that from the old dark wing duck show like was bonkers a cop
On the old dark dark wing duck show or was that security footage of present day and bonkers as part of duck tails 2017
It could be either. I don't know. It could it could be either. I mean, you know, my theory is like
I would think maybe
because of uh, jim starling, um, you know, he's like now m i a and
Maybe maybe in the maybe in their tv universe
Like they're still continuing on the show and maybe bonkers has like replaced dark wing like that
That's my insane theory
Okay. Yeah, I like it. Yeah. Yeah, and they just happened to just grab. I mean, you know, um
It's obviously with the they did the ramrod in this episode and uh, the ramrod's very different from the you know, original
series and
Like they did this whole like hey, we can go into other universes
And which open up. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It really did open up and like my media thought was like as soon as they introduced this like
All right
So, you know, disney xd has all their martel shows like, you know, they have well they used to now
It's such a spider-man, but they used to have like, you know gardens of the galaxy. They had avengers
Spider-man at one point they had hulk and they were all like connected with each other and they would just go like just
Like kind of like guest part guest star in each of their episodes, you know, like the comics. Yeah
As old comic fans, that's what that's what we love. Right. Right. Right. It could just be two or three panels as long as they showed up in another
Book, it was cool. Right. Right. Exactly. Exactly. So maybe we can start opening it up like, you know, have
Not only just like, you know, a duck tails and I mean, this had to be like a like, hey, we're trying to make a dark dark wing duck
Series. I mean, you know, if this wasn't, I don't know. I mean, there's no there's no other explanation on why they're pushing it so hard
but
But, you know, like maybe we can have like other disney afternoon
Shows in there and and and this whole ramrod thing is like the like the introduction of like, oh, yeah, there's other
Universes in this series
Yes. Um, and and the advertising alone on this single, uh, episode this two parter
Right. Um, is also an indicator because they have spoken with just about every online outlet available, but us
That they've spoken with everyone. Um, we have had frank on the show, but not for this they, um, but but they're
They're really pushing it and putting it on amazon or on youtube. It is on amazon putting on youtube
I think it's already at 180 something views. Um, after, you know, just a few days
Um, I think it's I think it'll probably top out around 200 there
And I know
Yeah, and the premiere on disney xd had like
A hundred and is under 150. I want to say it was like a lot lower than that
But um, most of the people watching the show are streaming from our experience
And so once you count all of amazon and and everything it it's had a lot of people watching it
Right. It would be a top contender. Yeah, exactly. Now, I will say for disney xd like getting a hundred thousand
That's huge actually because not many people have that channel
And like uh, it's uh, you know, that's like one of the unfortunate things like uh, like most of the marvel shows even though
Uh, they they have been like successful in their own, right? They they never reached those numbers
And that's being mainly because of like the channel it was and I think I think the biggest one that disney xd had
That um, and I think it broke over over a hundred
Thousand was uh, that show kicking it with leo hired and like yeah
But I mean well
And I know I know the the premiere of duck tails
The series woo was also right supposed to be one of their biggest ones
And actually that whole first season broke records for disney xd
And that's why they moved it to the disney channel right the second season
But it didn't do as well on the disney channel as it did on disney xd
Um, it still it still did great, but it didn't do as well
And then from what we've been told the producers of the currency the current season or the series
I wanted to move it over back to disney xd because they have
More say in how it's released. I think they they were really really excited about moving back and it's been good so far
I I wish it was on disney channel because it'd be easier for me to watch it
But um, I know they like being on disney xd and it's it's been a it's been a great channel. They have
Definitely put a lot of money into
Right letting people know it's there. Yes. Yes. Yes, definitely and something I do like that now
It's on disney xd is that instead of it being either at 7 30 in the morning on saturdays or
Three o'clock in the afternoon on on a weekday
All they're actually putting they're actually premiering the episodes like on prime time at monday night, which I think is pretty cool
Me personally I like that better like, you know, like
Uh, just like, you know, disney channel used to do that with some of their animated stuff
And then they just kind of like now like they know their money make their money is like with the live action stuff
And so they come in kind of pushing it. I mean, you know freaking like tangled got like
Their last season like premiered at like 6 30 in the morning and that's like a disney flagship
Right and that's been that's been part of the problem
Our experience with with fans of the show is that they're streaming it
A lot of people are staying up to like 3 a.m. On the east coast to watch it. Um, it's really crazy and um
I I I don't know you're one of the few people that I know that watch it when it airs
Right. Well, this one is the only one I watch it when it airs
Oh, okay
Because normally when it comes on because I get alert from youtube that says hey, there's a new episode
And I wake so I wake up at Monday morning. Um, and then I'll watch it then I'll go to work since I work from home
So on youtube, you get it they youtube tv. Sorry youtube tv. Okay youtube tv has an alert
So whenever there's a new episode of a show
Yeah, there's alert now surprisingly there was not one for darkwing duck for this episode
And the reason why is because I and probably because it was an hour special
They put it under extras instead of season three
Like so so like even when like uh, when I was trying to find it like this morning when I was trying to like
Okay, let me go and uh, watch it. I really was like, okay
Where is it and then I had to like, oh, it's in their extras
And like I mean because the other one that's under extras is uh, whoo
Like so they just like for some reason they just put it there instead of like putting on their season three
Now you were talking about the show expanding to other disney afternoon
Including other disney afternoon characters, and I know how you are with spoilers. So
Um, did you follow any of this stuff from the last couple years from san diego where they revealed stuff? Okay?
I followed nothing 100% followed
Nothing in fact, um, and that's something I want to talk about because because I followed nothing
Uh, I didn't know what god's arm was going to look like
like and the thing was
I saw a lot of people's like twitter
Things with that picture. I just I never connected the two together
Like I I just thought I just thought I was like, oh, okay. That's a cool character
I just thought it was some some character that either came from the comics or someone like some fan thing
I was like, oh, okay. Uh, like and I just kind of like but I did what I liked about godson's design was
I liked that they hid that number one in there. They made sure like, you know, instead of having her with the hockey jersey
She had like a pin. Yeah, right there like
one I was like
But I liked her design. Oh torus bulba looked so much like torus bulba
Like, you know, and unfortunately we can't get term curry to, uh, voice him again
But uh, this voice actor did both voice actors for both, uh, godson and torus bulba did a fantastic job
Yeah, and and james mineral eagle heart eagle heart eagle heart
I don't know how to say it, but he did uh, broadways of laden. He was the genie. Oh, nice
He's such he's such a big dark wing duck fan. Oh, nice huge dark wing duck fan
we've actually spoken with him a little bit behind the scenes and
Hopefully we'll have him on our podcast at some point, but he's a huge fan and he also did he played lance entangled
Oh, nice. Oh, okay. Yes, because it's strong though. So it sounded just like lance
My best friend
Thaddeus was always the smart one too smart sometimes he couldn't shut that big brain off
He came to the lab one night raving about fixing a flaw in the ramrod and I assured him there wasn't one
But he didn't listen. He tried to reprogram it and the ramrod
Backfire, uh, like it didn't and I wasn't I wasn't sure I didn't like, uh, I didn't look him up for some reason
I didn't look up, uh
His voice credit, uh, the one I did look up was mega ball
Because it sounded so much like Dan Castellana. I was like and like, uh, and then and then I remembered. Oh, yeah
They did the same thing
When uh, the first time they had uh dark wing duck beware of the buddy system
We had a scene from the old dark wing duck show
It kicked off the episode and it was huge like one of my co-host pirate steven
He messaged me at like 3am
That night and and for for some reason I didn't have I usually turn it over to to silent for some reason
It was on it might have been because I expected him to know the thing about it
But um, I got a message at 3am saying you have to get up and at least watch the opening
And uh, but it was really good. Yeah, same thing. Yeah, by the way
By the way, uh, do you know who spoiled?
Of the the opening sequence, uh for me for the episode before the show even started
Was it me sylvan is sylvani. Oh, yeah, he
Okay, so uh dragon con like before the show even started because like I was talking to him about like
Oh, what do you think about the dark wing design and everything and he and he told me oh by the way
In sometime in january, you know like end of like, you know, and some of his things obviously was changed
And they probably like uh from what they but he was like sometime in january
There's gonna be a hour special of gizmo duck and that's that's when we're gonna see dark wing duck
And that's all it's so when so every time so once I knew that the gizmo duck episode was coming
I knew that dark wing was going to be in there
And I like I don't know if he was allowed to tell me that I don't know if you
But like I mean people slip up. Yeah, you'd be amazed
Yeah, some of the stuff we've learned about the show just talking with people
Um, and and some of the stuff we're like, oh, we can't we can't say anything until after it happens
And uh dark wing was one of those we found out about dark wing pretty early on
Um, and uh, but we were we were asked, you know, not to say anything that because it was going to be a big surprise
So we we we did our part. We're a fan site, right fan podcasts. We want to support them
So so we kind of stayed hushed about it and then there was a um, there was an audio podcast with jim coming
Talking about it that came out and disney asked them to pull it. Oh the people who did it sent it to us
Oh, wow
So we heard it. Um, actually I heard it and I told the other guys I was like, listen, I've already sent you this
But you probably don't want to hear it. I was like
It it's spoiled something for me that I wish it hadn't right
So that's kind of how we treat it because although I'll take anything official
That's released like the san diego comic cons and the the promos and and all of that stuff the images and the articles
I I consume all that. I love all that
I'm staying away from the stuff that
isn't out there if I can
And still keep up with the community. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, uh, obviously I do the same thing
But they just turtles I try like yeah, not not the not the spoil stuff. I try not to oh, nice. Nice. You know what for you for you
I got
Just just for you
But that's I like it
I don't have one of those
You don't have one of those. Oh my gosh, like right as soon as it went up like, you know, I don't like funko at all
But I
You don't like funko
They funko actually finally dropped us as affiliates. I really was like maybe
Maybe they started listening to what I said been saying, but no it's because uh, we have it like we we're producing revenue for them
We can't get in with them. I need to talk with you about how you did that
You have to talk to my wife. There's you
But they dropped us
Let's schedule something because we've we've been following them for a long time and covering them because we are fans of the pops
Um, I have all the disney afternoon pops
Anything associated with the disney afternoon and a select few star wars pops don't tell them
I don't like bobbleheads. So I don't collect those
Right. You don't know they have to make it bobbleheads because of uh, hasbro
Right. Yep. I still like them. Yeah
Same thing with marvel. They can't uh, marvel has to be bobbleheads
So marvel has to be bobbleheads and star wars has to have a base like that's their rules
Like it's also a bobblehead too. It's also a bobblehead. Okay. I don't have a I used to have one star wars
And I gave it that away because I was I have
I have a captain rex from the clone wars
And I have an open one kanobi because those are two of my favorite characters. Nice
Yeah, and they were gifts. They were gifts. Yeah. Yeah. No, no, no, like I have like this big pop collection
And like there's some of them. I don't know I have and I know I do but like I like there's
But like like most of them like come in there like uh, like I try not to get them. They just come to me
and like it was funny because uh
someone uh because like someone from the
One of our podcast listeners wrote like oh jason you need to get this pop for your wife
And it was a pop of splinter because like because my wife doesn't like the cartoon splinter
And uh, I don't like pop figures. It was like hey look something you both don't like
Like the 87 cartoons. Yeah the 87 cartoon splinter. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. She finds them creepy. Um
And and and I was looking through my pop figures and I was like I have that one
I don't know and like I have I feel like go through my videos
I'm pretty sure some box one of the like nerd block
Neutral box one of those boxes gave it to me. Oh
Yeah, I was like like yeah, I I already have it. I can
Nice. Well, I'd love to get some more merchandise uh for darkwing duck for sure. I I've got
See funko did the action figures and then we got the pops. You're right. Um fat mojo had darkwing duck stuff coming
Um, and unfortunately they no longer have the license. Right. Right. Yeah
Oh man when uh fat
When fat mojo like I mean like I was so sad because I think that was like one of fat mojo's first like
One that they like like like expanded
Oh, because most of their stuff has been like in the video game section or the collector section
And uh, unfortunately duck tails didn't do well. Oh, and like, you know, I got I got cancelled now
I will say this at least your at least your show does not
Depend on toy sales to keep that show on because if there was Ninja Turtles, like, you know, you wouldn't have a season two
Yeah
Yeah, the the figures. I mean they were they were exclusive to target
So they were kind of even though they were in the regular action figure section. They were still kind of collectors
Right, um, even though I mean they didn't treat them that way
But being exclusive they kind of were and then of course they had to try to offload a lot of it later on
Right to other places. Disney's store started carrying them and um, I mean at the end they're in Walgreens now
Yeah
I I totally believe it like it was just
I just
I don't know what happened with their because they were awesome figures and there were good prices
They're good prices for their figures too. I mean, you know, like even like the the two kids together
That was like 12 dollars like a little higher than what you but but for the quality you got good quality figures
Uh, I was just I was just a little sad like I was sad when I when my target started like, uh,
like put him on uh
on a like
Uh clearance also. Oh man. That's gone. I'm like, yeah
Fat mojo's image that they had for the upcoming wave two
Included a few hidden items that you can barely see and behind there was going to be a spear of Selene with a deli duck figure
We were going to get like multiple deli duck figures. Oh nice and behind it was this one box that was I don't know the
Term for it, but it's like an open box. You know what I'm saying where the figures are displayed
Oh, okay. Yeah. Yeah, I understand. It's like one of those like the
The uh the flap opens and it has like the velcro on it. Well, it wasn't even like that like it is open
Like it's it's like a shelf
I don't know how to describe it
But it was an open box and you could see the figure in it
So you knew it was a big box and it had a figure that you could see the hat
And you could see the little cheek tuft and you could see that you could see its shoulders
Like dark wing and what would dark wing come with but the rat catcher, right?
No, all right, so uh the old playmates toys
I was never able to find
The rat catcher or the thunder quack and like right now those are now they're expensive. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah on ebay
they're like
Way too expensive
But like that was like one I was like, but I had all eight action figures and and I had them
And that's that was like when I was like actually starting collecting
You know like when I was stopped playing with toys and started collecting figures and so like I have
Some of them still sealed
Some of them like they're in my parents house. Like I can't find
The the three other heroes. I can't like they're in my parents house somewhere, but I can't find launch pad
Goslin or hunker, but I have their accessories. I know we're like so their accessories
Their accessories are in like the shelf. I just can't actually find them
I had a friend who had the darkwing figures, but I never had them
I was too hardcore ninja turtle at that point. Like that was all I was getting
You know, it was made by playmates who also made uh ninja turtles
That I think that was part of the reason why I bought them because I was that was you know, obviously
I was hardcore ninja turtles, but like I got really hardcore like so when darkwing premiered like, uh
That our premier darkly dunes duck
I mean I watched it that friday night and I was just this huge fan
I like immediately just gravitated towards that series and I was like, oh my god
and I remember because my affiliate showed it again the next morning and I immediately
Like watched it again and like and this time I recorded it and darkwing was one of the first shows
Like I recorded like all the episodes on like vhs
Okay, yeah, so yeah my my experience. I don't remember any of the premieres or anything like that
Um, I watched the show religiously as part of the disney afternoon
I mean like I was one of the kids that ran home to or actually
I probably watched it at daycare now that I think about it because both my parents worked late
But they turned it on for us every day and so when we got there we were watching the disney afternoon
And then I remember later it was a little more tiny tunes and stuff like that as as time went on but
Um, but yeah, I I watched a lot of that show. I didn't have I didn't have vhs tapes
Um, I just I really loved the show and I loved catching it. I caught it on syndication like crazy, right?
And I remember the pizza hut, you know when pizza hut did their their stuff
Um with their promo with the case files and boxes and all that. Yeah, so um, I had like
Uh, I I I know it's like somewhere in one of my boxes upstairs and I because I remember I brought it into this house
But I have like the the pizza hut like case file like their little like it was like almost like a little folder thing
was and then
I what I did was because I also subscribed into the power and into my power had that darkwing duck
Issue with darkwing on the cover, which I was oh my I was so excited when that issue came out
And I ripped out all the pages from that nintendo power
Issue and then I glued it into that case file
So now like that case file is like to open up and then
And then like I think it was like a year later or maybe like two years later when darkwing duck was released on the game boy
uh
Nintendo power also had like it was a bit is so much shorter than what it was for the nintendo power for the nes one
But they had like a like a feature for the game boy one
So I tore those out out of that issue and I put it together and that one
So like I have like the case my case file has like the thing and I remember like the big thing was I went to pizza hut
I ordered the the darkwing duck
Uh combo thing all they gave me was just the cup
They didn't actually gave me the little folder thing and I mean young jason over here upset and this
Pizza hut was in walking distance
To my house
And I actually walked up there because like my parents like were still at work
I walked up there and I said excuse me
I I ordered this and you didn't give me the little case
File for this and like it was two if you remember they had like
There's one and there's I can't remember the difference and they gave me both poster
I think might have been the difference. I think I think it might have been uh, but yeah, and but they gave me both and like
Oh nice. Yeah, and yeah, and then I had to walk back home
Like but I was so happy. I wish I kept that poster. It was a good poster. Right. No, it was a great poster
Are they were yeah, I can't remember what I did with it like some of the stuff I lost
Oh, yeah, I don't I don't have anything from but I don't have much from that time frame. Um, I as a collector
I'd be starting over
Completely I have looked at those on ebay and thought about buying them. Yeah, uh, but but they're kind of pricey and they're like, uh
You know the poster is nice. I'd like to see I wish there was a company that actually did license reprints of some of those posters
That would be really cool. Um, that poster showed up in
Uh, uh, the uh, the not let's get dangerous the right the one before that. Yeah, the uh,
Yeah, yeah
I said dark, but it's the duck night returns. Yeah, the duck night returns and drake and drake mallards
Changing room in his trailer. It's on the walls
Oh
So speaking of like a little easter eggs and everything did you catch? Um, did you catch a watermire's first name?
Thaddeus. Yeah, I thought I thought it was a really cool like, um, uh, like, uh, homage to you know, tad
tadstones. Yeah. Yeah
Yeah, I actually really like that gave him a name and we saw him in more than just, you know, we we we saw quite a
Well, I guess it was a lot, but it was cool that they added the to the character
Right, and I I feel like it's it might be an ongoing story at some point
That's what I felt like this was this was going to be we're like, you know, they because
you know, they left things wide open and
They're like, hey like, you know and like because you know in the original show, uh, watermire dies
I mean, you know off-screen, but like it was like, oh you killed him and like, oh
You should do that now. We have to get the information from his granddaughter. Um, but this one picture. I think yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah
Almost the same picture. No no grape jelly stain
Right. Well, but but we had Bulba this time. Yeah. Yeah. This time we had Bulba. That's how we had Bulba straight in there
instead of the ramrod
like, um
but but yeah, like, oh
This is the way that they did it like they really opened it up for like, okay
We can start doing a story where
basically
Their end goal is to get
Dr. Wadam are out of like whatever multiverse whatever the universe is in
Which I thought was pretty cool
And it was a really good way to do it because obviously like they had like their duck tails stuff in there too
With fowl and that kind of stuff, which I like that we had fowl in there for as a darkwind duck fan
um
But like, you know, we continued on from that but like, you know
We if like, you know, if if duck tails does end season three or they end season four
They don't end at all. At least if they do start a darkwing series
We have like a new like goal now
We have a new goal post and we're they're independent of and I did like, uh
It's like a launchpad. It was like mentioned two
I'll spend my days in duckburg nights in st. Canard and I'll sleep on the drive over
But it's almost like it's hilarious. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I like that
But like just kind of like saying hey, I can be in both shows if both shows are happening
Yeah, I like that too. I
So people who have followed our podcast and followed us online know that we we've been pushing
Hey a season four could still happen
We I feel like there's lots of ideas the world building in duck tails has just been phenomenal
Right. Um, and there's so many ways they could keep going. Um, I'm kind of backing off of a season four a little bit
I I I think
I think it's still possible. Right, but I I I don't see anything to indicate that it will happen
Um, I think a spin-off is way more possible. I I think it's very possible. We get a darkwing duck series
Um, again the world building they left it open
Frank has Frank has indicated that he has stories to tell for these characters
I can't remember which publication he spoke with but there was one where they flat out asked him
Is there a darkwing duck spin-off coming and his response was we have stories we want to tell
And if we're allowed to we will continue them in some fashion, right? Um, so it really was an indicator
I think everything's an indicator of if this is something you're interested in you need to be watching it watch it on youtube
Um, watch it where we can see the numbers that that's been my thing
Like I've stopped watching it on everything else and I'm watching it every time on youtube because I can see the numbers there
Right and and I like that. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, that that's actually cool
I uh, I think I'm still doing on youtube tv only just because that I like the interface better with that one
um, but uh, but but yeah, definitely like, you know
You know, at least like we're seeing the numbers we're seeing them grow
And like obviously we want to make sure this gets supported that like it does like I would love
I mean more than anything I would love a darkwing every time every time they suggest like oh, we're
We're bringing back duck tails. I'm always like man
When they're doing darkwing duck when like because I remember like so many years ago with the video game
When they uh, when they brought back, uh, duck tails remastered. Yeah. Yeah, and like my immediate thought was all right cap
When you're doing uh darkwing duck remastered because I want this treatment and rescue rangers rescue rangers was a huge game for me
Yes. Yes. Yes. Rescue rescue rangers like like it wasn't one of my favorite series, but it was one of my favorite games
I will say that I loved uh, uh, uh, I loved rescue rangers. Oh, you know
Tailspin that was an awful game. We don't need to it's a horrible game
Absolutely horrible. Well our first um our first year of podcasting. We did a charity
Supposed to be an eight-hour stream. It turned into like a 10 a half hour stream
Where we played the entire disney afternoon collection. Um that was released by cap con
Yeah, and pirate took the first three games and then I took the last three
And he had tailspin and I gave him permission. I was like dude just quit
Just stop. This is miserable. Nobody wants to watch this. That's the that's the only game
I have not played on the collection because yeah, yeah, because like I
I needed that game. What?
It's a range quitter. You can't you can't enjoy it. I mean I I okay
My parents rented like I asked my parents to rent this game for me when I was a kid
And like and I remember we had it we had it at a weekend and my brother and I we probably played it for like maybe
Two hours like at most and like we were done and we're like we did not want to see this game again
We returned it back to I think we rented from Kroger either Kroger or blackbuster, which everyone had it
We retrieved we returned it immediately. We didn't care
Like they even like uh, they're like, oh, we can't offer you another game. We're like, we don't we just don't want to take it
Just take it. I don't want to and I still have like just horrible memories and like the fact that they couldn't even
Oh do another like sprite to have blue turned backwards instead his upside down where he looks like he's going to fall on another plane
Yeah, oh my god. No, that was just
I have very fond memories of uh, duck tails and rescue rangers
I honestly don't remember. I'm sure I did but I don't remember the dark wing duck game
Before I got the the collection
But I played it a lot since then
I like um when I got the collection and like I remember I streamed it back when I used to do streaming on twitch
uh, I remember I streamed it and it was like
Second nature for me again because like that was a game
I remember I got that I asked my parents for that for christmas
And they got it for me and like I played it like constantly and I was just able
I mean and that was the first time I played it. I want to say at least
15 years
I mean because I know I at least touched it when I was on emulator and then I remember I put it
I remember I hacked my uh
My nes mini uh to put dark wing duck in that in that one as well
So I know I played it again there
But like this is the first time I went from beginning to end and like I was able to like go through it and like not
Like wait, did you do that on the nes mini or on the collection on the collection?
Okay, because you got the rewind feature. I did not use the rewind feature. I hate that. No. No. Oh, no. I don't use
No, no. Hey, I want to watch you play it without the rewind because I can't do it. Oh, I can't do it. Oh, no
No, no, no, no. Oh, man. It's a hard game. No. No. It's not that hard
I don't like like okay. No dark wing duck dark wing duck and tucktails are not hard games
They are like duck tails. I agree. I those are like pretty easy games
Like I mean mega man is hard and like duck. Well dark wing is just mega man light
It reminds me a lot of mega man and I didn't beat a lot of mega man growing up either
No, I I mean my brother was a big mega man fan. So I played most of those games and I'm like the
Five and six. I think that's that's when I stopped
Did you catch the video game reference in the show? So and let's get dangerous. You had the arrows
Yeah, yeah, yeah, we had the arrows and it stuck to the walls
Yeah, that's from the game because you can you can use those in the game in the clock top
Yeah, because you had to there were some parts where like you had to do that. I remember that's how uh, uh,
Oh god, I already forget which villain was it. Um, wasn't quacker jack one of them
Oh, one of them like that was like you had to like kind of like, uh
Uh, because they electrified the floor and then you had to like stick the arrow on the wall to
Go on it. So that way you don't get hurt by the I don't know that I ever used the arrow
Um for any of the villains which is why you this is why you have you as your rewind feature. No, no
So listen
I said that I've played it a lot. I didn't say I beat it a lot
And it wasn't until recently when pirate steven streamed it that I learned you can change your ammo
I've been playing it with a regular ammo all along. That's why I was having such a hard time. You never like press the select button
Never did it didn't look at the book apparently. Well, again, I didn't play it on the NES
So I didn't have the book. I played it and the collection has the book in it. I just hadn't flipped through right, right, right
I think uh, uh, personal I mind my personal collection. I think I lost the book. Um, but I had like, uh,
I still had the I still have the game
I still think I have the game box, but I think that's in my parents house
That was a that was a cool design that was a very cool design
I loved it a lot and then they used it again on the game boy version
Like they just just made everything smaller. I never I until emulator. I never played the game boy
Version, but I never had a game boy either
It's it's a uh, it's an iconic image for dark wing duck. Yeah for sure. Yeah. Yeah, definitely
100% definitely
like uh, some other things
Some other things that caught me off guard from this from this episode was uh, I was not expecting
One of my favorite lines from the original duck tails to come up again
And that was a sea monster ate my ice cream a sea box that ate my ice cream
Yes, and here in david tenet do it
I would love for footage of that recording to come out. I would I would love for that too like in parts of me
I'm wondering if like they like hey
Like they showed him the episode like this is like what he was we want you to emu to emulate this
Yeah, I pulled up that episode
This past week for the kids to watch and I just you know, we randomly turn on you know
The shows on disney plus and so they didn't think anything of it and when that scene happened
Both of them looked at me with big eyes going
That's from let's get dangerous and I was like no, let's get dangerous got that from this
It's funny how kids like mines work. I like wait they got it from there like no no no no no no no
No, you see this came out like 20 years before
Yep. Yeah, it's it's a fun episode. It's one of those that I would recommend
We've had a lot of people recently ask us, you know recommendations of stuff to to watch before
let's get dangerous came out and
Just not one I considered
But it's a good one. It's a good one for it. Right. I love that they kept pulled that they did a good job of
I mean, it's not really balanced. It's more dark wing than it is ductiles
But they did a good job of rooting it in ductiles or grounding it in ductiles
No, bush root reference
They because you had dewy involved in the dark wing stuff and he really was an important aspect of that
Right, because he was the one like gosselin. I'm going to help you. I I want to help you. Let's do this
You know, he has his whole dewy this gauze
Conversation. Yeah, and
And meanwhile had he not been there they might have separated earlier
So it was nice to see that the ductiles characters were important to the story and then you know
We've got the the foul connections already and then we've got Scrooge there with the with Huey and Louie
Um, and then they get, you know trapped and imprisoned and all that and uh, so you get the characters involved throughout the story
Until about the second half and then the second half
Which is two episodes we've seen uh today
How they're splitting it up and you can see it once you get to about 21 50
You see an episode end and then it moves into the next episode
But it's seamless the way they're showing it right now
It's seamless the way to show it, but like, I mean, it's really clear once like the ramrod like activates
That yeah, that's that that that's cut like as soon as I saw it like up there
We're going to the second episode, but like it's very seamless
Yeah, they do a good job it um, you do get a reference once the second episode begins the second half
Where alson the new mayor of st. Canard
Who's a reoccurring well reoccurring guest character in ductiles? Okay
She's telling the story of what's been happening
And you really see that a lot of damages happened in st. Canards in a bad place
And then you get launch pads saying that drake has been up for days
So you get the indication that some time has passed right between that first half in the beginning of the second half
Yeah, yeah, yeah, definitely
Yeah, all and that's actually a really clever way to do it and it's not in your face how
Spider-man does it where he just narrates
Like I don't know if you watch like the marvel spider-man their latest series
But every time like we get lever time like uh
Every time he gets to like a second part of an episode like the first like two minutes
It's him like swinging and just narrating what's been happening and like I was like, okay
I know what you're doing here. You just don't want to do a recap, but you're doing a recap
Yeah, they just want to say this didn't take place in a few hours. There's some time has happened
This is the last event you saw and they do that they do that here
It's kind of seems I didn't catch it first couple times. I watched it right um except for I started thinking
Why is drake so tired right and and launch pad isn't and then you find out it's because he's not been sleeping
he's been he's been working with uh
Fenton Fenton. Yeah, he doesn't know it's good. He doesn't know it's good
Who he likes he likes finn. Yeah, he likes
I like when he's when he tells him he's like
Because that was one of the questions we had we were like, where's drake getting all the cash?
Because he's got this nice layer and all this stuff and then at the beginning of the episode
You learn that it's because Fenton's been helping him and been
Creating stuff and and providing stuff. So it's actually coming from Scrooge. I guess but then you um
He says uh, he's a great guy. He's he's wasted on that hack gizmo duck and between you and me
He doesn't like him
And and do he and launch pad know if fenton is gizmo duck. So they're going what?
It's great. I love that. I love their reaction
I will say the only the one thing that bothers me about uh fenton um is
The thing that's been bothering me ever since 2008 when uh,
When a when a small movie came out called iron man and and and they and they decided to
Make all that hud thing and then everyone's like hey everyone. We like this
We're gonna everyone's gonna do this hud thing and like which I never
Because it because you it makes you get that illusion like hey, there's so much space in there
Like no fendon's hair should be like squished in because he has like uh like it's it's one of those things like I mean
I love the iron man movie like like iron man is like one of my favorite comic characters
But I'm like I'm getting so tired of seeing this hud. I'm like, uh, it's it's one of my it's one of my pet peas
When I see it because everyone's doing it. It's not just yeah, at least they gave him the like goggles
Yeah, they gave him the goggles and like, you know, and they did almost a good job of like trying to keep his beak
Not on the goggles, but like I mean you see sometimes where sleep slips in there
I mean, it's just but still fendon's head doesn't work out in that helmet
Uh, I think it's it's our buddy brian danger did a really great image
Of of like showing how it fits in and uh, it's it's funny. It's comical
You know, uh, so I told him I'm talking about bushert. Um, so okay, uh, because you know
Uh, out of all the characters bushert had like probably the most radical, uh, design
Um, uh from them and it really looks like there's an episode of darkman dot called twin beaks where like he
Faisal becomes a zombie. Um, and that's what he kind of looks like. Uh, to me in this episode. Yeah, it's confirmed. Yeah
Okay. Um, now here's here's what I think. Um, I think the reason they chose this
Was because we've had we're already having like such a crowded
Um, like a voices already
And they're probably like, okay. We obviously they they wanted to do like, oh, let's get the fearsome four. Um
and
um
Technically should be fearsome five, but that's something I'll get into
Full allow it. Oh, yeah. Um, I'll I would have. Yeah. Um, but I just think they just uh, you know, and they've already doubled up on
Uh, on megavolt and liquid liquidator. Uh, the both being keep keep uh, vergan Ferguson
Uh, so I just think they just chose bushroot to be
like mute
just so
We can just avoid having
Another voice actor like and like, you know, it's kind of like a cheat
Yeah, I'm I'm sure that had something to do with it. I mean
Um, when we had the other three characters in that opening to beware the buddy system
Yeah, he was not there and a lot of us were commenting on that and talking about the fact that you know, we're missing two
Um, we just saw the three which was you know, it was cool in itself to see the three. Um, and uh,
There was something said about bushroot not being in it
And it was an indicator that we might get some bushroot and then of course with some of the promo images
He was included in that so we knew we were getting him, but he looked dead. I mean, he just he looked dead
And it reminded us of that twin beaks
Frank has said on tumblr
He has confirmed that that episode
I don't remember how he put it but scarred him as a child or it was, you know, really impactful
Seeing seeing bushroot dead
Right, um and and zombified and and all of that so he did indicate that that's kind of where some of that came from
and then um, they really wanted to play with an animalistic character
And so it allowed them to do that with the zombie bush
bushroot character and um, I mean it was fun. I liked it overall
Looking back on it. I would rather have had, you know, bushroot's one of those characters
I feel like as a villain he showed up quite a bit right in the original series and
A great voice of great um great character all around they were able to use him in a lot
I think that's why he was used so much. He was kind of versatile, but
right
He uh, but yeah, I I definitely believe it started off with the fact that oh, what do we do about his voice?
right and probably it probably was and uh
Something I did I did like, you know cracker jack is mike bell. Um, I thought that I thought that was pretty cool
Um, and you know mega volt sounded so much like him and it probably yeah
And uh, I mean maybe it was a tribute that uh, I already forget what uh bushroot's of
voice actors name is um, but uh, he passed away
What? Yes. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, I I I never can remember it either
And and you know real fans will give us a hard time for that. No, I know exactly
Now I'm getting a thumbs down right now
Yeah, people are people are clicking on that, but we have the wonders of the internet to help us. Um
Although it's not working for me right now apparently
Um, I mean it's um, I know the name and as soon as I think of it
And it starts with the tino and sauna. What tino there you go tino and sauna. Yeah, um
You know that's part that's part of doing something
You know on on uh, youtube you forget when you're on camera, right?
But yeah, the the voice actors no longer with us and so trying to find a replacement
Which nobody ever likes right and one of the things they were going for with the dark wing duck series
Is that it is the dark wing duck series that we love but in duck tales
Uh continuity so like launchpad grew up watching the same show we watched
Launchpad made me watch a lot of dark wing duck even in let's get dangerous. They reference episode numbers and titles
When they're talking about stuff and um
Yeah, it matched. Yeah, it matches up and then the cards that came in the vhs that launchpad has right those
Numbers on the cards match the characters episode
Um, or you know the their first episode the first episode. Yeah, right
So they wanted to keep that um that these are those characters and the only way they could do that
Is to either have the exact same voice get the voice actor or do something creative
And I think that's what they were going for because with duck tales 2017 any time they do their own version of a character
Um, they recast because they don't want like like with launchpad a lot of people, you know, we love terry mcgovern
Would love to see terry on the show
Right, um, but his launchpad is very different right from the launchpad of 2017
So i'm glad it's got it that he different and i think that's launchpad too
um, so
Just like that with the boys and scrooge and you've got everybody recast
When they're bringing in a new character or when they bring in a new version of an old character
They recast but with these four
Just like with jim starling with dark the classic dark duck. They went with the the classic voice actor when they could
um, and of course, we don't know the situation with megavolt why
Why keith ferguson did an impression, but um, it's a really good impression. No, it's a really great impression
And uh, something with a liquidator. I like that liquidator they kind of updated him
For like, you know, like the are now time because you know liquidator was like a tv person
and
And like now he's like, you know, he's doing like almost like a website
Like with his like one line he does like more of like a website, uh, kind of
Reference like, you know, like oh tell me ask me how we're doing like one of those like facebook ads
Yeah, yeah, I enjoyed that they did that
I wondered if they would do that because it's really iconic to the character
Right, um, and and it wasn't over the top though because I mean in most of his appearances
It's how he talks all the time, but he does have a conversation with bulba before he gets into it
It's really it's kind of his banter once he gets into fighting he starts doing it right right right exactly
I thought they did a good job. Um, but overall this episode was just excellent. I mean and um, you know, like I said
I'm hoping hoping we get a series like hopefully this will be like, hey, let's green like this
Yeah, I I think that's what they're trying to do. I feel like, um, you know, we've been hearing indicators for a long time now that it was a possibility
nothing of nothing
Nothing official from anyone behind the scenes, but stuff we've been hearing for years
It always made sense that it would happen and I've said on our podcast
A hundred times probably not a hundred times, but a lot that if it doesn't happen
I will be more surprised than if it does right and I I feel like at this point
I've moved beyond that to say it's happening
The only way it doesn't happen is if they say oh this this wouldn't work people aren't interested in it and I
I don't see that
People will watch this show. I think 100% I think people watch this show
I can tell you because you know on our youtube, uh
channel we've been posting the promos and
One of the promo or our promo that like almost like broker site
Was the how their halloween promo and that had that had images of dark moon duck and more people were talking about dark moon duck
They were they were of duck tails
Yep
Yeah, it's true and it being on youtube means that everybody can can see it. I mean even like
Um, you know, we're trying to share that link as often as possible and getting as many people to watch it as
You know at anybody interested. We think they should watch it, right?
Because it's a fun episode. It's a good standalone
You don't you don't really have to know who the duck tails characters are to get or you know who they are
I mean everybody knows who they are
but you don't have to know about them to get into the story because
Everything's summed up really well. All the characters are characterized really well
The art's phenomenal. There's just some really
Fluid great-looking scenes in this episode
Duck tails has great animation. Anyway, I know some people
Don't like the designs at times. I feel like dark wing duck moves away from the duck tails design quite a bit
I mean which he should right because the original disney afternoon dark wing duck was always very different from all the others
It was the first time they had like real action and fighting and then also the slapstick and kind of warner brothers like
goofiness and and
I really like some of the articles where uh frank and matt have had have um
explained how they tried to fit that into their new show
And really just kind of keep it where dark wings the one with the slapstick stuff and everybody else's
It doesn't but you do get that scene where launch pad lands on him
Well, everybody lands on him and then launch pad does and you get that really
Fabulous stretch animation and it's it's really good. Yeah. No, I totally agree with you
Um, I mean in the way the way that this episode ends and this episode really reminds me of
If you go if you remember those sitcoms like back in the day when they're like, hey
We're trying to push another show in this show
To be spinned off and like so our main characters are kind of like pushed off to the side
While while we get introduced to these other characters like who are these characters and then boom we have a lever and surely show
Oh, and like that's what this episode really reminds me of
The only thing I will say
uh, that I kind of wish like I didn't like the way it ended was
At the very last scene like, you know, like dark like, you know, darkering as as ray comes up to the goslin and he's like
Oh, I want you to join me and he he says I want you to join me as a
site
Yeah, yeah, I was like like a partner
Fine fighter crying fryer or something like that. He didn't say sidekick. Um, but like the side sidekick and
Uh, that was like the only thing if I had like the
If I could like change if or something like that, I would be like, I wish we had more of that
I want to adopt you like something like that. Um, I get that
Yeah, and like I just felt that this episode they were really going off for goslin's quiver and quack
uh
reference more than
Gosling, I mean in like in goslin goslin not goslin
and
And like, you know, like and I really wanted a hockey stick
Um, I really want a hockey stick in there and like there's no like, I mean, it's I loved her quiver and quack
I mean, is this the I want like I wanted more goslin than
that one
But they gave you stuff to look forward to they did
Whatever and and I think that was what they were attempting to do. Um, I'll get to my I do have one thing
I didn't like that that I'll get to um, but on what you said we've talked about it in our discord
Over at res tv. Yeah
We um, yeah, yeah, we're we're family podcasts. Yeah, exactly. We are
Yeah, so, um, but we were talking about in the discord. I like that that they did that
One I anticipated because when we interviewed frank, um in a previous episode of our podcast
I made the distinction that that I could see goslin being like a robin and he said
It's funny that you would say that because that's what we were going for so I expected that
She's more like a ward right now more like, you know, then then his daughter
But you also had a few times in the episode where you got that fatherly
Uh protection of her and he was trying to protect her one sec young lady young lady
If you're fighting crime under my roof and using my smoke bombs
So you will play by my rules and if you won't listen then you are staying here until this is all over
You can't make me you're not my family
Um, so I think it allows them to expand their relationship right now. They're more like
Crime fighting partners or maybe a brotherly sisterly relationship
But as they grow together, it's going to become more of a father daughter
And and I think that's cool because there's there's families that I know
Um with with adopted children where it started off like that for them, right?
Like they were maybe part of big brother big sister some some sort of organization and then
You know, they were able to to to grow and become a family later
And I think that's what we're going to see because families family and in
Ducktales, I mean that that's what that's what it's been about and Darkwing duck was definitely about family
So I think it just like you said, there's a lot of things the gas gun
We see it, but it's never used right and and so we never got that suck gas evil degrees, right?
So there's like I needed that in this episode, but I think it's being held back. We're going to get it later, right?
Darkwing without the gas gun just still seems odd to me
It was but that's that's not my big gripe because I still see I think it's coming
Maybe even before the end of Ducktales, but I still think it's coming. My biggest gripe was
They did it
they brought these characters back from the television show
Into present day and put them together and had Darkwing fight them only to send them back in the end
Oh, yeah, had them. They were there. Why send them back?
Right, right. That was that was my biggest gripe. I could definitely I can definitely see I can I definitely see that
and like
But I can see them they send them back
Only only just so we don't have that that that lingering thing. Hey, what about these villains?
Are you going to take care of them or something like that and so and but you know, but we can bring but they'll come back
When we get when darkwing has his own show
I love and maybe they will I love that scene where drake goes by himself to storm
um the the um
It's not a lair, but the to storm the McDuck building in st. Canard and he walks into the security frame
And he's just standing there looking at them menacingly and they're like
What's he what's he what's he doing? He's just standing there and they're like he's never done that before
What is he doing? He usually does this whole thing with smoke bombs in the speech. I've never seen him just
Stand there. Maybe it's a trick or a trap or
I thought that was great because these like even though
All of his history with them was from watching a show in memories
For them it was real history for them because we didn't really talk about it
But salego and his theory of all these stories that we tell are actually alternate universes that exist
These characters although they were on a show they exist in their own universe. That's true
With a real darkwing duck so for them they had history with the character even though he didn't have that same history
I thought that was a fun play and um
We talk about it a lot in our next podcast that should be out soon or might already be out
But we think salego, uh, who gets a drop gets a mention. He's from the disney afternoon adventures comics
Um, I think he's I think pirate steven has figured out that he's going to be a big part of the rest of the season
I think I think it's possible. It could be, you know, okay
Uh, before before we end this I just I have a gripe about salego. Um, because um, I
Like all right, because I know I know we're getting a repent of these comics
And like people are people are like going to be like all excited because you know most for most people is the first time they've read them
Oh, yeah, I've never read them. I never I did not like them
I mean
and the reason why is because
I expected to be a
team up like because they were like because um, that's how it was
Advertised uh to be and then like it was like one of those when I read it. I didn't realize
I didn't realize what it was
and because
No one actually teams up with each other. You just you have like the tailspin story and then after that you have like the
the
The uh chippendale then duck tails then uh, then dark wing. I think that's the order
I think because I believe it ends with dark wing. I could end with bunkers. I don't know. I can't remember
I mean, it's so forgettable. Um, and but is this that you just had this crystal
and this crystal would just possess people and it but like
Like but like they're but like uh, but people were advertising it like oh
It's the team up of like and this is no, this is this is like your tgif. Um, like hey
Hey, there's a hurricane going on. There's a hurricane and like you're just named wrapping like places off the house
Yeah, exactly. Exactly. Yeah. Yeah. So instead of like urkel going into a full house. They just you know
Just said hey, I just got this package from chicago
Yeah
That's my only crap about that
But if anyone could take the essence and what everybody was excited about with uh and make it good
It's the duck tails crew. I I believe they will
I believe that if they can like if they can make a salego like actually like what I wanted
And like I actually have like the people, you know, we we've seen we've we've seen dark wing
We've seen chippendale. We we also had like uh, but was um the guy from duck from the tailspin
What's that guy's name? Uh, uh donkronar donkronar like so. So, you know, we already have like
Like four of the main shows already together in this one show
So, you know, if they can bring him and then actually like have it like what I was wanting
That'd be awesome. Yeah
Right, we we think so pirate's got a pretty good idea. I'm gonna wait and let him
Because it's his and I know I'm like in my mind
It's been cranking ever since we recorded the beginning of the week
And so I've got my own ideas rolling around of what they could do. I think foul
Here's here's one thing. Yeah, I think foul may not be the villains right now
At least bradford the head of foul and that
What if Scrooge is the villain and doesn't realize it? Oh, oh man
Yeah, uh, you know, that would be really cool. I don't see that but that would be really cool
I just 100% I just don't see that. I um only only because of the audience that the show was attended for
um, right and like, you know, oh
Like maybe he's an accidental villain, but I know that's what I'm saying. Yeah. No, that's what I'm saying 100%
Because with the host salego stuff. Yeah, what if his adventuring what if bradford's afraid scrooge is going to unlock this
And that that could destroy the world just like with the ramrod right and scrooge
Instead of he feels like it would just be a challenge to scrooge
So he's trying not to stop him but to behind the scenes stop him, right?
I think it could get pretty deep. We'll see it is a kid's show
It is kid's show and I because like I know a lot of people trying to grasp the straws
I'm like, oh man, this this this this and then and then you you have the grounded reality
Don't forget who the audience is. We're not the audience
It can't be it can't be too complicated
But I think I think they could understand what
I'm thinking could happen. Um, then again, salego may just be a one-time reference and we never hear about him again
It could be it really could be I
If it wasn't for your site, I would have missed that uh reference altogether
I did until he brought it up and I and we were because we were covering the fact that phantographics is launching this and I was like
Man, that would work really well in duck tails. And he was like, let me tell you what I think's happening. I was like, oh
Man, that would be awesome. Um, and who knows who knows what happens
Darkwing duck, let's get dangerous on duck tails 10 out of 10 in my book
The things that I didn't like about it. Do not overshadow anything that I loved about it. No, no, no
At the end at the end of the episode the only thing that made me more sad
Was the fact that I know that next week is just a regular duck tails episode
But
Without giving you any spoilers because I know you don't want them. Right. It does
There are consequences from this episode that we will fill in the next episode. Gotcha
Okay, at least that's something I can I can look forward to but yeah
But I'm just saying the only thing that this show does whenever we get darkwing is it just makes me sad that we don't have a
Darkwing show because like they keep one upping each other
Unupping the episodes and this is like let uh, duck the duck night returns was like my favorite episode for the longest time
Now this is my favorite episode
Yep, absolutely. I agree. Yeah. All right, Mitch. Thank you so much for joining me. Thank you for your time. This is incredible
Love talking about it. Yes, it was lots of fun. Love talking about darkwing dug-in. Thank you for giving me this
So
