What we call the physical world is nothing but a headset inside consciousness.
So to just see how dramatic the change is, most of us, myself included,
have to think of ourselves as tiny little objects in a vast spacetime.
Billions of light years across, you know, the nearest galaxy is 2.4 million light years away,
and that's the nearest galaxy, and they go off.
So I'm just this little tiny, tiny, trivial little chunk of matter
in this vast billions of light years across universe, spacetime.
That's the way I think.
And now what I'm realizing is the other way around.
Spacetime is a tiny little data structure in my consciousness,
and I create it on the fly as I need.
So that's how outrageous what I'm saying is.
To be very, very explicit, and maybe to shock people,
I'm a cognitive neuroscientist, but I'll say this.
Neurons do not exist when they're not perceived,
because nothing inside spacetime exists when it's not perceived.
Spacetime itself does not exist when it's not perceived.
It is only a data structure that exists when you create it in your consciousness.
That's the shocking, and that's what I've been having a difficult time
emotionally wrapping myself around.
Intellectually, I'm there.
The math has completely convinced me.
Our best science convinced me this is true.
We'll see when my emotions come along for the ride.
Donald, welcome to the show.
Thank you very much, Neil.
Thanks for having me.
What would you say the central question that's been driving your research
the past few decades has been?
Ah, well, I guess a couple little intertwined themes.
One is, do we see reality as it is?
Because my background is in visual perception, and perception more generally.
So that's a really interesting question.
What is the relationship between perception and reality?
And the other interacting theme is, what is consciousness,
and how is conscious experience related to everyday life in the physical world,
and neuroscience?
So those have been the two big themes that I've been pursuing,
and they turn out that they seem to be interacting.
The answer to one seems to affect the answer to the other.
You're pursuing a couple of quite easy questions there, I have to say.
What's underneath this search?
Before we started recording, you mentioned you come from quite a religious,
you grew up in quite a religious background.
What's been underneath this desire for truth and this search?
Yes, my father was for several years a fundamentalist Christian minister.
Holy Ghost, Holy Roller kind of thing.
And so I was exposed to that.
And but then at school I was being exposed to science classes,
and they were saying contradictory things.
In a church, the earth was 4,000 years old, in science class,
it was millions or billions of years old.
And that's not easy to reconcile.
And so I realized that there was this big conflict.
And as a teenager, it's hard to, at least for me,
it was hard to figure out how to reconcile these two things.
But I decided that I needed to do that.
And I wanted to understand the nature of consciousness
and the nature of human beings, are we just machines?
That came to be the question that I formulated for myself.
Are we just machines or is there something more?
The spiritual side seemed to say there was something more.
The science seemed to say we're just machines.
And so I thought that's, if the science convinced me that we're just machines,
then maybe the spiritual stuff is, there's not much to save there.
But if there's something about us that's beyond machines,
then that's interest.
It doesn't mean the spiritual side that I was taught was right,
but it means that there could be some parts of it that could be saved.
And so that was the question I was asking myself as a teenager.
Are we just machines?
And I was taking programming classes.
This was back when programming was fairly brand new.
I started programming in 1974.
And so that was, we had to use, we didn't even have punch cards.
We had to use cards that we bubbled in by hand with pencils and so forth.
But I wrote progress.
So I was aware of the programming.
And then I worked at Hughes Aircraft as an undergraduate at UCLA.
I worked at Hughes Aircraft, programming military microprocessors in machine code.
Again, starting off with punch cards, but eventually the miracle of floppy disks came around.
So I was into the computer and I realized that it was artificial intelligence
was what I really needed to understand.
Could we build human AIs that were equivalent to us, that were us?
And so I found out about research going on at MIT in the artificial intelligence lab
and with David Maher.
And of course, Marvin Minsky was the head of the lab.
And it was an incredible group there.
So I was fortunate enough to go to MIT in 1979, be in the artificial intelligence lab.
And also was now the brain and cognitive science department.
So I was looking at the human side with the neuroscience and the machine side
with the artificial intelligence, as were many other people.
That's what MIT was doing.
And so that was how I would begin to try to tackle this problem.
Are we just machines?
And intellectually, you have to be honest yet.
You just have to say, I don't know.
And let's go wherever the science and logic lead us.
One thing I could not do was something I had been taught in the spiritual,
in my particular spiritual training.
I'm not saying this is true of all spiritual training,
but in my particular spiritual training was we were taught that we had been told the absolute truth
and you should not listen to anything else.
And I knew that that couldn't be right, that wasn't right.
So I needed to take a more open mind and say,
sure, I need to listen to what the spiritual side says,
but there's no absolute truth here.
So that was the one thing where I clearly departed from what I've been taught.
And I think it was absolutely critical to you have to think for yourself
and go wherever the evidence, reason, and logic will take you.
And so I did that and did my PhD at MIT on a specific problem.
You can't just tackle the big, big questions.
You're not going to get your PhD because you won't get anything done.
So I tackled the question of how do we see in 3D and recognize objects?
I tackled one aspect of that, seeing in three dimensions and recognizing objects, which
is, of course, still an interesting and open problem to get self-driving cars.
That's what we need.
Are computers that can see through cameras and see in 3D and recognize what they're doing
so they don't run over people and don't run into parked cars on the road and so forth.
So I was grappling with that problem in my dissertation.
But what I realized was that doing that gave me a real deeper understanding
of the mathematics that underlies perception.
Most of us have no idea what's going on under the hood when you just open your eyes
and look around you.
It looks like, well, you just take a picture of what's out there.
How hard could it be?
It's a camera.
It takes a picture.
Well, give me breaks.
There's nothing to it.
Well, if that's all there was to it, we would have self-driving cars already that could see
and we wouldn't be having the slow rollout of autonomous vehicles that we're having.
Much, much slower than people expected.
It's really, really hard.
And then when you realize that you have billions of neurons and trillions of synapses
that are involved just in vision.
Again, that's not just a camera.
That's pretty expensive piece of hardware that's working there.
So that wakes you up to what's going on.
That it's not just a picture-taking process.
In some sense, a construction process.
You're getting an image at the eye,
which, your eye has maybe 130 million photoreceptors.
The same thing, but it's like 130 megapixel camera.
But if you look at the output of the camera, it's just a bunch of numbers.
You don't see a person riding a bicycle and tables and chairs.
You just see a bunch of numbers.
It's this bright at this location.
It's this color at this location.
You've got to take all those numbers and turn it into a visual world that you can actually navigate.
So that's the real trick.
So I came to terms with how much is going on there that it's a construction process,
not just a mere photographic process.
And then that raised the question, oh, if it's a construction process,
how accurate is the construction?
Is it a reconstruction of reality?
Or is it a de novo construction that maybe is unrelated to objective reality?
And the latter seemed unlikely to me, but I just needed to prove it.
And I just needed to understand, OK.
So of course, the idea was we reconstruct reality.
That was what I was taught.
That's what we believed at MIT, that it's a construction process,
but it's a reconstruction of reality.
But then as I started thinking about evolution and other things,
I began to wonder about that.
Evolution does things on the cheap, fast and cheap.
You're trying to save calories and save time.
So you're going to use heuristics and shortcuts.
You're going to cheat.
And so maybe the idea then was, well, maybe we cheat sometimes,
but most of the time on the important stuff, we're reconstructing reality.
So I thought about that.
And I went back and forth, and I finally came to the conclusion
that it seemed unlikely with what I knew about perception research
and from the AI point of view that any of our constructions were the truth.
But in 2008, I decided I need to settle this with evolution.
I need to actually ask a technical question.
What is the probability that evolution of a natural selection
has shaped any sensory system of any organism
to ever see any aspect of objective reality truly?
What's the probability of that?
Clean technical question.
And when Darwin formulated his theory in the 19th century,
he didn't formulate it as a mathematical theory.
So Darwin couldn't have answered that question with mathematical precision.
But John Maynard Smith and others in the 1970s took Darwin's ideas and
used evolution, what they came up with was evolutionary game theory,
used game theory and evolution together to create the field of evolutionary game theory.
A very, very powerful mathematical theory.
So Darwin's ideas are now mathematically precise.
And so we can now ask the technical question,
what's the probability that any sensory system has been shaped to see the truth,
some aspect of the truth at all?
And I went into it thinking, well,
probably there'll be problems because
getting the truth takes a lot of time and a lot of calories.
So we're probably going to be doing things cheaply and quickly.
And so we'll probably be approximating the truth,
but not really getting the truth.
That was sort of what I expected going into it.
And I got a couple of wonderful graduate students,
Brian Marion and Justin Mark, to work with me and some others.
I mean, Chetan Prakash and others worked with me and Manish Singh.
So it's not just me.
It was a bunch of group of people with mathematics.
And we went at it.
And what we discovered when we actually did the mathematics and the simulations was,
sure, there are selection pressure to do things fast and cheap.
And that will compromise reality.
But that wasn't the real, what we discovered was this, the payoff functions.
In evolution, you think about it as like a game.
And as you're playing the game, you're competing with others.
And the point of this game is to, as reproductive success, right?
You don't get to the next level of the game yourself,
but your offspring, your genes go to the next level of the game if you succeed.
And so the idea was that there are these payoff functions that govern,
effectively, how many points you get in the game of life.
And if you get more points than the competition,
then you have a greater probability of having offspring in the next generation.
So it was the payoff functions that are the critical thing.
And if you're going to be shaped to see the truth,
then the payoff functions must have information about that truth,
if they're going to shape you.
So that became the clean technical question.
What's the probability that a fitness payoff function
has information about structures that could be in the world,
like now it gets a little mathematical, like total orders, partial orders,
metrics, topologies, measurable structures.
There are all sorts of mathematical structures
that you could imagine that the world has.
And in each case, you can ask the technical question,
what's the probability that a randomly chosen payoff function
would actually have what we call homomorphism,
contain information about that structure?
And the answer is zero.
The probability is zero.
In case after case, you look at it, the probability is zero.
And in fact, even for things that are sort of close to homomorphisms,
in many cases, the probability is vanishingly small.
So that was a shock to the system.
We haven't been shaped to see the truth.
And that shock then has reverberations for the problem of consciousness.
Because what it means is what we're perceiving,
when we perceive a spatial temporal world of 3D of space,
one dimension of time,
and we're seeing physical objects in space and time and so forth,
we're not seeing reality as it is.
With probability one, we're not seeing reality as it is.
That is, if you buy Darwin's theory.
And that means that space time isn't fundamental.
Space time is just a form of our perceptions.
And physical objects inside space time aren't fundamental.
They also are just, the way I think about it now,
is it's like a virtual reality headset that evolution gave us
to play the game of life.
Right?
If you're trying to play a game,
like VR, Grand Theft Auto or something like that with your friends,
what you're really doing in this metaphor
is you're toggling millions of voltages in some supercomputer.
Right?
But if you had to do that,
if you had to toggle the voltages in the precise sequence,
you couldn't win the game.
You would lose the game.
Someone who just has a virtual reality headset
with a steering wheel and dashboard and gas pedal and so forth
is going to win over someone who sees the truth
and is toggling voltages.
And so I think what evolution is teaching us is
what we evolved was not an insight into truth,
but a VR headset.
Space time is our headset.
So instead of consciousness and its physical substrate,
which is which most conscious researchers are thinking about,
is consciousness and its physical substrate,
I think about it as consciousness and its physical headset.
And that's a complete change because if the brain
is the physical substrate of consciousness,
that means the brain is fundamental,
something not conscious is fundamental
and consciousness is arising out of it.
But if we take evolution of a natural selection seriously,
then the brain is merely an icon in our headset.
It's not the truth and it has no causal powers.
So I'm a cognitive neuroscientist.
I love neuroscience and I study neuroscience
and I've done joint work on fMRI and EEG studies of the brain
and then lots of computational modeling and so forth.
I'm very much into the brain and I love cognitive neuroscience
and I think it needs more funding
because it's far more complicated than we thought.
We thought when we look in brains,
we see neurons and synapses and there's 86 billion neurons
and roughly the same number of glial cells
and trillions of synapses.
That's complicated but it turns out that's trivial
compared to what's beyond it.
That's just a VR headset to something deeper.
What we, the neurons are just the headset version
of a deeper reality that we as scientists need to understand.
So we need more money for neuroscience,
not less because we're just scratching the surface
of what's going on when we look inside brains.
So that changes the whole game for consciousness
because my friends and colleagues,
and I'm friends with most of the people in this field
or colleagues certainly, or studying consciousness,
most of them assume that physical systems like brains or AIs
with the right either functional or functional properties
or causal structure and so forth,
that's substrate with the right causal structure
or functional properties.
Somehow the unconscious system gives rise to consciousness.
Like the unconscious system of neurons in the brain
and whatever pattern of activity they have,
whether it's a causal thing or a functional thing,
that gives rise to consciousness.
And what I'm saying is our best science,
evolution of a natural selection,
is telling us that space time isn't fundamental
and objects inside space time are simply icons
in the VR headset that we're somehow creating.
So that whole approach now, which is the approach
that I first thought was the right approach.
I mean, I went into the field thinking,
we're going to find the neural basis of consciousness.
I now think that that's, it's not going to work.
Now, of course, I think we need to study neuroscience
and we need to study the neural correlates of consciousness.
Absolutely, I'm all for that.
But the direction of explanation is going to go the other way.
Instead of explaining consciousness in terms of neurons,
we're going to be having to have a theory of consciousness itself
that explains why we see things that we call neurons
and glial cells when we look inside what we call brains.
So it's going to have to go the other way.
So again, I'm a small minority.
I would say 98, 99% of my colleagues and friends
who are studying consciousness are physicalists, functionalists,
or like in the case of IIT, they're saying
some kind of substrate, some physical substrate
with some kind of causal structural organization
that somehow then is either gives rise to
or is identical to, explanatorily identical to consciousness.
And I'm saying there is no substrate to consciousness,
no physical substrate to consciousness.
What we call the physical world is nothing but a headset inside consciousness.
So to just see how dramatic the change is,
most of us, myself included, have to think of ourselves
as tiny little objects in a vast space time, billions of light years across.
The nearest galaxy is 2.4 million light years away
and that's the nearest galaxy and they go off.
So I'm just this little tiny, tiny, trivial little chunk of matter
in this vast billions of light years across universe space time.
That's the way I thought.
And now what I'm realizing is the other way around.
Space time is a tiny little data structure in my consciousness
and I create it on the fly as I need.
So that's how outrageous what I'm saying is.
It's not small.
Sorry, I just want to quickly ask there, Donald.
How has that changed in perception, changed how you felt in the world?
Because that's a massive flip on understanding who you are.
Well, it's caused a big conflict in me because
we're all just born knowing that we're little tiny objects in a big space time.
That's the reality that we just know we are.
There's no question about it and in fact Piaget talks about object permanence.
Little children, he thought at 18 months they get object permanence.
Later research showed it's more like three or four months.
We're born to believe that objects exist whether or not they're perceived.
My teddy bear when you put it behind a pillow still exists
and I believe that there's nothing that disappears in reality when it disappears from my sight.
And so letting go of object permanence is letting go of something I was wired to believe
at four months of age.
So it's not trivial.
So what I find is really interesting to see in myself when I'm thinking clearly about it
and I look at our best theories of evolution and I'll mention physics in a moment
because I'm treading on their territory clearly.
So I'll talk about what the physicists say but when I look at what our best science is saying
it looks to me like yeah, spacetime is not fundamental
and therefore objects in spacetime do not create my consciousness.
It must be the other way around.
But when I am not thinking my natural reaction is to go back and I'm just a little tiny 160
pound body in spacetime and I'm you know and what I see is the truth and so forth.
So it's really so I do meditate and that's helping me to let go of my prior assumptions
but I must say they don't go quietly.
So when people look at what I say and say that's complete nonsense I say I completely agree.
It feels like nonsense to me too.
Emotionally it feels like complete nonsense what I'm saying but that's what science is about.
Science is taking our best ideas making them absolutely precise
and then following wherever it leads even if we don't like where it leads
and so that's what we have to do.
And just to emphasize what we're essentially saying here is that if you accept
evolution and mathematics as true if you accept those two things as true then you also
have to accept or not have to accept but it's also true that the reality we see is an illusion.
We're not actually seeing what's there.
Is that fair to say?
Yeah I would yes and I would just make a slight thing.
I don't need to claim that evolution is true.
All I need to do is say it's the best theory we have so far.
If you accept evolution then you have to accept this as well.
Evolution entails this.
Now I should say that there is an issue that's been raised by philosophers
that I should mention here.
So a number of philosophers and I won't mention them by name I don't want to impugn anybody
have published papers where they say that what I've just argued is logically self-contradictory
and the argument they give is this.
They say Le Coffman is saying that he's used evolutionary game theory to show that
space-time and its physical objects are not fundamental.
What we see is just an illusion is not fundamental reality.
Now Darwin's theory assumes that objects in space-time like organisms and resources are fundamental.
That's what his theory assumes.
So he's assuming that space-time and its physical objects are fundamental.
Now the argument that philosophers give is this.
Either the mathematics of evolutionary game theory faithfully represents Darwin's ideas
or it does not.
Now if it does not then Hoffman of course wouldn't want to use it to try to prove anything about
what it Darwin's theory entails.
And if evolutionary game theory mathematics does faithfully represent Darwin's ideas
then it couldn't possibly contradict his assumption that physical objects like organisms
and resources exist and are real.
So either way Hoffman's shot himself in the foot logically.
What they like to say is he's in an unfortunate dialectical situation
but basically he's so stupid he shot himself in the foot logically.
So and this is more than one philosopher has actually published this argument.
So this is and I think then other philosophers have talked with say yeah I buy that argument.
So here's why the argument is false.
It misunderstands scientific theories.
What is a scientific theory?
Scientific theory says please grant me these assumptions
and if you grant me these assumptions then I can explain all this other wonderful stuff.
Very very simple assumptions and then explanations.
What this means is there cannot possibly be a scientific theory of everything
because you don't explain your assumptions you assume them you don't explain them.
So now you can say well I can give you a new deeper theory that explains the assumptions of your
previous theory.
Yes you can and your new theory will have its own new assumptions and this goes on ad infinitum.
So this is horrible news for those who want a theory of everything in science.
There is no such thing.
It's great news for job security for scientists.
It means that we will never ever be done.
We will always be building new theories and what this means about any scientific theory
is that it has if it's a good theory it has a certain scope of explanation
but it also means that it will have definite limits.
No scientific theory is a theory of everything so it will have limits.
So a good theory gives you the mathematical tools to explore its scope.
A great theory gives you the mathematical tools to discover its limits.
So Einstein's theory of spacetime both special and general relativity.
One of the key ideas is that you know the speed of light is the same for all observers
and the laws of physics are the same in all reference frames.
And and so Einstein is using his assumption is that spacetime is fundamental either flat
spacetime or curved spacetime but spacetime is fundamental and then he writes down all sorts
of interesting equations the Lorentz transformations on the one in the flat space and you know the
equations of general relativity in the curve.
Now you might say okay well is Einstein's theory just a good theory or is it a great
theory? Does it have the tools to actually show the limits of the very concept of spacetime itself?
It turns out to Einstein's dismay it's a great theory.
What we what we discovered is that Einstein's theory together with just another thing that
Einstein came up with you know energy is proportional to the frequency of a particle
entails that that spacetime falls apart at 10 to the minus 33 centimeters and 10 to the minus 43
seconds at the Planck scale. So Einstein's own mathematics is good it tells you the scope the
incredible scope of his mathematics of spacetime. Sorry Donald can I just ask you to sort of
confirm what you mean by space time falls apart at at that figure what does that actually mean
that that it falls apart at that scale? It means that spacetime has no operational meaning there's
no experiment that you can do that would have any outcome if you're trying to measure things
that's smaller than 10 to the minus 33 centimeters or 10 to the minus 43 seconds. So so and the
problem is this as you go to smaller and smaller scales of space how do you do that well you have
to get bigger and bigger microscopes try to look smaller and smaller but what does that mean it
means that you're effectively using smaller and smaller wavelengths of light or some kind of
radiation but let's talk about light you have to get the wavelengths smaller and smaller and
smaller to resolve smaller and smaller things in spacetime and that's fine quantum mechanics
allows you to do that but but Einstein told us that e equals h nu as you get the smaller smaller
wavelengths the energy is going up then Einstein also told us the energy equals mass so the mass
is going up you're getting more and more energy therefore more and more mass inside a smaller
and smaller region of space and then general relativity kicks in and gives you a black hole
at some point and so at that when you get to 10 to the minus 33 centimeters the very thing you're
trying to say measure some tiny tiny particle well by the time you get to 10 to minus 33 centimeters
you destroy whatever you're trying to measure you turn it into a black hole and if you get frustrated
and say well i'm going to try to smaller wavelength and put more energy into it the black hole just
gets bigger and bigger and bigger so so spacetime there's literally no meaning that you can give
to 10 to the minus 36 centimeters has no meaning there's nothing you can do there it literally has
no operational meaning so Einstein's own mathematics that Einstein himself wrote down
to model his intuitions about spacetime come back and tell us the limits of
Einstein's very fundamental concept of spacetime itself it says that concept is fine as long as
you're dealing with stuff bigger than 10 to the minus 33 centimeters at 10 to the minus 33 centimeters
and smaller spacetime falls apart is by the way that's pretty shallow it's 10 to the minus 33
centimeters not 10 to the minus 33 trillion centimeters just 10 to the minus 33 centimeters so
spacetime it turns out an Einstein's theory is a very very shallow data structure a very really
shallow data structure but this is how science works you take your intuitions you turn them into
a mathematical theory if the theory is a good theory it allows you to explore the scope of the
theory like gps comes out of you know the the technology ps depends on certain features of
Einstein's theory of general relativity but if it's a great theory then the theory will actually
give you the tools to find the limits of that theory so so now to come back to the the philosophers
arguments against me they're saying again their argument is it you know hoppins using the mathematics
of evolutionary game theory to show that the very fundamental concepts of jarwin cannot be fundamental
in in they're they're gonna have to let go of those at some point they're not fundamental to the
nature of reality and they're saying i'm shooting myself in the foot you couldn't possibly do that
and what i'm saying is no what you're missing is this is the way science works the good science
takes mathematical theories and and uses the mathematics to find the limits of those theories
so that we don't get stuck in a rut with with one theory it allows us to go beyond so so i'm not
shooting myself in the foot i'm just doing what science has to do now what the old theory can't
do is tell you what you should do next once you've found the limit and once we know that
spacetime isn't fundamental and you say okay so well what's outside of spacetime and what could
that even possibly mean to say that there's something outside of spacetime isn't everything
inside spacetime what is what could you possibly be meaning well spacetime itself isn't going to
tell you because spacetime has its set of assumptions namely that spacetime is fundamental
well what you're now questioning is that you're saying spacetime isn't fundamental so i've got
to step outside of einstein's set of concepts to get a new set of concepts and the restriction
then will be whatever new theory i come up with it has to give me back einstein's theory of spacetime
as some special projection and by the way uh physicists are already doing this so the european
research council in the last few months announced a 10 million euro project called universe plus
and it's the goal of that is to find the new mathematical framework for for physics
and the framework they're saying beyond spacetime and beyond quantum mechanics and the reason they're
doing this is that roughly 10 years ago 11 years ago they discovered these structures called positive
they call positive geometries entirely outside of spacetime entirely beyond quantum mechanics
there are no hilbert spaces in these structures so there's no quantum mechanics there's no hilbert
spaces but they give rise to the right answers to scattering experiments like you know particles
in the large hadron collider smashing into each other you know glueland smashing in and glueland
spraying out and so forth you get the right answers the math becomes much easier when you let go of
spacetime math can not not not say this easy but much much easier than when you do it in spacetime
and you see new symmetries so they've been discovering just in the last decade physicists
have been and i should say high energy theoretical physicists many physicists who aren't high energy
theoretical physicists don't even know about this i mean i've talked with many quantum theorists for
example who simply don't know about this so it's a small branch but it's the it's those physicists
who were physicists who are dealing with the edges of spacetime's abilities right the high
energy theoretical physicists are the ones who are probing physics where spacetime starts to
fall apart and so they're the ones that are moving out to these new structures beyond spacetime
called positive geometries and something called decorator permutations so so it's not just some
cognitive scientists saying we need to do this the erc is funding this to the tune of ten million
euros they had in february their first meeting with over a hundred mathematicians and mathematical
physicists on board to launch this new field of positive geometries outside of spacetime so yes
we can go outside of spacetime it seems like ridiculous what what could you even be talking
about i've i've mentioned this to people and they have no idea what i'm even talking what what could
possibly be meant by something outside of spacetime spacetime is everything nope that's a conceptual
dead end thinking of spacetime everything is a conceptual dead end we can in fact use mathematics
and go entirely outside of spacetime and just to emphasize what we're talking about here in your
last conversation with us with annalseth as well you mentioned that what would have taken pages and
pages and pages of mathematical equations using the framework of quantum quantum physics or spacetime
you can get the same result or a better result using um like maybe a few lines of of
correct equations one page four four or five terms on a page that you can write down by hand
and compute by hand the other you couldn't even do it with supercomputers this you can do by hand
that's pretty crazy so and the implications in for consciousness are
all almost all of my colleagues
are assuming that spacetime is fundamental and that objects in spacetime are fundamental
they're looking for a physical substrate in spacetime that's prior to consciousness
now it may be prior in the sense that it has the right causal structures as an integrated
information theory or it might be prior in the sense that it has the right functional properties
as most as most physical histories are but in any case they're they're what they're assuming
either an integrated information theory or you know global workspace theory or
higher order theories or orchestrated collapse of quantum states of neuromicubules like
penrose and hemorrhoff these theories are all assuming that spacetime and certain physical
substrates or objects inside spacetime are fundamental and consciousness emerges and
and that now is simply ignoring what physics has revealed spacetime is not fundamental and the
substrates namely the physical objects inside spacetime are not fundamental and
ERC is and hundreds of brilliant high energy theoretical physicists are now finding these
new structures beyond spacetime the field of consciousness studies is now lagging behind
we are basing all of our research on a outmoded model of reality it's just it's gone
so there's no hope of booting up consciousness from neural activity or or from the causal
structure of substrates inside spacetime or the functional properties of substrates inside
spacetime it's not possible why because spacetime itself is merely a trivial and shallow
data structure and the objects inside of it for example what are particles when you ask what is
a physical particle like you know a quark by bosons leptons and quarks the the elementary
particles of the standard model physicists will tell you that they're just irreducible representations
of the group of symmetries of spacetime if you give me a spacetime
if symmetries dictate the properties of its particles and what the particles are
so the particles themselves what when when spacetime is doomed so are the particles because
they're they're just representations of the symmetries of spacetime so we're trying to boot
up consciousness from the particles you know complicated assemblies of particles that are
just representations of a spacetime that is itself a shallow data structure not the truth
so the whole enterprise of of trying to build consciousness from some physical substrate
either a causal substrate or a functional substrate is doomed and the physicists are the ones who are
telling us that and and i'm saying also that evolution by natural selection darwin's theory
agrees when you use evolutionary game theory it agrees so the the main pillars of modern science
you know high energy theoretical physics quantum field theory together with Einstein's theory of
gravity and then darwin's theory of evolution by natural selection are both tell our there are
greatest theories because in some sense they they have the mathematics it tells us spacetime
was a wonderful framework for centuries and it's over it's time to get a new and deeper
framework and for better or for worse what i'm trying to do is get a mathematical model of
consciousness while consciousness outside of spacetime and my goal is to show that so it's
like a a social network of interacting consciousnesses so so the mathematics is is network theory
very much it's all about networks the mathematics of networks and stochastic processes on networks
that's that's the the work that we're doing and what we're trying to do is show mathematically
that the positive geometries and the decorated permutations that the high energy theoretical
physicists have found outside of spacetime actually are projections of the network properties of an
even bigger dynamics of consciousness so the physicists are going from spacetime outward
and they're finding when we when we take off the spacetime headset what do we see we see
positive geometries well who ordered that this this little green we take off our headset and what
do we see it's like in 2001 a space Odyssey that the movie right where there's an obelisk and all
the apes are hooting and hollering and pounding on you know they know it's important it's really
pregnant with me but they have no idea what it means well that's where we are we've we've taken
off our headset we look outside of spacetime what do we see obelisks these geometric objects
these geometric objects they're static geometric that's these positive geometries
really like the amplitude hedron the associate hedron cosmological even poly like polytopes and
so forth these are like obelisks outside of spacetime that and they're sitting there well
you know sort of staring at us silently and what do they mean the the physicists you know there's
no dynamics it's just these objects sitting there who ordered that and then these permutations the
decorated permutations that classify the objects so what we're saying is well we need a dynamical
system outside of all of this yeah how about a network of conscious agents interacting we've
made the map we've made the map into the um the decorated permutations we're working on the positive
geometries a lot of this revolves around your theory of conscious agents as well what is a
conscious agent in like in really simple terms like why would you describe that to someone
hearing that for the first time that's right so so our proposal then is that spacetime is doomed
so spacetime can't boot up consciousness why don't we start with consciousness being fundamental
let's have a theory where consciousness is fundamental no substrates no substrates whatsoever
consciousness just is the fun so if you're thinking about making a theory of consciousness
you might say well you know there's lots of stuff that that theory has to do a lot of there's
qualia there's choice there's learning memory problem solving intelligence the self
there's tons and tons of stuff what are you going to do how do you how do you build a theory of
consciousness that's not you know coming you know emerging from some substrate either causally or
functionally so what we are doing is what you have to do with any science pick the minimal
minimal assumptions because the more you assume the less you explain so you want you know this is
Occam's razor do with as little as possible so we chose two things there are experiences
so we're just saying there are the taste of chocolate the smell of garlic the color red
that's our fundamental furniture of the universe of our universe not a space not a spacetime
universe something the universe outside of spacetime there are there are experiences
um and experiencers you know having those experiences and there are probabilistic
relationships among experiences that's it what if i experienced red what's the probability
there might experience green next that's it no notion of self learning memory problem solving
intelligence in any we don't assume any of that just so if people want to see the math we have a
paper called objects of consciousness you just google objects of consciousness the math is there
also fusions of consciousness you know they're free online so you can see what what we're doing
and it turns out that we get a social network of well interacting consciousness the
for all just say one sentence of math for those who want a little bit of beef
the we measure we model the spaces of possible experiences with problem probability spaces
measurable spaces and the interactions you know the probabilistic interactions among
experiences with marcovian kernels so and and it turns out our network model is computationally
universal so it means even though we don't assume learning memory problem solving and so forth we
can build models of agents that only have our two little assumptions experiences and probabilistic
relationships among experiences we can build models of learning memory what anything you can do with
neural nets you can do with conscious agent nets they're they're equally powerful as as neural
nets so we have networks of conscious agents but the key difference is neural nets are inside
spacetime they're networks of physical objects inside spacetime conscious agent networks are
networks of consciousnesses that have no physical substrate and are entirely outside
of spacetime and that creates spacetime as one of the more trivial user interfaces that they use
to interact with each other so what we accountants is that our spacetime three dimensions of space
one dimension of time is a fairly trivial headset that you know the some conscious agents use to
interact right think about it like the twitterverse there are millions of users and billions of tweets
there's no way that anybody could read all the tweets or interact with all the users
so we we have to have something that to you know calm things down to to make it understandable
and so we'll do the look at trends and so forth but ultimately what we'd like to have is some
some kind of like headset that allows us to see what's happening in wisconsin versus to tokyo or
whatever you know and that's what spacetime is it's just a little headset a little data compression
scheme and data understanding scheme that some conscious agents use to understand their interactions
with others but i don't see any reason that is special in fact it seems to me one of the more
trivial headsets why not have 50 dimensions of space why not have 50 billion why be stuck with
space at all you know so i i think that you know once we once we get rid of our um blinders in our
addiction to spacetime which we're born with so as i understand how hard it is to get rid of it
but once we let go of that then our scientific creativity can can go where we want okay i'm
still trying to wrap my head around this so we're are we almost saying that a conscious agent exists
beyond spacetime but uses spacetime as a way to interact with other conscious agents in the same
way that somebody with a virtual reality headset can interact with somebody in a game um in another
part of the world for example is this what kind of what we're saying that that's that's exactly right
so that conscious agents themselves uh are the fundamental idea and there's a whole essentially
infinite collection of these conscious agents that interact and we're we're writing a paper right now
on a logic that ties them all together so you know so many spiritual traditions have an idea of
of one god or one brahman or whatever they might want to call it right some some ultimate consciousness
and and it turns out when we when we look at our conscious agents we're starting off with
little trivial ones like this conscious agent has only one experience they can only see red
that's all i can do and this this conscious agent maybe it sees red and green and this one
has 20 experiences that one has 50 and and and we can and so any experience that you can imagine
we can write down a probability probability structure for it and a marcovian dynamics for it
and we can have these interact and when they interact they can combine you can take simpler
agents and they combine in interesting ways to create more complicated agents and so we get this
combination logic that that comes out of it and and we found uh in studying this we found a new
mathematical logic on marcov kernels the marcov chains that we're about to publish it um it turns
out that there's a logic on all possible marcov dynamics that hadn't been discovered before it's
a trace logic for those who who know about trace chains they i'll just give the definition one
kernel is less than another if it's the trace of the other that turns out that one definition
gives you a non-bullying logic of all the marcovian kernels which in our case gives us a non-bullying
logic of all possible consciousnesses and and what it does is it says there is because it's
non-bullying there's no single top consciousness so there's not what most people would think of as
god instead it's it's far more interesting there are an infinite number of directions
in which you can go infinitely far in more and more complicated consciousnesses so there's not
one top direction there's an infinite number of directions and and for me if anything sounds closer
to what i would think of by the meaning of god that is much closer to than just having one little
thing at the top having an infinite number of directions so and by the way i'm not smart enough
to think of this it was it was the mathematical logic of the trace the trace order that forced me
to let go of my baby thoughts about bigger and bigger consciousnesses and it forced me to
to think in this new way so that's that's the goal of science is to get us out of our dogmatic
slumbers and and our old ways of thinking and then force us kicking and screaming sometimes
to see a bigger picture and that's what this is doing
okay um so just to clarify so each one of us would potentially then be a conscious agent
which means that and if that's the case does that mean that on some level we each exist outside of
space time as well and this what we're doing right now is a sort of like temporary
illusion of a deeper reality that's right so you are a conscious agent but you're also
two conscious agents if we if we cut your corpus colosum in half the you have two hemispheres the
left hemisphere and right hemisphere and they're connected by a band of about 220 million axons
called the corpus colosum and a friend of a friend of mine Joe Bogan was a surgeon who um to help
people with epilepsy sometimes had to go in and cut the corpus colosum and uh separate the two
hemispheres that help with the sub problems with epilepsy and but what they found when they study
these people was that the right hemisphere you could talk to just the right hemisphere or the
left hemisphere and in one person for example I think the right hemisphere um was an atheist and
left hemisphere believed in god and the right hemisphere wanted to be a race car driver the
left hemisphere wanted to be a draftsman have a desk job so and and the two hands the turns out
the right hemisphere controls the left hand and the left hemisphere controls the right hand and
sometimes the two hands fought they would fight with each other because they they you know maybe
the person was making an omelet and one hemisphere wanted to have an egg and the other one didn't
want to have an egg and would try to ruin the omelet so it wouldn't it wouldn't be able to be
cooked so so so you're one conscious agent but apparently you're also we have evidence that you're
also two but I think that you're infinitely many but potentially infinitely many conscious agents
yeah there's this whole network of interacting conscious agents and at the same time you are
the one with the whole I'm maybe I shouldn't call it the one but maybe the whole consciousness the
in some sense you are the whole consciousness looking at itself through a particular trivial
space time headset and has your body is just a little avatar in that in that vr that you're
through what you're looking so so this changes the whole thing around instead of you are your body
and your brain is the the source of your consciousness it's the other way around your
consciousness is fundamental and what you call well what you call your body in your brain is
merely an avatar that you render when you need it is you know like an avatar and then in a virtual
reality game is is you know it's not you and and it only the hands that you see only exist when you
look if you don't look at the hands those pixels are gone and then there are no hands there's no
hands in the computer so so to be very very explicit and and maybe to shock people I'm a
cognitive neuroscientist but I'll say this neurons do not exist when they're not perceived
because nothing inside space time exists when it's not perceived space time itself does not exist
when it's not perceived it is only a data structure that exists when you create it in your consciousness
that's what the that's the shocking and that's what I've been having a difficult time emotionally
wrapping myself around intellectually I'm there the math is completely convinced me our best science
convincing this is true um we'll see when my emotions come along for the ride
I have no idea how you get anything done knowing this like just you must be just sitting all day
just can't believe this is actually this is actually true you know um but before before we wrap up here
don't I just want to ask a question that I think is important to ask um
um
if this is the case um
why would consciousness exist what might or maybe the better question is what do you see as
the purpose of human existence then um why would consciousness be having this experience
through our eyes in other words like what what might be going on there that's
that's the fundamental excellent question in this area
I started off by talking about how science there's no theory of everything no set of concepts
no set of theories can ever explain any everything and that that's true of my own theory about
consciousness right that's my my theory of consciousness is a first trivial baby step
consciousness is whatever it is my theory is just a trivial theory and it's the first of hopefully
billions of successor theories what this means about consciousness itself is
consciousness transcends any description what science does is build descriptions from certain
perspectives that's what we do as scientists we take a perspective and we build a description
and so what this suggests is there's a deep answer to your question and it comes
there's a theorem that no system can ever fully understand itself if I have a computer for example
and I want the computer to to understand itself completely what would I do well I'd have it build
a model of itself right some software model of itself well in the process the computer itself
has become more complicated because now it's the computer with a model so now I'd have to model
a computer with a model of it and you can see this goes on ad infinitum so it's pretty straightforward
to see maybe not to prove but to see that that no system can fully model itself
so tie that together with the fact that no theory of consciousness can ever
get anywhere close to the complete explanation of consciousness consciousness trend you are
consciousness and you transcend so so I'll be very personal you transcend any scientific theory
your consciousness transcends any scientific theory so what so what is consciousness doing
and why what if consciousness and first answer I don't know here's I guess maybe it's educated
maybe it's educated maybe it's uneducated but it's a guess maybe what consciousness is up to is
knowing itself and the way it knows itself is to say let me choose to project myself
from this direction and look at myself from this direction and when I do that I look it looks like
I'm this little thing called Don Hoffman that weighs 165 pounds lives in Irvine and so forth
that's what I look like but this I'm just the universal consciousness looking at myself from
this and or I'm Neil or I'm you know I'm whoever I might be that's what and and then I give myself
70 80 90 years whatever it might be to you know to look at myself from that and I and maybe to make
it so that I really take that perspective seriously maybe what I do is I let myself completely
forget who I really am let me let me forget who I really am let me really believe that I am 165
pounds of of flesh in space and time and really believe that and really be worried about stuff
and and so I really take this thing and then let me slowly wake up and and reap all the benefits
that I got from that perspective and that the entire life of Hoffman is one trivial trivial
perspective on who I really am and each one of the billions of human beings isn't important but
compared to the whole trivial perspective on what the consciousness is and and so that's
my best answer to your question is that what consciousness is up to is trying on different
avatars trillions quadrillions uncountable numbers of probably an infinity of different avatars
and the space time headset that we're using is as I've said probably one of the more trivial ones
we're probably really really low on the totem pole of avatars that consciousness is using
very very low right now you know we were like amoebas you know really low on that so but there
are there are other avatars with other perspectives that are much more much more complicated than
ours so so in this case in that perspective there's no surprise that I'm having a hard time
with this because the whole point was to give myself a hard time
just so I would take this whole thing seriously and really take this perspective and wake up from
it painfully um and and then realize that um death isn't the end it's just taking off the headset
wow okay well that's that's a great note to end on don't um where can people find you online
where would you recommend them to go after this conversation well for for those who are technically
minded um I have the objects of consciousness paper so just google objects of consciousness
and fusions of consciousness and then you can you know google scholar me you can if you do google
scholar and type in my name you can see the other papers that that that we've done on this
by the way if you're if you have a recent phd in mathematics and in um algebraic geometry and
you know these positive geometries I have a postdoc I have two postdoc positions um that
I'm advertising right now for so I I want you know someone within two years of a phd in algebraic
geometry to to so email me at ddhoff at uci.edu and I'll point you to the um to where you can
apply for a postdoc we want someone who again a recent phd in algebraic geometry last two years
to work with us on this and and for those who are
interested in in less technical things I would just say that I have a twitter feed so
if you don hoffman the don hoffman I think I forget what it's called my twitter my twitter handle
I can I can send it to you my twitter handle so I do post your stuff that I'm thinking about
and and and I post videos like this one I'll post when when it comes out if you allow me
in youtube videos and so forth so so
yeah I guess yeah my my online youtube stuff
you know and I have a book um the case against reality for those who want to look at the evolution
argument in more detail and see more of the guts of that and I talk a little bit about
consciousness in in that as well so fantastic fantastic well another thing I mentioned to you
before recording um before we started recording was that I think what you're essentially doing I
know you're not this isn't your intention and it's it's sort of just happening as a by-product
but you are opening the possibility of mystery in the world and a sense of spirituality in the
world to people that otherwise might not be able to access it you know and I think that's super
super important people that are very sort of intellectual and interested in mathematics
and physics and everything else as well spirituality is not accessible to them but through someone
like yourself then they can get in touch with this very very important thing in life so I think
it's super important what you're doing and um obviously just keep going and best luck with
everything going forward too thank you very much and I agree that ultimately I think there'll be
a very profitable interaction between science and spirituality because mystery
is at the heart science tells us that there is no theory of everything it's very very clear
there's no theory of everything that means at the core is a deep deep mystery and you are that mystery
you are not separate from the mystery you are that mystery so I agree with you that science and
spirituality it will be difficult there's a lot of bad history between them but I think eventually
it will be a very very profitable interaction thank you donald thank you very much yeah thank you
for listening and I hope you enjoyed the show if you'd like to hear the full version you can do so
with the weekend university premium membership this gets you access to your master library of
over five years of psychology conferences including over 230 talks and interviews with the word
leading psychologists professors and authors unlimited cpd certification transcripts quizzes
premium passes for our annual conference online courses with richard schwarz and deb dana and more
the cost is 97 pounds for one year which breaks down at around 27p per day the best bit is you
can try it out for 30 days completely risk-free as all orders come with a hundred percent money
back guarantee if you're interested please go to twmembers.com for more information
