Hi, everyone. Apologies for a few minutes delay here.
Ken, I heard an, uh-oh, is everything okay?
Technical problems.
Beautiful. Yeah, Mighty Networks is a little bit annoying with sharing links outside of the community.
So anyway, glad we got that resolved.
Ken, so let's dive right in.
I mean, we chatted for the first time a few weeks ago.
I read your book, I heard your podcast, heard your talk from, I think, a few years ago at this point.
But, you know, we, I think we want to spend as much time as possible sort of forward-looking and not having you recount the book for the umpteenth time.
But just as setting the frame, setting the context, why don't you kind of start with why objectives might be, why we should question them,
and why they might be especially dangerous when it comes to innovative and ambitious ideas? Why don't we start there?
Sure, yeah.
So hopefully not too redundant for those who've heard this a few times or read it maybe in the past, but the reason that we wrote this book
about how having an objective can be harmful to actually achieving something is because of this observation that when you have an ambitious objective,
this often can be deceptive. This is really deception that's the problem.
And it's really about ambitious objectives. So as we've conceded and tried to make clear like nobody's against having like modest objectives, those do work.
We continue to implement their modest objectives. But when it comes to really ambitious objectives, the real problem is that there's a series of steps that you need to go through to get to where you want to go.
That's your objective.
And we're saying it's ambitious because it's hard, like otherwise it wouldn't make sense to call it ambitious. It was easy then you would just do it. So this is by definition hard, kind of a truism.
So you have a hard objective. That means you don't know what all the stepping stones are to get there. There's this path you need to follow.
So, you know, again, if you did know what the stepping stones were, then it wouldn't be a hard problem. So you must not know all of them.
So that means that there's this series of like sort of intermediate states you have to go through. You don't know what they are, they're going to lead you to this thing.
And so when you set an objective, you generally will now measure progress against it by somehow with some kind of metric that will tell you how close am I to the thing that I'm trying to get to.
The problem is that the stepping stones, the things that you need to go through to get to the objective. They almost certainly don't look like the objective itself, because again, if they did look like the objective, then you would just go through them.
I mean it would be obvious. So there are things that are surprising like that's almost always true. That's why I discovered so interesting like you go through surprises.
It's like wow this leads to this who would have ever thought that so it's almost surely the case if you have something ambitious you're trying to do.
So the objective you're almost ensuring that you won't register recognize understand those surprising things, because they don't look like the thing that you're measuring, which is the objective.
And so this is hence the problem. So actually makes it harder to achieve the objective but also just generally achieve anything ambitious, because the problem is that now that you're focused on this metric which is this objective this one singular objective which you care about,
you might be blinded to all the other things you might be able to accomplish. Like if you have a bunch of stepping stones that you're going through like things that you're doing but you don't think of them as on the path to your objective.
You're likely to dismiss them ignore them and throw them away because they don't seem to lead to the thing that you care about even though they could lead to other things that you might care about, but you're not admitting those because they're not the objective that you actually care about.
So you're really closing yourself off to all kinds of achievement, the objective itself, as well as all the other things that you might achieve.
If you weren't so myopic about your objective.
I guess for, I guess like syntax to make sure I really understand it. Can you, can you talk really quickly about deception. You kind of write that it's the ultimate false compass, and stepping stone I think is like a very clear metaphor but we'd love to hear maybe
like double click on that for just a second how do you think of a stepping stone is it super obvious what that next step is is it sometimes unclear. If you could dive into those two things that'd be great.
Yeah, thanks that's helpful to get it made sure the vocabulary is not misleading or confusing, because you know, I come from computer science and artificial intelligence and some of these are just like jargon words, you know, deception is a common word like an AI.
But it's not like it doesn't necessarily mean exactly the same thing and like, you know, regular speaking. So like, what is deception what am I talking about in this case basically it's it really is a simple idea.
I mean when somebody's trying to trick you that's not what I mean, but what it means is basically that it appears to you that you're moving in the right direction, but you're actually heading towards a brick wall.
That's a deceptive situation there's there's also the converse of that which is that you appear to be going in the wrong direction but actually it would be correct if you would just continue along that path.
Both of those are deceptive situations. So the more I think the more kind of a threatening one when it comes to ambitious objectives is the latter where it looks like things are going wrong, but they're actually not.
You know, so basically you're, you're going along some path, and you get some weird results and it looks to you like this is nothing to do with what I actually want to do with my life.
And so you say, I'm not going to go down this path any further like I don't think I should pursue this. That's deception if actually that is what you needed.
But the problem is that it looks like it isn't because it's deceptive. And the problem here is that like, every interesting thing you ever want to do will be deceptive.
That's why they're interested like there's a surprise along the way or else it wouldn't be interesting you would know exactly what you need to do then there's no problem.
So the things that are like challenges are always going to be deceptive and so you're always going to end up on some stepping stone that looks like it's not the right thing.
And then you're going to be inclined to dismiss it, which is kind of like a tragic thing if you really care about that objective.
And so deception is just like ubiquitous across search spaces, which means like places where you might be looking to achieve something.
And it's, it doesn't mean that you need to become better at, you know, somehow like defending yourself against deception, like, because that's basically impossible.
Like there's no way to know what leads to what like we just don't know that's why these things are hard. What it does mean is that you just have to be more open minded about potentially going somewhere else.
And that's something this looks interesting to you, but in your assessment, it's like wrong for your objectives you throw it away that's a big mistake. If you think it's interesting.
It might not lead to your objective but it might lead to something else that's really great.
And you just threw it away and that's I think what we tend to do in our cultures and we throw away all these deceptive stepping stones because we think they're not leading in the right direction.
And in that vein, it's right. Two things that struck me reading your book is one, if you let go of achieving a particular great thing, you're more likely to achieve something great.
Now it might not be what you want or what you predicted but more likely. And then, is it right to think of following your interests as the right compass right and in your case.
If I'm misremembering but something the most interesting thing opens up other interesting things right so it sort of becomes this like fractal nature almost where you open up a lot of doors.
Can you talk to us a little bit about like changing our compass from one of objectives and sort of you know I will achieve this by this day versus following your interest because like it's such a from like a Western mindset is such a different way to approach problems.
Yeah, yeah, so that this this idea of following your interest and the idea of being able to achieve something but not a particular thing follows directly from what I said about deception.
So it's a really logical leap, like it's not as in, I like to say it's logical because I mean it's not like a new age kind of philosophy or something.
Like you could imagine somebody saying, you know just let's just all do whatever we want we're gonna have a good time and life will work out you know that that sound might be pleasing sounding to some to others not but that's not the point though like this is like this
actually a logical thing this comes from scientific experiments. So if you think about the point about deception, if you have a problem which is that the things that lead to where you want to go, don't resemble where you want to go.
It's a fundamental aspect of like all complex spaces. And so like you're not going to know when you cross that stepping stone, which means you can't plan properly like you don't know what to plan for.
And so like it leads to something that many people initially find depressing but I think it's actually liberating, which is this realization that there's no way to make a confident striving in a particular direction.
You cannot ensure that you're going to get to a particular place in life. It's just there's no formula for that. Again, unless it's modest, modest things we can do.
But if you want to be ambitious. And so that's like at first it's depressing because you know we feel like on anchor like what can I do then like I did you tell me I can't like actually plan for anything.
Well, but see the thing that goes along with that the corollary is like actually really interesting and liberating which is the idea that, but what you can do is increase the probability that something good will happen.
It's just not a particular good thing. And so that's like intuitively kind of hard to grasp at first like what does that actually mean, like I can actually be good at causing something good but not actually some particular thing.
But if you just think about it there's tons of opportunities out there, like in your life in general for our society for institutions there's all these opportunities out there.
It's not like there's a shortage of possible things we could achieve. And what we don't know is that we don't know the path to any particular one of them.
But if you have a mindset and interesting as comes into this where you're willing to collect stepping stones because they're interesting. You're increasing the probability that you're going to follow a path to one of those things.
You don't know which one, but all of them are worthy things to achieve. It's just not something you knew that you were going towards. And so, if you.
Now the interesting comes isn't comes in because like the question then is, what you really should be doing, if you want to achieve something ambitious is maximizing the amount of jumping off points that you have towards things are actually
interesting. And of course, it's kind of it's almost like circular but the things that lead to interesting things are interesting things.
So like if you encounter something interesting that leads to other interesting things. So if you're a collector of interesting things, what I was calling like in the book like a treasure hunter, like you just collect things that are interesting.
That's like a repertoire, or it's like an archive of like of stuff that you can use to jump off from to get to other interesting things in the future.
And eventually some of those are going to pay off you just don't know which and where you don't know what it's going to be in the end.
But so I think that when it comes to like really high achievement like think people doing remarkable things that's the kind of attitude that they have, which is the basically opportunistic it's like well this.
I was going down here but then I saw something interesting over there that's no problem I'll just take that also. It's not like you can't do two more than one thing at a time in life I mean you can have more than one thing going on that's true too.
And so it's not as dismal as like you're just following some like extremely risky path and that's the only path and you mean you can live life like that but you don't have to live life like that so it's more that let's keep a lot of things around that are opportunities, and follow
several of them like probably simultaneously because you have the downside of it is that there's risk.
And so like with ambition comes risk if you want to achieve something ambitious, you might fail and so that has to be, you know, taken into account and you, you also have a right to not do it like you could just say I'm not going to be ambitious.
And you can do things that are that are modest and just be perfectly happy so there's nothing wrong with that.
But this is about if you want to achieve things that would be considered to be remarkable not only about other people but by you, like if they would be something that would make you feel like you did something really amazing.
It makes me that it feels like a very artistic way to live life in the sense that like, I think if you're authentic with it, the things that interest you, there will of course be overlap with others but like the very pointy specific things that really catch you are
probably, you know, that overlap is probably quite different than most people, right so it's really interesting, like, again, like this fractal idea comes to mind where like the overlap of tennis and mental models and startups and whatever
is probably relatively unique to me, right, just to put myself at the center of it for a second.
So Ken one, you know, I think that's a great frame and jumping off point kind of covers that the main arguments if you will at least some of them from the book.
If we kind of move forward looking, I, let's start with, I guess has anything major changed since you published the book, whether that is new findings or good pushback you've gotten or surprising results.
Is there anything, anything that sparked anything you'd want to dive into.
Yeah, let's see.
The, actually, I just want to I didn't want to just cat, say something on that point about art because I do think I totally agree with that I think that's a really good insight that like that you just kind of artistic it's true that I keep running into art.
Like, at different levels like at one point actually spoke to the Rhode Island School of Design, which is basically like an art school.
And I have to say that was like one of the most emotional of all the time they've ever spoken about this and I've spoken about it a lot.
The artists like really really got it and it strongly resonated with them and it really it was like cathartic for them because like for them.
It's basically like, this is what I do, but I can't justify it to anybody which is which is like this dilemma of the art.
It's like my parents don't understand why are you doing this, like my teachers understand why are you doing this I got I'm constantly trying to justify my choices.
And this like kind of captures in some way like what why this is justifiable, you know the day of doing things because they're interesting, not because there's some metric that says well yeah if you like you know, bash this piece of iron on to like a piece of glass like this is like a good thing to do
just that that's interesting to me.
And yeah I met a guy like that is doing stuff like that you know at that school. So that really made an impression on me, like how the artists responded.
And I've also thought that like in science, especially artificial intelligence that we should, we should admit that there's actually a very artistic aspect to what's going on and that might change some of the dialogue.
Okay, but that's actually not your question.
Oh, it's great though. Thank you for that.
You're asking about like what has changed since the book. And that's seven years basically.
And there's been things that have changed, like in the field of machine learning where I, you know, mostly work in that that like build on.
Well there are algorithmic principles like it's it's funny the book is really unusual and that is basically saying, like it came originally from algorithmic principles and then they extended to like life principles.
It's like almost never happens you know it's like oh boy, my algorithm helped me to understand my life better like computer scientists don't talk like that.
And actually take a lot of pleasure in that that's just been super fulfilling to see an algorithm actually like give people like make people feel good about themselves.
It's very unusual but when I think about that, something I've thought maybe something maybe someone new over the last several years is that in some way that that should happen in artificial intelligence, you know like if you think about this field.
This is about intelligence intelligence is obviously a natural phenomenon which is an aspect of human nature, basically is in some ways it is what it means to be human.
Like intelligence encompasses it's not just like you're a human calculator like this like a bunch of arithmetic like everything that you do, which is about human nature.
And so it kind of makes sense like if we're trying to reproduce human nature in a computer it should have insights that feedback shouldn't it, if you ever hit on something deep, it should tell us something about ourselves I would think.
And so I kind of think that's that's a yardstick for AI that is very little discussed, but deserves like it really should be and that's kind of a result.
And so it's funny because because it does come from these algorithmic principles like it feeds back into AI and they're certainly less of an agency change in progress like one of the biggest things I think, which does relate to what people say even outside of the
is this kind of idea that people become uneasy about the suggestion of randomness in life, and also in algorithms.
And so like the book, and in general this philosophy recommends something like pursuing interestingness which is very relate to pursuing novelty.
And this makes people very uncomfortable because they're like, well, but if I pursue novelty.
My basically I'm living randomly, like I don't have any goal. So I'm like, I just do this I'll do that if there's no principle that I'm following and so forth.
I really try to argue strongly that this is this is not a novelty and interesting or not random, a completely different from randomness.
Randomness is, here's five things I could do, I'll just like roll a die and just like decide what to do like that's not what we're talking about here.
This is like very principle based on information like you decide what's interesting based on your entire life experience is anything but random.
Novelty is also like that like you're comparing where you are to where you've been. So you have a real metric there that you're actually using to guide you and point you in directions.
But of course like this also comes up in the field as well because we have algorithms like novelty search which reflect this philosophy but in terms of like AI.
And in those like there's been a lot of like attempts to reintroduce objective notions so where can that happen can that like I have certain things that I care about in life and I want those to be prioritized I don't just want to follow novelty.
And I think you see more sophistication there over like this the preceding years of like how, how can we incorporate these notions without destroying the ability to navigate freely, which is really the primary thing here like you cannot.
So if you if you destroy the ability to follow interesting as you've destroyed everything, like you can't actually succeed anymore. And so like if you reintroduce anything objective into this kind of style, you have to be very careful about it, because the objectives
tend to be like a poison pill that will like ruin the pursuit of interestingness. So there's a lot of like sophisticated ideas about like how these things can align in a way that's very careful and delicate.
There's, I think I heard EO Wilson talk about this the most but kind of this biological principle of explore exploit right like when your environment is very safe, it makes sense to exploit it right.
You have no predators there's a water source you keep going back you keep going back you keep going back. But if there's a lot of novelty the explorer mindset makes a lot more sense and it feels like there's some interesting parallel there sort of between what you're saying and that biological principle.
Yeah, if there's anything you want to add on there but I have a finer question to post on that after.
Yeah, let me add something that because that that actually that's a that's a metaphor that a lot of people bring up that like this reminds me of exploitation versus exploration, which certainly in computer science is brought up all the time but I think even outside
science people talk about this like this trade this trade off or dichotomy between explore and exploit. And I actually don't prefer that for this, you know, it's fun it's funny because I guess it may hopefully it's not too hair splitting but, but the thing is that I think
what explore and exploit when people talk about that. What they mean is that exploit means following a principle. It's like, I'm good I know that this kind of thing increases this metric so I'm going to go in that direction.
Whereas explorer explorer generally means having no principle at all. It's like, I'm just going to do stuff that's crazy but like maybe I'll hopefully if I'm lucky I'll just like hit on something useful and then I can start exploiting it.
I think that that's not actually what what I'm describing because like what's different here is that novelty interestingness are principles. So to me they don't actually look like what meet people usually mean by explore, because the explorers almost like this almost is like this kind of like dirty indulgence
is like well I'll just do it like when I get a little extra time on my hands are like I really shouldn't be doing this but it's something I'm going to do. But it's actually like, like I think that pursuing interesting is actually a form of exploitation, not exploration, exploration,
because like you're using information, actually very rich information which I would argue is more rich than what you do when you exploit, because exploit tends to be like a very, very impoverished type of activity like you have like this one metric.
It's like how fast is my robot running or something like this one thing and so it's very easy to follow, but it's not rich, whereas interestingness is about like thousands of things all at the same time like what makes a picture interesting to you.
It's very rich it's very complex high dimensional is what like a computer scientist would say there's many dimensions to it.
So, so I think like you're basically when you're recalling exploring in this kind of sense is actually this high dimensional exploration, exploitation, actually, it's the expectation of interestingness which is our novelty which are very principled and they are
information dense. And so I think that the metaphor makes it sound like something like to most people that it isn't it's actually just as principle does exploiting and it's actually a form of exploitation.
It's a different kind of information that's being exploited in this case.
Super helpful. Thank you for refining that 10 one, or a couple things that sparked in me when I was reading your book is like, yeah I think program made it famous that most startups look like toys at the beginning right it's something really simple people make fun of it that's
not anything, but they're following their, their interests, if you will. So you know just like, again, pulling from startups pulling from biology it's really interesting to see how, how much this seems to tie together.
One thing I'd love to get your, your perspective on is how you think about intuition in this space, like is following your intuition and your gut the same as novelty, and related to that.
Can we refine what is interesting to us to become better and better right so like if we're probably saying follow something novel follow something interesting.
Can we refine that compass somehow to kind of give us a better idea what the most opportune stepping stones are moving forward.
And so I think intuition is basically the same as falling interesting as I would say it's, it's a principal thing to do for sure.
It's a scary thing, because, you know one reason that we really like objectives is because we can do an assessment, which can tell you whether you're actually improving with respect to your objective and not we love that that I think of as a security blanket.
Like, you know, your boss wants to know, but how do I know you're making progress, and you bet I've got a metric here.
I wrote my okay ours or something and that here's a metric and I can tell you, they're making progress. And so that's a security blanket makes you feel like you're measuring something intuition.
On the other hand, is dangerous and can't be measured in general. And so people think of it as unprincipled it's like, well, let me just, you know, tell you I just feel really good about this like, will your boss, except that if you tell your boss.
I just really feel like this is the right thing to do I have I can't measure it at all. And a lot of people don't like that. But the thing is, if you if you think about it, intuition is a reflection of your life history.
It's not like you were just born yesterday, and you just have like these random intuitions, like built up those intuitions over an entire lifetime. And so they really can compete with these metrics, the metrics are like ridiculously naive in some ways, because they're usually
like you mentioned like something like speed or performance or you know it's very easy. So, so I wonder sometimes like okay we're in it we're trying to innovate because innovation is ambitious.
Like if we're not trying to innovate this might not be so true, we're just doing something modest but we're trying to innovate we're in a company or something.
So something really ambitious, then like, we say, well okay but we have to have a metric and we're going to follow this metric.
And the thing is that like, why do we have all these like high paid people to do that because like the thing is like anybody can just measure this metric it's like, you know how fast did it go how much energy did it consume.
How many people bought the product like I mean, like you don't need a PhD, like, or like, you know, I don't need a business degree to know these kinds of things like anybody can measure and then criticize you.
And they go the metric didn't go up like why do we have these educated to like the reason you have education the reason that we invested in you for like 2530 years like a lot of people through public education I mean I emphasize that because we're talking to millions of dollars
of problems spent, like to get you to where you are. And I would basically saying, well screw your intuitions we don't have any interest in them at all. Like, after investing all that time what the heck are we just building up, just so you can tell us whether the metric is going
to be where you don't need any education at all to be like in sixth grade education to do that.
It's in the intuitions that the value of everything that you've ever experienced are actually reflected I think.
And so those are extremely valuable, and they relate to what you find interesting it's just that it's harder to justify them in an objective manner, but that's a reason to be skeptical about objectives not a reason to be skeptical about intuition.
I think almost every great insight that anybody's ever had was because they had a good intuition. It wasn't because like some metric was there.
And that's where all the values coming from. So certainly I endorse intuition and think it's basically what you have a right to follow and sort of the shock or the change that this perspective gives you is to be is to be justified in doing it like it's
not like you're doing this like indulgence like you shouldn't really be doing your into it following your intuitions but hey you've got a little time on the sides you just see what happens and peek ahead.
Like no you should be doing that is completely principled I mean assuming you're interested in something ambitious.
Follow your interest in your intuition. So for sure.
Okay that was a long interest the first part.
Yeah, and just refresh like can we hone that intuition that that North Star over time somehow. Yeah, I mean certainly of course I think you can hone it.
You're just by living your updating your intuitions and in fact, like something I haven't really dealt into yet, which is, which is that like what actually constitutes interest or interest in this is that a huge component of it is novelty.
I would say that like, it's, it's not the case that everything that's novel is interesting like there are some novel things are not interesting, but the, the other way around is always the case so basically everything that's interesting is novel.
Like if there's something that's not novel it's not interesting either. You know it's like for example like cars were once interesting but they're not now it's like the idea of a car.
Like, you know I've got this, this cool thing let's talk about it like it's kind of like a box on wheels as it goes by itself. It's like, can you imagine.
This is just not interesting at all. But of course it was, it was super interesting 100 years ago or something or more than that. Like so so it changes with novelty novelty is very instrumental.
And because of that you have to if you're going to stay on the cutting edge of interestingness and this can be personally what you find interesting doesn't have to be what I find interesting.
What it is, you're going to have to be very attuned to what's novel now as opposed to what was novel 20 years ago.
And I think this is often why you know people fall off the game who were like really astute at a certain point in time, because you know it's hard to keep on that cutting edge.
Because it basically requires you to constantly be absorbing like what is at the cutting edge. So you can judge what's novel now as opposed to 20 years ago.
And that will feed into your intuitions, you know like understanding like the current turn of everything and the richness of everything that's going on right now.
And of course it's not only about novelty like you can refine your sense of the interesting it might be with respect to a category that you're interested in.
Like I'm interested in AI so you know I'm constantly like refining what I think is interesting within AI.
You may be interested in something completely different but you know you'll become a connoisseur, the more you kind of consume and understand that area to be something I couldn't touch at all, like with from my experience.
So everybody has a unique intuition that they're constantly refining and probably on multiple different multiple different topics.
And that all means like that's the way that you get good at pursuing these stepping stones and treasure hunting and so forth.
Have you found a way to spot those who are doing that. Is there any way to sort of tell who sort of, you know I think you say in the book those who are like one in the shadows almost right like one step away from like that stepping stone.
Have you found a way to kind of tease that out of people or spot that somehow.
I like that question I like that question that I haven't had that question very often.
So, I think that would be worth thinking about actually like it's someone just asked I saw the chat just flew by but I saw somebody asking something related about how do you decide who's on my research team.
Well if I could spot if I could spot these properties qualities that would help me decide who should be on my research team.
I want to acknowledge that this is always the case like sometimes, you know, you can be useful without being good at this like that's like if I just give you an assignment.
And it's very well defined.
That's basically objective based and it isn't deceptive like it's basically not super ambitious.
Then you can just do that and they can be very useful for me for you for everybody. So it's not like everybody has to always and even on a research team that's true like sometimes you know if I'm very vision being very visionary.
Like maybe I don't want everyone to be super visionary on the team, because like we're just going to get into conflict like they want to go this way and go that way it's like, well, maybe I should just get people who are more just want to follow instructions.
And so it's not always the case that you want someone like this. But nevertheless, I think the people who are going to shine the most and be absolutely outstanding.
And it's certainly people we want to get into the into research or any other innovative industries, like we want to identify them that's true, because it's kind of a tragedy if there's somebody like that, and they basically can't get into school or they can't get into the company or
whatever it is, because we don't know how to identify people like that.
So we do want to be able to find those people and promote them and basically educate them so that they have a chance to express those talents.
And so what is it that allows us to identify people like that and I think it's a way way far away from current, you know, assessment techniques.
You know what do we have now we have things like an SAT test grades, you know we have some things like an essay you send in an essay it's getting to college and grad school has similar things like GRE.
And I think that's just not really that related to what we should ask so what should we be asking.
I thought about this a bit. I think these are kind of weird things but I would ask some questions of people. The problem is honesty, but let's put honesty aside. I'm not sure like what to do about the fact that we could lie.
But I'd like to ask people something like, Have you ever written like a story without anybody telling you to do that.
When and how many and when did you start.
Have you ever written a program that we weren't assigned to write like how often did you do that what were they.
And like have you ever drawn a picture like how often did you draw pictures during your childhood like how long did that last like where they pictures that people told you to draw.
I think like if I could get some kind of like portfolio like that. I can think you might be able to see that that there's that there's a personality style or trait, just inclined towards exploration.
I think it's very important that you're not driven by what other people told you to do in some sense. It's unfortunate that like the culture actually like tries to make you do things that other people tell you to do.
You're found out by that noise, like, like you might be like that as a person but like as soon as you got into kindergarten, you know now or, you know the earliest grade, you know wherever you're from like now, you know you start being a culture aided to just follow directions
because that's what you're rewarded for so now it's a little noisier it's harder for me to actually see that signal, but I would, I would hope maybe like the most kind of willing to follow the interesting would have some somehow found a way around that.
You know, it's not like you're going to get home, they still did their thing even though it's cool they're doing a bunch of boring nonsense.
And so, you know, I don't mean actually to totally dismiss like doing boring nonsense if you do need that to learn things it's not like you should not have any kind of instruction.
But it's just that that's not going to help us detect those kinds of people is the problem.
I think that yeah we could if we could get portfolios like that I would love to just start a college where that's like, that's how you get in, you know you send in your portfolio from age like three to 18 or something of just stuff you've done
yourself and some sort of motivation like why did you do these things. And so we kind of find that explorer characteristic maybe.
I love that.
We dance around it I guess a little bit with with a lot of these questions but like your, no matter who you are you're like nested within a bunch of social structures right like you have your individual family you have your company, you know, on and on and on.
And it's one thing to adopt this for yourself right I'm going to follow what's interesting to me and that's exciting, but almost always you have someone to report to right you have a team around you and even just telling your family I don't really know what I'm working on I but I think it's
interesting like it's socially awkward, or at least it would feel so to me in a lot of ways.
So, with like that setup can like, how do you think about like there's individual change but then there's social change there's organizational change. How on earth do we start embedding some semblance of like this thinking at the right time like,
I guess it starts at the individual but yeah how do we build structures that allow, whether you're a VC, or a boss, you know, Google is 20% time sort of comes up but maybe that's a stupid idea but like, anyway, talk to us a little bit about that like social organizational change and how, how this might find
its way into it.
So the awkwardness is totally true and that was one of the reasons that the artist respondents are strong, because they did feel that this was, you know, socially, you know, just a very awkward thing to explain your parents and things like that.
And I think this does just pervade culture that it's, it's something that, like the idea of doing things because they're interesting is not, not something that that's really respected in general up and down.
Like all hierarchies that we have like institutionally, so this is now getting away from just personal institutionally, this is like a serious problem, I think, that like, if you, for example, apply, and I know a lot about because I was a professor for 10 years so
like if you apply for a grant, which is like you're saying you're saying basically I want money to be able to pursue this research project. And usually like if you're in research university like you do that by asking some agency in the United States would be like the National Science Foundation
or something like that for some money, basically say I want to want to do this thing.
And what they want is basically objectives they want to know like what is what are you going to accomplish, how are you going to measure progress, how are you going to confirm that you're making progress like they want to know all this stuff which is totally contrary to what I'm saying.
And so this is like the one of the worst places for this because this is this is definitely definitively a place, which is supposed to be fostering innovation.
I could understand if it's like, you know, this is like a restaurant and we're trying to like get all our orders out, but this is the NSF like we're actually trying to foster innovation.
And so like the, I think it's just a reflection of the fact there's absolutely pervasive across culture, and across institutions, even the institutions who job it is to foster innovation, which includes companies which includes like, like a lot of companies have a little, a little
company that's supposed to be like where like innovation happens or they have like a little lab or something like they work very objectively, generally speaking all across.
And so this was actually a big motivation for writing the book, like what the question you asked like it really was.
It really was about the fact that I perceived and my co-author Joel Joel Laman also perceived that once we have this kind of revelation that like this doesn't work even though it seems like intuitively.
Most people think at first like oh well having an objective is helpful but once you realize it's actually not helpful.
Then the next thing is like, but like the whole society runs that way like what the hell does that even mean, like I'll try and absorb like what does this actually mean that everything runs this way and it doesn't even make sense.
And I started to conclude that like, there has to be social change to do something about this to change the fact that like, like we run things in a way that that's like a complete delusion.
It's a security blanket but it's not true.
And so we decided, Joel and I that like maybe like what you answered to the question the first answer to the question you're asking was, we need to get the conversation started that was like answer number one like the problem the initial problem is, there's no
conversation, which I find really interesting.
Like, there's not like an anti objective movement, like have you heard of that like are the protesters on the street, like there's nobody cares about this one way or another.
It's so status quo that like there's not even any controversy about it. And that's like unusual for something where I think it merits some degree of controversy.
And so we thought like, we got to at least start a conversation so that's why we decided to write the book was so that there would be conversations like the one we're having right now which is why I'm really happy to be in this conversation because it's like
what really was like what the book was for is to is to provoke this kind of discussion, and have a chance to spread at least like that's step one right like as people should at least see that there's two sides to the issue, and like think about it like what
should we do about it. And then, beyond that though there's like what should we actually do. What should we do to affect institutional change in our culture and this pervades like everything back to the point where you start like kindergarten like I said,
you know about how objective like school is like that's also messed up like there should be some amount of rewarding of exploration, which is just intrinsic to human nature from like the moment you're born.
You know, which is just like completely sucked out of you, because of the way like the institutional structure works it's all totally objective.
And by the way, like problems like the fact that we can't get kids to perform well in school and stuff like that. The solution to that because it's very ambitious like if you want every student in the United States to score 100 on every test.
That's an extremely ambitious goal. It will also be subject to the paradox of objectives, or what I call the myth of the objective. It will not be achieved through objective means, because we need to collect stepping stones that don't look like everybody scoring 100 if we want to get to people
scoring 100. That's the only thing I know about how to do it. And yet that's exactly the opposite of what we're doing.
You know, because basically assessment just pervades everything so now we're going to have assessment for the schools for the students every, every few months every year like it's like it's just everything is about assessment objectively along this like prescribed path.
And so, to get away from this.
I think the answer is that at one level there should be some like, you know, public discussion or should be discussion like this but hopefully it will move to a higher level of discussion where like it's like, you know, big forums with many many people aware of it.
And then the other part of it is like within the institutions themselves people have to push for the change, I think.
It's obviously difficult, like I think like you think of like, okay, I run a lab at a company or something like that. And we've been tasked with like being innovative like we're supposed to like, you know, prevent disruption of what we do and also anticipate the future so that we
don't miss out on some opportunities so that's my job.
And so, in theory like I should be doing this like following interesting is collecting stepping sounds like that's what we should be doing.
But like the problem is that I answer to other people. I answer to someone else at the company, just probably some high level executive so if I'm running the innovation answering to some executive somewhere near near to the CEO.
Now, they are thinking in terms of like objectives, I mean they're like, okay, you're running the innovation lab, but we would like to see how that's impacting the larger company.
We're not just paying you to have fun after all right like you guys have a little fun for the next few months but then come back to us with some objective metrics.
And so now here's where the problem happens right like the person may be totally bought in like maybe they read the book.
I mean, ideally they read our book so they're like oh I totally buy all this philosophy, but they've got this boss who doesn't know anything about this it doesn't care and wants to know what's the reassurance and the security blanket that they're just blowing money.
And I can understand I mean I can empathize and relate to the idea that like innovation lab is like a super expensive thing right like you're paying like top level people like tons and tons like high salaries.
Over years and what the heck is the point why am I doing this so of course I would like reassurance, but the problem is that it's just reality must be accepted, it doesn't work.
It cannot cause people to be innovative by forcing them to report back metrics every month. And so it will just be antithetical to innovation and of course we'll end up destroying innovation lab, and I've seen it happen.
I've seen it happen at companies I've been in industry now for a while. It literally happens.
It's the same thing like NSF like they report ultimately who does the NSF report to they report to the government they report to like the Senate, you know like the actual like like the people in power have been elected officials.
So people want to see what what is the point of having NSF or pay spending taxpayer money.
Can you show me the metrics like and so NSF scrambling to come up with metrics that show that this research has impacted. That's why the researchers have to tell you what the impact is going to be before they get the money.
And so it's all totally upside down and it's the problems reporting through these hierarchies. How can we buck this trend like I think like the answer is that at the mid level, like if you are reporting to someone, which is almost almost everybody's reporting to someone.
Then you, you're going to have to like explain it. And that's another reason we wrote the book, like the book is supposed to be a weapon, so that you can actually fight.
It gives a lot of objective scientific advice.
I don't mean objective in the sense of falling objective I mean like we've actually done experiments to try to bolster the argument so that you could have an argument that's plausible with somebody if you really wanted to, and convince them and it's not impossible
like I've gone to gatekeepers with this and I had discussions with them and they have said that this changed their thinking, but again they usually answered somebody is the problem.
They're like yeah I mean I talked to somebody he was almost a billion dollars of research money that this guy was controlling. And he said, you know, like we need to reorganize like how should we do he really wanted to talk.
But you know I do answer to this, you know higher person and so is anything going to happen I don't know. I expect not much is going to actually happen. Just, it's just exciting but I don't know what to do.
So a real fight has to happen, I think, and it's really hard because if you think about it's so easy to not care about this because it's just so, it's so intellectual it's like out there it's not it's not like you know we're not talking about abortion here.
We have an objective. And it's just like, am I really going to fight about this like with all the controversy in the world. It's just really hard to get this going, but I think we should, we should try.
A couple things sparking me there can where kind of this idea that your business model take or it takes on the business model of your capital provider right so if you have someone that needs to return a certain amount of money in three years like you're going to be on that timeline
to whether you like it or not.
And it also strikes me like, if the collective we are able to do something like this.
It's so hard that it feels like this enormous advantage right like it's going to be hard enough to get it up and going once right with the right capital with the right group with the right sponsors etc etc that having anybody replicate that feels extraordinarily
which is a is the pain and also the opportunity I guess.
Can Richard heard who is the one who originally introduced us has a question so I love to turn it over to him really quickly.
Thank you. Can I appreciate you doing this and bless thank you.
Can you know I love your book and my couple questions one, have you and the seem to leave ever got together and compared notes and thoughts and ideas.
No, I've never had any interaction with him at all.
Well, the reason I asked is your work made me think of a couple of his books and an alternative title to your book could be the white swan, because he wrote a book called the black swan, which was all about looking for these random negative
events right and getting prepared for them. And I much for for your book I may would much rather go find a white swan and a black swan any day of the week and I didn't know if you had compared your thoughts on randomness because they do intersect right he's looking
more from a risk management perspective and you're looking at it from a opportunity creation perspective and the second is just more of an observation this reading your book caused me to reread pooled by randomness, which is a litany of case studies
of people who become so focused on an objective, they destroy their career. They're so focused on, you know, in this case usually financial trading, and there's all these novel things happening around them, they're stepping stones all around them.
And they're ignoring them because they're so focused on the objective and they end up blowing up their career so I didn't know if you had read that and had anything to add to that or comment about that but it did make me did make me think about it so thank you.
Yeah, thank you. Great comments. I like that whites one point actually maybe a better marketing angle for the book to be the whites one opposed to the blacks one.
And, you know, I would love to talk to tell them I've never and I think we would have a very interesting conversation I imagine.
I don't know anything about me either. But um, yeah I see the connection there, and it's a pretty interesting connection. And I wonder what he would think about all this.
And the, the second point.
Actually, yeah, could you just remind me that second point there.
The second point was fooled by randomness right I mean these are people who become so objectively focused events that they're not even considering that are happening right before their eyes.
You know, blow up their careers right it's it's it's it really is proves your point even more, not that it needed additional proof but becoming so objective focused is blinded these people to.
And I say these people should I've done it myself a million times not like I'm any different right. Yeah, that was more the point.
Yeah, the great connection actually yeah I haven't, I haven't read that, but I appreciate the connection there it sounds like a great story of sort of like the dangers.
You know this is the thing that's not talked about as much as just like, we're also worried about the dangers of not having an objective metric.
What might happen bad things could happen is really scary. What about the dangers of having an objective, you know, like, there's a lot of bad things that can happen on the other side to which is that's what his book is about.
Right, exactly. So I think it's, it's definitely relevant and it tells a good cautionary tell on the other side.
One thing we focus a lot in this community and I guess the way I try to judge success in one small way is like integration of these ideas is really difficult right it's it's one thing to understand it theoretically and that makes sense and we not our heads and this is great.
I think it's a great way to kind of figure out how you implement this in your own life. And whether it's something you've changed your behavior or a way you approach problems or opportunities or what you've seen other people do.
If you have any sort of like concrete examples of this in action, just to drive the point home I think be really helpful.
So, just just we should we should also make a distinction that the, that there's, there's maybe advice or suggestions here about institutional change and then there's sort of implications for your own life.
And I think both of them kind of deserve some attention.
And so now I'm going to focus on your, your life, like, because institutionally I think that you maybe even can be easier to talk about because you can see like some serious flaws like it's going on institutionally.
Your life is maybe is a little harder to talk about because it's so subjective and personal.
You.
I think like the main thing is that you have you should you need to start out by deciding what your risk tolerance is.
Like, because at a personal level like if it's not institutional, then like what I'm saying means that, you know, you have an opportunity to maybe achieve some some really remarkable things in your life.
If you're willing to kind of follow interestingness, but the trade off is that like you might fail.
It's like a much less kind of guaranteed route than just like, okay, I went to, you know, I went to college I majored in accounting and I became an accountant, like, I'm not saying it's bad at all it just that's something that we know how to do.
And it's a it's a path that's already been prescribed.
And so like, if you do first like you don't have to do this, it's personal, and if you just want to have a comfortable existence, there's lots of things you can do without trying to follow this.
And so, but if you really want to sort of like take what I but I want to have discovery in my life, like I want to explore maybe it's not just about professional also, I think there are other aspects of life, which is like personal fulfillment,
even cliche I mean love love is a funny thing because like, there are a lot of quotes about love that basically sound like they came out of the book if you just take the word love out of it.
And it's like, you know, the best way to find love is to stop trying to find it or something like it's like exactly the advice here.
And so, you know, just, just, you know, pursue relationships that are interesting, like don't worry about it.
And so I think at some levels, like almost everybody wants to pursue that so certainly that is advice you can follow.
So if you're really open to opportunities that don't worry so much is it going to succeed at some particular threshold that you're concerned with.
But in things that are like more like professional, then, you know, you're getting into risks where there are alternatives that are less risky so it can be troubling.
But with love you don't have much of an alternative I think like you just basically can't just define find a path to find for you to make that happen.
But something like, you know, making a lot of money is also like making a lot of money is a good example actually like like I mean, if you're talking like a billion dollars like it's completely different than like I want to make $100,000 a year.
Like I want to make $100,000 a year I think can be pursued objectively it's pretty clear there's a lot of stepping stones have already been defined and laid out for you.
There are many more than one option so it's not like the one that's good for you is necessarily the one for me but you can still probably identify ones that are reasonable and realistic.
So if you want to make a billion dollars, I mean there are no stepping stones laid out for that. Who knows what it is so like the way to get to making a billion dollars is almost certainly not trying to make a billion dollars.
And so what, what should you be doing is, you know, you should be doing things that are interesting to you.
And so like one thing you could do is well I could try to maximize my salary, like you know, like I'm not going to take the unpaid internship if it's like I'm how am I going to give it to be a billionaire with an unpaid internship but of course that's like a ridiculous position like it's
what you should be doing, because it's actually interesting. And it's almost certainly like the path of interesting. This will be the only path that can lead to billions but you have to remember again that the path of interestingness is not a path to a particular thing.
So there's absolutely no reassurance that doing something interesting will lead to a billion dollars, it will lead to something is the point, something remarkable, if you're lucky.
Personally, you have no idea whether a billion dollars is the thing at the end of that. But the other side of it is, if you did get to a billion dollars, it's probably because you weren't being objective at some point.
So at some point you did follow the path of interestingness and you can see this in the biographies of all billionaires like Steve Jobs or something is it like he says things like this all the time you know he took this like calligraphy class.
He dropped out of college so he could sit in a calligraphy class and just like hang out. Well what's the point of going into calligraphy class like what the heck are you doing with your future there, but then like that led to the whole font thing on the Mac and everything in the Mac became very distinct because of that.
And so like there's story after story after story like there's a people like that like willing to take risks because that's pretty scary. I mean I would never drop out of college and sitting cool I can't imagine myself being that brave, I don't know what kind of mindset that is.
It's like the kind of thing that leads to really interesting stuff just do stuff that's interesting like why was he so passionately interested in calligraphy I have no idea. Wasn't that interesting to me.
I kind of like fonts though but not that much.
But so it's like, this is, this is like what you have to be willing to do and it's your interestingness meter that actually matters, you know it's because it's personal to you.
And if you would have liked this you cannot follow someone else's meter because they'll do it better than you and you're not as sensitive and it is the it's the details that matter it's the richness, it's not the, it's not like the macro level big picture is the little parts that really make you unique.
And your sense of interestingness and that that just cannot be reproduced from someone else so that's why advice is not that helpful on this kind of stuff.
It's like read every biography you want of every famous person like you can't just follow their template like you have to do what's interesting to you.
And so that's that is hard to implement but I think there's there's some principles there like for example, keep a repertoire around.
Like don't just have one thing because it's just much more risky, like you can do that but you will probably go to disappointment and then you'll hate it.
You'll hate the philosophy and you'll assume me or something for telling you, because you'll end up impoverished and on the street or something like that's not a good strategy.
So try to find a way to like have more than one ball in the air at the same time that are interesting and ideally get into a profession that allows you to do that so you're not going bankrupt.
You know, I mean, these are kind of practical things but like you know I was a professor that that's a great profession I'm not saying everybody here should become a professor, but like it's one option like it was one thing where, you know, I can have several research
projects like if one fails, well that's okay like other ones succeeded. It's like having a portfolio of investments, but you want to be in a position where that's actually professionally expected, rather than like extremely risky to your whole livelihood, you know and your
family is going to go broke.
And so a little thinking about that which is practical can, I think can can be useful and it might mean there's some delayed gratification.
As you get yourself into a position where that's actually more realistic it might take some, some years of something like to get into that position.
You know, in order rebellious type people who like, you know, starting at age 15 just do whatever the hell they want, you know, most of them are like, you know, trouble by the devil like 25 like this, that doesn't usually work.
Once in a while it works great, of course, because like that's always somebody who is willing to just follow the interesting as you does the amazing thing that's always the case.
But of course, most people like that will just end up at a dead end and you know interesting this is not a guarantee of anything.
And so like, you know, you can be that way and just be like screw it and do whatever I want the gift to understand you're probably not going to be too happy a few years later.
So there are ways I think to integrate this into your, your personal lifestyle, you have to be realistic and understand what the trade offs are, as with all risk, you know I think risk is something people should be allowed to do, as long as they
understand the risks that they're getting into a lot of time I hear people complain about things that they did that led to less than they hoped they would.
And those are complaints often feel a little hollow to me, if it's something where they should have understood the risk.
You know, like the complaint is generally like, like, you know, it's like a lot of people complain about like going to higher education or something because like a lot of people can't get into higher ed because it's super competitive.
I mean, you probably like I would go into it but understanding I probably won't get into it.
You know, like if you thought that there's some guarantee that's actually like you were not assessing risk realistically.
When you I'm not saying I don't feel sorry like if somebody was misled or something, but like assessing risk is really the first thing.
And then you know if you feel like it's okay to take the right you know you want to become a movie star so you move to Hollywood.
You know, I think it's fine as long as you understand you probably not going to be a movie star, but you're willing to take that risk.
Super helpful can another book that had a great impression on me is Robert Fritz is the path of least resistance and the image I walked away from that book is like straight line is often not the most direct route to something right it's often like a spiral right
kind of the way he talks about or at least the impression I got from it and anyway we're at the top of the hour Ken and I want to make sure you know what we have a really interesting community here all sorts of backgrounds all geographies.
How can we collectively help you is it spreading the word is it just instituting this in our lives like what is top of mind for you and how white how might we be able to be useful to you in some way.
That's a good question.
Well, I mean, spreading the word is clearly useful I am, you know, I sometimes wonder like how viral this idea is.
I still don't know after years like exactly like what like if there had been a marketing team behind it or something with the whole world know about this or is it kind of just limited to certain kind of like intellectual type of person or something like what kind of person,
because I feel like it just should be going all over the place.
Every time I experience people's reactions is overwhelming repositive, I actually thought that when I wrote I thought it'd be controversial. That's what I was expecting like I'd like half the people would be like this is garbage you know like objectives are super important.
Because it seems like everybody's invested in objectives like there's all these gatekeepers everywhere I thought they'd all be angry.
But that's not what I get like that I was it was not what I expected but I found that the gatekeepers are usually feeling better after reading the book they're like I hate my job like I don't like what it's like it seems to speak to something in human nature that that's true.
There is of course some small percentage that don't like it there's always going to be that, but that makes me wonder why why then is it not spreading more.
And so anything that could help to get the word out like I don't care if people read the book is more the message, like to get people to be aware, especially at the institutional level.
Like because that's desperately what I want to battle but I think at the personal level it seems to also resonate and be helpful.
So it's definitely like how can I get the message out anything to get the message out is is great for this I think and now wasn't trying to make money by writing the book the book doesn't make me much money at all.
It's just really interesting getting this message out and trying to do that. Other than that.
You know I would, I would, you know experiment with institutional change if you are a gatekeeper.
That's really hard, I recognize that and so I'm really interested in the actual attempts to do that. I don't think there are a lot like although there's a lot of people who do I know have have read the book and have expressed like you know kind of deep
interest in what its message says they don't necessarily really wreck the culture where they are.
And it's just interesting if somebody would have the courage to do that what the story would be what would that actually look like.
I know a few. There's some very exceptional cases where somebody like modeled their company after the book or something was usually very small startups or something like that, really big success stories like that so that'd be very interesting.
And let's see what else could be helpful is if you if you let me keep in touch I guess like, you know, maybe all things will, as I try to, you know, get this idea more, more accepted maybe have more success and then maybe
maybe I would want to touch base and have to have more ideas for you.
That sounds great. Thank you so much for your time for the book for your perspectives, everyone who stayed on a few minutes later thank you so much.
Ken and and in that in that vein if you're open to it we can share your email with this small group right not not super broadly we don't want to flood you or anything like that but building up case studies seeing how people are using it in their lives I can imagine that would be
interesting so maybe we do that as a next step here.
Sure. Yeah, that'd be great. Please do amazing.
Amazing. Okay, thank you so much everyone have a great day. This is great. Thank you.
Thank you so much. Thanks for having this guys.
Pleasure.
Thank you.
Thank you. This was awesome.
