Welcome back to the program, folks.
Uh, coming up in this half hour, Rich Hall will be here,
and in a couple of minutes I'm going to introduce you to Barbara Blackburn,
who, uh, as you know, is the world's fastest typist.
Now, okay, now it's time.
Uh, this woman who was supposed to be here earlier in the week, we ran out of time,
and I'm very happy that she could stick around and come back and see us.
She is a grandmother. She is all the way from Salem, Oregon,
and, uh, this woman is the fastest typist in the entire world.
Please welcome Barbara Blackburn.
APPLAUSE
Hi, Barbara.
Good to meet you.
Come on over here and sit down.
Go right around me.
Uh, fastest typist, how fast is that?
First of all, tell me what's a good average typing speed?
Oh, a good average typing speed should be around 75,
100 words a minute, maybe.
Wow, that's blistering right along.
Well, you can go down to as low as 60 if you want to.
But 60 would still be considered okay.
That's right.
A person could get a job with 60 words a minute.
That is your average job speed, yes.
All right, and tell us what is your best word per minute ratio?
Uh, I have typed 170 words a minute on minute timings.
I have gotten up to 200 on computers.
No kidding, 200 words a minute.
Now, you said minute timings. How long can you sustain a speed like 170?
Uh, sustain typing, I've done 150 for 50 minutes,
which is 37,500 word strokes, so the Guinness book says.
So for 50 minutes, you go along at that rate.
Now, what about accuracy?
Accuracy is one of the things that I strive to have all the time.
I don't like making mistakes.
Do you ever make mistakes?
Well, I'm not perfect.
Yeah. Now, how do you know you're the world's fastest?
It's not an Olympic event.
No, I don't know.
Did you go to LA and compete again?
You know, the Russians weren't in LA, Barbara.
I know they weren't, and I wasn't in Russia either.
All right, so how do you know you're the world's fastest?
The Guinness book has made the comment
that I am the fastest on the Dvorak keyboard.
I don't know what that means.
Well, it's a different typewriter keyboard.
It's different due to the fact that the keys are rearranged.
Now, somebody was explaining to me that the original typing system
was laid out just arbitrarily.
That's right.
And the system you're talking about was there was some thought
into what letters you use more often than other letters.
That is correct.
It was scientifically developed by Dr. August Dvorak way back in 1932.
I love his work.
I'm sure you would.
Now, Barbara, tell me if this is a correct statistic,
that in the traditional method, your fingers move
the distance they travel in a day of typing is like 15 miles?
That is correct.
That's what they have run some studies on and have found to be true.
Yeah, and with this system, your fingers travel the distance?
About a mile.
About a mile, all right.
About a mile.
I guess, are we ready to do this?
We have a challenge for you, Barbara.
That's what I understand.
Yeah, should we go over there?
Now, come on over here, Barbara.
Let's set this up.
Now, when you're taking, do you make extra money
because you're so fast at this?
No, not really.
No kidding?
No.
Boy, that stinks.
Tell me about it.
All right.
Now, do you take a dictation off of a printed page
or through your ears?
I take it through my ears.
Yeah.
Now, do you understand what's going on?
Do you comprehend what's going on or do you just type it?
You have to understand it in order to be accurate and correct.
So you know everything that you type?
Basically, yes.
Okay.
All right.
I'll tell you what we're going to do.
Let me bring out the, Barbara, the world's fastest typist
is going to go up against the fastest typist we have on our staff.
Ladies and gentlemen, the hardest-working production system
in American television,
say hello to Barbara Gaines.
Barbara, come on out here.
Let me help you with that typewriter, Barbara.
This is Barbara's first time on our show
and we're happy you decided to help us.
Now, how fast can you type a minute, Barbara?
I'm really nervous.
I probably won't be able to type the minute.
But what's your best time?
85.
85.
Those are huge buttons you have when you're sweating.
Okay, Barbara Blackburn, Barbara Gaines.
Hi.
Ladies, now...
She's one of our guests.
Be a little more hospitable.
Nice to meet you.
Nice to meet you.
She came to us all the way from Salem, Oregon.
All right.
Here's what we would like you ladies to type.
For one minute, we'll have a clock on the screen
and from the official Baseball Rules 1984 edition,
they will be typing tonight,
Section 8.05,
The Bawk Rule.
Ladies, are you ready?
On your mark,
begin typing.
One minute here.
Starting out with the Bawk Rule.
They have it in front of them.
Mm-hmm.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
You know, I guess maybe I forgot to explain that...
You know...
You didn't have any paper in there.
I realized that.
I know.
I did on purpose.
I guess it's easy to say you're the fastest.
No way to prove it, is there?
That's the most peculiar thing.
Now, do we have time to load it up and try it again, or is this...
Okay, Barbara, put some paper in there.
I'm sorry.
Yeah.
Barbara, you won that one.
All right, best two out of three.
Okay, here we go again.
Ladies begin typing.
Little paper.
That's just the darnedest thing.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I'm sorry.
Is that a colon or a semicolon?
I don't know.
I have a question about this.
All right, we have a half a minute left.
And the winner receives the lovely dinette set.
All right, we're getting under 20 seconds.
Remember, they're typing the balk rule, section 8.05,
making 84 addition to the official baseball rules.
All right, five seconds remaining.
That's it.
Okay.
All right, tell you what, ladies, come on over here.
We'll do a commercial then.
We'll take a look at the results.
Come on over here, folks.
That was a good one.
That was a good one.
A big one.
A big one.
We'll take another one.
Okay.
Great job.
Thank you.
Thank you so much.
Okay, it didn't, something very strange has happened.
Barbara Gaines, our own production assistant,
I'm not sure how many words exactly, but she acquitted herself quite admirably Barbara. Nice job. Thank you very much now
Barbara figure out how many words you got there in a minute. No, no Barbara Blackburn something happened here
Through no fault of your own. I guess we get the bum equipment or something. Let me just read the first sentence gentilly. I a loosal old loosal
in I amock vets
knit Pintrel a vitton heuristic tea plane
What now what exactly happened there that we screwed something up something something happened to the typewriter while it was
While it was here because you know this smacks of organized crime if you ask me
No, but in all fairness to you apparently we had the wrong ball on your machine something
Yeah, something has happened. It was all right
When I was supposed to be here last night. Yeah, well, we'll get it fixed and you come back
But for right now Barbara Gaines is the world's fastest
I
Will do it we'll do it again. We'll be right back ladies gentlemen
Okay, let me just quickly recap this using the standard the system Barbara had 50 words a minute and about a dozen errors
Barbara was using the the other system. I don't know what went wrong, but we'll figure it out now
I'm sorry, we're almost out of time. I want to apologize a rich hall will be rescheduled
I'm very sorry. We ran out of time for him because of this typing nonsense and it looks like someone may have taken a dive
We'll get into this next week. Good night everybody. Oh
Oh
And if you were with us on Thursday night, you know that there was we had the world's
fastest typist on our show this woman is her name is Barbara
Barbara Blackburn and she can type 220 words a minute and she was out here for a
She was out here for a little typing demonstration and all hell broke loose so we've
We've launched our own little investigation into that but in the meantime, please say hello to our good friend Paul
All right, let's spend a minute here talking about what happened to Thursday night
We had a very nice woman. Her name is Barbara Blackburn. She is the world's fastest typist
In fact, she has entered here in the Guinness Book of World Records
She attains a speed of 170 words per minute using the Dvorak
Simplified keyboard system and a couple of other records right here
So we thought it would be fun to have her on the show and have her go head-to-head in a typing competition with our
fastest typist who happens to be Barbara Gaines one of our
Production assistants and they were going to type from the official baseball rules book
I think the balk rule was what they were gonna type
Okay, so she came out and we started the competition take a look at this videotape
And I think you'll see this was the first place in the competition. We noticed something was not quite right
Oh
Okay, see she didn't put any paper in the machine and we thought well
This is kind of strange for a woman who can type 170 words a minute
So so we we had to reload her machine and then we started the competition once again
And here's what happened at the restart remember they're typing the balk rule
section 8.05
to the official baseball rules
I don't know if you can see it there frozen, but what she was typing was complete illegible gibberish now
We asked her about it and and here's here's Barbara's explanation for why what she typed was unreadable
Barbara Blackburn something happened here
Through no fault of your own. I guess we get bum equipment or something. Let me just read the first sentence gentile I a loosal
in I am mock vets
knit Pintrell a vitton eristic key plane
Well, no, what exactly happened there?
Something something happened to the typewriter while it was while it was here because you know this smacks of organized crime
Okay, something happened to the typewriter while it was here. Well immediately we impounded the samples of the two typing
Barbara Gaines and Barbara Blackburn
And so we thought tonight what we would find out for ourselves. Is she in fact a world champion typist or a world champion con artist
We've assembled now a blue ribbon panel. Let's begin the investigation. Shall we?
Gentlemen howdy-do first of all, thank you very much for coming in this first man to my left is the typewriter repair man
He is from Manhattan office products. His name is Lenny Danny yellow. Am I pronouncing your name correctly?
Yeah, nice to meet you sir
I
Here we have the machine that Barbara
Typed on now. Have you had a chance to take a look at it?
Yeah, I looked at it before and is there anything wrong with it not at all in your years of repairing typewriters
Have you ever seen something malfunction that would cause it to type gibberish?
Yeah, but in this case I didn't find it
I see is it possible that on the night of Thursday, whatever that date was that somebody had tampered with the machine and then after the
Broadcast untampered it so that no one would notice that there was a problem not that I could see now
Uh-huh, and as far as you're concerned this machine is typing perfectly walking. Do you want to demonstrate that for us then?
Oh, the selection is correct. You can see yourself a test for a rotating tilt
Okay, the rotating tilt test is just fine
I mean, so Danny in a brief sentence, how would you describe the condition of this perfect working order?
Nothing wrong with it perfect working order
The next member of our blue ribbon panel is president of corporate security consultants and former secretary of the New York State polygraph Association
Ted even chick Ted nice to meet you, sir
Before the broadcast you had a chance to listen to some of what?
Barbara was saying on the tape, and I believe you put it to some analysis. What are the findings?
Yes, we did David and I put it through a stress analyzer
And we came up finding out that there is a great deal of stress when she's talking about the typewriter itself
Mm-hmm and former claims to speak
And and your experience that the stress could indicate possibly
What exactly oh it can indicate anything from the fact that she's completely unfamiliar with it to the fact that
She doesn't understand herself. What's happening?
But you're prepared to testify that in fact there is some sort of tangential stress there absolutely great deal of it
All right now from the United States Navy ladies and gentlemen, please say hello to Lieutenant Ariane Calpax's lieutenant
Lieutenant I understand you took the example of the typing from Barbara Blackburn and to the layman
It just appeared to be gibberish, and you did some decoding on that example
What what did you find there a lieutenant? Yes, I have Dave and
I've studied this
And as you'll see it's a simple substitution cipher
It reveals the bulk code as a matter of fact
Simple substitution
Substitution cipher meaning what exactly well actually what has happened here is that the
Typing was done so that each letter was displaced one to the right on one particular hand
Oh, I see so it's possible then that for example when I took typing in high school and just learning I would
Inadvertently place my hand in the wrong position on the keyboard and produce something like that
That's correct as a matter of fact
I have here a diagram of the vorac keyboard which is the one she used and as you'll see
All the letters typed with the left hand are as they should appear correctly
However on the right hand we notice that the discrepancy arises it appears that her hand had been had been displaced
One key to the right all right resulting errors. Thank you very much lieutenant
I'll tell you what with this in mind
Let's take a look again at that videotape as they're restarting the typing competition and see if we can notice
Any motion or movement of the right hand going from its original place to the place that the lieutenant suggests remember
Look closely at the right hand here now is the videotape
So apparently for whatever reason the hand moved one notch over
So then summing up briefly here what is our conclusion?
Well our conclusion is that certainly the fault does not lie with late night the staff the production crew the technicians or
This fine piece of equipment the IBM Selectric
So then ladies and gentlemen perhaps
The fault lies
elsewhere
You
