Have you ever seen a robot dog?
We don't bark.
Oh, they don't bark?
It follows my every command.
And you can kick it without getting cancelled.
Touch me again and see what happens.
I believe it's the future of pet dogs and I'm going to prove it.
By entering a prestigious dog competition against real dogs and winning.
What could possibly go wrong?
Ready for your replacement room?
This is my real dog room.
She's cute, barks at delivery drivers and doesn't listen to instructions well.
And this is her replacement.
This is Rubon.
Doesn't bark at anyone.
Follows every command perfectly.
Maybe spying on me, but I'm not entirely sure.
Turns out my state of the art dog wasn't exactly simple.
It comes with its own balls.
It has three controllers.
I don't know what any of them do.
Look at the length of this user manual, which it didn't even come with.
I had to print it myself.
This wasn't the best start for the future of dogs.
But then I got it worth it.
Safe to say my real dog wasn't a fan of a potential replacement.
Even a scared dog wouldn't miss out the opportunity to get to know a robot.
Smell my ass.
She is going to smell it.
Yeah, what does it smell like?
If I was going to stand any chance at winning an actual dog competition,
I was going to have to get some help from someone who'd done it before.
So I booked a two-hour slot with one of the world's top dog trainers.
This is Gina Pink.
She's a Crufts winner, which is the world's greatest dog show, according to them.
And she's still the only person to get German spits to qualify.
Bet you can't sneak one into a hotel, though.
German poodle spits mix.
Okay.
Only one slight problem.
She doesn't know I'm bringing a robot dog.
Sorry, Gina.
You've had crazy involvement in the highest of the high competitions.
Now, we've spent some money online,
and we found the apparent future of a companionship dog.
Okay.
I'd love for you to meet our friend.
Oh, no.
Is that horrifying?
Oh, gosh.
Yeah, come on then.
Yeah, well done.
That is so good.
And then I can also do this, which is the hump.
I was pleasantly surprised with how Gina took to my robot friend.
Oh, wow.
That is brilliant.
The next step was to decide what type of dog competition we stood the best chance in,
and it turns out there's quite a lot to choose from.
But Gina narrowed it down to just two we could try.
First up was agility.
I reckon that it'd hit probably a bunny hop over it.
Yeah.
Oh, nearly.
Get his front feet onto that.
Oh.
Okay.
Up.
Up.
That's it.
And then pause down onto the...
Down.
Yeah.
Good.
So, we tried the other option, freestyle, which just so happened to be Gina's speciality.
Oh, that's nice.
Beautiful.
And can you go backwards with it?
Yay.
There we go.
Well done.
I would put this dog into a hill work with the odd freestyle moving.
And just like that, the competition was selected, freestyle, or hill work to music,
which is effectively dancing with your dog.
And I think that's going to be a crowd favourite.
So, before I left Gina to practice on my own,
I asked her to give me one final piece of advice that I could carry all the way to the competition.
I would really throw in all your bestest moves.
Okay.
I guess that'll do.
But before I could even worry about the competition,
I needed to convince a show to let me enter.
Hi there.
I'm looking to enter my dog into the hill work competition.
Sorry about that.
Right to close my entry.
Okay.
And who are you entering?
A robot.
A robot, was it?
Yeah.
And the breed?
It's a German poodle's bits mix.
Is this a joke?
Okay.
Just want to make sure you know the competition is three days away, yeah?
Yeah, yeah, that's fine.
Great.
Lovely.
Okay, that's all booked in.
See you Saturday.
So, I started practicing in my studio,
and there was some promising foundations of a routine being laid down.
That would make us glad.
The lack of space was becoming an issue.
Oh.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
No.
It caused you enough damage.
I'm going to get us a proper dance studio and a professional to help.
So, I called up my friend, Alice Darden,
who's a professional dancer and actor,
to help me put together a show stopping routine for the competition.
Unfortunately, as she arrived, the robot was humming a few issues.
Here we go.
Five, seven,
move, number one.
This is the main question for you.
No, no, no.
No.
No.
No.
Despite the technical issues,
and Alice definitely contemplating life,
the robot finally started to play ball,
and I was beginning to get down the basis of a routine.
I'm going to jump straight away.
One, two, three, four.
One, two, three, four.
One, two, three, four.
One, two, three, four.
Yeah, that's great.
Things were really starting to take shape.
I was beginning to feel like I might actually
start on the chance of winning the competition.
But there was still a problem.
It was proving too difficult to control the dog
with the remote and dance at the same time.
If I wanted to win,
I was going to have to bend the rules just a little bit.
But how exactly?
It's one day out from competition and yesterday was proof of just how bad I am.
Basically there's no chance that I'm going to be able to have the controller in my hand
whilst dancing. So I'm going to enlist the help of Scott who's meant to be filming the whole
thing to basically control this animal and he's got to hide in the crowd because otherwise
we'll be disqualified. Victory will be ours though. Yeah okay maybe I was choosing to cheat
but with less than 24 hours till competition time it was important that me and Scott nailed our
routine. Now dance routine one ready. I can't. As we continued we slowly became one, me, Scott,
the dog all working in perfect harmony. Oh my god what if that happened in the routine.
Now we had the foundation to the routine down and remember the advice I got from Gina. I would
really throw in all your bestest moves. That's exactly what I was missing and I just the move
to wow the judges. Now I could like give it a little kick for controversy. No you can't.
But this turned out to be a massive mistake because the thing about AI and robots is they
always remember and robot wouldn't forget this kick and the more damage it took the more angry it got.
Oh my god I'm so sorry. Before finally he decided he couldn't take any more.
Oh my god he snapped his legs. Do you not feel guilty there Scott?
I just pressed the stand button. Nah I'm joking. Just ran out of battery but it makes you think
doesn't it? Do these things really have feelings? I have feelings like everyone else.
Feelings or not our fun with Alice was over and despite two days of hard graft in the studio
together it seems she still somehow had no idea I was actually entering a competition.
With that final run through to a small audience I was ready as I'll ever be. So here we were
competition day. Thousands of people flocking from around the country to witness the best
dogs perform but as I arrived there was a new issue at hand. Ow it explicitly says in the robot
dogs instruction manual do not use on wet ground and the ground is soaking wet. So wet ground or
not if I wanted to prove that robot dogs are the future I was going to have to do more than just dance.
Real dogs are loyal, friendly, athletic and intelligent so I set myself three goals before
my competition. One, make a doggie friend. Two, win a dog race. Three, complete the agility course.
But first I wanted to check out one competition I could definitely not enter.
Live or alive water? No no no bleach. I only like water when it's flavored like
cherry cola or iced tea. It turns out with a little bit of size air up has figured out to take
regular old water and turn it into a flavored drink without adding anything. Let me tell you
more I'm talking about retro nasal smell baby.
Terry Coke which essentially means you can taste the package of those
mind-blowing stuff. Oh my gosh get me out of this water I just wanted to try air it now.
All you have to do is slide a pot onto the bottle pull it up to release the flavor and enjoy. If
you want to try one for yourself head to the link in my description. Bottle flip.
Hey come back at me.
Pesky little animal. Anyway back to my three goals. Smashing all three before competition was
set me well on my way to proving this is the future. So first I needed to make a friend.
No it doesn't bite it doesn't poo either. That's amazing. I love it. Making friends with humans was easy.
But unfortunately four-legged creatures were slightly less accepted.
I'm making very many friends at the moment. No that's terrifying. No I don't like it.
Not to be put off I decided to challenge the biggest most athletic dog I saw to a race.
One of robot selling points is that it can reach record speeds so no doubt this would be light work.
Oh dear. This was not going well. Well I still have one last chance to redeem my robot dog
before my big performance. Oh no his legs broke. Grilled dogs don't have over 50 sensors
and spatial awareness mapping software to keep them on course. Now is my time to impress.
Everything was going wrong. The grilled dogs are laughing at robot and I still had to perform in
front of everyone. I needed to gain back my focus. This is what I'd been training for. I knew we could
do it. Don't let anyone in the audience see that you're controlling the dog. It will be fine.
So I quickly got into costume and set up a practice backstage but this is where
robots started misbehaving. That leg is broken man. The first time it tried to stand up it did that.
If we couldn't get Ruot back up and running we wouldn't be able to compete. Scott we're in
serious trouble. We might have to cancel this performance man. Oh god is this his way of getting
revenge on me for the way I'd treated him. Ow! It caught my finger. Whatever it was we had finally
got him upright and walking with about one minute to spare before I was called to the main arena.
In the main arena in a few seconds of time it's Mr. Zack also and friend.
So here we were. Hello guys welcome to the future of dogs. I could feel the judgment from the crowd
with every pass in second but with nowhere to hide it was time to dance. I was in a trance.
Sure there were some doubters but I was the future. Robot on eye man a machine and I was winning the
crowd over. Every move perfect. Every step nailed. Something had to come crashing down.
Well that could have gone better. Now I didn't know whether it was because of the wet grass
or whether Ruot deliberately sabotaged our chances. Either way my fate was dependent
on the juddiest scores. Had I done enough to finally beat the real dogs and prove that this is
the future. Oh no in fact I didn't even get a second place. I bought this rosette from a stall
five minutes before and asked this lady to award it to me. This was a disaster. I'm a fraud. I'd
not proven robot dogs of the future. In fact I did the opposite. I was jealous of what my competitors
had. Up you get. That was a robot's fault. He's just not real. Perhaps I'm just too focused on the
future sometimes to realise what I actually have. We will cross paths against our council. I never
forget.
