Hello everyone! I'm going to present you a book, a very interesting book, written by Bill Gates.
I think we all know who Bill Gates is and what he does.
But this book is very interesting because it talks about the climate change.
But in a very interesting way, I know that climate change can be quite a cliché.
Almost like everybody is saying that they are bored with this theme that everyone is talking about climate change.
It's almost like a cliché and it shouldn't be.
So I have found this book to be quite useful and quite...
In a way it's good, it's a good book, but in the same way it's a scary book.
Because if you are reading about all of the consequences of the things that we are doing now,
it's not such a great book to read because it will scare you actually.
So the complete title of the book is How to avoid climate disaster, the solutions we have and the breakthroughs we need.
So Bill Gates has studied this issue for quite a long time.
I must tell you that just to give you an idea.
So almost like three quarters of the book are with the issues that we are having
only a small tiny part of the book is about the solutions.
I wish Bill would have spent a bit more time in doing the positive part of the book, the solutions part of the book.
So yeah, 51 billion is the number that you should know.
It's about tons of gas that we are having on this planet, the gases that have a greenhouse effect.
And zero would be the target.
So from 51 billion to zero, that's quite a lot.
And basically the goal of Bill Gates in this book is to tell us how we are going to get there, basically.
So I think that it's achievable, definitely it's achievable.
But in the same time, I think that it's quite costly.
This is the truth because Bill says that in order to get there, we should electrify everything like give up on the things that make us go to
fossil fuel, to things that pollute and electrify everything, you know, instead of using like, I don't know, your normal car, you should use an electric car, but we all know that
it's not an activity that is greatly incentivized by the government because the electric cars are quite expensive still for a lot of people.
And not only that, they're not ideal for long distances, to be honest.
So he built as a truth about this climate change, and that truth is that the richest countries are guilty for this.
And the poor countries, the poor people, they unfortunately suffer the consequences.
So we have to fix something that the rich people or the people that can afford to have conspicuous consumption of things in order to prevent the poor people to get like the shorter end of the stick.
So, yeah, I have found this to be a bit unfair, actually.
The book is filled with a lot of technical details.
So Bill tells us why it should be zero and not another number, and this should be achieved by the end of 2015.
So there are a lot of like diagrams and a lot of charts.
And the sad thing about this carbon dioxide that's being released into the atmosphere is that it's not going away very easily.
So one-fifth of the carbon dioxide that we have released today, it will still be here another 10,000 years.
So it's not very easy to erase the consequences of our less nature-friendly activities.
So Bill portrays a future, how will the future be if we do not take actions, and we can see the limits of this future.
He says that we will have more days with extreme temperatures, we will have much more storms, very violent storms.
Talks about the Hurricane Maria in 2017 that has left Puerto Rico devastated, and not only that, the damages that it has done, it has put Puerto Rico 20 years behind.
So yes, a natural disaster, like it devastates everything and leaves nothing behind.
So it can push you back a lot.
So imagine like, you see this all the time, with a lot of hurricanes, with a lot of issues basically.
So it's not very good, it's not very good at all.
We will have much more fires in the woods, and if the temperature will rise even with two degrees, the coral reefs might disappear, and that will trigger a chain reaction in the sense that it will destroy a major income source for the fishermen.
And for those who have made a living by providing service with fishing, so it's all in a chain.
So this book made me really understand the fact that everything that we are doing is triggering a chain reaction.
So you can say, okay, it's not a big deal that I have a car and my car runs on gas, I'm just one person.
But the problem with this is that each of the billions of people, if they think like this, nobody's doing anything.
So it's all things that add up.
Bill mentions Syria and the drought that happened between 2007 and 2010.
1.5 million people have abandoned the areas, the rural areas where they used to do agriculture in favor of towns.
And by 2018, 13 millions, 13 millions of people had to just walk away.
Yeah, just imagine that suddenly the area that you are living is becoming like a desert.
And if you used to like grow vegetables and have animals, and that suddenly is no longer an option, you will just have to relocate and go in another place.
That's not very easy to do.
So now let's talk about petrol.
About petrol and I found some very interesting details about petrol.
On a global scale, we are using 15 billion, 15 billion liters of petrol every day.
The petrol is cheaper than the cheapest soda, like a refresher.
And I was blown away and Bill made some calculations.
And the gas price, for example, in 2020 came on 26 cents per liter.
I think he has done his calculations for USA, honestly.
And the soda, the cheapest soda is 75 cents per liter.
So imagine like petrol is really cheap, gas is really, really cheap.
And this is why it's such an issue to convince anyone basically to choose the echo friendly alternative because of the taxes and because of the Green Premium Edition, you know, you pay extra if you want to echo friendly.
And you have noticed that everything that has that little label, you always pay extra.
It's just because for the moment, it hasn't been found a solution to cut down the cost, you know, of producing something more green, more echo.
And the issue is that until any type of technology gets adopted, it takes time.
So Bill Gates says that and we have noticed this throughout the history.
Remember how long it took until all people had a computer in their homes?
It took years. How many years did it take until every family had a car?
It took years.
So adopting a new technology means maybe decades, decades.
It's the same with green energy.
The only issue that we have is the fact that by the time all of us will be able to adopt it, the climate will maybe be severely damaged, you know.
So Bill starts to talk about the main industries and the main areas of our lives that cause the most pollution.
And he starts with the fossil fuel and the coal industry.
So because of the pollution caused by coal exploitation, there are more people dying because of this.
Because in comparison with all of the nuclear incidents, I know that when nuclear is spelled in a sentence, it automatically triggers a lot of mixed emotions.
Because I must tell you that I was amazed to find out that using nuclear energy is the only type of energy that is green like it does not cause any release of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere.
So it's the greenest of the alternatives, the nuclear energy.
And because of the incidents that happened, let's just mention like the Chernobyl, people are very, very reluctant, you know.
Like I'm pretty sure if someone would come and knock on your door and tell you, hey, we are planning to build a nuclear power plant in here.
I bet people would almost entirely say no, because there's a lot of fright and a lot of prejudice, you know, because people do not know these facts, basically.
So let's name the guilty ones.
Bell makes a list with the main five guilty industries that are contributing to the overall pollution and climate change.
It's about the production process, basically.
It's about concrete, steel, plastic, and 31% out of the greenhouse effect gases are being produced because of this process.
So all of the buildings that need these materials, these three basic materials, they are responsible for the pollution that is happening.
Another responsible is connecting at the electricity network, 27% of the gases, agriculture, 19%, and I'll make a small little note, stop eating burgers.
I was blown away to find out that in order to produce the meat and the burgers, you need a lot of land, and not only that, but the cows are responsible for these gases,
because they also release a methane in the air because of the flatulence.
I was like, even Bell was so funny when he specified this, that it doesn't look like a very serious deal to say that the flatulence of the cows that help you eat the burgers are affecting the planet, but it's actually very true.
Transportation going from A to B, 16%, and maintaining hot or cool air or heating or cooling your house, it's 7%.
So these are the main responsibles.
In Switzerland, we have a sort of a machine CDA that is supposed to absorb the CO2 from the atmosphere, so it's basically like a big vacuum that could just absorb everything from our air and purify it.
But check this out, it would cost 5.1 trillions of dollars every year in order to solve the problem.
Okay, this sounds very unlikely for me to happen. I don't think that any government would be willing to spend so much money to clean up the air.
Bell talks about the poor areas on our planet, especially about the sub-Saharan Africa, where 600 million people do not have access to electricity.
So this is the irony of this planet, I would say, that the poor people are going to be the most affected by what the rich people are doing.
So an example about agriculture, for example, like a farmer from Switzerland or from USA is much better equipped to deal with the consequences of bad climate on his crops than a farmer in Africa.
A lot of farmers in Africa are already struggling to make a living from agriculture, so if the weather goes bad and their crops are being banished, they're done.
So I have found this to be very ironic and very sad and almost cynical that as our salaries grow and as the well-being level grows throughout Europe and USA,
people can afford more, so people spend more, so people get an extra car, they get air conditioners, they get a lot of stuff, and that just raises the level of pollution.
And unfortunately, the poor people in Africa and other underdeveloped areas, they will suffer more than those who have got their air conditioners. It's quite sad, I think.
So the fossil fuels, they are giving us two thirds of all of the energy that we are generating. So the problem with fossil fuels is that they are very cheap.
They are very cheap to exploit. They give a lot of energy and it's very hard to convince the titans in the industry to say, okay, I'm not going to use this resource and go to a 10x or 100x more expensive eco solution.
So it's a vicious circle and it's very hard to solve, actually.
The great issue with energy and its storage, how do you store?
So let's assume that we are able to find green alternatives for energy, but how do we store it?
That's another issue. You would need huge batteries. It's unimaginable, so this is another issue of green energy because even if you would obtain it, how do you store it?
So it's like a loop, you know, it's a loop of issues.
Bill mentions in 2021 a project called Express TransWest. It's a project about transmitting the energy generated by the wind in Wyoming and get that to California.
It will become operational in 2024. I haven't researched if it is operational. I'm really curious about that.
And that's happening 17 years after starting it. So it takes time. So it takes a lot of time.
So the nuclear energy is the only source of energy without carbon emissions. So it can provide you with electricity day in and night out.
So it's, yeah, it's really good. I was amazed. So Bill talks about the two processes in the nuclear energy that can be used to obtain energy.
It's about using the energy when the atoms, they split or when they get united.
So the issue with those is that they can leave radioactive waste.
So even with nuclear energy, we have to think about, okay, what do we do with that radioactive waste?
So I have discovered that there is no solution without a problem to solve afterwards.
So we have to find ways in which we can tackle the entire period of consequences for any solution as green as it can sound.
So bringing the atoms together is better than and using that energy is better because the radioactive, the waste is radioactive only for a couple of hundreds of years.
It compares on with the other method with the fusion where the waste can remain radioactive for thousands of years.
That's a significant difference, I would say. The problem is that we need a lot of energy to start that reaction.
So in order to start the reaction, yeah, we need a lot of energy. That's the problem.
There's another project in France about this.
So this project is supposed to start in 2030 and it's supposed to generate plasma and energy from its type of nuclear reaction.
Very, very interesting.
There's also talks about the wind energy and the biggest user of wind turbines by using the coast wind is UK.
I was amazed to find this out.
So this is pretty much it about the coal, about the steel.
Oh, mentioning the steel, producing one ton of steel makes 1.8 tons of CO2.
That's a lot.
So all of the steel in the buildings, yeah, they came with a price.
So let's move on to agriculture.
So here, Bill mentions a very important person that has made quite a significant contribution to agriculture.
It's about Norman Borlaug that took the Nobel Prize in 1970.
He has developed a different type of wheat with a shorter stem and with a bigger size.
And all of the wheat that is growing today in the world is derived from the plant developed by this engineer.
So Norman did a huge service to humanity.
Another significant improvement in agriculture came with the development of the synthetic product
that farmers use in order to nourish their crops, you know.
So without that, a lot of people in really poor areas, they can't improve their soil otherwise.
So developing this product, this synthetic product really helped a lot of people.
And Fritz Haber and Karl Bosch managed to do this process.
Yeah.
There are also talks about the forest.
I was very sad to read this statistic that in the entire world we have lost more than 1.3 million square kilometers of forest from 1990s until now.
And it's really not beneficial for us because one tree can absorb 4 tons of CO2 in 40 years.
So the trees basically absorb all of the toxic CO2 out of the atmosphere.
So when we are cutting and using them to burn them, we are doing double, double damage.
We are extracting a plant, a product that can help us and we're also releasing CO2 while burning it.
It's really sad.
So again, we go to another guilty factor, the transportation.
So there have been works done when it comes to using green energy for transportation.
But for example, in cases of planes, it's very unlikely to have that developed in the future.
Because the best, the best top-notch electric plane that has been built, it can transport two people.
At a maximum speed of 340 kilometers per hour and it can fly only for three hours until it needs to be recharged.
So this is not a reliable plane that a big company would want to adopt.
Because using kerosene and the classical fuels for planes, it's what gets people from A to B really, really fast and really, really cheap.
So we need technology and we need people with brilliant minds to find alternatives basically.
This statistic again shocked me.
So the population on the planet is keep on rising.
So in order to provide shelter for people, we will need to add 232 billion meters of buildings until 2060.
That is the equivalent of building a New York every month for 40 years.
So I think that we also need to find alternative ways to develop buildings and places to live that would not require so much pay and so much fuel and so much concrete.
So again, I think innovation and there has not only innovation, but we need to think the buildings in a different way like much more green buildings.
And there is such a building, Bullet Center in Seattle.
It's one of the greenest commercial buildings in the world, but it was very, very expensive to build.
We need a concept that is cheap, that is available and that we can use from commercial to urban.
And again, I think challenge in a way I can understand while Bell is quite in a dilemma because the problems are so many and they are so all interconnected that the solutions will have to be very, very, I don't know, original and new and cheap.
That's the problem because people are not willing to spend a ton of money or pay for greener electricity like have their bill cost raise up to 100% or 200% just for the sake of the planet.
Like people who live on day by day will be not motivated.
They will say, okay, screw the planet.
Like I don't have the money, a greener bill for my electricity, give me the cheap, polluting friendly alternative because I can't afford it.
And this is another factor about the taxes, the extra taxes that you have to pay for these alternatives because they cost more.
And I can understand why people would not be willing to adopt it.
The cost, I think the cost is the biggest issue.
Yeah.
So we go on the third, like, the second, the third factor, the agriculture is a lot of talk about agriculture.
It's quite a predominant subject in this book.
So there's a talk about the mangrove alternative because the mangrove can help stabilize the soil against flooding.
So when flooding happens, these mangroves are able to somehow be like a buffer front of this phenomenon.
And there's a new field emerging, geoengineering.
And this is about making temporary adjustments in the oceans or in the atmosphere in order to cool down the planet.
So Bill here said that a lot of people are against geoengineering because it looks like we are playing God and you're trying to really like change the planet.
But for me it makes sense because there was a story about somehow changing the way the clouds absorb and to make the clouds much more luminous in order to reflect sunlight.
And if you managed to do that for a couple of days or a couple of months, it would really have an impact and then you can stop.
For me it makes sense because I think it would be maybe cheaper in comparison with trying to make the people adopt costly alternatives to what they are using for their daily lives like transportation, what they're eating.
So I don't know, I was wondering that even if a brilliant mind like Bill Gates has, even if he is struggling with this issue, finding solutions and finding alternatives, this gives me a depth of the problem.
And it's so complex because it doesn't come only from what we are eating or it doesn't come from where we are going and how often we are traveling.
They're all like interconnected, interweaved. So yeah, it's a very complicated issue so I can understand why it's so complicated.
It has become almost like a cliche because I suppose that not a lot of people would go in depth and really try to find out what's this thing with the climate change.
Yeah.
There's talk about Denmark. We all know that all of the Nordic countries are a bit ahead of everyone almost, but Denmark is producing half of its electricity supply from the wind.
And it's the biggest exporter of wind turbines in the world.
Well, I was like, of course, doing this, it does not apply to every country, but not every country has this sort of geographical positioning so they could use the wind.
But those that do, it makes sense for them to invest in it.
And not only that, but I think it makes sense because it's like you are obtaining a sort of freedom when it comes to electricity that is using natural resources that are there.
But you only have to use them. So I think what this book maybe doesn't have is maybe a list with all of the natural assets that every country on the planet would have.
And it would make them like approach finding an energy supply in a wiser way. For example, okay, if you have a lot of sun, use it. If you have a lot of wind, use it. If you have a lot of water and use it.
So, yeah, I think it should be consensus to have each country find alternatives for energy, but find them from nature and from the natural resources they have been given.
For example, UK is using like the winds, Denmark is using them. So, yeah, I think this is still a new territory, I think.
Yeah. So, there's a super story of a family in Kenya that grabbed my attention. Let me just find it because I really liked it.
So, yeah, this is like the farmer and Bill talks that in 2009 he went to visit Miriam and Laban Palaam at the farm in Kabyet, Kenya.
So, they also have three children and the farmers are living in Kenya with less than one hectare of land.
So, what happened two years before being visited by Bill? They were small farmers that practiced a really basic agriculture just to make a living.
They were cultivating corn, which is quite common and veggies. They also had a cow that they milked two times per day.
In total, the cow would give them three litres of milk. And that's quite little, three litres of milk for a family with five members. That's quite little.
So, after two years, like when Bill has met this family, their life was completely different. What has changed?
So, first of all, they had four cows. They were producing 26 litres of milk. They were selling 20 litres. They were keeping six litres for their own consumption.
So, they were winning four dollars a day. So, in Kenya, with four dollars per day, they were able to rebuild some parts of the house, you know, to cultivate pineapple for export and also to be able to sustain their children in school.
So, what happened? It was a decisive moment when a farm, a factory for cooling the milk was opened near their town where they live.
In that place, that factory, there were people that managed to educate farmers and tell them what they could use on their crops and what could they use for their cows to help the cow give more milk and to keep them healthy.
And this helped them a lot.
So, the average Kenyan is producing 55 less carbon dioxide than the average American.
Yeah.
So, the family in Kenya was saved by education, basically, because a lot of people that live there and they try to make a living, maybe they do not have access to the knowledge.
Like, to better feed, to better care for their cows, to just information.
And having that factory open, it helped them.
So, did the farmer raise his carbon print?
Yes, but it's very insignificant in comparison with a farmer from Texas, for example.
So, I think that it's very important to specify that Bell says that it wouldn't be fair, and I agree, it wouldn't be fair to say, let's, like, if the people from the poorer area try to raise their head above water and just make a better living,
they will contribute to the pollution of the planet, so they should not advance.
But that's not fair, because it's like, why should they pay for, like, the consequences for the rich people that brought the planet into this point?
So, Bell says that we have to find alternatives for farmers and the people in the poorer areas to also level up their lifestyle, but without contributing so much to the climate change.
So, it's a very complicated issue, and let me just say, I think in chapter 11, Bell starts to offer us 10 solutions for 10.
In chapter 10, it must be, yeah, in 10, no, in 11, yeah.
So, this is, like, the part with the solutions from the book, and this is, like, the part with the problems.
So, it's definitely not very encouraging.
Yeah, so Bell presents us his plan to reach zero, like, zero emissions, you know?
And he says that it can be done, and he remembers his times when he had a dream with his friend, Paul Allen, when founding Microsoft to be able to let, like, have each person on the planet have a computer, you know?
So, it looked pretty wild, but now it's possible.
So, this makes Bell also think that, okay, we can also make this happen in the environment, you know?
We can also, like, yeah, make it happen somehow.
It looks like a fantasy until someone gets it done, you know?
Each dream, it looks like a fantasy until someone gets it done, you know?
Ah, yeah.
And he says that we need a lot of sciences to contribute to this because we need a common effort, you know?
It's not enough to have one actor, you know, from one industry to take action.
We need a common effort, you know?
And this can only be done through collaboration.
It's not through pointing fingers, you know?
Oh, the agriculture is to blame.
Oh, no, the fossil fuels.
Oh, it's like, we are, like, the titans of all industries could just say, okay, we all contributed to this mess,
but this mess was somehow necessary in order for the world to be as it is now, you know?
So we need a couple of sciences to collaborate and we need biology, we need chemistry, we need physics,
we need political sciences, we need economy, we need engineering.
So we need a lot of specialists to just gather up and now think about it, you know?
Like explore the depths of their minds and find out.
So he talks about offer and demand.
So he's trying to say that, for example, if you are going to choose to order a vegan burger instead of a classical burger,
you will make a difference because once you place that order, there is a demand.
And if more people are doing it, then, of course, the big, big players in the market will listen because everything that's happening now,
it's like offer and demand.
Are people consuming more soda drinks and say, okay, we're going to create a product?
Are people, do people want green cars and stuff like that and there's demand?
Okay, we're going to produce that.
So this is what this book maybe is trying to do to instill a sense of personal responsibility and contribution in the problem
because you cannot wash your hands and say, I'm just one person in Europe and my habits do not make a difference.
Yes, they do because it's the power of the compound, the power of the many individual choices.
So you pick it one day and you tell a friend or a sister or a brother and maybe they will pick another thing and this adds up.
It's like the snowball effect.
So I think this is one thing that Bill tries to do in his book to tell us that all of our individual choices will contribute to a change in the demand in the market.
Because if people would come, let's put it this way.
If more people would come into a KFC and they would say, do you have a vegan option?
And this would happen a thousand times per day.
Probably the KFC management could say, okay, our crispy chicken is not so much in demand.
People want more vegan options.
Okay, we need to change.
And that will have an effect on the planet because they will need less chickens because people are no longer interested in chicken nuggets.
But if people are not trying to change their own habits, guess what?
The market will give them what they want because if you were to have a business and you want to make money, you are like the client is your master.
And the client will tell you what he wants and you will deliver because you want to make money.
And it makes sense.
I like that Bill does not point fingers in order to make people guilty because in our industry, even the biggest burger chain, they are providing to people what they want.
So maybe I'm thinking that in a similar situation like with the farmer in Kenya, people need education.
People need to be told, hey, do you know that there's a better alternative to the classical burgers?
You could have this and that.
The problem in perspective in the sense that you want your children to need healthier air, you want your grandchildren to live on a good planet, you know?
Because we will be gone by natural causes.
People get born and they die every day.
But the planet, we are stuck here for the moment.
So for the next 100 or 500 years, I do not see people colonizing different planets.
Like this is what we've got.
And yeah, we need education.
Yeah.
And we need also innovation.
Innovation.
I would dare to say that we need scientists.
We need people like Einstein and people like Max Planck and people like Tesla to invent new things, you know?
So Bill makes a list with the necessary technologies that we need.
We need zero carbon concrete steel.
We need and based on plants and on cells, you know, you can create in the lab.
We need to find a way to store energy.
We need a geothermal energy.
We need a subterranean transmission of electricity.
There was one great idea that I liked about finding a way to transmit electricity, you know, the excess of electricity underground.
But the problem is that you have to find cables that do not overheat much.
Because electricity, like, if you go, like, do not touch but cables through which electricity is transmitted, they can get pretty hot.
So trying to send a lot of electricity underground without any system to ventilate that underground, obviously, is another issue that has to be solved by a brilliant scientist, I would say.
Yeah, we also need electrophills, electrophills, we need biofuels.
We need the nuclear energy, but we need to find ways in which to make it safe.
We need the government to increase the budget or research and developing clear energy and bills makes a comparison with the budget that the government gave to for health.
And the National Institute for Health, it has, it had a budget of 36 billions of dollars.
But for research, the budget is only 7 billions of dollars.
But Bill states, and I can see his logic, that the investment, the bigger investment in research would pay, would pay itself off dividends because of the compound effects it will have on the climate.
So you invest more in research now, but you will, like, reap the benefits decades and hundreds of years later.
Bill also says, again, for the governments, that it would be a good idea to invest in a project of research and developing with high risk and great results.
And he gives an example of the human genome project, and it was a very high risk project, but it paid off dividends because for each dollar that government invested, it was an earning of $141 was reaped for the economy of the United States.
A solution is also to accelerate the demands for innovations, to have stimulants that can reduce the risks and costs, to have a price for the carbon.
And he says that people should pay extra if they choose the options that are increasing their food carbon print.
So if I have an alternative to go green and I don't, I will pay extra.
And it makes sense. For example, look at air conditioning units. You know, there is that, there are those labels that tell you it's A plus plus, it's A plus, it's B, it's C.
So you might get a cheaper air conditioning unit at the beginning, but on the long term that will be very costly for you because energetically like it's inefficient and it's consumption, it's preposterous, you know.
On the contrary, if you invest in a more expensive air conditioning unit, and it has like better energy consumption, you will reap the benefits once and years after, like because your electricity bill will be lighter because that machine is better thought in terms of consumption, you know.
I will also say that we should have a standard. So here is the complicated thing. In order to develop worldwide standard, you have to put nations to agree.
Having so many nations, so many different interests, you know, to agree on a standard.
That's a challenge. That's a challenge.
No, he also says that we should throw away the old stuff like and including like factories and I don't know places where they are trying to energy but they're very inefficient and bill is going through the tear down and rebuild again approach.
But I can understand why this can be again something that not a lot of people would agree with because they would, they have like the sunk cost fallacy in the sense that, oh, we have invested so much into building this, I don't know, power plant and how can we like carry down and build another one like wow.
But again, sometimes it's good to let go of the things that are not efficient anymore.
Think of the, for example, as a comparison, the old vintage cars, the old vintage cars that some people keep and actually drive.
But those cars are like punges for gas.
They, they have a crazy consumption of gas like it's not, it's not smart to continue to drive them.
It's just ludicrous like you can keep them for beauty but driving that it would make your pockets stink.
Like, and take this analogy with the energy exploitation and the factories or maybe the plants.
Again, it doesn't make sense to keep them running if they are just making money, you know?
Let's talk about the government, about the authority.
And in Chapter 12, Bill says, how can we, each of us contribute as a citizen?
And they suggest that we should be much more active in the political scene in the sense that we should see who is responsible for clean energy in our city, to get in contact with them.
Yeah.
And he also has some talks about the politics.
Yeah.
So there's a lot of talk about the politics and the governments and their impact on this problem.
And, yeah, it makes, it makes a lot of sense because for any law to be approved, it has to go through the process of the bureaucratic process of being adopted.
So I liked this book, but I admit that I would have liked for it to have a thicker part of the solutions because the problems God knows there are so many.
And I, my intuition tells me that we need some really good, good scientists to put their minds together and find solutions, you know?
So I understand it makes sense to delegate more money and more resources to research, you know, that kind of activity that maybe a lot of citizens find boring or unnecessary, but let's take a minute to go back in history and realize that everything that we normal, common people enjoy
has happened because that scientist, someone who has studied and did a lot of research, was able to find an idea like the light bulb, the electricity, the wheat that, you know, so we need to support these people
and we need to allocate funds for them in order to get the better alternatives, you know?
So yeah, investing in education and in research and innovation is really, really important because people, these invisible people that nobody sees because they are with their heads in the box and studying and doing experiments, these are the people that put our money and our bets on because they will manage to find a solution, you know?
Yeah. So this is it about this book.
I think it's a necessary reading because we have to think a bit further than our immediate horizon.
And I think we have all seen at least, I don't know for you, but for me at least in the last five years, you could see in your country the fact that change of seasons is not the same.
The winters are not the same anymore.
The autons, like everything is shifting and it's definitely warmer and you have temperatures in January and February that are like shocking, you know?
Because 20 years ago, in Europe at least in February, it would be very cold in the winter, but now it's like springtime.
So for us that are a bit older, we can see those things happening, you know?
Children and teenagers now, maybe they haven't gone through so many seasons, but those who have been living for quite a while, they can get the difference and it's pretty scary, you know?
To realize that this whole climate change is very not real.
Okay. Thank you very much for listening to me and I'll see you next time for the next book review. Bye-bye.
