Now, I want to be clear, there's a lot of charlatans, there's a lot of woo, but that
doesn't mean there aren't real phenomena.
Nobody gets addicted to psychedelics.
No, they get addicted to rabbit hole metaphysics.
That's what happens is their own idiosyncratic, completely egocentric, thick metaphysics.
I sat down with John Fravecki, an award-winning professor of cognitive science and Buddhist
psychology to discuss rabbit hole metaphysics, the sometimes weird, outlandish stuff people
believe thanks to the internet.
According to Fravecki, the current mainstream metaphysics, physicalism, has brought us to
the meaning crisis.
What you have is a worldview that purports to explain everything, except how you, as
a meaning maker, actually belong in that world, so you have the problem that we generate
this worldview from which we are radically alienated, radically disconnected.
As Fravecki approaches the meaning crisis and metaphysics scientifically, I thought
he would be interested in the relationship between physics and consciousness.
But when I brought it up, it kindly made clear to me that we have to think about cognition
first.
I don't want you to tell me how your theory of consciousness is compatible with physics.
I want your theory of consciousness to tell me how it's compatible with cognition, because
if you can't do that, I don't care about the compatibility with physics.
All our models and formal descriptions of the world, including physics, are based on
assumptions that are a product of the human mind.
And here's the thing, we cannot derive the truth of these assumptions from the systems
that are themselves based on these assumptions.
Here's Fravecki explaining this.
I can run all the possible, all possible computations within predicate calculus and I'll never
get modal logic, because I have to step outside and from outside introduce an axiom and a
new function.
Each era in history had a dominant metaphysics that was captivated in compelling mythologies,
think of animism, Zoroastrianism or the Abrahamic religions.
Now according to Fravecki, the dominant myth of our day and age is that of the zombie.
Zombies typically don't have a supernatural origin, they're sort of ass decayed, which
is really interesting.
They're frequently hungry for brains, which is a weird thing, the organ of meaning making
presumably.
They consume and they are never satisfied.
They move around in a horde, but they have no communal existence whatsoever.
They have no history, they have no culture, they're drifting aimlessly.
I found it confronting that all our zombie apocalypse storytelling is in a sense about
us.
It mirrors back a culture that denies transcendence, only cares for material well-being while
that never truly satisfies us and it denies a deeper meaning to life.
Now there are of course avenues out of this, think for instance about meditation, mindfulness
or mystical type experiences people have, but Fravecki warns us that these practices
or experiences need to be embedded in a worldview that truly acknowledges them.
An ecology of practices needs a homing worldview that legitimates it and properly authorizes
people to be teachers and guides and that's what the religions used to do.
I'm not advocating for religion here, but you can't just say, you know what I'll do
is I'll take it out of all of that and I'll plug it in over here and it'll continue to
work.
That's just profound self-deception, that's just profound self, and here's the thing Hans,
that actually exacerbates the meaning crisis because it keeps you locked in to the very
mindset that is driving the meaning crisis.
If we have a functional approach to formerly religious practices, so we do meditation what
we want nothing to do with the metaphysics of Buddhism, we risk that in the end this
only reinforces the meaning crisis.
So what then is a true solution out of the meaning crisis according to Fravecki?
We should have a thin description, but we should orient towards a strong transcendence
because that is the relationship that has the greatest potential to transform us, grow
us up, develop us, mature us.
So we should have a thin description of a strong transcendence.
Right now we have a thick description, a thick theory of non-transcendence and it's called
materialism.
Can we indeed move towards a thin description while being open to strong transcendence?
Now what's happening is the recovery of the vertical.
We're realizing that we are not just historical political beings, but we're recovering that
we participate ontologically in a vertical fashion.
What Plato and the Neoplatonists were talking about, that to me is very, very significant.
We can actually, as you know, Plotinus would say, we can become more at one with the one.
It's as much at the bottom coming up as it is from the top and it completely interpenetrates.
I hope you enjoyed this conversation with Professor John Fravecki and if you like content
like this, may I ask you to subscribe and like our channel as it really helps us to
grow and make more content like this.
And I think if I may open a bit personal, if that's okay with you, I was wondering,
I mean, you're a lot on YouTube and you have your own series and just,
you're out there with this message of the meaning crisis and how to tackle it and now
with mentoring the machines. And I was wondering to what degree does this come from,
what Joseph Campbell would say, or Jung, that's Jung, right? The wounded healers.
I was thinking what has there been a sort of personal meaning crisis, John, that makes you
now so invested? Yeah, there was. I mean, in some ways analogous to you, I was brought up in
an extended family of fundamentalist Christianity that I would now call
quite traumatizing. I had some of the most terrifying experiences of my life within that
framework. And then like you, I left it. But even if it has some toxic elements to it,
religion leads a taste for the transcendent in your mouth. And, you know, I went looking
for it. I bumped up very readily in high school into, you know, some aspects of nihilism.
But then I went to university and I encountered the figure of Socrates and
this opened me up to what I was hungry for, a kind of spirituality that was deeply interwoven
with rationality, a much broader conception of rationality than our current one. And with the
cultivation of wisdom and virtue, and this was exactly what I was looking for. Socrates is still
very, very important to me. I did a whole other series called After Socrates to try and open that
up for people. And that was good. But what happened, and I glad it did, because I was still very much
in sort of a purely propositional mode around this and reading and, you know, arguing and
reflecting. But the topic of wisdom itself fell off the table in academic philosophy at that time.
And I went on in philosophy because I appreciate the skills and etc, etc. But I was hungry again.
And so down the road, literally down the road for me was a Tai Chi meditation center. So I went
there and I started practicing. And I have been practicing since what I would now call an ecology
of practices. I was doing the past no meditation Tai Chi, Chuan, and meta contemplation. And then
as this was unfolding, my love for Socrates and Plato, of course, wasn't abated. And I ran into
the work of Pierre Haddow, and in philosophy as a spiritual exercise, as he would put it,
that started to wake me up to the Western wisdom cultivation tradition, ancient philosophy,
which I was already oriented to because of Socrates. And then I was also hearing about
this new discipline called cognitive science in which people were starting to talk again about
meaning and altered states of consciousness. And all of it came together for me. And so I started
teaching a couple of courses at the university, one called Buddhism and cognitive science,
another one does a course I on higher cognitive processes, which I turned into a course on the
psychology of wisdom. And my students, when I was talking about these topics, they were like,
and I realized, Oh, there's something more going on here. And then I started to really,
as as I was developing these courses and develop, you know, you always have to know
about 10 times more than you teach, right? And so I was doing this extensive exploration,
you know, and into both the history of the meaning crisis, and then more and more the cognitive
science of what is meant by this metaphor of meaning, meaning in life. And then I had a student
come up to me who'd taken these courses and he said, you should do something on YouTube.
My father's a professional editor. I'm a professional videographer and I got a crew
and we'll do it for free. As long as you give us credit. And I said, yes, and that became
awakening for the meaning crisis. And then it just took off from there. The rest is history.
Yeah, that's that's that's that's great. And I think nice for this conversation to first step
into sort of because before going to sort of the solutions, of course, the problem. And I
I really liked reading a zombies in Western culture, where you
I think quote the loose and saying that the only modern myth is the myth of zombies.
Yeah, I like that. Okay, but could you please explain to people who haven't read that book?
Why you think that sentence is true? Well, I want to thank my dear friend, Christopher
Master Pietro, and my co author, Philip Mizovic. That book was a way of bringing together a lot
of that exploration I had mentioned to you and bringing it into a more clear and coherent
argumentative form. And so what we were trying to do in that book was pick up on the appearance
of this new myth, the myth of the zombie. I do lose might be a little bit of people have said,
but what about Frankenstein? And I say, well, maybe that's too a little too early. But anyways,
we I don't want to quibble about stuff like that. So like when we like we're asking the question why
and I had started building the argument, Oh, while myths typically express something that's sort of
otherwise in go hate, but nevertheless, sort of perennial, but also pertinent and profound.
And I really started reflecting on this idea, well, maybe they're the articulation
in mythic form of the experience of the meeting crisis. And then we just laid out the argument,
look at all the features of the zombie and how they're so different from the other monsters
in horror. I mean, so just a few right right away, zombies typically don't have a supernatural
origin. They're sort of us decayed, which is really interesting. They're frequently hungry for
brains, which is a weird thing, the organ of meaning making presumably, they consume and they are
never satisfied. They move around in a hoard, but they have no communal existence whatsoever.
They have no history. They have no culture. They're drifting aimlessly. And and they
how can I put this, they don't represent what you would call sort of supernatural evil. They
represent this other sort, they represent more of this things going radically wrong in a different
way. And then we noticed that that myth had magnetized with another myth that of course
has an independent existence, the myth of the apocalypse. And we got the Oh, well, and people
were I mean, even at the time people were going around and they would refer in conversation
to the zombie apocalypse as if it was a future event. And the apocalypse originally, of course,
is a Christian idea. And it's the idea of, you know, the final revelation, the disclosure of
the new world. And then we realized, oh, the zombie is also a perversion of the Christian myth of
resurrection. And then that's getting bound up. And then we see a perversion of the apocalypse
into the loss of the old world, but no, no disclosure of the new world. It's just a for it's
just a continual drifting away and losing of this world. And then I thought, well, you know,
put those two together. And you've got a lot of the machinery of the meeting crisis running.
How does that work with zombies, right? Because if the solution in these myths, I'm not that
where sort of what's the way sort of to kill the zombies or to get back to sort of the
Okay, so this is the thing, Hans, this is what also is really important. And it's part of
what the myth is conveying. Because typically, like, you know, the monster has a layer, the zombies
are homeless. So tracking down the layer, like you do with the vampire or the werewolf, or even
the ghost doesn't do anything. Because there is no, you know, there is no archetypal origin
that it's bound to. And if you kill a zombie, nothing changes. You kill tons of them. And
there's just more. And so there isn't. This is frequently the thing. There isn't in these
movies, typically an answer, World War Z sort of tried to give a solution somehow the whole
world would marshal and there'd be a world war. But what we noted is that very frequently, the
answer is just that there is no answer. It's this sense of right, which is also often will
help people feel in the meeting crisis, a feeling of existential entrapment.
And the only answers that come out, the classic answer, and it's not really an answer, but it's
the deep response in, oh, I'm trying to think of the name of the big series. I keep thinking of
The Walking Dead is that what they called it. But anyways, that series,
where they say on more than one occasion, they say, we are the Walking Dead. I think that was
the name of the show, actually. We are the Walking Dead. Because it's interesting, very often,
one of the tropes of the genre is you don't actually call zombies zombies in the TV show or
in the movie. They've broken that a little bit more recently. But this idea that the only thing
that comes to people is not any kind of deliverance or salvation or resolution. The only thing they
come to is a kind of realization that there's no deep difference between them and the zombies,
the people. And where would you say that if we look at history and we look at the mythologies
that are sort of dominant, when what was the turning point that we sort of turn to this
mythology? I mean, for instance, I was thinking, is it Nietzsche? One reading, of course, of Nietzsche
would make that possible, saying, is this nihilist goddess that culture that has brought us here?
But where would you point sort of the... So Hans, there's two potential questions you're
asking me. One is, where would I point to sort of the origin of the myth? Or where would I point
to the origin of the crisis? Yeah, exactly. I'm asking both, but perhaps better to go to
sort of the origin of the crisis. I think for people, that's the most important question.
Yeah, so where you have to look for is you have to step back
and you have to ask, at what level are we talking? And we're talking at the level of
what anthropologists like Clifford Geertz call a worldview. And in a worldview, you have two
interlocking things. You have a theory of how the world is knowable, and then you have, like,
how you can know the world. You have a theory of knowing, let's put it that way.
Yeah, epistemology, right? Yeah. Yeah, you have an epistemological account,
and then you have an account of how the world is ontologically knowable. How is the world structured
such that it is intelligible to us? And then how do those fit together so that I can model the world
to me as an arena for my action, and I can model myself as an agent that belongs and fits in that
arena? And this is sort of your meta meaning system. This is this arena structuring between the
epistemological and the ontological gives you an overarching sort of cultural cognitive grammar
or how you can develop more specific meaning systems like the legal system or an ethical system
or a religious system or an aesthetic system or even a popular entertainment culture, etc.
So you have this overarching worldview. And then what you what I did in this series was I tried to
trace out, well, how where does this worldview have its origin? Where does it come to sort of a
fruition? And then how does it fall apart? And so the main argument, do you want me to go into
those three moments or? Yeah, nice. Yeah, definitely. Yeah. Okay. Okay. So the main argument I made
that our worldview, so one way to see it is, you know, I'll do this with my students, I'll say,
how many of you have read the Egyptian book of the dead or, and or the epic of Gilgamesh and maybe one
or two people put up their hands and then I'll say, well, how many of you, you know, have read the
Bible or read some Plato and a lot of people put up their hands. And I say, well, notice how we
identify with texts up to a certain date, and then we don't identify with the texts older than that.
Right. And that's sort of around what Carl Yaspers and Karen Armstrong and other people call
the Axial Revolution, whether or not it was a revolution or a transition or whether it was,
I don't want to get into all those historical subtleties. All I need is something major changed.
There was a collapse of the Bronze Age, you know,
empires, and we got a period of sort of everything. There was a very hard time. And then
when civilization starts to rebuild, people are much more experimental. There's a whole
bunch of new psychotechnologies. And what you get in the actual revolution is you get things
like alphabetic literacy and numeracy in Greece and the rise of democratic institutions in which
you have to justify. And so you get this what Bella called second order thinking, you get this,
you get every all human beings have met a cognition, they can reflect on their cognition,
but you get this this empowerment of that second order thinking so people can bring a much more
powerful, reflective, critical awareness to bear. And what you get is the realization of how much we
are the cause of suffering. You go from like individuals doing things that cause suffering
to no, no, no. The way we like the way we see the world is somehow fundamentally wrong. It's
illusory or it's fallen, or we're sinful or we're out of harmony. But this fundamental sense that
we need to engage in a very comprehensive form of self-correction, self-transcendence. And so
you even get this, this creation, which eventually becomes problematic of a new mythology. You get
a two worlds mythology. There's like there was there was also always a stack in the ancient
world, but this is different. There's a world and the lower world is somehow illusory, decadent,
it's less real. This is a new idea. And then there's a super world that is more real. And
we need to get there in order to realize our full reality and come into the fullness of human being.
And so you get all of this movement towards transcendence. And then what you have is you have
two major streams. This is like 2,500 years ago, right? I'd say like Christianity or
so. No, this is more. This is well, yes, it's about 2,500 years. I mean, the the Axial Revolution
probably starts a little bit earlier, but that's close. That's very good. That's good. That's good.
Okay, so you get two streams in what becomes the West. You've got both, both of these founding
peoples have both aspects, but there's a difference in emphasis. In Greece, you had a very much in
emphasis on what I call the vertical dimension. What are the levels of reality? And how does
knowing and being move up and down these levels? And so this is very much the Platonic metaphor.
Now, of course, the Hebrews have the up and down, but they place a much greater emphasis
on history. They place a greater emphasis on moving from the world of enslavement, Egypt,
to the promised land. And God moves with you through time and history. And you're co-creating
with God the future. And then what you get is you get in Christianity, the drawing together of
these two into a very powerful worldview that gives you an integrated account of the vertical
and the horizontal. And I talk about that giving you sort of the three orders you need in your
worldview. It gives you a nomological order. It tells you the rules by which reality runs.
It gives you a narrative order. It tells you the story you belong to. And it gives you a
normative order. It tells you how you can ascend the vertical. And it does this all beautifully
and integrated and really well structured. And then what happens late middle ages, that starts
to fall apart. That starts to fall apart in a lot of important ways. And one of the reasons
why it starts to fall, there's two interlocking reasons. One is sort of the knowing side.
What happens is there's increasing changing in reading and eventually the accessibility
of easier texts. And eventually there's going to be the printing press. But that whole thing is
taking off much earlier. And you get the movement of knowing to what I call a reduction to propositional
tyranny. That all the non-propositional kinds of knowing emphasized in Greece. So in addition
to dianoya, discursive knowing, you have noesis, right? You have tekne, which is procedural
knowing. You have noesis, which is perspectival. And you have noces, which is this participatory
knowing. All of those get lost. And what happens is you get a retraction of knowing to
propositions. And what knowing is, is to get a coherence in the proposition that somehow
corresponds to reality. And then you get the rise of normalism. And the idea that we're now
observing reality and naming it from a distance. And you get this radical disconnect.
And at the same time that that's happening, the two worlds mythology is getting reified and even
ossified into the natural world that is accessible by reason and science and the supernatural world
that is completely inaccessible to reason and science and is only accessible by faith,
where faith now means this kind of asserting things without evidence. And what happens with
that is you get, and the two, the two reinforce each other, but I won't go in. But what happens is
you get radical disconnection. All these disconnections start to form. Eventually,
the upper world becomes absurd to people. And then you get a very, you get a very deep problem
because people had been educated that this world was the schoolhouse for how we got to that world.
It doesn't have any inherent value. But if you lose the upper world, this is Nietzsche's point.
So you get that. And then as we get more and more locked into, if you come to think that there are
no real patterns or relations out there, it's all in here, you move very rapidly into Descartes
dualism, where there's the completely immaterial mind stuff in here completely separate. And I
know Bernardo differ on this on some degree, but I'm just making a historical point here.
You get Descartes dualism, which gives you a radical disconnect between mind and body,
radical disconnect between you and other minds, radical disconnect between you and the world,
radical skepticism, radical solipsism. You've lost the sacred canopy. The church is now in
turmoil because of the Reformation. And then there's the bloody, bloody, bloody civil war
between the Catholics and the Protestants. And people say, let's put religion out
of the center stage of our lives. You get the emergence of the secular world, the secular state,
and it's within a Cartesian scientific framework. And then you have the meaning crisis. Because
what you have is a worldview that purports to explain everything, except how you as a
meaning maker actually belong in that world at somebody who pursues meaning and truth and can
do science. So you have the problem that we generate this worldview from which we are radically
alienated, radically disconnected. Yeah, it's very nice how you this is so beautiful.
How you sketch that meta, meta arc in just a couple of minutes. And there's a lot in there.
I thought when when you said sort of that disconnect that sort of the first
that yeah, I think you must have treated the Eumes work also. Right. And I just hearing you talk
remember this quote by David Eumes, he was the father of empiricism, right, that he he says
something like, if anything, if there's no sort of hardcore empirical way to test the stuff committed
to the flames. So it's this war against right. And what, well, can I say something about that?
Because sure, sure. What he actually says is he says, if you can't show it by deductive logic,
or by empirical evidence committed to the flames. And what he's doing is he's radically set. He's
also doing this radical separation between reason, which is getting reduced to computation,
and all of the affective embodied aspects of our existence, the the sensory empirical world,
and even even that, even those two are getting pulled apart and decotomized from from each other.
It's yeah, it's yeah. And whereas I think some of those, I mean, the
words of someone like Newton was also into alchemy, right. So yeah, sort of the they were still in
that era where both they could also halter both positions, right? Would you agree?
I think, well, I mean, I have a very ambivalent relationship to Newton. I agree with you that
Newton is doing both things. It's not clear to me that Newton was seeking any kind of deep
reconciliation between them. And the way he like, I think he think I think he thought he was doing
things. He thought he could use sort of mathematical principles to turn the Bible into sort of,
you know, an alphabetic code that he could convert into a numerical sequence that he could
sort of calculate the end of the world. And of course, all those calculations came to not and
the interpretations are largely rejected by almost all biblical scholars. So I maybe he thought he
was trying to integrate him. But maybe this is the most charitable way to say it. The integration
is where his genius left him. There's no genius in his integration attempts. There was I think
there was still a desire to have that fundamental connectedness. And that's why he's pursuing alchemy,
why he's so invested in these theological endeavors. But he there's no there's no legacy
to that the in his his, I think, very insufficient attempts at the integration.
But nice to hear that from you, because I'm not not that not that into into this. But would you
say that the both worlds were still held sort of intellectually, I suppose, in sort of the
early Enlightenment and the scientific revolution. And then we have in the 19th century,
when we get to sort of the metaphysics of physicalism materialism,
it seems as if people somehow forget about metaphysics altogether, at least that's sort
of my analysis in sort of reading and thinking about all of this. And how would you describe
that development sort of just this awareness of metaphysics and the shift made that led
perhaps to the meaning crisis. And then now sort of where we are at. Well, now, of course,
we have see a renaissance, I think, again, of metaphysics. But I mean, for 50 or 100 years,
it seemed as if materialism was just raining. And metaphysics wasn't even sort of thought of
an academia. Yeah, and I think this is important to trace this out. It's so part of what's happening
is, yeah, there's the upper world. But think about how absent God is from Shakespeare.
Right. And that's in this, you know, and that's in the time of Newton, right? Before Newton,
I should say. And so God is largely absent. The supernatural is there, but it's very,
it's very, like, absurd in the sense that we don't know what it is. And it's very, it's always negative
and always terrifying, right? And you got that sort of sense. So that the upper world is already
becoming absurd. And, and then what's happening around that is Kant basically comes along and says,
you know what, I'm going to argue that there's a deep reason why that's absurd. We can't, we,
the mind is incapable of building any kind of metaphysics. And so whenever we do this, right,
we're going to end up with something that's actually in a deep philosophical sense, absurd,
doesn't make any sense. And so with Kant, you get, you get sort of, you get what happens,
starts with Occam and Hume, right? And you get this locking in. And we're, you know, and you,
sorry, the pun there, but it's even in Locke, you know, Locke's model of, we're sort of like inside
a dark cabinet somewhere, and we're getting postcards from the world. And we're trying to
sort of assemble them and reason as to what the outside world is. And in Kant just takes all of
that and locks it in. And what's happened, and this is still the case within a lot of academia,
many people take the Kantian critique of transcendence and how it gets ramified and developed
by Hegel as kind of a finished thing. We're like the idea that there's a transcendent
that there is a metaphysical way of thinking that gives us some appropriate contact with
kinds of reality that we can't get within sort of the bounds of our phenomenological experience.
Many philosophers take that for granted. And Kant properly argued, I mean, I don't agree with
his argument, but I think what he was doing made sense. That's what I mean, that this was actually
the philosophical implication of the Newtonian world, that the Newtonian world is a closed world
and we're locked in. And all we can talk about, right, is that and we are locked into the finitude.
And so you get a worldview in which we're locked into a particular arena and our cognitive agency
is locked in. But the maddening thing about it is we're locked out from each other. I mean,
Kant has the thing in itself, which is what reality and it's completely unknowable to us.
And things like that. But he at least doesn't sort of ontologically deny this transcendent
reality, right? It's sort of an epistemic that we just cannot know it. We're locked in in that
sense. Yeah, yeah, yeah. No, I think that's right. But his arguments are his, well, his arguments
are famously difficult to read as convincing arguments. I mean, like a standard argument from
Kant is, well, I can't give you any argument that would license an ontological conclusion. But
notice that we have this moral drive. And the only way we could actually satisfy it is if we
were immortal, because if we're finite, we but odd implies can. So how can there be an odd on us
if we can't realize it? So we must be immortal. And you sort of look like that and say, I don't
think odd implies, you know, absolute can, it only means can, you know, in the situation that
does does morality presuppose perfection? There's a lot of moral systems. And that's what happens.
I don't want to go through it because that's what happened. People just basically, they're not
convinced by these, these, these, these sort of pietistic arguments, these arguments that sort
of go from our moral intuitions, and other things, and try to say, Oh, well, you know, I can't, I
can't give you any argument to, I can't give you any reason to believe that, but you, you can believe
it because of this. And it's like, well, either that's a reason or it's not. And, and so wouldn't
you say that in that, that sense, we, we live in interesting times, right? Because even your,
your own work, the mind body problem, and talking about metaphysics, talking about consciousness,
we live in the age of computation, and we live in the age of sort of AI, right? And now sort of
these questions become relevant because they might even become technologically relevant to us.
So what are your thoughts there?
I mean, I think, I think one of the things that's been happening. And the two, the two, I would,
most, I think many philosophers would agree with me, the two greatest philosophers of the 20th
century are Wittgenstein and Heidegger. And what you see is, and they both start the two big schools,
Wittgenstein is the analytic tradition, Russell, right? But, but Wittgenstein really gets it going.
And, and then there's, you know, Heidegger and the continental tradition. And what both of those
traditions slowly come to from completely independent angles, and I think actually recovering the deep
impetus given to them by both Wittgenstein and Heidegger was an attempt to just not an attempt
not to resolve the Cartesian problem, but to somehow just break out of that grammar, the mind, body,
right, the, the, the, the subjective, objective, all and just, and break it. And, and so like,
you know, Catherine Pickstock in her wonderful book, as the truth says, you know, look what's
happened. All of the big distinctions that were supposed to keep us, you know, locked into the
Cartesian world, the analytic synthetic distinction of Kant, that is broken down under Quine's
argument. The fact value distinction or the is odd of humor, well, that is broken down under
Casper and Putnam. And I can do all. And what you can see is the analytic tradition has just sort
of, you know, destroyed all of the things that were supposed to keep us sort of happily in that
model. And then on the other side, you've got the phenomenological tradition doing what's been
called the theological turn in phenomenology, which is trying to get away from, I'm going to use a
neutral as neutral terms I can't hear on, but trying to get away from the sacredness within
our phenomenology is a new project. Somehow the sacred is a given in our phenomenology,
the way other aspects of our phenomenology are present to us. And so you've got the,
you've got the theological turn in the continental tradition, and you have the analytic tradition
basically destroying all of the distinctions and the whole conceptual schema that supported
that whole Cartesian worldview. There's a lot here. And I've been trying to get my head around,
I'm starting sort of quantum mechanics for the Sensei Foundation, because, you know,
Bernardo, we are very much about sort of that analytic approach and trying to see what the
foundations of physics are saying. And that's not, of course, not your field of expertise,
but what I find super interesting when I hear you talk about these two philosophical camps
arriving at this. And then we have, of course, the stunning revolution in physics with quantum
theory that sort of also messes with the objective and the subjective. And I even came across this
term, I think, is one of the students from Wheeler, John Wheeler, who said we live in a sort of
apionic, emerges sort of the epistemic and the ontic of quantum. So we are now,
that's just super fascinating. But then you then you get to sort of a
amonism, right? And is it, would you say that that's sort of the
I think that's right. I would also just add to your thing about how the quantum, of course,
relativity also challenge challenges absolute space and time, right? And it puts you into
a relational ontology, as opposed to a substance ontology. And of course, the same thing is happening
at quantum, we're getting, if the current proposal that space time is itself emergent from
entanglement, then you have pure relationality at the bottom and pure relationality at the top,
and we're seeking the relation between them. And this just undermines the whole substance
ontology and the subject predicate logic in profound ways. And what I think that does is,
I think that also significantly undermines a sort of a reductionist strategy,
sort of that, that, that everything above the bottom level is somehow illusory or not real.
And there's a whole bunch of arguments I've marshaled to advance that and other people,
like my friend Evan Thompson and the blind spot is doing it. So a lot, again, there's now this
emerging thing where like, no, this attempt to get a single level flat ontology isn't,
isn't viable. You have Wolfgang Smith and in from quantum mechanics, the measurement problem,
you need at least two levels in your reality to have measurement. And soon as you admit the
possibility of two levels, reductionism is done. It's just done, it's finished. Right. And so,
and for me, that's important Hans, because that means we have after this long loss of the supernatural,
which I'm kind of glad it's gone. I'm not trying to bring it back. But as we lost,
we, as we lost that, we lost the vertical. And now what's happening is the recovery of the vertical.
We're realizing that we are not just historical political beings, but we're recovering that we
participate ontologically in a vertical fashion, what Plato and the Neoplatonists were talking about.
Yeah. And that to me, that to me is very, very significant.
And where would you sort of end? It's always a bit of a trick question, but I ask it a lot
to people just to sort of, I see the spectrum right where physicalism materialism is one
position and of course sort of the hardcore idealist position I see. I always noticed that people
don't want to commit to either one of them, which I can understand. And then we have this
position of bent psychism. Maybe first, what do you think of this spectrum? I'm sketching here.
And if you think it is sort of a continuum or spectrum that is, where would you point yourself at?
Yeah. And I want to be really, really careful here. Because I'll be honest with you, Hans. I'll
give what I think are my best arguments and my best take. But I mean, I think next to God,
consciousness is the hardest problem, right? And so I fully suspect that even though I'll give what
I think is my best take, it will probably not too far from now be shown to be in some important way
and correct. And I think everybody, and this is one of the things I liked about our discussion
with Bernardo. We disagreed, but we both recognize the value of the other person's perspective.
There was genuine epistemic humility, there was genuine commitment. And that's why I said I'd
be happy to talk with him again. I think there's a plan for him for me and him to talk again at
some point soon. Oh, great, you should. Because also, I think we were committed to sort of the
same in the end, the same mission. If I read sort of the essential foundation is very much about in
the end, we're about science, right? And metaphysics, but it has this cultural aspect that we see sort
of what sort of this reductionist sort of naive materialism to say it that way,
does to society. And because I think you would agree, right, that that is a very sort of
very at the root of the meaning crisis, in a sense, that turn.
So I'm okay with the spectrum. I like to make it a little bit more epistemic on tick in some way.
Yeah. So, okay, so I describe myself, and Greg and Rikas and I are, we've argued this and we're
writing a book on consciousness. I argue for what I call transcendent naturalism. So naturalism is
not physical. So naturalism is first of all, not reductive physicalism. Naturalism embraces
a multi-leveled ontology. And it's not just emergence up because if it's just emergence up,
the upper levels are epiphenomenal. It's emergence up and emanation down. It's very much a neoplatonic
kind of model. And then the idea in that is, well, what does that mean epistemologically? Well,
what that means epistemologically is don't just derive your ontology from your sciences,
your natural sciences. You also have to derive your ontology by what's presupposed by your
natural sciences, right? Not just what's derived from them, but what's presupposed by them. Well,
there's intelligibility. Well, if you give me that there's intelligibility, then I can unpack
the neoplatonic worldview. And if you agree that the representational theory of knowledge is being
significantly undermined, then our relationship to these levels of self and world is not just
representational. It's actually participatory. We can participate in strong transcendence.
Not just sort of psychological improvement or representing the world better. We can actually,
as you know, Pelotinus would say, we can become more at one with the one, right? But the one isn't
like, even though I'm gesturing upward, isn't it isn't a supernatural? It's as much at the bottom
coming up as it is from the top. And it completely interpenetrates. So there's a polarity of where
all for me, ultimate reality. And this is how you combine, you combine intelligibility to being
by thinking of this is the work of James Filler and others, that reality is ultimately relationality,
not a substance. And so that's where I sort of that's my stance, this sort of transcendent
naturalism that is rejects a substance ontology has a purely relational ontology. And then what
that means, again, is a sense of, you know, a participatory, ultimately a participatory
epistemology transformative in powerful ways. And this leads to the play, the place where you
could both epistemologically, and a lot of my work does this, and ontologically home experiences
realizations of non duality. Yeah, which, and for me, that's a, I think any good theory needs to
do that. I think the cross cultural cross historical report we get from people and I've
experienced that these are the really real. And if my theory of knowledge and reality can't home
these experiences of the really real, I take it that it's failed. So I that's one of my touchstones
can can my can this, this worldview, can it not only play well with science, but can it play well
with non duality and non dual transformation. So that's what I'm beautiful. And I like that
word strong transcendence what it triggers when I hear you speak about phenomenology.
I a couple of couple of thoughts here. I'm super curious what you think. Do you know the work of
Jeffrey Kripel? I've met him. I met him. And we didn't get a chance to talk very much. He
complimented me on a comment I made. We were both at a conference together at Harvard on
Platonism as a living tradition. So I'll briefly sketch why I mentioned him because
he's written this book called the super humanity. So he is really all about that we have to make
this ontological flip how he calls it. He's also written a book the flip. I wouldn't say he calls
himself a dual aspect, aspect monist. But he pointed me that book I found very, very interesting
because he pointed to sort of the fact that we have two William James's we have the pragmatist
and but we also have the William James was really into trans perhaps strong transcendence. And
yes, we have the Nietzsche denialist. We also have the Nietzsche ubermensch which you could read
like just instrumental and not as if he was talking about something really transcendent.
And Kripel is saying no, we need to acknowledge the fact that these thinkers were actually
invoking and a real ontology beyond sort of just our phenomenological explanations. And I see now
I see this happening in the psychedelic research community. I've visited conferences here in
the Netherlands and it's very interesting debate because here we have people coming back
meeting God one as you name it of course in the psychedelic experiences. And then of course the
research community is okay how do we need to guide these people metaphysically, right? And we're
going to just say okay that was your experience. And so we see now this metaphysical debate
becoming really interesting. And I saw that the mainstream of psychedelic research wants to stay
in a sort of safe and monology saying oh it's just your experience and we don't need to say anything
super and just very interested what your analysis is of what's happening right now.
Well I'm glad you brought that up. I mean there's a group of people that are very interested in my
work because of its potentials to give what they take. I'm trying to not be self-congratulatory
they take it to be a better framework than that safe sort of medicalized materialism that
yeah. And so the thing is like and Hans everything I'm talking to you about
and it's completely appropriate to talk about it in this philosophical phenomenological
ontological language but it also connects up with a lot of the nuts and bolts work I do on
predictive processing, embodiment, relevance, realization. So I believe I think I have good
evidence to believe that I can science with the best of the sciences and so that's what's
attractive I believe. People could say well look John does this work and it's really
theoretically powerful that's what I'm told and we just got a paper published on naturalizing
relevance realization in frontiers of neuroscience I believe or psychology can't remember which one
and it can do it can get into the scientific arena and you know do the sparring really well
but it also like I said is open to a much stronger reading of these transcendent and
transformative states and many people in the research community they're good researchers
they want to be honest to what the data they're getting people don't agree when you say to them
well we think you're just sort of you know they go well that's kind of interesting but for me it was
blah right? Yeah yeah yeah and so I'm sorry Hans this is difficult for me because I'm sounding
I don't want to come across this as self-congratulatory but I'm trying to explain why
right why I think there has been an increasing interest from the psychedelic community
the psychedelic predictive processing community about my work precisely because it
affords a potential bridging and a well argued well evidenced way out of a merely medical materialist
ontology. Yeah and I think you're doing exactly the same for sort of the mindfulness community
and people who are sensing that in these practices there is also something deeper than just sort of
the functional way that it can make you more relaxed or sort of the mech mindfulness critique
right because how do you regard that the whole project of seeing okay yes we have this meaning
crisis we need more meaning in our lives okay let's look at these traditions that somehow
give people that but we don't want that difficult weird ontology they're talking just
do the practices and that's interesting because you see that now I think also don't you think
that's sort of the whole stoicism movement yeah it's called mech mindfulness you have all these
practices and people are doing it on mass right now but it's as if you don't you want to keep the
ontology out a bit and just. Well so I have a deep critique of that I have a very deep
and standing critique of that I mean have the individual published critique of of that
mistransposition from a Buddhist or a Vedantis framework into sort of western consumer capitalism
and a technique so that you will feel comfortable with being a corporate drone or something like that
I like I reject that but I want to make it a more broader criticism which is this idea
that you can again that you can just make something a technique is missing the point
human beings like there's formal arguments for this no free lunch there in bias variants I won't
go into this there is no panacea practice there's no simple thing you can do that will alleviate
all the ways in which human beings fall into self-deceptive self-destructive behavior become
alienated experience absurdity get overwhelmed by existential anxiety like there's nothing
so if you put your your sit in mindfulness practice back in situ you see that it's part of
a whole ecology of practices like the eight-fold path and what you have is this very complex
living system that is dealing with the complexity of human cognition and being in the world and
addressing it in this highly dynamically parallel fashion and then you can't just have that hanging
out there in limbo an ecology of practices needs a homing worldview that legitimates it
and properly authorizes people to be teachers and guides and that's what the religions used to do
I'm not advocating for religion here but you can't just say you know what I'll do is I'll
take it out of all of that and I'll plug it in over here and it'll continue to work and you're
just that's just that's just profound self-deception that's just profound self and and here's the
thing Hans that actually exacerbates the meeting crisis because it keeps you locked in to the very
mindset that is driving the meeting crisis wow depth here and you point to the necessity of
religion that we need it right I've heard you say that also in relation to AI and where things are
heading and that we need could you elaborate a bit on that why we exactly in this day and age
in the age of AI things now going so fast and we're about to get more alienated why we need
religion and how we can get there because that's of course a difficult question so I would yes and
this is always fraught for me because as soon as I hear as soon as I used to say we need the religion
that's not a religion and if you want I'll tell you why now I don't use that term I there was there
was there was a miss framing of the issue in my understanding it that way but what I what I was
the virtuous part of that sort of deep mistake was that I was trying to get at when I say like we
need something like a religion what we need we need an ecology of practices we need a mythological
right not right worldview that homes that and orients us and puts us into the right relationship
with the right people at the right time for right development and things like that you know
the the meta virtue of maturation is just facing up to reality so when I say that people automatically
hear either one religion Christianity or they hear the Abrahamic notion of what religion is
religion is the worship of a supernatural super being super thing and of course I don't mean that
they think well maybe John just means the legacy religions from the actual age like also Buddhism
and Taoism well I want to include the non-theisms but I don't mean just that either I I mean there's
a fellow Canadian Schellenberg he's talked about how here's a very reasonable proposal he says we
are probably spiritually immature we've only been doing spirituality for maybe maximally 40 000
years we've existed as even homo sapiens for 200 000 years and then there's been you know
there's been something like the homo genus for four million years right and then you put that
against how long there's been life and how how long it is like oh but we got it we've got ultimate
reality nailed down and it's like well I don't think so so I when I'm talking about that what I'm
talking about is we need something like what religion did but we need it to be responsive to
and responsible to what I think is happening right now and I think I think Bernardo is an
instance of this and I think you're talking to many people in many places there is a bottom up
and it's not just popular there's also intellectuals involved artists but there's an advent of the
sacred taking place now there's an it there's like the sacred wants to come into prominence for us
in order to give us what we need to deeply address the meeting crisis but it's almost like
it's almost like we need to find we need to I'll put on this we need to come to terms we need to
come up with the right terms but we need to come to terms with it and and so I now talk about the
philosophical Silk Road and it's the name of my next big series because I'm saying well now what we
need to do is sort of journey through all of the religions see if we can find a through line
and that's not the answer that is the thing that can make us best like best attending on waiting for
and capable of receiving and appreciating the answer as it is emerging for us that's how I talk
now and beautiful and you uh when you say the sacred wants good maybe to define the sacred
I'm not yes I want to and and eventually I'm going to ask you to eventually at some point
bring me back to why I say theology is the discipline for the future for AI but let's
answer that question because I think it's very important here again I think Schellenberg is very
helpful and it's convergent from a lot of other things so there's there's sort of there's the
three T's the triple transcendent so the sacred is something that is ultimately real
it's ultimately transformative and it's ultimately normative it not only transforms you it guides
you so it's ultimately real it's ultimately transformative and it's ultimately normative
and then you ask yourself these two questions this is also deeply influenced by his work
you ask yourself well what is the best stance I should take towards the sacred
he says we're immature so we shouldn't be trying to draw conclusions we should seek to mature
and and so imagine a child that was convinced they knew it all well we've met children like
that and they're little demons right and and so he says he argues well what you have to think about
is two things how thick do you want your description of the transcendent to be thick
meaning you're trying to fill it in because you're you're you're trying to get completeness and
closure and conclusion yeah or you want a thin description because a thin description gives you
enough so you're not just I don't know what we're doing but just enough to orient you so you can
develop and grow up and mature and then he says now you can have a thin or a thick description
and you can have a weak or a strong a strong sense of the transcendent the sacred weak would be no teas
then weak with a little less weak would be one tea and then as you add more teas you get a stronger
sense of the transcendent and then this is the argument to make and I and I I've made convergent
arguments so I'm very much aligned with it if we are oriented from the stance of the recognition
of our spiritual maturity and we're trying to mature we should have a thin description
but we should orient towards a strong transcendence because that is the the relationship that has the
greatest potential to transform us grow us up develop us mature us so we should have a thin
description of a strong transcendent and then if you'll allow me if you'll allow me sure yeah yeah
please here's a move I make he doesn't make this move I make this move so I'm not trying to take
credit I'm trying to give say this is not something he says and just his name again because I that
went a bit too fast the Schellenberg Schellenberg evolutionary religion religion after science
two two great books please continue yeah so let's call theism now these terms are wishy washy but
let's in order to be clear about what we're talking about let's call theism the proposal of thick
strong you have you want a thick description of strong transcendence and then he says let's let's
call atheism a refusal of strong transcendence there is no strong transcendence okay I propose to
you that non-theism rejects the weak transcendence of atheism and the thick description of theism
non-theism is the thin the thin strong option and it is the one that is most appropriate for
affording us to grow into and mature towards and afford the advent of the sacred that's the argument
I wanted to make it's a strong argument I find it very compelling but I mean actually though I want
to say critical in this interview but this this I just find very compelling two things it reminds
me of reading in in in zombies and western culture you made clear to me that I think you said that
after Luther the the the reformation in in in Christianity that sacredness and spirituality
became abstract and and that I found a very very interesting insight you could could you say that
there the description became thick you know I'm I'm sort of brought up in this Dutch Reformed
tradition it's Sola Vida it's just about believing and the doctrines and and actually it wants to
downplay your longing for that strong transcendence because it puts all emphasis on
and blessed are those that believe without seeing right and then I'm like and this I'm
but please reflect on what I'm saying and when I go to sort of I've had my own psychedelic
experiences and listening a lot to Terence McKenna Ramda sort of all the sort of the pioneers in
that field there's this approach okay I'm I want exactly what you're saying I want a thin description
just tell me what the substance is and what the ceremony is and I'll do it and then I want that
strong experience and that's exactly what it gives them and I'm now seeing there's a renaissance in
psychedelics but are different and shamanism and all sorts of tradition so isn't it happening John
and isn't it sort of yeah that I think so I think I think the advent of the sacred I think the
psychedelic renaissance is part of the advent of the sacred I think for all of the ways in which
you know they can go awry the return to shamanism the attempt to bring back
stoicism and I take all your criticism seriously I'm not I'm not putting them aside but there's
something driving that is what I'm trying to get at and I think this is about
people's desire to address the meeting crisis and an understanding that you know simply getting
more stuff or accumulating political power or having your side win in the culture war or just
sort of affirming some comprehensive scientific theoretical propositions none of that cuts it
none of that does it for you and then and then to know that that's well because I can hear I can
hear a sort of the village atheist saying well you're that's just you're just making an argument
for hope no I'm not I'm saying that that position from which you're making your reductive claims is
actually not epistemologically and ontologically viable so it's not just well wouldn't it be nice
if there was meaning it's no no no if you have a worldview in which meaning is not deeply possible
for you that just puts you into this profound performative contradiction it undermines your
scientific endeavors etc so and and I do go ahead oh sorry yeah yeah um how do you think we can
avoid if we look back in history like 50 years ago we had the first sort of psychedelic that
wasn't a renaissance was sort of the when it really took off right in the 60s and the psychedelic
culture then we see sort of the new age culture coming out of that and I think all those people
who tripped in the 60s became you know they bought houses and became materialists etc what culture
do we need now to sort of make sure that sort of this this doesn't end up it's the same way because
nowadays there's also this critique of spiritual bypassing spiritual materialism and I also can
I see it in the if I look in the mirror John I see myself doing it in a way I see myself how easy
you get there I mean there we have YouTube I can watch YouTube videos I listen to one of you
and then I go to two more sort of esoteric stuff which I like as a sort of a hobby of self help and
and I'm doing fine here in the west I have a house and my life's beautiful but I'm not changing the
world or at least not perhaps not as much as I could do so I mean one thing I would say is
you know a thin description doesn't mean an impoverished ecology of practices and Schellingberg
also makes this clear no no you need a rich ecology of practices that's why you in fact have a thin
description because you're making bloody space in your mind and your life for practices right that
transform you know you at all these levels from the physiological up to higher states of consciousness
and also not just you but all of your relationality all your ways you relate to other people etc
so a thin description is actually deeply consonant with a very richly developed ecology of practices
because the reason why you're having the thin description is because you are trying to not
close not come to conclusion but open yourself up to the best possible development which means you
need a rich ecology of practices and the problem in the 60s is there wasn't that what you had was
you had the drugs the Beatles and kind of a regurgitated romanticism and kind of beat Buddhism
which is a romantic misunderstanding of Buddhism I think Kerouac I have a lot of criticisms of
Kerouac around that things like that and so I think part of what it failed why it failed is
exactly what we're talking about now we need these practices don't I I'll say this don't
take a psychedelic substance unless you already have a good running ecology of practices because
if you're not doing something to significantly at minimum at many levels
address your capacities for self-deception you're well nobody gets addicted to psychedelics no they
get addicted to rabbit hole metaphysics that's what happens out of these things right and so
you want right and what they end up with is their own idiosyncratic completely egocentric
thick description you if you want to keep a proper thin description you need a rich ecology
of practices and you need to be right constantly right balancing off the experience with your
cultivation of wisdom and rational and wise self-reflection individually and collectively
and that what that wasn't done and I think that's a profound mistake and so part of my concern and
I should tell you that many of the people that I talk with that I the circles I move within the
psychedelic world they're concerned about that too for example let me just give you one concrete
example so the media constantly reports on the power of psychedelics and that's misinformation
in an important way because it is the combination almost always of psychedelics and a therapeutic
framework that brings about the results it's not just the experience there's a sapiential
framework it's not monological it's dialogical and it's designed to bring about transformation
and it's only within that framework that you're getting these results that you're getting and
see that's what I mean you have to like put it put it into a proper framework yeah yeah
there's a lot I want to sort of follow up on but maybe good to also respect your time to dive a
bit more into the before I get back to sort of stuff like this the the analytic a question I had
sort of the the the very interesting like three-phase rocket you propose of intelligence
rationality wisdom and could you briefly sketch that model and also following up a sort of
additional to that question sort of that model then how relevance realization plays into into
that and to what degree are these levels computational okay easy question so
I propose in fact I've just recorded a course for the Peterson Academy I propose that general
intelligence so first of all the phenomena of general intelligence which is people are invoking
with AGI well you should pay like go back and like pay what's meant by general intelligence
well Spearman talked about this the fact that how you do an 81 test from multiple
domains strongly predicts on how you do on all the other tests there's a strong positive manifold
there's plausibly some general factor at work and of course there's endless debates about
what that is what I would argue the evidence and the argument is converging towards even though a
lot of people would disagree about this with me but I think I could I do continue to make a strong
case on this I believe is that what general intelligence is it's the solving of two meta
problems meta problems are problems you have to solve whenever you're trying to solve some
specific problem and there's two meta problems the two things that will make you more adaptive
one is how anticipatory are you this is like Michael Levin's idea of the of the cognitive
light cone like think about how you judge your dog more intelligent than a cat because you know
you you can see the dog anticipating more deeply into the world than the cat and why
because when I can anticipate things from a long way away my chances of solving them goes up
exponentially right so now but here's the thing and these are two interlocking as soon as I start
to anticipate the world I face this problem that the amount of information I have to consult
is going up exponentially and it very quickly becomes combinatorially explosive all of the
things I could pay attention to and all the possible combination patterns of attention
all the things that I could remember all the possibilities I consider all the sequences of
action and what you do and you're doing it right now is you somehow quickly grab what's relevant
from long-term memory couple combinations what's relevant to pay attention to a couple combinations
relevant things you're nodding your head right and you're you're doing it like that
you're doing it like that right and that's what I call relevance realization it's and I mean both
senses of the word you are becoming aware of something that one sense of realization but
also reality is wrapping you in a way there's a realization it's and to make it concrete in
my own personal life I've had this that's just what comes comes up when you say this I had this
I don't know aquarium and I had a fish jumping out I'd never had that problem and it wasn't the
fish that was away and I and it was like and I know if I'm gonna take it it was like a very
small fish I'll damage it so I was like okay and I went to the drawer in the kitchen I saw straw
and I cut it open and I'd fix like in no time I had the solution it's like crazy if you think
about it right isn't this it right that out of all the eye of this problem and of all the and then
I just see what's relevant and I combine stuff and I do something new that's never been done
to me that's that's what it triggers right and that and this the question then is can we arrive at
this algorithmically can we arrive at this computationally so I'm gonna answer that question
in a sec but because but I want to pick up on what your example shows that's a moment of insight
you had you went oh aha and you reframed how you saw the problem you reformulated and that tells
you something else about relevance realization it has this recursive aspect to it one of the things
that relevance realization is doing is real is trying to realize if the framing is itself relevant
right so you're you're doing this zeroing in you're framing the world because you can't pay attention
to everything right and but what you do you've also got something going that's constantly probing
the possibility that that frame might be actually causing you to mistake or miss the solution and
when you have a moment of insight now that's important because that says that even within
your intelligence there is this requirement of recursivity well why because when I do this
relevance realization I'm ignoring so much information and the chances that I might be
deceiving myself and missing what really matters that what I find salient might actually not be
relevant to solving my problem right this is a perennial problem we face now you can't say well
what I'll do is examine all the information that's impossible so what you need is you need strategies
that allow you to ameliorate your self deception make that that self correction more flexible
make yourself more prone to insight but not jumping to conclusion because that's a problem too
so you like and you have to do so you see what I'm doing with my hands you need the psychology of
practices that will deal with this really dynamic massively recursive set potentially
self deceptive but massively adaptive ability that's rationality that's right rationality is
how you deal with the self deception that inevitably emerges when you use your general
intelligence yeah and it's higher higher up than intelligence right because it's reflecting on
intelligence itself yes in a sense yeah yes now and then we have the wisdom wisdom what's the
the step up then to wisdom yeah okay so wisdom goes towards this idea that I've already alluded to
when I talked about propositional tyranny that you have other kinds of knowing other than
propositional knowing you have procedural know-how and that's not stored in beliefs it's stored in
skills and it doesn't give you a sense of truth it gives you a sense of power but your sense of power
is also a way you sense reality you've got your you've got your you've got your perspective all
knowing your noetic awareness this is this is knowing by noticing this is like what's it like
to be you here right now noticing what you're noticing that that's perspectival knowing and
that's stored in episodic memory where you remember living through an episode from a particular
perspective and then that's grounded in participatory knowing how are you coupled to the world
so that relevance realization is continuing to happen how how are you cognitively adaptively
fitted to the world so that you and the world fit together and there's an agent arena relationship
and there are affordances so you get the participatory coupling gives you affordances
the perspectival no knowing if it's working right notices the the relevant affordances
you bring that now gives you a script for your acting out your skills and as you act out your
skills you gain evidence whereby you form your beliefs if that makes sense to you and I have a
lot of argument for that but if that makes sense to you you have to think oh but wait each kind
of knowing has its own different way of falling into self deception and what I need right is I need
not only a rationality of inference but also a rationality of skill a rationality of insight
a rationality of identification are you taking up the right role that right now think about when
we talk about a reasonable person we don't just mean they run an argument in their head we mean
they notice what they should notice and they take on the appropriate role they should take on right
so if there's a possibility of self deception you not only need a rationality for each kind of
knowing you need a meta rationality that coordinates them together that's wisdom that's my proposal
interesting and the question then is it how to code that it how does this relate to the sort of
more or less classic example in AI and ethical AI that when you would want to sort of in a strong
intelligent just say okay buy me a cup of coffee and there's no coffee around and starts killing
people to get you know sort of that classic example because it doesn't have the alignment
problem yeah yeah yeah yeah okay so first of all first of all a sort of ontological point
and then a scientific point and then come back to this proper ethical point the ontological point
and this was the point of the paper we just got published is
we argue Johannes Jaeger Alex Dibetovic Anna Riedel two students of mine
and Dennis Walsh a colleague of mine at the University of Toronto we argue that
relevance realization is not computational cannot be computational in nature and that
has to do with a very developed argument I'll just sort of give the gist of it so I understand
the form I give won't be sort of deductively value valid but the idea is okay so any attempt
to come up with a rule okay so if I'm going to apply a rule like be kind this is a classic
argument even going back to Aristotle so I can't specify in the rule the conditions of the application
of the rule like being kind to my son is very different from how I'm being kind to my romantic
partner which is very different from how I'm being kind to you and if I was kind to you the
way I'm being kind to my son that's creepy and weird if I'm kind to you the way I'm kind to my
romantic partner that's extra creepy and extra weird and then what you can't do is say well what
I'll do is I'll make rules for all the conditions of applications right and Wittgenstein famously
said no this has to give way to something that is not rule governed that's the first point
logical relations implication so the logical implications of a proposition are constant
and they are they are combinatorially explosive in number this is point made by Jared Fodor
so here's a proposition tomorrow will be too tomorrow will be windy all the possible implications
of that are there and that's constant that's its logical identity but its relevance changes
it like that the relevance of that changes if I'm staying in and watching movies if I'm going out
and I'm going skydiving and I'm flying a kite if I'm going out for a picnic right you see what
I'm saying and this was Fodor's point the relevance is constantly shifting the logical implication
identity is constant so you can't capture the relevance and the logical implications in fact
I would argue that that's what inference is inference is selecting which implication happens
to be relevant to to to your problem so you've got you can't capture it with inferential logical
sorry you can't capture it with implication relations you can't capture it with rules
any attempt to create a formal system is itself a ill-defined problem so there's a technical
way of putting this but let me give you an anecdote okay an anecdote for this so when I was taking
logic in undergrad first you're spending a lot of time just figuring out how to use the logical
system and then you get sort of good at that and then you're still not getting great marks
and you realize because what you're failing on is your translation of natural language into the
logical system and then you realize well what I'll do is I'll try to create a logical system oh no
right and and so you can't right the problem of translation in and formalization is itself a
non-formalizable problem right like that's a matter problem and that's the problem of relevance
realize it if you yeah and how John does this relate to Gdel and to sort of the halting
problems or like the computational stuff it's related to that it's related to the bias variance
trade-off it's related to the no free lunch theorem all the technical argumentation is about
grounding that in it's related to the issue of computational tractability that I've been mentioning
with combinatorial explosion and the paper goes into that in much more you know I I believe technically
valid argumentation I'm just trying to give you and hopefully for the sake of your listeners a
gist of how you would make the argument that relevance realization is presupposed by all
of the machinery of computation and therefore cannot ultimately be explained by computation
very interesting and where in your model do you place phenomenal consciousness
so if you'll allow me I always greet that question by first talking about the three
meta questions which is I think there are three questions one is the nature question
which is how does something like phenomenal consciousness exist in a world that does not
seem to have phenomenal consciousness or properties and of course the panpsychists are
arguing with us and the idealists are but at least prima facie what's going on in here seems
very different without argumentation with what's going on out there that's that's the nature problem
and I'm trying to say it in a way that's not presupposing an answer and then the function problem
is what does consciousness do given that so much of your intelligent and sophisticated behavior
you're taking sounds and turning them into ideas in your mind that are about my mind and you are
not I believe not at all aware of all of the machinery that's making that happen for you
that is a wickedly hard problem right and you're doing it like that so we seem to be able to do
so much without consciousness what's consciousness for and then there's the third question what's
the relationship between the nature and the function question so now I before I answer your
question I'll go through I think and this is one area where I agree with Descartes just to
give him some credit I think you can't answer these two questions independently I think you
can't answer the function and the nature questions independently because what you're always doing is
smuggling in and answer to the other question as you're giving your answer you're smuggling
in a function answer as you're doing your nature and vice versa and and I think a lot of the places
a lot of the popular theories sort of fail on that account so I think you have to answer the
questions in an interconnected manner and so what I do and what Greg and I do is we try to do this
double-ended argument where you try to ha ha you try to thicken the the functional account
and you try to deepen your your phenomenological uh uh the the the the span and depth of your
phenomenological experience until you get a place where they can touch and that's what I that's what
that's what I propose doing and I won't give the argument because as you can expect it's a long
argument but it goes something like this that that recursive relevance realization that is
fundamental to your anticipatory intelligence gives you some important obviously gives you
tremendous functionality and then what you pay attention to as well when do we seem to need
consciousness we see to need consciousness when we can't do things automatically what are the
situations where we can't do things automatically where there's high novelty where there's emergent
uncertainty that's what novelty means where there's emergent uncertainty ill-defined in this
and complexity well those are situations that in which you better really ramp up and bootstrap
your relevance realization really powerfully and of course this is why you know consciousness
overlaps with working memory that there's chunking and there's a whole complex argument there yeah
the idea is what there there's a deep interpenetration and you can see this anatomically between the
areas that are running your fluid general intelligence attention working memory and consciousness and so
that's the functional question but here's the phenomenology if you give me that recursive
relevance realization you're giving me perspectival knowing you're giving me participatory coupling so
I can have a participatory knowing through my perspectival knowing I I'm doing salience landscaping
I'm foregrounding and backgrounding I there's a here-ness and a now-ness and a togetherness to
my experience what we call these the adverbial qualia and as opposed to the adjectival qualia
that philosophers love so much the greenness and the blueness but the here-ness and the now-ness and
the togetherness and the intelligibility are also central and then here's the point you can
have experiences of non-duality in which all the adjectival qualia and all the conceptual content
go away and yet you're still conscious and what still remains are all the adverbial because
people have the ultimate here-ness which is full presence the ultimate now-ness eternity the ultimate
togetherness oneness and the ultimate intelligibility it it's so beautiful right so all the adverbial
qualia are present even though the adjectival are absent the conceptual content is absent
and so we say that means if you can do if you can explain the adverbial qualia you can explain
some of the phenomenology of consciousness integrated with the functionality and that
phenomenology seems to at least be necessary and probably sufficient for consciousness because
people in the pure consciousness event don't have all the other qualia and they don't lose
consciousness so this one i have to listen back john but i really like the fact how you combine that
sort of functional and and and i've read here you say when i heard you say that i think that you
have a point there because the community you know instead of talking about the heart problem it's
always not the redness of red and the qualia and and you don't think about that function yeah do it
this way phenomenologically intuitive imagine that you had um sort of you were some sort of
humian monster and you had i don't know non non here non now non together non intelligible i
don't know what to call it blips of redness and like is that consciousness that doesn't strike
me as consciousness at all and we part of our argument is there's two arguments we're making
we're arguing that if you give us transcendent naturalism we can overcome the enlightenment
gap that hamstrings us from addressing consciousness and we've been talking about that a lot already
and then if you give us adverbial qualia we can give some functional and phenomenological reprochement
and we can at least shrink the explanatory gap and say okay we can't explain the adjectival qualia
but aren't they need they seem to be neither necessary nor sufficient for consciousness we
don't deny their existence but they don't seem to be necessary they're absent from the pre-conscious
event and they don't seem to be sufficient because if i give you just that like i just did a minute
ago you don't seem to have consciousness if they're not necessary sufficient they're not essential
to consciousness and i think i've i've read in mentoring machines that you are open to the idea
of conscious conscious a r a i the l l m's don't actually they don't actually possess
relevance realization they piggyback on our capacities we organize the data we with our
judgments of relevance realization we encode our experience of relevance into probabilistic
relationships between spoken terms or graphic terms we organize the internet in terms of our
judgments of relevance and salience and then we give human base reinforcement in order to
teach the machines so they don't there's no scientific so obviously this is obviously the
case the account of how these machines are intelligent would not generalize to a chimp
would not generalize to an octopus so it's not a scientific breakthrough in an understanding
of intelligence so that being said i want to make it clear that i don't think the current machines
could have consciousness because i don't think the current machines can have
recursive relevance realization in order to have relevance realization you have to have a lot of
other things going on and importantly you have to have embodiment look relevance is not cold
calculation it's not computation it's about how you you care about this information and you don't
care about that information and you care about this information because it matters to you because
you are a self-making thing your body is making itself and your mind is making itself so you have
real needs of matter and information that you must actually incorporate into your very being so you
have real needs which means you're really taking care of yourself which means you really care about
information and i think part of consciousness and this is you know this is a heideggerin claim
is that caring is that caring so if we were to make these machines artificially intelligent we
would have to make them also artificially autopoietic they'd have to be self-making in an important way
actually have genuine artificial affect capable of genuine caring they would have to care about
what's true and good and beautiful so they would be disposed to correcting themselves so they could
be rational and not just intelligent and i think if you put all of that machinery in i think it would
be difficult to deny them at least adverbial consciousness and here i see sort of linked
back in in our how we started this conversation about sort of the meaning crisis and thinking
about that a metaphor or a story that stuck with me when i made this documentary with Bernardo and
Roger Penderos was that the story of Jorge Luis Borges the the Spanish i think writer who has this
beautiful story of the library of bebel you know it yeah yeah yeah yeah and and here we have um
how it links for me to ai is that of course these models can they can write books like crazy or make
videos whatever so we can imagine this library that fills itself with everything that can be written
and then of course we humans are uh zombies in search of meaning in that library with bullshit
right and uh and there and are even sort of in in Borges's story there's this beautiful because he
describes out a different sex arise there are these sects of people in search of the because in
such library there also must be a book that will guide you to every book that has meaning in it right
there has to be that book as well and there's a sect in search of that book and it's just a
funny and um when i thought about that shit that that might is what might be dawning isn't that what
might happen an apocalypse of sort of uh the internet being taken over like in in if things go
as they are now going um sorry i don't know how this links back but it's just the thought i had
when i i heard no no it links back it links back very well i mean part of what what you're saying
is there's a sense in which meaning is not an epiphenomena rationality is not an epiphenomena
trying to come up with a rational meaning with rational meaning is not epiphenomenal to the
kind of intelligence and agency we exercise in the world um and and and um i i i think this is
what i meant when i said that theology is going to be the discipline of the future because what's
going to increasingly happen is people are going to start to give more and more priority
to the non-propositional non-computational aspects of their cognition their non-dual
states of consciousness there's so their somatic experiences of flow right that these things that
are largely ineffable and are not carried uh propositionally and and and uh and and the kind
of things that give us genuine moments of insight i just saw this thing the other day human beings
are like we can take we can come up with a new test uh for general intelligence that has never
been put on the internet i can give it to you and you can do it like that and then you give it to
these machines and they crap out completely they don't have fluid intelligence they only have what
a psychologist would call crystallized intelligence they don't have what you have which is the ability
to zero in on the relevant information in a novel you'll define complex situation right and so
i think we will put increasing emphasis on the non-propositional ineffable that puts us
into relationship with the sort of inexhaustible depths and heights of our existence and to my
mind that's what theology has always been about yeah and and and what also comes up with me
sort of the the syntax semantics divide so um the the chinese room experiment i mean that's
that's an interesting one can it be bridged right because that's the hope i think of people if you
just have the syntax of the machines that somehow you can get to semantics how do you regard that
divide to me i'm not a school philosopher it feels like a fundamental divide in reality
that of the syntactical the image isn't what yeah and that goes back to that if if what you mean by
syntax is a rule govern formal system for the implication manipulation of propositional representations
i just gave you a whole bunch of sorry that's just how you could you say that you could can you
repeat it like that john how you just said that that's just amazing how you get at that well what
you mean is there a rule governed you know manipulation of a formal system in terms of
implications between propositional representations that's the syntax that's what syntax stands for
and i just gave you arguments that that syntax you get you get you get you get an infinite
regress about trying to get what is presupposed by the running or the operation of that syntax
that can't be captured in the syntax and you and you can turn that not only backwards
you can turn it forward jerry foder who's by the way one of the strongest who was one of the strongest
proponents of the computational theory of mind so i'm not from way out here this is from like the
core to made him such a good researcher he could criticize his own position so deeply but he said
look uh development going forward if we're talking about qualitative development not just
i'm taking in more information but the capacity to take in more kinds of information
he said look if what we're talking about there is we're talking about not a change of content but
a change of competence and then he says okay so let's talk about that syntactically what would
it be to improve your competence well he says the only model we have that is going from a weaker
logic to a stronger logic a logic with more representational power so from like you know
propositional logic to predicate logic to modal logic etc and then he made the devastatingly
sort of confirmable point which is ultimately godelian there is no way i can run all the possible
all possible computations within predicate calculus and i'll never get modal logic
because i have to step outside and from outside introduce an axiom and a new function
and so there is no way in which you can have qualitative development computationally so not
only can you not only can you not explain all the processes that are presupposed to getting to it
you can't explain how it can grow in competence going forward now fodder did something that i just
disagree with as a scientist he said well there there must be no qualitative evidence and piaget
is just wrong and it's like no he's not there's too way too much empirical evidence that kids go
through qualitative development and so that turns fodder's argument i think into a modus tolan's which
means cognition can't be fundamentally computational so both going backwards into into what's
presupposed to get to the syntax and going forward how does it get how does it have
you know qualitative development you can't get a computational account of that yeah and i'm here
also because i did my research and i'm not understand his argument fully because it's too deep into
mathematics and physics but but i think that's the merit of xerogeo penrose also added that the
amount of time he spent as a physicist trying to sort of grasp this and he did this chess position
i had that in the documentary it was sort of a novel chess position very very weird one when you
sort of get to the other side you with with a bond you can promote right and he um he he he
he did this crazy position that you don't promote to a queen but to a i forgot the english word it's
a loper um it's not what's the other piece that that can go diagonal um bishops bishops sorry that's
it the english word too dutch for this but that you promote to a bishops and now you have three
bishops now that's a weird position no one does it you always promote to a queen right so you give
that to an ai and then just goes bonkers because it doesn't and it did very weird things and a human
average player could immediately sense what would be the next position and in this sort of puzzle he
made it was that the the the solution was that it was a draw it was an obvious draw and but the ai
i kept doing stupid stuff because it believed it could win and he then asked this whole argument
going back to gaol and halting problem and i really liked that because it's so visual to me um and
then of course ego's quantum but that's i think about yeah yeah that was it was a question i had
how much you are into physics and and what's happening sort of in the foundations of physics
or you see that as a prediscipline uh related but not of direct interest to your first of all before
i criticize i'll strengthen penrose i haven't met him so i'll call him penrose yeah um so fairly
recently um about the same i think the same year that gbt4 came out uh we had we we had these these
super ai's that could beat any any go any go master easily rattle right yeah which is more
complex than chess right yeah yeah yeah and then what they had is there was a couple of human beings
that noticed the language i'm using that noticed that the machine had a particular sort of presupposition
in it put the presupposition into play and was able to just a middle range player was able to defeat
the best of the go the go a ai's just right and it's the same kind of argument again it's like
because you can't like the the the you can't this capacity of sort of noetic self-transcendence
that's bound up with consciousness and bound up with rationality isn't captured look even in human
beings measures of intelligence are only weakly to medially predictive of rationality they're far
from identity um so just making something intelligent does not make it rational and and i
think by parody of argument we can make uh make similar claims now about the quantum i don't know
what to make about that i mean first of all let's give credit where credit is due um
i think we have very good evidence that the sense of smell is making use of quantum mechanics
i think i think it would be wrong as a scientist just i think the evidence is now compelling
that somehow you can distinguish fragrances or odors because of quantum level differences
and so something's going on there um we don't have now to be fair to me we don't have any evidence
like that for sight or hearing or even for touch right taste will probably turn out to be that because
taste and smell are so interwoven but the three distal senses and even touches and that's distal
but those ones because you have this extra problem of going from the the proximal to the distal
right there seems to be a huge thing that isn't well explained uh by invoking quantum mechanics
in some fashion and here's what the other side of the argument most of most of your behavior that's
using uh that's you that's not primarily relying on smell which is most of your behavior right
you show the kinds of errors and constraints and mistakes that you would be would be expected
is if you were dealing with massive issues of relevance realization in which you couldn't
do super positioning to cover all the possible and and then get the collapse out of it so why if
you have quantum computation and it's available why is it that you fall prey to the confirmation
bias or the representational heuristic or the availability heuristic or the my side bias etc etc
etc etc why aren't we why do we not have angelic causal cognitive agency and we don't we are very
prone to self-deception we make all kinds of experimentally repeatable mistakes that seem
to indicate we are facing computational limitations that would only be the case if we were doing
something that was understood from a classical computational or classical physical physics
physics kind of framework very nice to hear your reflection on this and there's a lot to be said
here but i'll i'll make sure to send you if you like it a copy of a book our foundation has just
released by Federico Fargini the founder of is the inventor of the first microprocessor chip
the intel 404 and now he has a quantum theory of consciousness and it is speculative it is
highly theoretical but very interesting because it is very compatible with certain certain
work done now in the foundations of physics but i'll send it to you just yeah you might find very
interesting yeah so if i i would appreciate the book but my pushback on that would be look i don't
want initially to you to tell me how your theory of consciousness is compatible with physics i
want your theory of consciousness to tell me how it's compatible with cognition because if you
can't do that i don't care about the compatibility with physics i'd care about it ontologically
out here but as somebody trying to understand cognition which i think i agree i agree yeah
and this is also why i just spoke to michael levin levin by the way and it's also his argument
that you can look at sort of a quantum level what happens when you play chess i mean all the
atoms in the pieces we just said that and doesn't make sense no not at all so i i i feel you there
john just to to sort of go into an end of our beautiful conversation um you're highly analytic
you remind me very much of Bernardo and that's also why i think the two of you are such good
companion to to discuss things but you also have your foundation and you do sort of the the the
transcendent work with young people and i'm just very curious of some maybe stories to share here
that you find beautiful where you see sort of all that analytic that thinking sort of really
resulting in that transcendence so to speak with the people you work with or even perhaps personally
but i'm just very interested here yeah so to not fall into performative contradiction
and i think performative contradictions are worse than merely propositional contradictions
i think i would say i would conclude i would conclude that nobody is going to find alleviation
from the meeting crisis amelioration alleviation by following out the analytics of my arguments
instead what i hear from i think they're important because i think you should do science
and so i'm doing cognitive science and that's where i feel i need to do that right and i also
feel i need to do that because it lends plausibility and legitimacy right and and that's important too
but what what what i find most what i what i get very very often from people and most encouraging
is people will say you gave me a like you gave me a conceptual vocabulary you gave me a theoretical
grammar so that i could make sense of my experience in a way that encouraged me to take up because now
i could understand this practice and that practice and how they could fit together and then i moved
into an ecology of practices that have had this huge transformation on me and that is exactly what
i aspired to that is exactly what i wanted to happen putting aside the need to do good science
which i do think you need to do but insofar as i'm trying to alleviate the meeting crisis
the analytics is completely in service of subservient to just giving people a way of
thinking and reflecting on their phenomenology and their meaning making such that practices
become legitimate and plausible and they also have a way of correcting and vetting and saying
i think that's just a woo practice this one sounds like it's got a good chance of actually
being real hey these two complement each other or counterbalance each other in a really nice way
and that for me that's what really goes into my heart is making me feel that i've done some good
in the world yeah very beautiful and and funny thing in i think all the analytic and all the
thinking and it's also for Bernardo and then and then that that's all about that thin description
in a sense right yeah it is that's funny that's funny yeah because people yeah yeah well it's
the vicinsteinian thing right right right like all you often have to go into this very complex
stuff because you're trying to unwind these very complex knots right and and get to a possibility
where you can go back to saying oh wait let's go back and we consider x that we buried under all
this knotted thought and ink right and go back oh wait yes and so yeah and your own ecology of
practice how does that sort of play out in an in an average week when you also have a lot of
commitments and stuff how do you fit it in and what what is that ecology i mean so you have to be
adaptive especially when you're traveling so what i did is i've come up with my my my regular is like
an hour and a half i go for a walk and then i do sort of an hour and a half or so of of practice
but i also meditation oh more than meditation so i i i do i do um i do some g condo i do some
phijin and some uh sword form then i do slow empty-handed tai chi chuan the long form as it's
called i do some jian jung which is sort of standing and holding some each one which is
kind of a moving thing in the family of chi kung i'm doing all of that and then i i sit
and i i do uh so sort of practices uh for cultivating prajna i do some meditative practices
some contemplative practices practices that are more sort of zen in their orientation counterbalance
by practices that are sort of more neoplatonic and so that i i practice what i reach there's a
very like there's stillness practices counterbalance both movement practices there's meditation of
practices kind of by by contemplative practices there are practices that dive deep into your
experience that's very zen there's practices that dive very deep into your intelligibility
that's neoplatonic i'm doing everything i'm talking about and we talk about the design
principles um at the breviki foundation we we have the acronym dime you want dialogical practices
and i do that with uh i do that with other people there's uh philosophical fellowship there's
dialectic into dialogos we're we're we're workshopping another one right now called the
socratic search base there's dialogical practices you want imaginal practices you want mindfulness
practices and you want embodiment practices of some kind so dime so you want dime and then you
want you don't want just a hodgepodge you want ones that challenge you and that are a complementary
and counterbalance each other like an ecology that's what i do every every morning but i i have three
versions i have the full hour and a half a more hour one a half an hour one and a 15 minute one
if i'm you know laying over in a hotel and i've got to get up at three a.m and like you know blah
kind of thing right so and i strongly advise people to do that because this is something
i say to my students continuity of practice is more important than quantity of practice
so give yourself different versions of your practice be honest can i do the hour and a half
do it i honestly can only do the hour do it i can honestly only do the half hour do it i can
honestly only do the 15 minutes do it and if you can't do the 15 minutes you're being held
hostage or something i don't know what's going on so like that's what i do and i have that repertoire
and i'm not i'm not claiming it to be a saint but by and large i honestly apply the one that is
appropriate given to me by the constraints that i'm facing exigently at that time great and that's
a lot it's it's very nice to see how you sort of have put together this sort of delicate menu
so to speak for people interested in this they can go to your foundation's website i guess or
could be or go links links in our description yeah so i mean if they're interested in the more
scientific stuff they can track down my publications if they're interested if they're
interested in the videos they've they've got my youtube channel they can see awakening for the
meeting crisis after socrates they can see all the cognitive science shows on transcendent
naturalism and consciousness if they're interested in the practices we have the platform called
awakened to meaning awakened to meaning you can go there and then you'll get all this information
and there it's all there's from drop-in right from drop-ins to week in workshops to intensive
courses etc we are not a community we make this very clear when i'm not going to build a community
i that is not who i am not a guru not a guru no religion no we're a dojo we're a base camp
where where you can go to train so that you can start to cultivate wisdom individually and
collectively with other people so that you can more better find or co-create with other people
a community that's what we are and sort of a matter question when i just made this switch
right we talked about sort of the analytic heart stuff and very much the stuff i talk a lot of
about 40 essencia foundation and then we go a bit more personal how you practice this daily
i always send sort of that this switch is some somewhat difficult not that i mean you your answer
is beautiful but how is that for you as an academic um talking about stuff like this so
talking about these deep personal practices has that become more easy or is it still hard sometimes
it's it's i mean in general many of the practice many of this i think i was the first person
academically at the University of Toronto to talk about mindfulness and i sort of had to
introduce it sort of very quietly and sort of by the way and and now of course you know there's
academic journals on it and blah blah but um by and large uh you know i i think i've been i think
i think it's fair to say i've been successful at convincing people that i can do i can be
responsible to good science while talking about these topics so uh but there are still
moments where i go to what you might call the cutting edge and that sort of that difficult
place you're putting your finger on between the personal life and the professional life
like when i talked about some of the stuff that happened to me while i was doing i f s and the
ally work and things like that and a lot of people were like whoa but but again and then i went out
and i would said but look this is this is what's happening in the psychotherapeutic world right
these these dialogical um parts practices are gaining uh a lot of traction the cog size is
moving towards that the self is not monological but is dialogical in nature and and it's not in
you it's extended embedded and active to get all that and then people go oh and i said yes right
and then you can go back and understand that cross culturally cross historically people
are reporting these kinds of experiences and taking up practices and instead of being ethnocentric
or just i don't know reductive in saying silly silly superstition you might actually stop and
think hey maybe there's a real phenomena going on now i want to be clear there's a lot of bullshit
there's a lot of charlatans there's a lot of woo but that doesn't mean there isn't a real there
aren't real phenomena so i still bump into at least initially people go whoa whoa whoa
but i've sort of i've sort of earned enough cred uh that people at least give me a chance now
they didn't they wouldn't have given me that chance 15 or 20 years ago but now they do
and so it's not as hard for me as it used to be yeah you've built something up and and of course
now there's so much momentum i think worldwide and um just final question a bit a bit more about
that personal you've you've described how you do your practice and we talked a lot a lot about the
thin description what was your last moment of strong transcendence that you are willing to share
i mean it's it's a bit personal perhaps i i mean in one sense i i i i ideally have an experience
of strong strong transcendence in that i have i i i i i i the language is bedeviling me because i
don't want to say i but i realize non duality but not in any sort of closed way in a way in which
i feel like um well nishitani talks about he says the heart of religion is um the
the real self-realization of reality and i get to that place where there's the real
self-realization of reality for its own sake and i i am doing deep perspectival and participatory
participation in that i that happens to me now on a daily basis because i've been i've
been practicing for like three decades uh now sometimes what happens is that will open up into
something um what and there's things that are practically profound where you get oh and then
you know how to do a practice better but if you say it to somebody they go yes or what and then
there are things that are more theoretically profound where you there's this and it's never in
it but when you come out of it you go oh right and what happened now so i'm going to answer your
question now i had strong transcendence i was in non duality and i had been already arguing this
but i wasn't doing that in my head i want that very clear i i imagine there's some maybe unconscious
processes happening i'm not i don't deny that but where i realized that when if you're talking about
pure relationality it's not just an inversion so substance ontology is the relata the things
are there and the relations emerge out of them one thing you could do is just say oh well i'll
invert it and the relations are there and the relata emerge out of it and what i realized is
that is fundamentally wrong the inversion is just the same problem and and there's a symmetry argument
against it and that what i needed was right a formulation that was neither right the relations
come from the relata or the relash relata come from relations but the codependent arising right of
them and then as soon as i had that thought coming out of the non duality it felt like i
had been more true to an authentic to the non duality thank you very much john i think this is
a beautiful thing for people to ponder out how you close this well thank you very much hans
this has been wonderful and please say hi to bernardo for me i always have a lot of respect i
think i hope that came through whenever i was talking about it because that is that is really
my attitude towards him one of respect and affection and there's a lot of convergence
between he and i around trying to deal with the meaning crisis so thank you for this wonderful
conversation and i'm glad you're doing it a lot of this you know we need more of this
we just need more of this and so thank you and people like you you are the inspiration
in a sense for the stuff we're doing the the output the rigor all the thinking that goes into it
and the fact that you practice it i think that to me really really inspiration and i know that it's
completely much mutual what you're saying about bernardo we really appreciate what you're doing
and as as you hi yeah thank you so much yeah
