Space time is just our headset, but we lose ourselves in the game.
And we take the game as the reality.
For Essencia Foundation, I had the honor of sitting down with one of my absolute intellectual
heroes, cognitive psychologist Donald Hoffman, to discuss the nature of reality.
Before I share our full conversation, here are some of the highlights.
I'll say this.
There is no physicalist theory that has at any time proposed a specific conscious experience
that they can explain.
There's not one on the table.
The distinction that we make between conscious and unconscious and between living and non-living
is not a principle distinction.
It's a mistake.
It's a rookie mistake that we make by mistaking our space time headset for the final truth.
What if you were unable to wake from that dream?
How would you know the difference between the dream world and the real world?
Were you happy with the movie The Matrix?
What it did sort of culturally with that metaphor?
The Matrix really does open people's minds up to the possibility that what they're experiencing
is just a simulation, right?
Now in The Matrix, though, once you pop out of the simulation, there's now the space
time world.
So when Neo takes off the headset, he's back in the space time world.
Welcome to the real world.
So it's Trinity and everybody, they're all in the space time world.
So what I'm saying is even more radical, that whatever is beyond space time is utterly
unlike space and time.
But this is like fundamental stuff, right?
This is the real cool stuff.
We are still thinking of traveling in space time and we have all these space time fantasies.
Most of the galaxies that we can see, we could never go to.
Space is expanding so quickly that we could never get to them through space, moving at
the speed of light.
So there's all this real estate out there that we can see that's waving at us and saying,
nanny, nanny, you can never get here.
Well, that's if you go through space time.
But if space time is just a headset, think about the options that come, you don't have
to go through space time.
You could go around space time.
When we let go of the physicalist framework, we say, no, I am consciousness.
I transcend this.
Death is just stepping out of this headset.
In other words, we're wired up to take the headset seriously.
And so consciousness wired itself up to take the headset seriously.
But part of the waking up process is to step back and go, oh, wow, okay, oh, no, no, no,
I'm not a little thing inside the headset.
The headset is inside of me.
I'm eventually going to take the headset off so I can have a looser relationship with
all this stuff.
I don't need to get that big house to be something.
I don't need to have that big scientific paper.
I don't need to be acknowledged.
Has it done this for you, Donald?
Has it done this for you?
What you're now saying?
Yeah, sort of this realization in your personal life.
It, it's interesting.
It does it for me when I am conscious.
Okay, great, Donald, I'm really, really happy that we can do this.
So nice to have you on the other side and sitting here.
Thank you very much, Hansen.
It's a very kind of you to invite me.
Yeah, we just spoke about your background.
I thought if it's okay with you to start a bit sort of on a personal note, personal note,
could you tell a little bit about your background and your upbringing?
Well, I was born in an army hospital in San Antonio, Texas.
My dad was a GI.
He was just trying to find himself.
We went into the army, newly wed, and I was born nine months later.
So they, they were both just like 21 and trying to figure things out and they, they were having
a hard time making ends meet.
They didn't have enough money to eat at the end of the month.
So it was quite, quite something.
But six months after I was born, they moved to California.
So I, I basically was, was raised in Southern California all of my life and he was, he was
an engineer and my mom was, she had a bachelor's in biology and she ended up doing some computer
programming when I was about 10 years old.
She was one of the early programmers and sort of got me interested in computers.
My dad was an engineer.
He had a master's in chemistry and worked at various high tech companies that were at
the early stages of building like storage devices for computers and so forth.
And then he, he became a Christian when I was 10 or 11 years old and that changed things
quite a bit.
They, my parents both jumped into it pretty heavily and by the time I was in my mid to
late teens, he was an associate pastor at, at, at a church and went on for, for decades
afterwards to be a pastor.
So I was really from about age 10 on really raised pretty heavily in the fundamentalist
Christian Protestant kind of background.
So, and that, so it was pretty intense and, and of course you, well in my case I was the
oldest.
I didn't rebel.
I, I went along.
It took me a long time to get a perspective, to be able to step back and start to get a
perspective on it.
My younger brother rebelled earlier and my, my sister has never rebelled to this day.
And did you ever personally believe, did you have the faith as well as a teenager?
Well, yeah, I believed in, believed in God and, and, you know, my, my thoughts about that
have, have changed over the years with what that word actually means, but there is a sense
in which I still think that consciousness is fundamental and, you know, the, the grandfather
in a chair with a long white beard is not what I think of when I think of consciousness.
So, so, you know, the, my, so I had a, it had a big influence on me, both positive
and negative.
I mean, it really made me think about things beyond space and time, but I think it made
me think about them in, in not very functional ways.
And so I had to step back and, and really sort out what, what, what we're, I mean, there
are beautiful things when Jesus says love your neighbor as yourself.
That's, I mean, that's, that's, there's many, many beautiful things, but it's a mixed bag.
And so we each have to, to sort out that mixed bag and take what is really good and, and
try to be kind to everybody in the process.
But I think it's so great that your work offers, is, is in a sense, I think a refuge.
I mean, that, that it is to me, alongside with people like Bernardo and, and more people
who think consciousness might be fundamental.
So that, I think that's really great that you're offering that intellectually through
science to people.
And a question I had has to do with the, I hear you say a lot in interviews that you
want to make things mathematically rigorous, right?
And I am not, I'm not a mathematician.
Understanding of math does not sort of extend beyond high school.
And what exactly, if you had to define, and that's maybe a two, a weird or broad question,
but what is math exactly?
Is it sort of a symbolic representation of reality?
I mean, that's what I now think, but how would you define mathematics?
So mathematics is the way of getting rid of fuzzy thinking and hand waving and, and therefore
the dogmatism that can come with it.
Because I know what's right.
Because if you try to come at me with some argument, then I'll just sort of change my
view enough so that.
So if, but if I put it down in an equation, then it's hard for me to dodge and weave.
It's not impossible, but it makes it much, much harder to, to dodge and weave.
So, so mathematics is infinitely complicated.
This is a Gertle, Kurt Gertle in 1930, 1931, when he was a young man, like 25 years old,
proved perhaps one of the, the greatest intellectual achievements in all of human history.
It was called Gertle's incompleteness theorem.
And without going into the details, it, it entails that there's no end to the exploration
of mathematical structure.
There, in some sense, it, it seems to me that it, it entails that you can't be omniscient
about mathematics because it, it just really, it won't, won't put it this way.
The kind of omniscience involved would be stunning omniscience.
It would have to, I would have to, is beyond my conception of the kind of omniscience that
would be needed to have a full comprehension of the math.
Only any finite formal system is, Gertle, Gertle shows us, merely a scratch on the surface
of this infinite depth of mathematics.
And so that, that means that math is a two-edged sword here.
On the one hand, it cuts through our dogmatism and our fuzzy thinking.
And so it's absolutely essential.
Because one thing we know about human nature is that, you know, we, we, we're dogmatic.
We know what we know and we know that the other guy's wrong and, and we're not in, in
conversations typically to, to learn, we're in conversations to show other people that
we're right and they're wrong, with, with happy exceptions.
But with mathematics, when you're forced to state your ideas with mathematical precision,
there's no hiding, right?
And when I say, for example, that I think that consciousness is fundamental, and then
I say, and here's what I claim the structure of consciousness is.
And so I have to write, I write down some math.
Now, now I get the other, so that's the first side of the sword and it's wonderful, right?
It really cuts through dogmatism and fuzzy thinking and, and dodging and weaving.
On the other hand, Gertle has told us that essentially there's infinite wisdom beyond
any formal theory that you could write down.
Yeah, by proven by math itself, that's so astonishing.
It's proven by mathematics.
That's really, truly stunning that, that the mathematics itself gives us the insight
that no mathematics that we could do is ever the whole truth.
And in fact, that there's essentially unbounded intelligence of mathematics beyond what you
could do with what, so, and, and, and who knows, I mean, if, and mathematics isn't the
whole world, so, but that's just part of it, certainly part of, of reality.
And so already we know that reality transcends any mathematical theory.
So that, that also entails that there can be no scientific theory of everything.
And yeah, yeah, it makes us humble, right?
Gertle, Gertle made us humble.
It's very, very humbling.
And so what, what we have then, so someone might say, well, there's, throw up your hands,
you know, let's just party and, and, and, you know, we can't, can't know it all, then
why know anything?
And I think that that's the wrong attitude.
It's not my attitude anyway.
It is, we do have this wonderful tool and we do find that it is incredibly effective.
Eugene Wigner has said that the unreasonable effectiveness of mathematics in, in the natural
sciences, he was, he was amazed at it and a lot of us agree.
It's truly stunning that using Newton and Newton's equations, we can send rockets to
planets and it works quite well.
And with Einstein's equations, we get even, you know, greater fidelity and with quantum
theory, you know, well Maxwell's equations and quantum theory, we're talking literally
on opposite sides of the world using technology that would not be possible without the mathematics.
Absolutely not.
And, and so, so the mathematics is at once empowering and it avoids dogmatism and it
really then is humbling once, once you really understand it is truly humbling.
And, and so, and I think for me, it then is a pointer to a way of thinking about what
is consciousness about.
If consciousness is all there is, then mathematical structure is only about consciousness because
that's all it's, that they're there for it to be about.
So, so then Gertl is telling us that there's no end to the variety of conscious experiences
and conscious activity.
Whatever consciousness is, is literally unbounded because mathematics is unbounded.
Yeah, I'd love to go a bit deeper into that, but I'd first like to ask you, you just said,
I mean, it avoids mathematics, avoids fuzzy thinking, right?
And we, I'd like to talk a bit about sort of the two paradigms, physicalism versus
idealism is a big spectrum, of course, there's a lot in between.
But could you sort of sketch our Newtonian worldview and how we always thought about
consciousness and why that felt so scientific or scientifically correct and, and what quantum
theory did do that notion?
Right.
So, so many of the early scientists, like, like Newton himself, were, were actually believers
in God and, and, and Christians.
And, and Newton apparently wrote more theology than, than physics.
But his, his, the Newtonian world was essentially a mechanical world.
You could write down these differential equations.
And if you knew the starting conditions with precision, then you could predict pretty much
everything that was going to happen going forward.
And, and so it led others like George Barkley to, you know, who was a, a bishop in the,
in the Christian Church of England or something like that, to come up with his version of
idealism as sort of a counter to what he viewed was the, the mechanism, the mechanical view
of the universe that came from Newton.
So he, he was a reaction in part against that.
And, but eventually, you know, idealism had a heyday in the 1800s.
But in the 1900s, it, it sort of died out, largely died out the success of Newton and
then the success of Einstein's special and general relativity theories.
And then the success of quantum mechanics.
Now with, with quantum mechanics, the early theorists, many of them like Max Planck, for
example, clearly thought that space and time were not the fun, not the final thing.
They, they thought, you know, Max Planck was very, very clearly thought consciousness was
fundamental.
And he, he said so.
And, and there was a period in which many of the early thinkers in quantum theory, you know,
from like 1926, 1925, until World War II.
So that, that period in there, there was a lot of soul searching about what was quantum
mechanics telling us deeply about who we are and the nature of the universe.
And, and is the physicalist idea that space and time and matter are fundamental.
So those, I mean, that's the, that's the physicalist idea.
Space time is fundamental and the particles in space time, you know, quarks, leptons and
bosons, those are our new fundamental particles right now.
That, that is the fundamental grounding reality and everything else is just a
complicated pattern of the interactions of, of those particles in space time.
Many quantum theorists begin to question that early on, but after the start of World
War II, things changed.
It, it, we got the shut up and calculate kind of attitude because physics now, and quantum
physics became put in service of, of the war and, and it became highly funded and it
made the atom bomb and, and all of a sudden it was a completely different thing.
And, and so that the, the early generation that started, that were thinking, what does
this really mean?
That, that really got shut down in large part by World War II.
But, but more recently than it, like the conference that we'll be having here at
Chatham, there's been a lot of thought now about the nature of what our current physics
theories are telling.
Quantum field theory now with gravity, you know, trying to understand how those
interact has, has led some, but not too many physicists to, to once again wonder whether
consciousness is fundamental.
That, that I would say not, I don't know too many physicists.
I've been to an FQXI conference a few years ago on the role of the observer in, in quantum
theory and it, it became very, very clear there that the idea that consciousness might
be fundamental was, was basically not on the table.
It, it, it's, it's not taken seriously.
But what is taken seriously is that space time is doomed.
That's really interesting now.
And we're, we're talking big, big giants in, in physics.
Ed Whitten has said that who, one of the ones who's been foundational in string theory, M
theory, Nathan Seiberg at the Institute for Advanced Study, and then very
influential Nima or Connie Hamed, who's also at the Institute for Advanced Study.
And, and it's, it's become very, very clear from the actual structure of the physical
laws themselves that space time cannot be fundamental.
And this is, again, where the mathematics is really powerful.
Just like Gertl used the mathematics to show that mathematics, at least any finite
axiomitization of mathematics, can't be the whole thing.
So the physicists are using the theory of space time to show that space time can't be the
whole thing.
And that is the beauty of the mathematics.
It tells you where the theories stop.
This is where space, space time is great.
It's a wonderful framework for a while.
And here is where it stops.
It stops at about 10 to the minus 33 centimeters and 10 to the minus 43 seconds.
It ceases to have any operational meaning.
And what happens, but you're referring to the Planck scale, right?
The smallest scale that we have in physics.
What exactly happens at that scale that makes you say space time is doomed?
So, of course, I'm not a physicist, so I'm telling you what the physicists say.
But what the physicists will tell you is that the way that you probe smaller and
smaller regions of space, in other words, to have a better and better microscope to
look at smaller and smaller details, you need to have wavelengths of light that are
getting finer and finer because you have to have fine wavelengths of light to resolve
fine detail in what you're looking at.
Well, that's fine.
It requires more energy.
From quantum theory, we understand that the energy is proportional to the frequency.
E equals h nu.
So as the frequency goes up, you need more energy.
So that's fine.
So unless there's gravity, and that's the problem.
So if it was just quantum mechanics, you could, in principle, go as far as you
wanted, as much energy as you wanted.
But the problem is with gravity and Einstein, energy and mass are equivalent.
So as you put more and more energy into a smaller and smaller region of space,
you're essentially putting more mass into a small region of space.
And then, unfortunately, you, at some point, at around 10 to the minus 33 centimeters,
you just start creating black holes.
And so the very thing that you're trying to study no longer exists.
And if you put more energy, if you say, I'm frustrated, I'm just going to try to go
smaller with higher and higher frequencies, you just make the black hole bigger.
So the problem just, the problem literally grows.
So that's one reason, the second reason is that in quantum theory, the measuring
devices themselves, the thing that you're using to measure the spin of the electron
or the position of the gluon or something like that.
These devices themselves are physical devices.
And so they're quantum mechanical systems with their own degrees of freedom.
And therefore, they have their own limits of precision, Heisenberg uncertainty kinds
of things. And so if you want more and more precise measurements, you have to have
more and more degrees of freedom in those measuring devices, which is going to make
them heavier and heavier.
And at some point, once again, the device will collapse into a black hole.
So if you have a small, if you have a room and you're trying to measure something in
a room, it turns out there is nothing that you can measure with precision.
So there are no local observables in any part of space and time.
Yeah. So if you want to pinpoint space time down to the smallest and really know
what it is at the smallest level, it will blow in your face.
It will become a black hole and that's right.
And beyond that, then the very notion of space and time of lengths and distances
and time beyond that level simply has no operational meaning.
So we're not, they're not saying that there are pixels that at the bottom level,
there are these pixels like the pixels on your screen of your computer screen or
something like that. No, it just means that the whole notion of space time
itself ceases to make sense.
So it, so it stops. Space time is doomed.
It cannot. So this is a huge blow because with Newton, right?
Space time is fundamental, although Newton believed it was more of a dualist
view because he thought that there was a God beyond space time.
But once, once the scientific world let go of that, then it's just space time
and its particles are fundamental.
And we thought, we thought that it was infinitely deep.
You know, you could always, we thought reductionism was going to work.
We could just go to smaller and smaller scales in space time to find more and
more fundamental laws.
And so, and with, with, you know, Boltzmann and his work on thermodynamics
and so forth, we, we had our first taste that maybe something like that could
really work that we could not, well, not the first taste, but a, a compelling
taste that that kind of reductionist thing could really work.
And so we were off to the races with reductionism reductionism would be,
yeah, reductionism is, so I understand this, but this is just for people
watching this reductionism means going down into space time, the smallest
building blocks of space time and see if we can understand that.
And if we understand that, we, then we have laws that sort of govern
everything bigger, including consciousness.
That's right.
So it's going to be, as we go to smaller and smaller scales, we'll just find
deeper and deeper laws.
And so that was, that was the, the dream.
And it's, it's a, and, but, but Donald, what I'm very curious about your take
on quantum mechanics, or at least how you would explain it, I've read this
book, quantum enigma by Bruce Rosenblum and Fred Cutner.
I heard it was sort of a good introductionary book and I found it very,
very, very good.
And they say with quantum theory, physics encountered consciousness.
And I was just wondering, I've read the book and I still find it hard to sort
of retell it to people because it's just so counterintuitive.
How would you explain that, that in quantum theory, or, or, I mean, if you
agree, did physics encounter consciousness?
Well, some of the earlier pioneers of quantum theory did think that.
So Max Planck, I think Schrodinger, arguably, um, Wigner, um, some things
that von Neumann writes, wrote seem along those lines, although I won't pin
them with that.
But I would say when I talk to modern day quantum physicists, um, I don't, when
they talk about the role of the observer in quantum theory, the observer is a
technical term.
It's some kind of measuring device, perhaps another quantum system, another
physical system.
Uh, and the idea that, that consciousness is fundamental, um, is a tiny
minority view of, you know, I would say under 1% in, in, in my, um, interactions.
They, they understand that, that in many of the interpretations of quantum
theory that we need to have some notion of the role of the observer, although
the, in the many worlds or multiverse kinds of interpretations, you can start
to, to let go of that role of the observer in some sense and, but they have
their own problems.
Um, so, so I would say that for those who, um, want to ignore consciousness and
still be quantum theorists, they can do that.
And many, many brilliant, um, physicists are, are doing just that.
Even the ones who, um, take the notion of agency as really important in
quantum theory, that somehow the, the wave function is not, you know, the, a
state of the external world independent of the agent, but is actually a
statement of the degrees of belief of the agent about the outcomes that they
will experience if they do certain experiments, certain measurements.
But even in that case, um, and the theorists doing this are, are brilliant.
Most of them are, are going to say, um, I don't know what an agent is, and I'm
not going to commit that it's consciousness.
I'm just talking about, you know, I'm doing quantum theory, you, you tell me
what an agent is, but it's probably going to be some kind of, when we really
cash it out, it's probably going to, you know, be some kind of quantum
physical system with just lots of degrees and freedom and, and so forth.
But, uh, don't, don't worry with me about that right now.
You know, I'm just going to assume that there's some notion of agent that
will leave undefined.
So I don't see, what I do see is brilliant researchers like Neymar,
Connie Hamed and Juan Maldesena making bold moves beyond space time.
They're, they're saying there is, you know, space time is doomed.
Um, it's the work of our generation to find out what's beyond space time.
So how do you do that?
Well, you know, what, what, what kind of flashlight are you going to use into
the dark beyond space time?
Because even though quantum field theory and gravity together tell us that
space time isn't fundamental, they can't tell us what's beyond.
They, they, they just say, oh, this is how far I go and no further.
But they can't tell you what, what's next.
But when you say, but, but when you say you think consciousness is fundamental,
you are not in the school of, and indeed you're right, that is a minority.
I think the consciousness causes collapse sort of interpretation of quantum
mechanics, Von Neumann, who still sort of believed that.
And John Wheeler, I don't really know.
I'm curious also on your thoughts on John Wheeler.
But, um, so you are not thinking that consciousness somehow collapses a world
in superposition into a classical world.
Uh, no, that's not, not my view.
Um, I, I, I think that the closest.
To my view, among the standard quantum interpretations is, um, uh, Chris
Fuchs, uh, Cubism, quantum Bayesianism, right?
So we're, I think it's a brilliant interpretation where, where Chris Fuchs says,
look, the, the, the way function is not some objective thing out in space and time.
It's in the mind of the agent.
It's the degrees of belief of the agent.
And, and he's, he's very consistent in, in pointing out that when you're
thinking about probabilities, you can either be an objective probabilist
or Bayesian subjectivist.
And, and he gives good reasons to think that, uh, you know, just on probability
alone, you should be thinking about a subjectivist interpretation of probability.
And then, uh, once you adopt that, then, well, the quantum wave function is
really, um, how probabilities of interpretation.
Just for people who've now totally lost it, uh, when we, when we talk about, um,
objective probabilities, then you, um, then you believe there is an actual
world out there and you just don't know it, right?
And then you have to deal with these probabilities and, and, and that, that,
that gives you sort of, uh, a way to predict what's going to happen, right?
But there is an up there objective world and subjective probabilities would be
that you just don't know what's out there or, or how would you describe this?
Well, you, you could be a realist about the external world and be a
subjectivist about the probabilities.
So you could, so, so the objectivism and subjective subjectivism, but
probability is about, um, what do we mean when we say the probability of
tails is half?
Well, does it mean that if I flip the coin a thousand times, you'll get exactly
500 heads and 500 tails?
That's a sort of a frequentist kind of view that, that what probability means
is what frequency, if you do lots of observations, will you end up with?
Uh, and the subjectivist says, well, no, it's not about objective frequencies
that are measured.
It's, it's more about your degrees of belief about what, you know, what you
expect to have happen.
And, and so you could have prior probabilities, you know, I, I expect the
sun to rise tomorrow at whatever time, 5.30 in the morning, um, because it's
been doing so for thousands of years.
And, and so I have this prior, I mean, it's not, you know, I would say it's
0.99999, you know, well, you know, a lot of nines that the sun is going to
rise tomorrow, but there is a tiny chance.
Um, so, and that's, um, that's a subjective degree of belief.
And so, so now if, if you have this idea that, that what we're dealing with in
quantum theory, and when we're talking about the wave functions of various, you
know, like two gluons hitting each other and four gluons spraying out in, like in
the Large Hadron Collider, and you're asking what are the probabilities of these
various events.
Um, and you, and you write down these scattering amplitudes, you know, these
amplitudes for it.
I think the Cubist would say that is merely me as a theorist putting, as a good
Bayesian, putting down what I expect to have happen, what, what I expect to see.
Whereas an objectivist would say, no, it's really a statement about something
true in the, about the objective world and, and, and you will, you can measure
that truth with, with frequencies, um, you know, by lots of, lots of observations.
And so, my view then is more like Chris Fuchs in the subjectivist view, but in
which case then, I don't need to have all these worlds out there.
I, I, it's just, I, I'm, I'm positing.
Well, okay, maybe the coin is, comes heads or maybe it comes up tails.
I don't need to have a world branching out there.
I'm just wondering about the difference.
So I don't need to have all this metaphysical excess of, well, there's a
whole universe in which the thing came up heads and the other one in which it
came up tails, that's a, you know, it's a metaphysically high price to pay for
being, you know, but it's so, what I find so funny about this, because I now
understand this after a year of sort of getting my head around it, is that I
now understand that your position makes less metaphysical claims because people
on the street will think you're making a crazy metaphysical claim that
consciousness is primary.
And they say, of course, there's a world out there and they'll maybe have
read something about the many worlds interpretation that there is parallel
universes, and that they think is sort of not a metaphysical claim.
So where's this, how do we, how did we end up in this sort of misunderstanding
of what metaphysics, what is sort of a heavy metaphysical claim and a light one?
Well, I think many of us intuitively would agree with Einstein, right?
Well, Einstein was a realist and, and he,
thought that the moon was there when no one looked, right?
He didn't think that the active observation when I look up there and
see the moon that I'm creating the moon when I look at it, it's, the moon is
really there.
And Einstein wanted physics to be that way, and he didn't like the spooky
interactions at a distance that he, that he himself sort of pointed out in quantum
theory that, that, that things could happen and faster than the speed of light,
apparently, and, and of course there weren't any causal interactions.
They were nothing, no information traveling through space fast, fast and
speed of light as it turned out.
But he didn't like it because he, he wanted to have a sort of a Newtonian,
a classical worldview, right?
Where, yeah, space and time was, was much more interesting than Newton thought.
But, but nevertheless, it, it wasn't spooky like quantum theory seemed to be
indicating.
And so, I think most of us intuitively would, would agree with Einstein.
And he, you know, he's not bad company.
You know, if, if Einstein thinks that, you know, space and time are fundamental and
objects are, are, the moon is there when no one exists, who might argue with Einstein.
So, so I think a lot of us intuitively think that and, and I, and I think I know why.
The developmental psychologists have told us why.
So Piaget said that children, he thought by the time they're at 18 months of age,
get what he calls object permanence.
That is, we're programmed genetically.
That's at a certain point in our lives to just believe that, you know,
up to a point when mommy has the, the doll and it's where I can play with it,
that's the doll exists while I'm playing with it.
But as soon as mommy takes the doll and puts it behind the pillow and
I don't see it, it's gone, it, it doesn't exist.
Until you're around 18 months of age, according to Piaget, later work showed us
maybe three or four months of age, much, much earlier than he thought.
Where you get what's called object permanence, which is the pre-programmed
belief that, that object really exists even when you don't perceive it.
So you start to become a metaphysical realist, not because you're argued into it,
because you're programmed to believe it.
So, so the reason why it's so hard for us to let go of the idea that the moon
doesn't exist except when you look and create it, right?
To let, well, to let go of the idea that, that, that things really are there, right?
We want the dolly to be there, we want the moon to be there.
It's because we believe that before we were rational.
It's, it's, it's the water we swim in intellectually.
And so it's really hard for us to, to even see that, to question it.
It's, it's, when I, I remember giving a talk to, to my own department,
Cognizant Science Department, where I was explaining my argument from evolution.
Why we are creating everything that we see on the fly.
So I have an argument, so the physicists have an argument that space time isn't
fundamental and, and therefore, you know, somehow the act of observation must be
creating what we're, because it's not, it's not space time, whatever is there.
I have an argument from, from evolution of natural selection to the same.
So I gave it to my department a few years ago.
And the argument was pretty clear, so they were nodding their heads and, oh yeah.
And, and I, I realized that they, they were, they followed the argument, but
they didn't know what it really meant.
So I said, look, this means that neurons don't exist when they're not perceived.
Neurons cause none of our behavior.
And then look of horror throughout all my colleagues who used to think that I, you
know, was a reasonable and possibly intelligent guy.
All of a sudden, like, looks of horror, what, what is this guy saying?
So, so it's, it's not, it's a deep emotional thing.
It's, it's like being told that someone that you thought you knew really well all
your life has been in a suit and they're really a Komodo dragon.
And you didn't, you didn't know it.
It's just, it's just that appalling and idea that, you know.
And how has this, how has this all been for you personally?
I mean, because it's, this is all intellectual and mathematics because, but at night when
Donald goes too bad and you, the ponder about this, you know, how does that sort of, what's
the impact?
What has the impact been on you personally?
Well, it's, it's, I know firsthand how difficult it is to let go of the object permanence.
I see it, that is my default mode.
So even though I've been working on this mathematics and publishing papers for decades
on this kind of topic, when I'm not paying attention, I'm a, I'm a realist.
I, you know, the moon, I mean, I just automatically fall to that point of view.
So it's, it's, it's, the way I think about it is like, if you've ever played a virtual
reality game that's highly immersive, right, you put on a headset and body suit and you,
you know, when you first get in, hey look, this beautiful world that I'm involved in,
maybe it's Grand Theft Auto or whatever it might be, some VR version of that.
So you're immersed, you're seeing all this stuff.
And when you first go in, you, you have this sense of detachment.
Here I am outside of the game with just this headset on.
Once you get into it, you're in the game and your emotions get tied up in it and you,
you lose yourself in the game.
And so effectively that's what I'm saying is happening here.
Space time is just our headset, but we lose ourselves in the game and we, we lose, we,
we take the game as, as the reality and what, what science has done, what physics has done
is study space time very, very well.
It studied our headset and they, they, they studied the headset so well that they, they
discovered it's just a headset and that's the power of the scientific method, right?
We studied space time because we thought it was a fundamental reality.
We were lost in the game, but we, because we didn't just wave our hands and get dogmatic
about it, we actually, you know, we wrote down equations and then Einstein wrote down
you know, with, Einstein was the one that really blew this thing open with general relativity
because he, he had the notion like in 1907 that if I was in an elevator standing on a,
a scale to weigh myself and all of a sudden the cord broke and the elevator started in
free fall, how much would I weigh on that scale?
And Einstein realized I wouldn't weigh anything.
That was, he said, what the, like the happiest thought of his life.
That was the key idea for general relativity.
If I was on a free falling elevator and standing on a, on a scale, I would weigh nothing.
Brilliant idea.
It took Einstein, I don't know, seven or eight years or something like that of intense work
to turn that idea into mathematics.
And it was, and he's Einstein, right?
He's not, he was really, this really, really smart guy takes his, it takes him seven or
eight years.
He has to learn the mathematics, it was fairly unusual mathematics, Riemannian geometry and
so forth.
But he, he, he learned the mathematics and struggled and struggled and finally turned
it into mathematics in 1915 and turned that idea into one equation.
And that one equation then, a year later, a guy named Schwartzschild, a German guy,
I guess he was fighting in World War I and had time and brilliance to, to work on Einstein's
equations, discover what we now call the solution that's called black holes.
And Einstein didn't know about black, black, black holes and he didn't like it.
But his, so the, the key thing was, you can be as smart as Einstein and be so smart that
you write down the, the field equations of general relativity.
And then those equations come back and teach you something fundamental about black holes.
And they then, black holes are what tell you that space time cannot be fundamental itself.
There's got to be something beyond.
And so, so that is what I love about the, the hard-nosed scientific attitude is, turn
it into mathematics, the, if, if, if you have a theory that is good enough to tell you where
it stops, that's the kind of theory that is the heart and soul of science.
If you have a theory that allows you to dodge and weave and, and always dodge any objection,
I have absolutely no interest.
You're not playing the science game, you're, you're playing some personal game.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And, and if we had to, if you let, let's stay in that headset metaphor, which you've used
very often, of course, and it's a great metaphor.
First of all, were you happy with the movie, The Matrix, what it did sort of culturally
with that metaphor?
Yeah, I think the, well, the, the Matrix really does open people's minds up to the possibility
that what they're experiencing is just a simulation, right?
Now, in, in The Matrix though, once you pop out of the simulation, there's, there's another
space-time world.
So when Neo takes off the headset, he's back in a space-time world.
Right.
And, and so is Trinity and everybody, they're all, they're all in a space-time world.
So this, what I'm saying is even more radical, that, that whatever is beyond space-time is
utterly unlike space and time.
It's, it's, it's utterly outside of space and time.
And that's really hard to think outside of the space-time box.
When I talk about conscious agents, people go, where are they?
I mean, they're not in space and time, where are they?
And you have to turn things around.
Space and time is inside the minds of the conscious agents.
It's just like someone inside the, the virtual reality game of Grand Theft Auto.
You know, if, if the players inside could say, you think you're not, that you're not
really riding a red Mustang and you don't think that green Ferrari really exists, well,
where are you?
Well, I'm outside of the game.
This game is just a headset.
But if you're not on the game, where could you possibly be?
If, where else is there besides the game?
And that's the same situation we have with space-time.
We can't think about being outside of that game.
But that's what our mathematics is telling us.
You've got to think outside of that box.
And the best physicists are, well, the best, the physicists that I'm really interested
in like Neymar, Connie Hamid, and Juan Maldesada and others, Benny Costa.
These guys are, are taking the bold step of moving beyond space-time and they are finding
beautiful structures beyond space-time that are really, they don't know what they're
about, but they're there.
Yeah.
I mean, I think what people find so hard and also me myself, at first, I was more
sort of attracted to this idea of our brains being a receiver to a larger consciousness,
right?
That you see sort of the radio.
What's that interpretation called?
I think it's Aldous Huxley, who sort of popularized the idea.
And but you also say that your brain itself is just a sort of, and your whole body itself
is a projection in space-time, right?
It's not real.
It has no causal role to play for consciousness at all.
That, that's right.
So I, right now, I don't have a brain.
I have no neurons.
If you looked inside my skull, you would find neurons and brains, but that's because you
would create them as you looked.
The act of observation is creating what you see.
So the, the brain isn't a receiver for consciousness because the brain doesn't even exist.
The brain itself is just a symbol inside of consciousness that consciousness makes now
and then, and then deletes.
So it's just like when, if you're playing a virtual reality game, like, like the Grand
Theft Auto, and you have your headset on, and if I look over to the right, and I'll see
a green Mustang.
Well, there is no green Mustang, right?
What I'm really interacting with in this, in this metaphor is some super computer somewhere.
It's got all this megabytes of software and diodes and resistors and voltages and magnetic
fields.
I don't know anything about that.
I don't have to know, but that's the reality, quote, unquote, in this metaphor.
There's no green Mustangs inside that computer anywhere.
There's nothing green inside that computer that looks like a Mustang.
So I'm creating the Mustang when I look, and I'm deleting it when I look over here.
Now I see a, you know, a white Porsche.
Well, now I've deleted the green Mustang and I'm, I'm creating the white Porsche.
So we're, we create the stuff on the fly.
But someone has to look, someone else might be looking at that green Mustang, right?
For that person, it will still exist.
So, but, but the it will be a different green Mustang than the one I saw, right?
Because I create my own Mustang in my head and they create their green Mustang in their
head.
And we think that we're seeing the same Mustang because we agree.
Is there a Mustang to my right?
Oh yeah, there's a Mustang to your right.
And so we think that we're, we're seeing exactly the same.
And that's that baby principle, the object permanence you mentioned, right?
That my, my child learns that.
But the hard part also is that people find difficult to understand is that if for instance
I take alcohol or psychedelics, which is something in space time, that definitely has a causal
effect on my consciousness, right?
Right.
So, so it's absolutely the case that space and time are an interface that allow us to
do things that can affect consciousness.
So, so for right, for example, right now, you are affecting my consciousness.
And you're, you're doing it through space and time.
You're doing it through an interface.
So we know that even with the idea that consciousness is fundamental, that one consciousness can
affect another consciousness through the intermediary of space and time.
And in fact, that's what space and time are.
They are this interface.
It's an interface that some conscious agents use to interact with other conscious agents.
So it's no surprise that actions that we take using an interface could affect our consciousness.
That's what the interface is for.
Now, but the reason why people have a hard time understanding this is because we make
another mistake.
We mistake, because we mistake our interface for reality, we also make a fundamental mistake
that things that look simple to us are therefore necessarily simple in and of themselves.
And things that look dead to us are necessarily dead.
So, so for example, if I look in the mirror, I see my face.
I presume when I look at your face, you're conscious and so faces point to conscious
objects.
Well, I look at my cat, I am surely alive and it's probably conscious.
And an ant, certainly alive, people might begin to wonder about consciousness.
When I get down to a microbe alive, probably not conscious.
And when you get down to virus, now we even debate about whether it's alive.
When we get down to particles, absolutely not alive.
And only if you're a panpsychist, you might say that they have some consciousness associated
with them.
But a physicalist would say no consciousness.
That whole way of looking at things is fundamentally flawed.
It's mistaking a limit of our interface for an insight into the nature of reality.
An interface necessarily has to simplify things.
But that's what an interface is there for, is to hide most of the reality and the part
of reality that it shows you, it's dumbing it down.
Well, so with certain symbols, like human bodies and human faces, we get perhaps the
most insight into other consciousnesses.
With other symbols like cat and dog and mouse, we get less insight.
And with other symbols, we get almost no insight.
Well, that doesn't mean that I'm not interacting with consciousness.
It just means that my interface gave up.
Well, no surprise, that's what interfaces do.
They give up at some point.
But it's a rookie mistake to take the pixels of my desktop interface as the fundamental
elements of reality.
And so right now, I'm looking at a bunch of pixels, which is Hans' face.
So those pixels are conscious.
But if I go smaller and smaller, the pixels that correspond to the door behind you or
whatever, those aren't, well, that's the wrong way to think about the pixels.
This is just, those are just pixels.
They're a portal through which I'm actually interacting with something on the other side.
So we've mistaken our interface for the reality.
And so the distinction that we make between conscious and unconscious and between living
and non-living is not a principle distinction.
It's a mistake.
It's a rookie mistake that we make by mistaking our space-time headset for the final truth.
And so as a result, now to get back to your question, when we start to do things like
take drugs or get hit on the head, and we have changes in consciousness, well, first
of all, there's no surprise that the interface allows you to change consciousness.
That's what it's for.
It's what consciousness is used to interact and affect other consciousnesses.
When I have something that I call a drug, if I'm a physicalist, I'm thinking, hey,
there's nothing to this, but some chemicals, right?
This is a chemical formula.
There's no consciousness here.
So here is this physical thing, a chemical, and look, it's taking down your consciousness.
So that shows that physicalism is true.
Your brain is creating your consciousness, and this drug is affecting your brain, so
it's changing your consciousness.
But again, it's a rookie mistake.
Just because something has so simple in my interface that it looks like a chemical doesn't
mean I'm not interacting with consciousness.
It just means that I'm getting very, very little insight from my interface into the consciousness
that I'm interacting with.
So I'm always dealing with, behind the screen of my interface, I'm always dealing with consciousness,
just like in Grand Theft Auto.
Behind the screen, I'm dealing first with a supercomputer, but then with all the other
people around the world that have their headsets and body suits on, I'm affecting them.
I'm talking with them through that interface.
And so there's no surprise that the interface is giving me no insight into the consciousness
that I'm interacting with.
But what is the glory of science is it has the tools to tell us a headset is just a headset.
That's what the math is telling us.
When they say space time is doomed, basically physics is learned, the headset is just a headset.
And we're starting to look outside the headset.
Now, Nima and these other physicists, I'm not saying that they, in any way, endorse my
idea that consciousness is fundamental.
So I would bet that they don't.
I would think that they are just saying, look, we're finding these structures beyond space
time.
I don't know what they're about yet.
They're just let's stick with the math, let's find these structures and show how space time
arises.
And hats off to that.
That's I think brilliant.
Yeah, but at least they agree with you on the point that what we're in is not fundamental.
So this, if you call it a headset or not, but space time cannot be it.
And there you, there you agree.
And what makes exactly, I've heard you explain this a lot of times, but I'd like to hear
it now from you again, maybe in different words today.
But what makes you take the leap then to say if space time is not fundamental, consciousness
must be.
There's a couple reasons.
Maybe the biggest one is the poverty of my imagination.
What else would I do?
It's sort of like what if I'm interested in consciousness, I'm interested in my emotions,
my sensory experiences, the sense that I have of being, even when I'm not really perceiving
or thinking, I'm still, you know, when you're at night with your eyes closed and not seeing
anything or perceiving anything, you're still, there is this sense of I am, the sense of
being there.
And it's perfectly plausible if space time is fundamental and physicalism is true and
reductionism is true, to take all of that stuff that I just said, you know, my conscious
experience and so forth, as, well, that's not real, and I'm just a brain, I'm just
a body, and this is perhaps, you know, some weird, effective matter when it gets complicated
enough.
But when space time isn't fundamental and I realize that particles are not fundamental
and reductionism, as Nima Arkani-Hamedis said, you know, reductionism is dead, reductionism
is completely dead, it doesn't work.
So many physicalists, many of my colleagues in cognitive neuroscience, and some of them
will be here at this workshop, so they're cognitive neuroscientists, I would say almost
to a person, every one of them is a physicalist, and so they're looking to see how consciousness
emerges from complex neural activity or whatever, integrated information or global workspaces
or neuronal-mocular tubular collapses, so they're not going to think of consciousness
as being fundamental, they're going to think of it as somehow emerging, so they want, but
they want, they take consciousness seriously, so here's the, so most of my physicalist
colleagues, not all, but most take consciousness seriously, they say it's not something to
just be dismissed, it's not an illusion, you know, Dan Dennett and Keith Frankish will
say it's an illusion, it's just plot out an illusion, we've been misled, but most will
not, but they have not been able with their own theories, and this did affect me, when
I looked at their theories I realized, there's no beef here, in the following sense, specifically,
there's no specific conscious experience that anybody's ever explained, right, integrated
information theory, I asked Julio Tononi about this back in the late 1990s, he came to talk
early on in his career at the University of California Irvine at the Helmholtz Club and
we had him there, so I asked him at the Helmholtz Club to give me a particular example, he
couldn't do it, you know, one specific, you know, the taste of chocolate or the filling
of a headache or the smell of garlic or whatever, what is the specific conscious experience
that your theory can say, this is the integrated information that must be that conscious experience,
it could, it must be the taste of chocolate, it couldn't be the,
Yeah, and we're talking here about the code, let's call it the algorithm, show me the code,
the exact code that must be the taste of chocolate or garlic,
Exactly right, the right, because there, in some sense you can think about what you're
doing is proposing these circuits, right, the circuits have certain kind of integrated
information, so okay, great, sounds very very rigorous, give me the circuit for one conscious,
just one, I just want a circuit that you say must be one specific conscious experience,
there must be, you know, the taste of vanilla, and it could not be the smell of garlic, just
give me one, we're trying to do science here, we need some predictions of specific, the
predictions they're making is am I conscious at all or not, and that is an artifact, what
they're getting is an artifact of our interface, when I get certain kind of complexity now
in my interface so I can start to see the consciousness, that doesn't mean that there's
no consciousness otherwise, it just means that that's when my interface lets me see
the consciousness, so it's no surprise that you can get these complexity measures in
the variables of your interface about when you can detect consciousness or not, that's
no surprise, that follows from my theory, that you know my approach in which consciousness
is fundamental, so that's no surprise, what would be a surprise from my point of view
is that they could explain any specific conscious experience, so every, I'll say this, there
is no physicalist theory that has at any time proposed a specific conscious experience
that they can explain, there's not one on the table, and I, you know, I ask, I mean,
again, nothing personal here, I'm friends with a lot of these people, I'm friends with
Stuart Hameroff, and last time I was on stage with him I pressed him, give me one, Stuart,
what is the orchestrated collapse of, you know, quantum states in neuronal microtubules
that must be whatever you want, you know, the smell of barbecue, whatever you want.
You think he's still like Stuart Hameroff and Roger Penrose are physicalists in that
sense, they are like the objective collapse kind of school, right, which states that there
must be an external real world out there.
Well, either that or dualist, but probably mostly physicalist, I would say that somehow
this non-computational aspect of physics they think may be somehow where consciousness
somehow emerges, but what I want when I talk with Stuart is, okay, great, give me one,
what is the specific orchestrated collapse of neuronal microtubules states that must
be whatever you want, can you give me one, and last, so I had to really press him on
the stage, it took me several presses to really get him to say I don't have one, and
he knows the next time we're friends, I'd love to have a beer with him and so forth,
he's a great guy, next time I'm on stage with him I'm going to ask the same question, and
I'm sure he knows it, I'll ask the same question, and the point is, and again this is nothing
personal, these are good friends, and what I'm hoping is, I mean they're so smart, if
I can get them off of this physicalist thing where they're doomed to fail, right, space
time is doomed, there's no way that you can boot up a theory of consciousness if you start
with particles or any structures inside space time, you cannot do it, so I see all of my
friends and colleagues in this field, many of them just IQ's out the wazoo, but when
you have, I mean if I'm trying to set up, for example, a theory of space travel and
I believe in flat earth, good luck, I mean you just have sort of the wrong framework
to think about space travel, yeah I think for people it's just very nice to bring it
back to that, because people know the matrix, they know sort of VR, metaphors, to sum up
everything we've discussed so far, so when we enter this game or this simulation or this
matrix, object permanence sort of psychologically made us forget that we put on a headset in
the first place, and now we are sitting here as two adults and it's your life's work to
sort of get to the point that you know we have a headset on and to describe that headset
and then of course to think about how we can put it off again, right?
That's right, and once we realize that space and time are not fundamental, space time is
doomed and reductionism is dead, then we're free to begin to think about what's beyond
space time and my hypothesis is that it's a network of conscious agents and I have a,
with my colleagues Chetan Prakash and Manish Singh and Chris Fields and Robert Prentner
and others, we're all developing this mathematical model, not that I believe that we're right,
I don't, I believe Gertl that any mathematical model that we come up with will only be scratching
the surface but I don't think that we're wasting our time, we in some sense make some
progress, we do at least counter our own dogmatism and we look beyond and somehow when we get
new deeper theories, we also get new deeper technologies that are telling us somehow that
we're getting some kind of insights that are tapping into something that we couldn't
tap into before, so this, so I'm working with my colleagues, collaborators on this mathematical
theory of conscious agents and then what we have to do is show how space time emerges
specifically, right, with mathematical precision, we have to show exactly how space time emerges
as a headset, so what is it about the dynamics of conscious agents that is being captured
by the space time headset that we use?
Can you prove that?
Donald, that's my lack of understanding of mathematics, but can you prove something
like that mathematically, that is what you can do?
What you can, I wouldn't use the word prove, but what you can do is you can write down
a mathematical projection, so you can say here is this mathematical model of conscious
agents, it's like the Twitterverse, right, so it's a big social network and you can
say here's how Twitter works, this guy tweets and he follows and he retweets, so you can
sort of write down the laws of how tweeting works, so it's like that, so I've got the
social network of conscious agents, they have their own laws about how they work and then
you can look at the patterns that evolve in that, right, so with the Twitterverse it's
like what is trending and why and so forth, how do you get these little in groups where
you have echo chambers and so forth, so you can look at all the things that happen.
Then you can say okay, let's ask what about, what aspects of this complicated dynamics
of conscious agents gets mapped into what we call space and time, how precisely, with
mathematical precision, what are the trends in the behaviors of conscious agents and really
that's the way we think about, technically we call it the asymptotic or long term behavior,
but it's really like trends in social media, how shall we capture those long term behaviors,
those trends in the format of space and time and what we call physical objects, how do
we do that, so we've actually, at this workshop I'm going to be proposing a mathematically
precise path, I won't say the path now because it's just a bunch of mathematics that wouldn't
make any sense, but there are like five or six steps, precise mathematical steps from
the dynamics of conscious agents all through permutations, through these polytopes, through
the amplituhedron and into space types, so there's this mapping that, so the idea then
is I've got this high level picture with my team and now we have to work out, it's going
to take years to work out all the details of each step in this, but we see the path
from the dynamics of conscious agents through permutations and Birkhoff polytopes to grass
monions to the amplituhedron into space time, so there's a lot of work to be done, but once
we do that, once we have enough progress on that, then we can get to the other thing you're
talking about, which is it'll give us new technologies essentially, once we know what's
beyond, well I won't say once we know what's beyond space time, once we have our first
baby step theory, the first baby step beyond space time that's really solid, it'll be
conscious agents 1.0, then maybe in five years it'll be conscious agents 10.0 or something
like that, hopefully it'll move quickly and throw away my best.
This is like fundamental stuff, this is the real cool stuff, we're still thinking of
traveling in space time and we have all these space time fantasies, so also science fiction,
don't you think that when you look at what Christopher Nolan does in his movies, that's
really great, I admire it as a filmmaker, I think it's absolutely fantastic and it's
very close to science, but to me the really fascinating stuff also for artists to fantasize
about what we could do, right, because when we go outside of space time we do not have
a clue what we're waiting for, right?
That's right, so one of the things that occurs to me, most of the galaxies that we can see,
we could never go to, space is expanding so quickly that we could never get to them through
space, moving at the speed of light, so there's all this real estate out there that we can
see that's waving at us and saying nanny nanny, you can never get here, well that's if you
go through space time, but if space time is just a headset, think about the options that
come, you don't have to go through space time, you could go around space time, think about
Grand Theft Auto and everybody that's got the headset on is playing Grand Theft Auto,
you're stuck within the game, but if you're a software engineer who knows about the computer
and the software, you could take the guy who's driving the fastest car and winning the game,
you could give him flat tires out of nowhere, you could take the gas out of his tank, you
could turn his car upside down and put it somewhere else anytime you want to, you're
not stuck in space and time, the whole notion of causality, nothing can go faster than a
certain speed inside Grand Theft Auto and in space time nothing can go faster than the
speed of light, well that's all just part of the headset, once you go outside this headset
you can tinker with it.
But then you're also sort of, then we also can take the matrix metaphor again, this is
like Neo programming itself like new skills out of nowhere, it potentially could be possible
you're saying.
It certainly does seem to be quite possible that we could be interacting with other conscious
agents in a way that we can't even conceive right now and tapping in to an intelligence
that is inconceivable, literally inconceivable because it transcends any conceptual system.
And if this idea that we are consciousness is correct and that that's what is the fundamental
reality then the Gertl's incompleteness theorem tells us that in fact you and I already are
that infinite intelligence, we're projected into a particular headset and waking up to
that fact and that then raises an interesting question which is what is consciousness doing
and why and what Gertl seems to be saying to us is that there is an infinite unbounded
unstoppable realm of exploration that consciousness needs to do and so what consciousness is doing
is exploring all of its possibilities and maybe to understand itself and so it's the
old Delphi, or Oracle of Delphi, know thyself.
But do you think, a lot of questions here, when I'd like the ontology of conscious agents,
what are your thoughts here, I mean what are we talking about those conscious agents outside
of space time, are we, I mean people would say we think spirits or gods but any thoughts?
Right, so the theory that we have picks just two aspects of consciousness because when
you're trying to do a scientific theory what you're trying to do is say what are the minimal
ingredients that I need to boot up a completely general theory, right and if you ask yourself
the question, so what, if I'm thinking about consciousness being fundamental, well what
kinds of things do I want to really understand, well I need to understand experiences, I need
to understand free will or action, I need to understand learning, memory, problem solving,
intelligence, the notion of a self, emotions, so now if I just assume all that stuff, I'm
not making a scientific theory, I'm just saying well that's what, I'm just sort of
sitting back with a beer and saying well that's what exists, but if I'm trying to do a scientific
theory what I have to do is to play that game is I have to say okay out of all that stuff
I was talking about and more that consciousness has to be dealing with, what are the two things
or the one thing that I need to really turn into mathematics and say this is the foundation
and then boot up everything else, that's what science is about, so what we've picked
is there are conscious experiences like the taste of chocolate and those conscious experiences
can influence other conscious experiences, those are the assumptions, that's it, there
are experiences and experiences probabilistically influence other experiences, that's the minimal,
so notice there's no notion of memory, problem solving, self, none of that stuff is there,
so we have to build all that stuff from the raw materials of just conscious experiences
affecting other conscious experiences, so that's what we're really up to is a mathematical
model of that, now you could say look you picked the wrong starting point, that's fine,
that's the kind of critique that I would welcome, I'd say okay pick some other starting point,
pick your own networks of whatever you want to call them, but then you'll be having to
explain other things and that's perfectly fine, so I picked what I thought I couldn't
get away with, and one reason why you want as few things as possible that you're assuming
it to begin with is because the things you assume are your miracles, the scientific theory
has its assumptions, every theory has an assumption, those assumptions are the things you're saying,
if you grant me these assumptions then I can explain all this other good stuff, but
I'm not explaining these assumptions and that's what I mean when I say they're miracles
for that theory, they're the things that you just say please let me have this, then I'll
explain all this other stuff, so you want to have your miracles as few as possible,
now of course I've helped myself to a big miracle, conscious experiences, which is I
think it's very natural to say it's only the last couple of hundred years that we find
that a weird assumption to make, but actually it's the only thing we have, this is Descartes,
but then we forgot about that and we got so immersed in what we assumed to be the real
world that we forgot about that primacy of consciousness, that's what dawned to me,
I mean we were looking inside conscious, we're doing the Large Hadron Collider, we do that
in consciousness, we let these particles accelerate and burst into each other, it's within consciousness
everything, right, that's so...
That's exactly right, so when you start to look at it you realize, well no, this has
just been a headset all along, space and time has just been a headset all along, it's really
consciousness looking at other consciousnesses through this filter, and so yeah, the experiences
are fundamental, my experience of space and time is just my experience, and as soon as
I close my eyes, the moon literally disappears, it's really gone, now there's something out
there, not out there in the sense of out there in space, but there's something out beyond
my experiences and it's by hypothesis other conscious agents, so I'm interacting with
other conscious agents, and what I see are things like the moon, or an amoeba, or a rock,
it's not that the rock is conscious, it's just like, again like the pixels in my Grand
Theft Auto headset that I see as a Porsche, those pixels are not a Porsche, those are
just pixels, I'm making the Porsche in my consciousness, and that's the same thing, so I'm not saying
that the rock is conscious, the rock is my pixelated headset, it's pointing to, when I
look at Hans, I see a face, skin, hair and eyes, what I'm seeing is not your consciousness,
I'm seeing something that I created, in fact that hands is now gone, and now it's there,
but your consciousness presumably stayed there even when I wasn't paying attention to it.
Yeah, it's an icon that refers to something else, and what I'm wondering, it's also a
question I had, is could it be that those conscious agents in creating space-time as a headset built
in certain hacks, so to speak, we know for instance death is one, I mean if I jump in front of a
train I'll die, and I'll somehow, we know that the headset's off then, or I suppose that, and what
are other ones, I mean is meditation one, or psychedelics one, what are your thoughts there?
I think that there's an infinite variety, that the headset that we have right now is just one of
it, literally an infinite variety, and so this might sound similar to an idea that a physicist
named Max Tegmark has put out, so Max Tegmark has the idea of these multiverses, but he thinks
that mathematics is fundamental, that it is the fundamental reality, not consciousness,
mathematics, and not space-time, at least not our space-time, and also I think building on
girdles in completeness theorem, he points out that there's an infinite variety of mathematics
out there, and so that's his level, what he calls level four multiverse, every kind of mathematics
is possible is actual, and it's all out there, so it really exists, and my guess is in a similar
spirit, I don't take mathematics as fundamental, I take consciousness as fundamental, and mathematics
is like the bones of the living organism of consciousness, so it's different from Max Tegmark's
view, but where it's similar is, whereas Max says everything that's mathematically possible is
mathematically real, and that's my multiverse, I'm saying every structure of consciousness
that's mathematically possible is consciously real, and that's my consciousness multiverse with
all the possible headsets that it could have, and so our little space-time one is presumably one
of just many that are concretely right now inconceivable to us, but what's interesting to me
about consciousness is in this framework, why is it doing this? Why should consciousness
go to all the effort? This is a pretty amazing space-time universe where there's billions of
light years across, it's got trillions of stars and hundreds of billions of galaxies, and
in this framework in which consciousness is fundamental, what's happened to consciousness,
put on this headset, programmed itself to get lost in it, to think of itself as a tiny little
object in this vast universe, and then to slowly wake up and to recognize as vast as amazing as
this whole thing is, I transcend it. Is that what consciousness is about? It's knowing what it is,
by knowing what it's not, so it really immerses itself into a headset like space and time,
and gets lost in it, and flounders in it, and really it has to learn how to play it. Don't touch
the fire, you'll burn it. We really don't step in front of the car. It's painful, and so you're
learning all how this headset works, and then you're learning about how fantastic it is, and then
you wake up and realize, I'm not a little thing inside that headset. That headset is a tiny little
thing inside of me. I am not that, and that's how consciousness is knowing itself, and maybe if
Girdle, one way of interpreting Girdle is that that process is never ending, there may be a deeper
way in which you can just view it as a vast incredible intelligence that just knows that,
but every perspective on that gives you this temporal feeling of coming and waking up to it.
So there may be an even deeper perspective in which you could look at the whole thing as just
a vast intelligence that already knows it all, but any projection of that, you're seeing it as a
process of coming to know itself. So what's interesting is, if this is anywhere close to right,
then you and I, and anybody that, any person, is really part of that infinite intelligence,
but wearing a headset. But we're wearing a headset that has really strict limits on it. If I ask you,
please imagine a color that you've never seen before, just one specific color that you've never
seen before. Well, does anything happen? Nothing happens. But it turns out that there are women
called tetrafemes who have four color receptors. Most guys have three, 93% of men have three color
receptors, 7% of men have only two. These women have four color receptors, and experiments strongly
suggest that they have a new dimension of color experience that no man could ever imagine, and
most women can't imagine either. And so they're having concrete experiences that you and I can't
even imagine. And so what's stunning to me is that consciousness, if we, if you and I really
are not separate, we're just different headsets on the one big consciousness, the one infinitely
intelligent consciousness. So we're not separate from that. We really, it'd be pretty stunning that
we are actually not just connected with, we are projections of that infinite intelligence,
but projections that we've taken the projections so seriously that we can't even imagine a new
color. We've really restricted our imagination, even though within consciousness at a deeper level,
all things are possible. All possible experiences are there. Yeah, we truly sort of somehow forgot
who we are and the function being to expand, expand this whole thing, right? It was needed
somehow to. But what I'm wondering here, I heard you say you're reading or maybe even
revaluating religious literature. And because this is so similar, of course, to Eastern philosophy
and traditions of meditation that tend to bring you back to sort of this primordial
awareness that you're a part of and make you see that all else is, is created from,
from that awareness. So I'm just wondering here what your thoughts are, is science and these
traditions of introspection mostly, are they coming together? Are we going to see a science
that sort of includes introspection, maybe even? I think that we'll need to go there. I think that
we'll need scientists. If this idea is anywhere near right, and we really are
the infinite consciousness in a space-time headset, then the best way to do our scientific research
is, of course, to use our mathematics and to do all the stuff that we're doing right now,
the study and so forth, but then also to step back, to literally let go of thought completely
and just dive back into that non-conceptual infinite intelligence.
You're doing that, right? I spend a couple hours a day, even more, two or three hours a day,
meditating. And are you then breaking outside the headset? I mean,
making a tiny crack into the headset?
I would say tiny crack. When I read the experiences of others, I would say that
there are many far more advanced to me, but I do go into periods of complete inter-silence,
and I think in those periods, whatever ideas I have that might be of any interest
come from that. And I think that if we really cultivate that as scientists, and as artists
and writers and so forth, whatever endeavor we might be involved in, going into ultimate
complete silence, letting go of the restrictions of our conceptual system,
really puts us in touch with this infinite intelligence from which we can then take back
insights that we can try to then reconceptualize and make useful in this headset. And many of
the great scientists seem to talk in ways that suggest that, like Einstein would say that he
wasn't really getting ideas from just the equations. He would go and have these vague feelings and
ideas and pictures or something like that, and it would take him a long time to turn the stuff
into language and mathematics. So he would suggest that he was going, and I think many of the great
physicists and scientists more generally, and then of course people in the arts and humanities
who are doing wonderful work, they're getting their inspiration probably even with just brief
periods of silence, maybe that they don't even know, that is when they go into that
inner silence that we let go of the headset temporarily and tap into this deeper intelligence.
So that could be, if this is right, I would suggest that in the future we would train our
scientists with all of the standard tools, but also teach them to tap into this infinite
intelligence as well, spend time on a regular basis, letting go of all of your theories and
recognizing that, hey, in some sense, every theory we come up with here is child's play,
all of it is child's play. It's, Gertl tells us everything that you come up with is child's play.
There's a quote from Newton that I'll put up at the end of my talk at the workshop,
where he basically says, I don't know what other people think of me, but I think of myself as
a little boy that spent my life on the seashore picking up a pretty pebble or a shell while
the whole ocean of unexplored is beyond me. It's just sitting there, and I think that's
the right attitude. It's not the theory of everything, I don't have a theory of everything,
we're in science, we'll never get a theory of everything. We can't, we'll get a theory of
everything except our assumptions, and those assumptions keep going down and down and down
forever, Gertl tells us. So your theory of everything except your assumptions is basically
a theory that barely scratches the surface. And so in that sense, it changes the whole dynamic.
Right now, a lot of the dynamic is, I'm this little tiny thing in this vast space and time,
and I don't feel very significant, and the only way to get significance is to make my mark,
so to make a new scientific theory, a new piece of art, or that piece of literature,
the great American novel, finally the great American, whatever it might be. I'm trying to
make myself significant or have some lasting value by something I do, but when you, and that puts
a lot of pressure on you, you only got 60, 70, 80, maybe 90 years to do it, and then will they really
look at your painting 200 years from now? Who knows? You're really grasping at stuff to get
significance for yourself, and it's sort of a struggle, right? So I'm doing all this stuff,
or I can just say screw it, I'm going to just drink and have a good time, but I'm not significant,
I just acknowledge that I'm here to have a good time, but when we let go of the
physicalist framework and we say, no, I am consciousness, I transcend this,
death is just stepping out of this headset. So that puts all that I'm doing in a very
different framework, so I feel the innate drive to try to be significant and to be better than
all that, that's sort of wired into us, just like object permanence is wired into, so I see that's
all, in other words, we're wired up to take the headset seriously, and so consciousness sort of
wired itself up to take the headset seriously, but part of the waking up process is to step back
and go, oh wow, okay, oh no, no, no, I'm not a little thing inside the headset. The headset is
inside of me, I'm eventually going to take the headset off, so I can have a looser relationship
with all this stuff. I don't need to get that big house to be something, I don't need to have that
big scientific paper, I don't need to be acknowledged, this is just all-
Has it done this for you, Donald? Has it done this for you, what you're now saying?
Yes, sort of this realization in your personal life?
It's interesting, it does it for me when I am conscious, when I let go of thought,
and sit there in consciousness without thought, yes, but as soon as I get back into thought,
then I'm back into the old self that says, oh, it's just, and by the way, it's automatic,
it's just like, yeah, the moon is there, yeah, I need for my own significance to solve this
problem or publish this paper, so I always have to step back and look at that and go, okay,
there it is, so part of it, see, that may be part of the whole waking up process, because
when I step back and I go, okay, look, there it is, it feels bad, I feel like I'm under pressure,
why am I under pressure, this is a game, oh, I'm taking the game, so I got lost in the game again,
okay, so here I am lost in the game, so that the periods of consciousness where you go, oh, look
at that, you know, I'm competing with so-and-so, I feel mad at so-and-so, wait a minute,
because Joe just stole my Ferrari and Grand Theft Auto, it's just a game, who cares if Joe
stole my Ferrari and Grand Theft Auto? Yeah, I absolutely love it, but it's so beautiful because
this brings me back to discussions I have with Bernardo and Essentia, of course, is that we
want to communicate pure science, right, you don't want people to shift or accept an idealist
worldview because they want meaning in their life, right, like you would pick a religion
because you want meaning, no, you want to, you want it because it's true, because it's more
truthful than physicalism, but you do get as a sort of bonus a lot of extra meaning, right,
because do you think culturally and where the world's at right now that this shift towards
your view that consciousness is fundamental could also sort of bring us further and sort of make
us tackle problems within the game that we are now sort of just some talking climate, inequality,
everything we see happening right now, what are your thoughts there? Yes, I think that this does
lead to a perspective on social interactions and climate change and things like that, so
communism in principle sounds like a great idea, no ownership, everybody works and shares,
and if we were all wonderful consciousnesses and that's it, that would be fine, but when
we're plunged into this headset, it's competition, it's nature, red and truth and claw, and so
communism doesn't work because we're all asleep, we all buy the headset,
but if we wake each other up, if consciousness, so there are certain spiritual teachers, right, who
are doing that, like Eckhart Tolle, for example, and many others who are doing a great job of
sort of helping to wake people up and say you're not a little thing inside space and time,
you are the fundamental consciousness. The only way for us to get social institutions that work
better is for the people to change. Right now, we need things like democracy and maybe even
blockchain because we don't trust each other, right, so why do we have democracy? Well,
if we have a monarch, we know that the monarch, it's luck of the draw, if it's Nero,
you're in trouble, if it's Marcus Aurelius, you're great, but that's very unlikely you're going
to get Marcus Aurelius, so when we have people that are asleep that believe that they're little
items inside the headset, then we have to have all these rules in place and so forth,
but as we wake up, then I think, and maybe humanity will, maybe that's what consciousness
is about in this headset, is humanity waking up and maybe the science for the last several
centuries where it studied space and time and all of a sudden realized space time is doomed
and my interpretation realized it's a headset, that was a huge part of this consciousness waking
up, that space time is doomed as a big one, now realizes a headset, realize oh, we're the
consciousness beyond the headset and then as we wake up, maybe we can have a different kind of
interaction with each other inside the headset and so until there's the waking up, then we just
have to use the standard, you know, rules and enforcement and democracy, avoid the monarch
and all this stuff because any one person in power makes the whole thing vulnerable,
that's, the blockchain takes it to the extreme where you basically, you'd have to have a third
of the players, right, that are trying to be negative or take things down for the thing to
fall apart, with a monarchy you just need one player to take it down, but when you have blockchain
you need like a third of the players to be malicious, what they do, what they call Byzantine attacks
and so forth, so I think that changing human nature simply by waking us up to what we really are
is the way forward for the social things, otherwise what we have to do is just make sure
that we have the right rules and yeah and you do this and I think that is sort of noble and so
important that it's done through mathematics and not sort of because we had spiritual and religious
traditions doing this, but we also see them falling back in that headset reality, right,
and that's all about power and sort of control, whereas at the core some of them or many of them
I think point to this, but it feels as if mathematics is maybe the most safe way to do this,
to just don't make mistakes in doing so, in waking up, make sure we really wake up and not
sort of fool ourselves, I think so, I think that the mathematics is a gift that it counteracts
dogmatism, it counteracts fuzzy thinking, it counteracts being asleep in some sense, it really
is a wonderful tool to wake us up, I think there's something really deep there, mathematics and
relationship to consciousness, I feel like my insight into that is trivial, I just have a
deep feeling that my understanding is trivial, but I say that math is the bones of consciousness,
I mean that's a metaphor, but I feel like Newton, I'm like a baby boy on the shore and there's
something really deep out there. And Donald, did you two close our interview because we started
with your upbringing, your dad being the fundamental of minister in a fundamental
Protestant church, did you ever, is he still alive, your father or? He died five years ago.
Ah right, sorry to hear that, but did you ever discuss your work and theory, did you
have discussions with him about this and what did you think about what you did, your work?
I did and I think he had mixed feelings about it, I think that he still thought the earth
was 4,000 years old, but I think that he also liked that I was saying that consciousness is
fundamental because he thought that that was true, but he had a notion of God,
you know, that's sort of separate from us in some sense and the notion that I have is more that
we are all one with whatever that one consciousness is and that may be what Christianity really means
deep down when it says that we're all children of God, right, that that might be what that means.
So he had I think mixed feelings, he wanted me to pursue this because he liked that it was not
physicalist, so he loved the mathematics and the science that was showing that that space
time isn't fundamental, but and I learned not to argue with him about evolution of a natural
selection and the age of the earth because within the interface saying it's, you know,
when you take on the framework of the interface it's just wrong to say it's 4,000 years old,
right, it's just wrong. Now if you step outside the interface then I can say the very notion of
time itself is an illusion, it's an artifact of the projection into our headset, so there is a deep
sense in which yeah it's not 4,000 years old, it's not a billion years old, but within the
interface if you're playing it within the interface then you need to play fair within the
interface, it's not 4,000 years old. Funny, it's so funny because it really reminds, it's the
sort of discussions I have with my dad, he really likes the fact that all of this is pointing to
consciousness being primary, but the moment I start telling that we are all one or part of this one
consciousness, I mean I'm much into Bernardo's thinking here as well, then I'm losing him because
he really wants this God creator sort of exactly what you're saying outside of separation, yeah.
Yeah, I agree. Now I'll just say one little thing too about the eastern traditions that are more
mystical that what this can do is they talk about language as pointers, that the word isn't it and
so forth, but what science can do is really up our game on pointers, it can really help us,
it's nothing to boast about that we've used the same pointers for 3,000 years, so I'm using the
same pointer that the Dowdy Ching used or something like that, there's nothing to boast about. What we
would like as a way to get surely if consciousness is infinitely deep, we don't want to be sticking
with the same pointers all the time, we need deeper and new pointers and that's where science and
spirituality together, not antagonistically, but the insights of spirituality with the rigor
of science together can evolve new pointers that help us to avoid one of the big problems
of human nature which is dogmatism, both among scientists and among spiritual people, I mean
spiritual people can be very very dogmatic, but I know the truth, it's very very nice to have the
mathematical stuff to actually push you so that you, you know, we believe dogmatically
space-time is fundamental, our math said no no no, space-time, your best theory of space-time
tells you that space-time is not fundamental, that's how we avoid dogmatism. We need to bring
math into church. Yes, I will go to those sermons, those are sermons I will go to.
Thank you so much Donald, you have to leave. Thanks, this is a great pleasure.
Thanks, thanks, good to hear that, and a pleasure as well, thanks so much.
