I'm Jean Beeman. I'm an assistant professor of sociology at Purdue University in Indiana
and as I get here on faculty here and I'm also affiliated with the Global Studies Program
and the African and African American Studies Program. I do research on race and racism
in immigration in both the United States and France. My book, Citizen Outsider, Children
of North African Immigrants in France, is about the second generation North African
immigrant population in France. So people who were born in France to parents who immigrated
from, immigrated to France from former French colonies in the Maghreb, which is either Algeria,
Morocco, and Tunisia. So the goal of the book is, the goal of the study is to understand
how minority groups, how those particular ethnic minority groups understand what it
means to be a minority in a context in which you can't talk about race and ethnicity as
easily as you can in other plural societies such as the United States. I focus on the
middle class segment of the second generation population. So these are individuals who,
as I said earlier, were born in France and have lived their whole lives in France, were
educated in French schools, and many of them have graduate degrees and have sort of more
unprofessional kinds of jobs, whether it's being a banker or a journalist or a lawyer
or those sorts of things. But what I found in my book is that they even, despite their
sort of middle class status, they still feel that they're marginalized because they're
seen as non-white or because they're ethnic minorities. So their sense of belonging to
France is very complicated because oftentimes they see themselves as French because that's
the only society they've ever lived in, for example. But they recognize that people, the
other French people who are white, for example, don't see them as French. So that sort of
sense of belonging or that sense of sort of connection to France is continually challenged
by other people. So I think they respond to it in a multitude of ways. I mean, what I
think is that they sort of hunker down and insist upon their friendship or more explicitly
says that they're just as French as other French populations, partly due to the colonial
relationship between France and the migrant, but then also due to the fact that they've
only lived in France. But another response is sort of resisting French society entirely,
which is then how some of my respondents talk about wanting to move to other countries or
other societies because they feel like, you know, despite the fact that they've done everything
right, they're still not accepted as front by others. There's not anything else that
they can do to sort of change that. I did my research in the Paris metropolitan area,
and so I was doing interviews with people who lived in the Paris proper within the city
limits, and then also people who lived in the outskirts. What we also, excuse me, we refer
to as the Bonne or suburban communities just outside of Paris. And those are the communities
that historically have more immigrant origin individuals or immigrants in their descendants,
partly due to sort of the history of migration patterns over many years. So anyway, for many
of my respondents, they often feel more comfortable in their skin, if you will, in some of these
sort of, you know, predominantly immigrant origin communities. And again, this is regardless
of their actual socioeconomic status, because these communities tend to be more impoverished
than some of the neighborhoods in the center of Paris, for example, but they're also much
more ethnically diverse than some of the neighborhoods in the center of Paris. And so I
think the sort of idea, especially for my respondents who are middle class, that they
have to sort of work in, you know, predominantly white spaces or go to school and predominantly
white school universities, living in an environment that has more ethnic diversity is really
meaningful for them for feeling more connected to where they live. So in terms of the actual
sort of markers of knowing places where some of my respondents feel that they can belong,
you know, it could be things like, you know, the number of, you know, mosque in a particular
community, or it could be something like the number of like halal supermarkets or restaurants
or community, right? So just kind of indicating that this is not just supposed to be this
particular neighborhood or community, it's not supposed to be a sort of white space. I
think you can even think about it in contrast with like, you know, the Champs-Élysées or
popular street, like in, you know, Paris proper. So, you know, a lot of these streets in the
vanyas, they'll be more dilapidated buildings. There'll be more sort of vacancies. And the
restaurants will be more casual, I guess, for lack of a better word, more kind of kind
of street markets that you'd find within the city proper or within the sort of like, you
know, Grand Boulevard of Paris. You can still find some of that in Paris itself. So it's
actually not that the first time I went, I felt like it wasn't that different from what
I had experienced in some communities in Baltimore, which is kind of near where I grew up, if
that helps. Sonically, I would say you probably hear more, well, you definitely hear, I mean, you
hear French spoken, but you also hear Arabic spoken. And so that's also reflected both in the
sort of like, you know, the language you can hear and also just like the music that's playing
outside too. So I think that's a big marker between, you know, some of these communities and
some of the kind of more, you know, expensive neighborhoods within Paris itself. I think
it's important to note that a lot of these communities are more, you know, ethnically
diverse than, you know, similar communities in the United States, even though there is a
concentration of people who are North African origin and Sub-Saharan African origin in these
spaces as well. So I think that's the first thing I would say. So it's not, it wouldn't be uncommon
to see white people in these spaces, but you would see fewer of them than you would in other parts
of the Paris metropolitan region. Another thing that is happening to answer your question is sort
of rapid gentrification. So for example, I've been doing research in Paris for over a decade now,
and some of these older immigrant neighborhoods on the outskirts of Paris, but so within Paris
have been like gentrified or now are like super, you know, hipster or hip or what have you. And so
a lot of the original residents of those communities are being pushed further out to
outside of the city limits itself. So that's, you know, that's something that's currently
happening right now in terms of sort of changing the demographic reality of some of these spaces.
I think you're seeing kind of what I've seen before, you're seeing in these sort of hipster,
these neighborhoods that have become more hipster, there's more and more sort of like
trendy ethnic food restaurants. So it's like not just a sort of Singaporean restaurant,
it'll be sort of like a hipster take on that, if that makes any sense. And then also more and
more like kind of wine bars, like those kinds of things are like tapas kind of places, places
that are sort of geared or particular age demographic as well.
