Case Western Reserve University's Institute for the Science of Origins proudly presents
the Origins Science Scholars Program.
The Institute advances the scientific understanding and application of origins and evolution of
human and natural systems.
The Origins Science Scholars Lectures are presented with the assistance of Case Western
Reserve University's Segal Lifelong Learning Program, College of Arts and Sciences, and
Media Vision.
This evening, it's my pleasure to welcome Professor Joseph Lamana, the Gene M. and
Joseph S. Silver Professor of Brain Sciences, and Professor in the Department of Physiology
and Biophysics.
Professor Lamana is an expert on blood flow and metabolism in the brain, on the adaptation
to hypoxia, which is the lack of oxygen.
He served as president of several learned societies, and it's my pleasure to welcome
here tonight to talk about the origin of mitochondria.
Please join me in welcoming Professor Silver.
Today we're talking about mitochondria, and it's going to be in three parts.
The first is going to be about the origin of life.
We can't talk about the origin of mitochondria without talking about the origin of life.
You'll see why shortly.
Part two will be about the origin of mitochondria themselves, and then the three will see how
they had a role in the development and evolution of multicellular animals.
To begin with, we have to talk about the time frame.
This is called the biogeologic clock, and it breaks up the four plus billion years of
Earth history into a nice circle, which shows that for most of the existence of the Earth,
there was not multicellular animals.
So we have, first, is the period here where the Earth is formed, and it's beginning to
cool, and within a billion years or so, we have the origin of life, the first evidence
that life exists there, and then for most of the existence, most of these billion years
after that, there's not much in the way of multicellular life.
So the single cell life began almost as soon as the Earth was cool enough for life to occur.
So we're going to look at when it began, the conditions under which it began, and some
leading hypotheses about what generated life to begin with, and then what changed, how
the conditions changed.
Important to all of this is the consideration of energy.
That's the ability to generate and manipulate energy that defines life.
The basic ingredients for life, once the conditions cool on Earth enough so that the chemicals
remain stable, you need energy, which can be in the form of light, heat, or chemical
energy.
You need the chemical components.
These are the molecules, organic molecules.
They had to come from somewhere, and they had to get there first.
And then you need water, and so that's part of the conditions on Earth had to be cool
enough for liquid water to be available.
So to get right to it, we have evidence from microbial mats of life existing at about three
and a half billion years, pretty strong evidence.
We have the earliest physical evidence at about 3.7.
But we also have a theoretical belief or theoretical understanding that life could have occurred
in hydrothermal vents at about four billion years ago.
And this is a description of the eons of the Earth showing these particular eons.
We have the Hadean eon named for Hades, as you might expect, because apparently the conditions
there are what we think of as hell, with the sulfurous volcanoes and bubbling molten magma.
And then you have the Archaian period, and this is the period under which life first
arose.
You have then a long period of time in the protozoic, which single cell life in the beginning
of multicellularity, but not much in complexity, and then the Phanerozoic, which really means
the obvious life period of time.
What we notice here, I just want to mention this, this LHB is the late heavy bombardment,
and that's a period of time when there were lots of meteorites hitting the planet Earth,
and these carried with it water.
And they also, I see meteorites brought water, and also meteorites carried organic compounds.
And we know from the meteorites that we've seen recently that if we calculate how much
organic materials in how many meteorites there were, there's plenty of possibility for carrying
most organic life, organic compounds to Earth by meteorites.
And then you have the rise, right at about 3.6, 3.7 of bacterium archaea, which are the
prokaryotes, they are single celled organisms.
And they arose under conditions without oxygen, that's the most important thing.
The atmosphere initially contained just hydrogen and helium, that's because most of the universe
is hydrogen and helium, so when the Earth coalesced, first that was the natural compounds
in the environment.
There are two light to stay on the Earth though, Earth's gravity cannot hold the light gases,
and so both hydrogen and helium will leave the atmosphere reasonably quickly, and the
atmosphere then becomes a mixture of what comes out of the volcanic vents, lots of volcanic
gases, mostly steam and water vapor, carbon dioxide, plenty of carbon dioxide, you have
sulfur and nitrogen, plus the trace gases, the noble gases that don't react so much,
the argon and the neon, you have a little bit of methane, a little bit of carbon monoxide
and hydrogen.
What we were taught in school, probably when you went to biology, we were taught the primordial
atmosphere consisted of hydrogen, ammonia, methane, water and hydrogen sulfide, which
are the most reduced forms of the biological elements, nitrogen, carbon, hydrogen and sulfur,
or oxygen and sulfur.
This has to be revised a little bit because under those conditions that we now know to
be present, there could not be much ammonia or methane, they would have been further metabolized,
but so we add nitrogen instead of ammonia and we add carbon dioxide instead of methane,
and the UV light will be breaking down some of the water vapor into a little bit of oxygen,
but as soon as any oxygen will be made, it will react with minerals in the crust of the
earth and be pulled out of the atmosphere, and the hydrogen that was left would also
leave via the kinetic energy in insufficient gravity.
But the most important thing is that this was in a reducing atmosphere, no oxygen, or
less than one part per million oxygen, very low oxygen, and it seems like that's a requirement
for life to have a reason.
Now there's lots of theories on the origin of life, it's been discussed for as long
as people have been around, they've discussed origins, and you remember also from your biology
about theories of spontaneous generation and life from non-life that were discussed prior
to people like Pasteur who showed that this was not possible.
We had Darwin talk about the warm little pond which got sunlight, which had some organic
chemicals in which life could arise from there.
We had the experiments of people like Miller and Ure and Fox which took the elements expected
of the primordial atmosphere, put electrical sparks in, and got organic compounds out of
it.
We also have hypotheses where these organic compounds could line up on community clay,
this is clay along the beach, that would act as a place for to catalyze reactions among
these compounds.
The Chile start hypothesis, which if you had the snowball earth and a frozen seas would
protect the ocean from UV light and allow the chemicals to react and form life, a radioactive
beach hypothesis, this is radioactive chemicals along the shoreline producing the heat necessary
to provide the energy for this.
I mentioned meteorites being able to provide organic compounds.
More recently they only were discovered in the 70s, some hydrothermal vents, deep sea
vents, when these deep sea submersibles started exploring the sea bottom and they found these
areas where obvious venting was coming from the sea floor and lo and behold there were
things living there, way out of the sunlight at 100 atmospheres of pressure, at temperatures
approaching 200 degrees C and amazing, we call those extremophiles, that is organisms
that live in extreme environments.
And these were, these suggested to people like Gunter Wachteschauser that life might
have originated there, making use of the iron and sulfur minerals as catalysts.
The black smokers had sulfide, they were very close to the magma and very hot, the
white smokers a little further away, a little cooler, little more alkaline and there was
hydrogen available to get energy from and the idea that hydrogen metabolism may have
been the first energy available for life to arise and of course any or all of these might
be contributing, that is a multiple genesis hypothesis.
Now once you had these, once you had life, part of the chemical process using, getting
energy from hydrogen and methane and carbon dioxide produced oxygen as a byproduct.
So this is in a, in a reducing anoxic environment, oxygen being released as a waste product is
a toxic product.
So as the environment gathered more and more oxygen, the, there would be adaptations to
make use of this toxic waste product in a positive way.
But before oxygen could accumulate, it had to react with all of the reduced iron that
was floating around in the oceans.
The oceans were filled with a soluble form of reduced iron, ferrous iron, and as the
oxygen came into the environment, it would react with the iron, oxidize it and this is,
well, this is rust.
So you had to rust all of the iron in the, in the ocean and that iron doesn't, it's not
dissolved, it sinks and so these thick bands of, red bands of rust accumulated at the floor
of the oceans.
We call these banded iron formations and it allows us to pinpoint fairly accurately when
the oxygen was produced and when the oxygen was accumulating in the environment.
We know, and this is a banded iron, example of a banded iron formation from the American
Museum of Natural History in New York, but there's an example in our natural history
museum, it used to be out front, I don't know where it is now, but it used to be right
out front door as you walked in every day.
So this indicates prodigious amounts of oxygen being generated during this three billion years
ago to two and a half billion years ago.
These banded iron formations are about two and a half billion years old in the middle on
average.
And at the end of this period of time, we come to very close to our current atmosphere,
which is an oxidizing atmosphere with one-fifth of it being oxygen, most of the rest being
nitrogen, little bit of carbon dioxide and there are trace noble gases.
Where did that oxidizing event come from?
We call it the great oxidizing event, GOE, and the best guess here is the evolution of
cyanobacteria.
So these are bacteria, single cell animals, which we used to call blue-green algae when
we were growing up, but they're not algae, they're bacteria.
And they kind of look like this, this is a picture of cyanobacterium, they grow in these
mats, this is current mats that are available in western Australia, and those are layer
upon layer of cyanobacterial mats producing oxygen.
Also these cells, these single cell bacteria became the precursors of the chloroplast, which
is the organelle in plants that does photosynthesis and gives us oxygen today, so that's the
precursor of all plants.
And what happens then, the history of oxygen on Earth winds up this way, very low amounts
for the first two billion years, the great oxidizing event occurs, but notice that this
is a log scale, this is one percent of the current atmospheric level, one percent of
that would be point two percent of oxygen in the atmosphere, not twenty percent, so
twenty percent is what we have now, this is a much still very small amount, so for two
billion years oxygen was a very low level, and this is a time when mitochondria started
to produce multicellular animals, and we will talk about the more current time period for
oxygen in part three, but right now I'd like to just summarize part one here and then stop
for some questions, and the basic points that I've mentioned are that single cell prokaryotes
arise about four billion years ago in the absence of oxygen, and then cyanobacteria begin to add
oxygen resulting in the great oxidation event two point five billion years ago as the environment
shifts from no oxygen to some oxygen.
One of the earlier slides you showed the meteorites and one is chirality, what's the Italian there?
Oh yeah, yeah, yeah, in the organic compounds that we use, the sugars, the amino acids, some
of them are asymmetric, that is they have a left handed form and a right handed form,
and the biology tends to use one or the other, in the carbohydrates it's mostly the D form,
the right hand form, and amino acids tends to be the L form.
The chemically they're exactly the same, so how did we get to choose one over the other?
Because biologically you can only use one because enzymes are like a glove in a hand,
you can't put a left hand glove on a right hand, and it turns out that in the meteorites
there's a chiral preference as well, indicates that possibly we get the preference from the delivery
of these compounds from space.
Because you can look, you can, they've examined meteorites for example in Antarctica,
in a sterile environment, and then they analyze them and they find that they have organic compounds.
Is it fair to say that the low oxygen level in early days was basically until the ferrous iron
got used up and became from abundant trace levels, and at that point the oxygen began?
Yeah.
It would seem to be that for the species present to survive you had to remove oxygen somehow,
and that transition not only in the percent oxygen would be a great evolutionary driver to things that could tolerate oxygen.
Absolutely.
Rise of oxygen gives you the rise of diversity and multicellularity.
The iron had to go, but also the iron reacts with, I mean sorry, the oxygen reacts with the carbon compounds as well,
it's carbonates and things like that, so as the, and oxidations of the minerals in the rocks,
these all get buried, but there's a cycle as they rise and get weathered that gets released back into the atmosphere,
so there's a long-term cycle there as well.
And later on, when the iron is gone, there still is a reaction with all the carbon,
because the animals take the carbon and make carbon dioxide out of it by burning it with oxygen,
so there's a balance between oxygen utilization and plants making the oxygen.
And you had very large amounts of carbon-containing organisms to allow oxygen to build up to large levels.
I think when we get to the last slide or two, you'll see what I mean by that.
Thank you for joining us.
You've been watching Dr. Joe Lamanna discussing the origin of life and prokaryotic cells,
those lacking a distinct nucleus.
For more information on the Origin Science Scholars Program, please visit the institute's website at origins.case.edu.
In the next part of the talk, Dr. Lamanna discusses the origin of mitochondria and of eukaryotic cells, those with nuclei.
Now, back to the talk.
This is the, this is probably, this is the heart of the talk, this is the origin of mitochondria.
Mitochondria are the cells engine that's where all cells, all eukaryote cells mean they have a nucleus.
All multicellular organisms are eukaryotic.
All animals, all plants, all fungi are all organisms that have mitochondria.
And the mitochondria that they have are all related.
That's why we know that this event occurred only once and we all have the same related mitochondria.
So let's move along.
All cells need energy to function.
All cells use the same organelle.
That's the mitochondria.
And the kind of the currency, the energy currency of the biology is adenosine triphosphate, ATP.
It has a high energy phosphate on the third one and enzymes that can take that phosphate off also get a lot of energy from it.
And ATP becomes ADP, diphosphate from triphosphate, and you get a lot of energy from it.
And the mitochondria takes the ADP, makes ATP for us.
And it looks something like this, kind of looks like a bacterium, and that was obvious to the people who first saw them.
It's double-membrane organism, like a bacterial cell, and it's got its own genetic material in it, as well as the ability to make its own proteins.
It's got ribosomes and the ability to make its own proteins.
I'll talk more about how this works a little bit later in part three.
But in most typical eukaryotic cells have the nucleus, which is number two here, followed by number five, which is a lot of the protein-making machinery.
This is Golgi apparatus.
But here's our friend, the mitochondrion, which is providing the energy for all the work done by eukaryotic cells.
And eukaryotic cells are about ten times bigger than bacteria, because bacteria about the same size as mitochondria.
So you get an idea of the size orientation.
They're originally seen by histologists who were, these are just barely at the edge of visibility in a light-level microscope.
And people like Altman thought they looked like bacteria.
It wasn't sure whether they were bacteria, but they looked like bacteria.
He referred to them as bioblasts.
Later they were named mitochondria, from the Greek, which means thread-like granules, because as Benda looked at it,
he saw that they were connected with little bulges on them, looked like a thread that had granules along it.
And it was known from biological dyes that they were associated with living cells.
You couldn't stain them if the cell was dead, but if the cell was alive, they took up this dye.
And because of that, it was suggested that they were involved in the oxygen respiration,
that is the utilization of oxygen to make energy, and it was really confirmed after World War II
by Leninger, who wrote the classic textbook on biochemistry, that indeed this is the organelle that makes ATP from oxygen and substrate.
There's a whole story involved in the electron transport chain that's maybe for another time.
Now, in the mid-60s, Lynn Margulis proposed that these mitochondria not only looked like bacteria,
but they must be bacteria, and so she proposed the bacterial origin of mitochondria
and was able to publish her paper in the Journal of Theoretical Biology in 1967 using her married name.
She was married to Carl Sagan, so Lynn Sagan published this.
It was rejected in 14 journals before it was published in the Journal of Theoretical Biology
because it was a crazy idea of mitochondria coming from bacteria.
But they look like bacteria.
They have the same genetic base pair distribution.
Eukaryotic cells have more of the AT base pair than the CG,
but bacterial and mitochondrial DNA have equal amounts of those pairs.
They have no histones. They don't fold up.
They have a different ribosome to make protein from, and in every case, the bacterial and the mitochondrial are identical.
So we have come to understand that Lynn Margulis was indeed correct,
and mitochondria started out as bacteria,
and the idea was an archaea, a protea.
It's another prokaryote, but not a bacterium.
An archaea, it's a different domain of life, had different characteristics.
It engulfed a proteobacterium.
The proteobacterium was able to resist the digestive attempts of the archaea,
and then a symbiotic relationship occurred.
They had different metabolic processes that turned out to be synergistic.
This may or may not have happened quite a few times,
but at least one time it worked so well that it dominated life from then on.
So you have the generation of the first eukaryote cell,
and it required a nucleus to occur to sequester the DNA from the host cell
so that it wouldn't mix up too badly with the DNA from the bacterium,
but a lot of eukaryote DNA comes from bacterial sources.
A quick note just on the DNA differences.
A nuclear DNA made with base pairs, coils, and then coils again,
and then the coils coil and the coils coil again,
and it's covered with histones that keep it from just generating all kinds of mRNA until it's needed.
Whereas bacterial cells like this E. coli have these plasmids,
these kind of circles of DNA that are same as mitochondria.
Now the nuclear DNA in each cell, human cell,
there's about 10 feet of DNA if you stretch it out in each cell.
So you took all your DNA and stretched out end to end.
You could go back and forth to the moon 70 times.
That's a lot of DNA coiled up very tightly in each cell.
On the other hand, and there's only one copy per cell.
In mitochondria, mitochondria have smaller genomes, only 13 genes.
Those bacteria that became mitochondria have lost a lot of their genes.
And there's 5 to 10 copies of these plasmids in each mitochondrian,
and there's multiple mitochondria, maybe hundreds per cell.
So there's a lot of copies of the mitochondrial genome that mitochondria can divide independently.
And the copies of the DNA can be reproduced fairly quickly compared to the nuclear DNA.
So as I say, the mitochondrial genome, it's kind of a circular plasmid type DNA,
and it has 13 to 20 genes that are the minimum required for the mitochondria
to control certain of its functions locally.
The reason it does it is that sometimes the mitochondria can be very far from the cell nucleus.
Imagine a nerve cell where the nucleus is in the spinal cord,
and the axon goes all the way down to the big toe.
That's a long distance away from the nucleus.
If you depend upon the nucleus to be making the proteins you need,
and also to be able to respond to local energy demand, you need local control.
The other significance of mitochondrial DNA is we get all our mitochondria from our mothers.
The egg has the mitochondria, the sperm uses all the mitochondria it has as energy to get to the egg,
but only one set of mitochondria are left.
And we can use that evidence to look at, by looking at rates of mitochondrial mutation,
to predict when the first human mitochondria appeared.
And that would have been in our maternal line, so we call that first human eave,
and we think maybe it was 170,000 years ago, although there's a lot of speculation,
there's a lot of work that goes into this.
It's not a done story by any means.
And also mitochondria help control what we call apoptosis.
This is a Greek word that refers to things like where the leaves fall off the trees in the autumn.
It's a programmed cell death, or it's like a cell suicide,
and this is triggered when the energy capacity or the energy system, the mitochondria,
gets so damaged that they can no longer provide energy for the cell,
then they trigger the death of the cell so that it can be phagocytized and doesn't gum up the work, so to speak.
And it's also very important to study the mitochondrial DNA as we get towards understanding mitochondrial aging.
And Nick Lane, who is a good scientist and also a good writer,
this is an interesting book on the subject, if you're interested, called Power Sex and Suicide,
and it's all about mitochondria.
And he's pointing out that the fact that life occurred almost immediately when it was available in its single cell form
was not that remarkable, but multicellularity depended upon a unique event,
and that is a synergistic endosymbiosis to have it occurred once it occurred.
It only happened that once, while mitochondria are related.
We think it comes from purple bacteria.
These have a chlorophyll-like substance.
They have different colors in them.
They can't live with oxygen.
They use sulfur for their energy system.
And the other side of it is the archaea.
These are what would be called the pioneer organism in the iron sulfur world theory.
These are methanogens, meaning they make methane.
They get their energy from CO2 and hydrogen, but the problem is hydrogen is scarce,
so finding sources of hydrogen is crucial for these cells.
They're not bacteria and they're not eukaryotes.
They have a different cell membrane.
It's polysaccharitic.
And they can go anywhere because they make their own energy from light or from chemical processes.
And these are some of the places where they occur.
These are the black smokers.
They're black because they have sulfur compounds.
They exist near magma in the deep ocean trenches.
This is where the continents are pulling apart.
The plates are moving apart.
Magma heats the water, spews all kinds of minerals here.
It's very rich in minerals.
There's no oxygen, but there's plenty of other sources of chemical energy.
And, of course, you have thermal energy.
And if you look at the one on the right, there's tube worms and what are called squat lobsters.
I don't know, but these are deep sea vents located maybe at 2 and 3 kilometers depth.
So 100 atmospheres pressure, where the water may be 400 or 500 degrees in the case of the black smoker.
It's still liquid because of the pressure.
And it's a very acidic environment.
That was for the black smokers.
I just said most of this.
The first one was discovered in 1977 as these underwater submarines started looking at mapping the seabed.
It's a source of the iron and nickel, the reduced forms.
And chemosynthetic bacteria live in these.
This one didn't come up.
There it is, the white smoker.
These were discovered only in 2000.
These are a little further away from the trench, so the water is cooler.
These are steam that's bubbling up through the rock.
Instead of big holes, they're from little porous labyrinthine tubes,
which produce lots of surface area for chemical reactions to occur.
And they're more alkaline than acidic.
And it's thought that the life that's here represents some of the organisms that we're familiar with.
Lots of barium, calcium, silicon.
They make serpentinite.
This is a compound of iron and magnesium and barium and calcium that looks like green snakes running through it.
Today you can find these type of archaea in places like Yellowstone National Park.
Yellowstone National Park, this is one of the geysers, it's a hot spring.
And it shows the steam coming out of the center of it here.
But all along the side, the orange color is coming from the algae, the bacteria, and the archaea.
And these are, again, like the purple bacteria.
These are carotenoids and bacterial chlorophylls.
And the colors change with the temperature and the seasons.
And so sometimes they're more purple or green and sometimes more orange, depends on the conditions.
Very, very colorful.
So basically in part two what we have is we have the event that occurred.
We have the last eukaryotic common ancestor.
That is the eukaryote cell that joined an archaea with a proteobacterium that became the precursor cell of all eukaryotes going towards the future.
And there are three domains of life, the bacterial domain, the archaean domain, and the eukaryote domain.
And the eukaryote domain produces plants, animals, fungi, and all life from eukaryote domain has mitochondria.
That allows them to take advantage of the changes in the environment that we're occurring and to grow into multicellular organisms and animals.
So I would stop here and take some questions about mitochondrial origins.
What has to happen to the bacteria?
One thing it has to be able to resist being digested is food by the archaean engulfur.
And then it has to keep from poisoning the genes of the archaean.
Remember the archaean engulfur doesn't have a nucleus and so its genes are floating around and now when the bacterial releases their genes they get mixed up.
And most of the time that's going to be disastrous and so a lot of those engulfments that would normally have occurred are going to be worthless, damaging rather than productive.
So it had to be a very tricky event that occurred that allowed the bacteria to first survive and then figure out how to keep its DNA from getting too mixed up with the other cell's DNA.
Have scientists now been able to do this in a laboratory setting, put an archaean and a proteal bacteria together?
Actually that has been seen in nature and in the lab.
They haven't made mitochondria but there are examples of symbiotic, endosymbiotic organisms existing today.
Could you make a comment about the variation in the structure of mitochondria of one species compared to another?
This refers again to this question of mitochondrial Eve and whether you can have a continuous feed of mitochondria from other species into another.
Mitochondria are more similar than they are different.
The genes that encode the local proteins and also a lot of the proteins that come from the nucleus, those genes can vary.
But the proteins that they're producing are identical.
So almost all mitochondria are just mitochondria.
Now there's local changes that can change them to a certain extent but they all have the cytochrome chain, the electron transport chain.
They have about the same density of energy production, the same sizes.
They're more similar than people are similar to each other, mitochondria, from all different organisms.
By looking at the ultra-structure picture of a mitochondrion, you couldn't tell where it came from.
When they do investigation like for my sister's or brother, we share the same mitochondria, right?
You got from your mother, yes.
From my mother, right.
So when you go back to Eve and we go back to all these various things that the anthropologists find at the Natural History Museum,
those humans, do they have the same mitochondria or that 170,000 year thing as set in stone and you cannot...
So every once in a while, there would be a mutation that would change one of the base pairs and might not affect the protein too much.
It might be in a non-coding area, just like in the nuclear genome.
So you can watch that, you can look at that going backwards.
You get the types and you can follow the changes in the populations of mitochondria going back.
You could see how often the change occurs and then you could predict how far back the first one had to be for this particular lineage.
We hope you've been enjoying the Origin Science Scholars Program with Dr. Joe Lamana.
Dr. Lamana is a Janet M. and Joseph S. Silber Professor for the study of brain sciences at Case Western Reserve University.
In the second part of our talk, we learned how early bacteria were taken up by prokaryotic cells and eventually became the cellular powerhouses we know as mitochondria.
In our final segment, Dr. Lamana will discuss the role of oxygen and mitochondria in the evolution of multicellular organisms.
Now, back to our talk.
All right, let's move to part three then.
And this involves, it's a little jumpy here, it's got the role of mitochondria.
So we've got some examples of how mitochondria participate and the role of oxygen as the mitochondrial partner in evolution and in extreme examples of energy consumption.
So here's our mitochondrion again.
And what we're going to talk about is to show how the mitochondrion can go about generating energy in a very outline form that I think will make it understandable.
Basically what the mitochondrion does is it takes the hydrogen that we get from eating food and it burns it with oxygen that we get from breathing it in from the atmosphere.
And when you burn the hydrogen with the oxygen, you get a tremendous amount of energy from that.
And that energy then gets transferred into ATP molecules that the cells can then use to do the work of the cell.
So the first step is getting the hydrogen.
That's done through the TCA, tricarboxylic acid cycle that was worked out by Hans Krebs, Sir Hans Krebs in Oxford and sometimes called the Krebs cycle.
And I'm showing Sir Hans in a standard biochemistry joke of Hans Krebs riding a cycle so it could be Hans Krebs cycle.
It's required of all biochemists I think to make that joke.
But basically the hydrogen from sugar comes in.
It's converted through this cycle of compounds and enzymes.
And the hydrogen is transferred to the mitochondrion and this is where the carbon dioxide comes from.
So in changing, getting the hydrogen from the food, the carbon dioxide is pulled off the molecules.
So we have breathed out the carbon dioxide and the hydrogen is passed on to the mitochondrion.
And then here's where the magic occurs.
We have a number of compartments in the mitochondrion.
So let me spend just a few minutes with this diagram.
It's two membranes, two membranes, an outer membrane that's here.
Number two is the outer membrane and an inner membrane.
And that means that there's then two spaces that are important.
There's the intermembrane space between the inner and outer membrane.
And then there's the space that is completely surrounded by the inner membrane.
We call this the matrix.
And it's in the matrix that the Krebs cycle is working to make the hydrogen available.
And that, the cytochrome chain, which is a number of these proteins lined up one after another,
the job that they do is to separate the electron from the proton
because hydrogen is a proton and electron.
And so the hydrogen proton goes out into the intermembrane space
and the electron goes passed on to the next member of the cytochrome chain.
At the end of that chain is a molecule called cytochromoxidase.
It looks very similar to hemoglobin.
It has a pocket that oxygen can bind to.
And the oxygen binds in that pocket of the cytochromoxidase.
The electrons come streaming down.
And when four reach it, it turns the oxygen into water.
It reduces the oxygen to water.
And so as you have oxygen there, it pulls the electrons through.
And as it pulls the electrons through, the hydrogen is pumped out.
What good is that?
Well, because you have now a big difference between the amount of hydrogen
in the intermembrane space and almost none in the matrix,
that hydrogen creates a concentration gradient
and it comes pouring in through this very specialized pore,
which is an ATP synthase.
And as it comes down, the energy in that gradient is used to make ATP from ADP.
And that's magic.
This is, in reality, each mitochondrion acts as a hydrogen fuel cell.
If you're familiar with hydrogen batteries and you know how much energy you can get out of it,
you can run a Tesla from hydrogen batteries, essentially, right?
So this is the same idea that is hydrogen is separated into electrons
that flow through the electric circuit.
And then the protons are used to, or the electrons as they flow through
are drawn away by the oxygen to make water.
And you have your fuel cell, your battery, your hydrogen battery.
Okay, so what's the advantage?
Suppose you just burn sugar in the case of, without oxygen.
So no oxygen, this is just sugar being used to make some energy.
You get two ATP for an amount of sugar, say.
And if you're a bacterium or a penicillin mold or something like that,
you could do just about what a mold can do.
Not much, although they do a good job on that bread.
Lactic acid is the end point.
And this is, you know, if you exercise strongly and you get into an oxygen debt
and you build up lactic acid, well, you know that you can't keep running.
You need to stop and get oxygen to replace the energy.
The burning the sugar with oxygen gives you almost 20 times as much ATP
as you get from running it without oxygen.
It's a huge energy advantage, 20 times the amount of energy.
And this allows the cell to do a lot more than a prokaryote can do
without the oxygen burning ability.
I have that little marshmallow in there just to remind me to give you an example
of the amount of energy and sugar when you burn it.
If you've burned your marshmallows over your campfires and it catches fire
and it burns pretty well, there's a lot of energy and sugar when you burn it with oxygen.
Of course, the cell takes it in small pieces and turns that into ATP
rather than let it burn like that.
And nature takes the mitochondria and it puts it where it needs to be inside the cell.
This is another example of how the different cells
evolve their different structures in order to do the function that they're required
and provide the energy to do that function.
So this is a mitochondrion that sits inside a muscle cell.
Those striations in top and bottom are the muscle fibers
that are going to use the energy produced by the mitochondrion.
And each mitochondrion essentially produces pretty much the same amount of energy.
It has about the same components.
So if you look at the volume of mitochondria,
you can get a pretty good idea of the ability of the cell to generate.
You know how much energy you can generate.
And I have a couple of examples here that I think are pretty impressive.
On the left you have a muscle from a mako shark.
And these are muscle fibers that are cut in cross-section.
They're going in and out of the board.
And right next to each one of them are these mitochondria.
So these are mitochondria.
These are the muscle cell.
These are the mitochondria.
Very close and a lot of volume.
So you have essentially looks like pretty much the similar amount of volume in mitochondria
producing the energy as you have in the muscle cells that are producing the work.
This might be similar to thinking about an electric car that has half the weight of it is batteries
in order to do what it has to do.
And so this is a shark muscle.
So it's a cartilaginous fish.
But on the other side we have a mammalian tissue.
It's a heart muscle, cardiac muscle.
It happens to be from a mouse, but it's pretty much similar.
Here these are the lines of the muscle.
So those are the ones that are pulling apart and going together.
And these are all mitochondria.
Sit in the middle of these fibers of the heart.
This is the nucleus of the heart muscle.
Here's a pile of mitochondria.
Cardiac muscle, about 40% of the volume is mitochondria.
That's about, and there's maybe half of it or a little more maybe is the striated muscle.
But the ratio is pretty good.
In brain tissue, for example, that ratio is about 10% of that volume is mitochondrial.
So it shows you the difference in the energy requirements brain versus heart.
Now this is probably my favorite one.
This is a hummingbird flight muscle.
A hummingbird that beats 300 times a second and can stop and hover in the air.
And this is really impressive.
These are capillaries.
And here's the mitochondria between the capillaries.
There's a nucleus of a cell.
And there's the muscle cells.
Here you have more mitochondria than you have muscle.
That makes sense if you think about it, right?
And here's a close-up on the capillary.
It's a cell in the middle of that capillary.
And it's filled, surrounded by mitochondria.
Here's what's using oxygen, what's producing the ATP.
Here's the muscle.
A thin strand of muscle completely surrounded by mitochondria.
So it's pretty impressive.
And you can understand how the hummingbird can accomplish what it does,
how the shark can accomplish what it was,
how the heart can accomplish what it has to do for that length of time that you needed to work.
All right, so let's move on a little bit now and talk about the multicellular organisms.
In a way, it's a little backward.
But what I did is I showed you what the capabilities of the system is once you can provide the energy.
And here's how it impacts things like evolution.
If you're an organism and you're working at the substrate level,
that's making lactate, say, without having the advantage of making oxygen,
your energy-providing system is only about 10% efficient.
It's not much, 10%.
That means if you had a predator come along and want to take advantage of the energy that you have,
and it grabs you, and it's 10% efficient,
now it becomes 1%.
10% is 1%.
And that's not a good deal.
It costs more to do the engulfing and the digesting than you get out of it.
There's very little predation at the level of single-cell organisms that are prokaryotic.
But with oxidative phosphorylation that allows you to use oxygen to generate energy,
you're around 40% efficient.
Now, the first person in the chain gets grabbed by the next person.
It's 40% of 40%.
And then 40%, 40%, 40%.
And you could develop a chain at least six layers deep before you run below 1% of the energy supply left.
That means that predators now have an advantage, can gain an advantage in their competition with other organisms.
And the bigger the cell, then the better the predator.
So predation tends to produce larger and larger cells or organisms,
and prey doesn't sit around waiting to be preyed on.
It does the same strategy and starts getting bigger for protection.
So once you have this efficiency in the chain,
then you have the ability to really stimulate growth and diversity and development.
So why didn't bacteria get larger?
They had 2 billion years before the event that made mitochondria.
And that's because the way prokaryotes work, their energy-producing system,
that prokaryote bacteria cell that went to become the mitochondria,
was still making energy based upon its own surface area.
And if it got bigger, its energy requirements would grow with the volume by the cube,
but its ability to make energy would only grow by the square root of the surface area.
So it's not a good strategy.
But once you put the mitochondrion inside the cell, you can add mitochondria.
You really could add them.
And then your energy production capacity will grow with the volume of the cell,
but your utilization for most cells is related to the surface area.
And that's a much more favorable relationship.
So bacteria, we're not going to be able to get anywhere with a 10% energy efficiency,
and they couldn't grow larger anyway because of surface volume considerations.
And bacteria are very successful in their niche, but it's a simple solution,
and it's not going to get complex.
They work very well, and successful bacteria are the ones that can divide fastest,
and that means you can't have a lot of genes because that takes time to reproduce your genes.
So the smaller the number of genes you have, the faster you can reproduce,
and the more successful you are.
So the prokaryote philosophy, the prokaryote strategy keeps the cells simple and small,
and successful, but simple and small.
Until you've got mitochondria, you can't get complexity.
Now let's look at the more modern part of the oxygen curve in the last minute or so.
And this represents oxygen variations that we know closer to our own time.
This is half a billion years.
This is from essentially the Cambrian explosion of life onto present day.
And if you plot in the yellow curve there, oxygen levels, you see it's not constant.
It varies up and down.
And what we now know from this up and down is that the rates of evolutionary diversity
and the die-off in the extinctions are related in a great measure to the oxygen history.
So that at times when oxygen is rising, you have increase in diversity,
taking advantage of everything that oxygen can give you in terms of energy from the mitochondria.
But when oxygen becomes limiting, then the inefficient forms die off.
There's a lot of information here, but I want to focus on this one here, this peak.
This is when oxygen reached about 35% in the atmosphere.
Remember today it's 21%, there was 35%.
That's a maximum because any more than that and the forest would burn
and you wouldn't be producing more oxygen.
So there's a limit.
And that's it, right?
Oh, okay.
So at that time you had a higher density in the atmosphere because that was all extra oxygen
and you allowed the gigantic insects and flying insects and that.
The only thing I had left to try to get through is just to give you some idea of what the human body does
and we produce about 85 watts of energy, about a good strong light bulb.
And we use about 150 balloons worth of air per day and we produce half liter of water from metabolism every day
and the mitochondria in our body make essentially 100 pounds of ATP every day by cycling ADP.
That's about half the body's weight of ATP cycling and that's the strength of the mitochondria.
And with that I will just summarize what we said and I'll say thanks and ask for final questions.
The Origins Science Scholars Lectures are presented by CASE Western Reserve University's Institute for the Science of Origins
with the assistance of the Segal Lifelong Learning Program, the College of Arts and Sciences and MediaVision.
For more information on the Origins Science Scholars Program including a full video archive
please visit the institute's website at origins.case.edu.
Thank you.
