Hi, I'm Corey Doctorow. I'm coming to you from Las Vegas, Nevada, where I have just
given a version of this talk on the main stage at DEFCON. I'm going to give you a shorter
one here. So as you can tell from my video stream, I am old. I have two artificial hips.
I have cataracts in both my eyes. And one of the things that happens when you're 50
right after the ARP tracks you down and gives you your membership card, they also give you
a card that entitles you to complain that things used to be better. And I do think things
used to be better. I think the internet used to be better when it wasn't just five giant
websites, but with screenshots of text from the other four. Moreover, I think there's
a reason it got worse. And I think it has to do with really specific factors around platform
economics. The platform is the endemic form of the internet. Remember when we thought
the internet was going to disintermediate everything? It turns out that it did and
then it re-intermediated everything. Because that's all the platform is. They're an intermediary
with two groups of stakeholders. You've got business users on one side. You've got end
users on the other. And the platform sits between them. That's Uber sitting between
drivers and passengers. Amazon sitting between sellers and buyers. Or Google sitting between
publishers and searchers. And under the platform model, there's a kind of common pathology.
So what platforms do when they start out is they use their investor's capital to allocate
surpluses to users, making life good for those users, luring them in and then locking them
in. Once those users are locked in, all of that surplus is clawed back. And it's allocated
to business customers, advertisers, publishers, platform sellers, gig workers, creators or
performers, until all of those people are locked in too. And then finally, once both
sides of this two-sided market are locked in, the platform scoops up all the surplus for
itself. And I have a somewhat notorious name for this that I coined. I call it insidification.
And it's the reason that things really are worse these days. So let me give you a quick
case study in an insidification kind of doom loop. Let's think about Facebook. When Facebook
started, well, when it really started, it was a service to non-consensually rate the
fuckability of Harvard undergraduates. Incredibly, this was the best moment in Facebook history.
It only got worse after that. But at a certain point in 2006, it said, we're tired of only
having people with .edu addresses on the Service American College kids. We're going to open
up to the general public. The problem was that the general public were already all using
MySpace. So Facebook had to make a pitch to those users. And it said, hey, MySpace users,
as it ever occurred to you that you're trapped on a platform run by a senescent, crappulous,
evil Australian billionaire who spies on you with every hour that God sends. Come and
use Facebook. You're the privacy forward alternative to MySpace. We will never spy on you. If you
come and use Facebook, we will ask you to tell us who matters to you in this world.
When those people post a thing that they want, the people who follow them to see will show
it to you. That was the initial Facebook promise. Now, users piled into Facebook because that's
actually a pretty good offer. And as they did, they locked themselves in. This is the thing
that happens with social media. When people who like each other, join a platform and start to
use it to interact with one another, they take each other hostage. Because even if they don't
like the platform, they like each other. And agreeing on whether it's time to leave the
platform and if so, where to go. It's one of these transcendentally difficult things. It's what
economists call the collective action problem. And so you end up in this mutual hostage taking,
where I like you, you like me, we both hate the platform, we like each other, but we can't agree
on where to go. And so we're stuck here. Now, once those users had locked themselves in,
Facebook could start to withdraw some of its surplus from them and start allocating it to
key groups of business stakeholders, women's advertisers, the other woman's publishers.
So the advertisers, they said, Hey, do you remember when we told these rubes, we were never
going to spy on them? We were lying. We're going to spy on them from asshole to appetite. And
we're going to let you target ads really cheaply. And we're going to devote an enormous amount of
engineering resources to making sure that there's very little ad fraud. So you're going to buy
ads really cheaply. You're going to target them really accurately. And then every ad you buy is
going to be seen by a human. Another great offer. Then they went to the publishers and they said,
do you remember when we told these rubes that we were going to only show them the things
that they asked to see? We were lying then too. Why don't you take small excerpts of the things
that you publish on your own website, put them on Facebook, add a link to the bottom of it.
We're going to non-consensually ram those into the eyeballs of our users who never asked to see
them. We're going to create a free traffic funnel that will drive traffic to your website where you
can monetize it however you want. And so those advertisers and publishers, they got very locked
into Facebook too. They became very dependent on Facebook because they needed the users. So the
users locked in each other and then they locked in the business customers, the advertisers and
publishers. Once everybody was fully locked in, it was time for the third stage of enchantification.
That's when Facebook withdraws the surplus to give it to itself. So for users, that meant that your
feed became an increasingly homeopathic dose of the things you asked to see, posts by the people
you followed. So there was room for advertisements and suggested posts from people who paid to boost
their posts. For advertisers, it meant the prices went up and ad fraud policing went down. So you
paid more for ads and there's a much stronger likelihood that no one was going to see them even
if you were paying for them. And for publishers, Facebook was able to turn the dial so that your
post was much less likely to be seen unless you put much more of that post in there. So until
gradually, Facebook had kind of boiled the frog so that every publisher was putting the whole text
of their article in and then sticking the knife in at the end was saying, when you link back to
your website, we can't even tell if it's a malicious website. So we're not going to show posts that
have links to outside the Facebook ecosystem to users. So even if you want to reach the users who
are following you, we are not going to show them that unless you keep all the links out of your
post and put the whole post in, don't link back to your own website. And then the next stage was,
hey, tell you what, we're not going to show them to them even then, you're going to have to pay to
boost your content. And so now we have like the perfect storm of gentrification. Facebook is
withdrawing surpluses from end users, advertisers, publishers, and try to leave just enough residual
value that nobody leaves, but not one penny is worth more because the rest of it is rightfully
the property of their shareholders. Now this is a super brittle equilibrium to maintain. All it takes
is one privacy scandal, one Cambridge Analytica, one whistleblower, one live stream mass shooting.
People can go from like, I hate this place, but I can't figure out how to leave to, oh my god,
get me the fuck out of this shithole in like one instant, and they're gone. Boom. And so Facebook
is now in this place where they're in terminal and shitification, where they're a pile of shit,
and they're doing what tech platforms do when they reach terminal and shitification.
They're panicking, which they call pivoting. And so the pivot in this case is the idea that
all of our futures is to submit to being legless, sexless, low polygon, heavily surveilled cartoon
characters in a virtual world they stole from a 25-year-old satirical science fiction novel.
And so here we are in end stage and shitification, and it's not just Facebook. It's all the platforms
are starting to look like this, whether it's Reddit or Twitch, Amazon, the first five screens
on a search for Amazon are 50% ads. The whole first screen is ads. Many of them are ads for
things that aren't the things you search for. Amazon makes $31 billion a year selling ads.
What they're really selling is Paola. It's the right to have a product that isn't a match for
the user's search be at the top of the search results, which means that $31 billion of the
value is being extracted from vendors who have to make it up somehow. They're either making it up
by raising their prices or by lowering their quality. We don't really see it because Amazon
has this monopoly position and it is able to extract what's called the most favored nation deal
from all of its sellers. That requires them to make sure that nobody sells their products
more cheaply than they do on Amazon. So Amazon is now taking 51% of their seller's clearing price
in fees of some kind or another ad fees, stocking fees, just junk fees basically.
Those buyers are the sellers that they can't afford to leave because Amazon's locked all the
buyers in. They're pre-selling us a year, shipping in advance through a program called Prime. Once
you've got Prime, 90% of users start their searches on Amazon. If they find what they're looking for,
they don't search anywhere else. If you're a merchant, you've got to sell on Amazon.
So Amazon can take 51 cents out of every dollar that you make and then you can raise your prices
on Amazon and we don't see it at least not in this particularized way because you also got to raise
your prices everywhere else. So the prices at Walmart and Target and even on the wholesaler's
own website, the manufacturer's own website, are all higher to pay for this and this is in
shitification too. And shitification is what happens when you have three factors. On the one
hand, you have a monopoly or a cartel. That's happened in a lot of industries, everything from
from intermodal shipping to running shoes to professional wrestling to beer to finance.
And there's a reason for it. 40 years ago, Carter took a couple of Jenga blocks out of the antitrust
enforcement system in America. Reagan liked that idea and started removing them by the fistful.
Every administration since has followed suit. And so what we were left with at the start of the
Biden administration was a kind of sickly, barely alive antitrust enforcement that could
not even get out of bed on its own. The Biden administration has substantially reversed that,
but it's going to take a long time to undo the damage, even assuming that the next administration
doesn't reverse course again. So once you've got a monopoly, you're in the starting gate for
in shitification. It's easier to treat your customers like shit if you're the only game in town.
But with tech, you get two more factors that produce the pure, high grade in shitification we
see in our tech lives today. They both have to do with the endemic flexibility of digital
services. Digital services are just flexible in a way that physical services are not.
John D. Rockefeller couldn't click a mouse and drop another extra 100 miles of train track
in order to compete with someone who is putting in a competing oil pipeline. But when Jeff Bezos
tried to buy diapers.com and they said, no, we don't want to be a subsidiary of Amazon, he was
like, fine, click to mouse. And they started selling diapers below cost. They lit $100 million
on fire in the course of a couple of months. Diapers.com went out of business. Platforms can
twiddle the knobs on their back end to change the compensation, to change the recommendations,
to change the likelihood that a performer will get an audience or not, whether they're boosted,
whether they're suppressed. And they can do it from moment to moment and second to second.
And they're effectively unconstrained by any regulation that would limit them and how they
do this. So they're unconstrained by privacy law, by labor law, by fair trading laws. And they're
able to do things that would otherwise be considered illegal labor practices, illegal
privacy practices or illegal trading practices in any other sector. One of the reasons that they
have all of that legal privilege, that legal protection is because when an industry dwindles
to a handful of companies, it's much easier for those companies to decide on what they want to
spend their lobbying money on. When a sector consists of 100 squabbling, small and medium-sized
enterprises, they can't even agree on where to hold their annual meeting, much less have an
agenda that emerges from it about what they're going to ask Washington DC or Westminster or
Brussels about. But when there's three or four or five companies in the sector, they have so much
money to spend because they don't really compete with one another. And they have so little trouble
agreeing on what to spend it on that they get policies that are very favorable to them. And so
we have the people who run these tech platforms that have very little competition, who get to
twiddle their knobs all day long and we can't pass a law to make them stop touching their knobs.
And they love touching their knobs. And then you have the third factor of enchantification,
concentration, unlimited twiddling for the platforms and no twiddling for us. So the same
digital forces that impart that flexibility to digital platforms that allow them to reel us out
and reel us in like a fish on a hook also allow us to push back. Think about ad blocking, the most
popular consumer boycott in the history of the human race. One in four web users has installed
an ad blocker. And you know, that's because the web is an open platform and no one vendor controls
it. And so you can just mod your web browser, you can install a plugin that looks for things that
look like ads and just makes them disappear, looks for things that look like trackers and blocks them.
But the platforms have managed to secure changes to technology law so that we can't do that
elsewhere. If you wanted to do that with one of the closed platforms like the app ecosystem,
you would first have to reverse engineer the app. And reverse engineering the app would trigger
criminal and civil liability under section 12.01 of the digital money and copyright act.
That's a $500,000 fine and a five year prison sentence for first offense. Even if you don't
violate anyone's copyright, this is basically a charter for felony contempt of business model
where doing anything that displeases an incumbent business constitutes a crime or at least a civil
infraction and places you in very serious legal jeopardy. And so that's the third piece of the
puzzle here. You have companies that are highly concentrated. They can abuse us any way they
want. And they have the digital tools to make that abuse move really quickly and allow them to play
a very high speed shell game. And we are not allowed to have any self defense mechanisms.
And all of this militates for a way to not restore the old good internet. I don't want
the old good internet. It's a way for us to build the new good internet. A way for us to make the
in shitter net a kind of intermediate stage between the old good internet and the new good
internet. A new good internet that's run by and for the people who use it. A new internet where
we seize the means of computation. So the first thing we got to do is we got to start breaking
up the monopolies and making it harder for new monopolies to form. This is actually going pretty
well. Lena Kahn, the chair of the Federal Trade Commission and her counterpart Jonathan Cantor
at the Department of Justice Antitrust Division have promulgated new merger guidelines that put
place really strict limits on the kind of predatory acquisitions that have driven the scale of the
tech companies. The tech companies like to call themselves Willy Wonka's idea factories. But
they're really just, you know, Rich Uncle Pennybags. Google is a company that made one good product,
a search engine. That was 25 years ago. Everything else they made in house, they fail that. It can
make a video platform. It couldn't make a social media network. It couldn't even keep their RSS
running. I mean, their RSS reader running to say nothing of their, you know, goofy Wi-Fi cities
and Wi-Fi balloons and all the rest of it. Everything they've got that's successful that
made them into the kind of vertically integrated monopoly they are, they bought from someone
else. They bought their video stack, they bought their ad stack, they bought the collaboration
stack, mapping, server management, mobile. You name it, right? They're not making things company.
They're buying things company with a sideline and operationalizing them. I don't want to give them
a short drift here. And that's true of other tech companies too. You know, Apple buys 90 companies
a year. Tim Koch comes home with a new company more often than you come home with a new bag of
groceries. And so by limiting mergers, we really limit the ability of these companies to grow because
they're just not that good at thinking up stuff. They have the innovators' dilemma. They're big and
unwieldy. And on top of that, there's efforts to break them up. So there's a new bipartisan
bill called the America Act that would break up the ad business of Google and Facebook.
That bill, when I call it bipartisan, I'm not kidding. It's two main cosponsors,
are Ted Cruz and Elizabeth Warren. All right. So step one, limit corporate concentration.
On it, it's going to take a while. It took 69 years to break up AT&T. Step two, we got to reduce
the twiddling by the platforms. Comprehensive privacy law, labor law that ends the fiction of
gig work, fair trading law that says that if you tell someone that you're going to show them a feed
from someone they subscribe to, you have to. If you tell someone that you're going to,
that you're going to give them a search result that matches what they search for,
you have to give them the best result, not the one that pays you the most money, right? Those
are just basic fair trading standards. You walk into the shop and you ask for a GE light bulb
and the guy behind the counter sells you a no-name light bulb but tells you it's GE
and tricks you into it. You don't notice till you leave. That is fraud on its face. And we've got
to stop these companies from doing it. We also got to let those users leave the platforms. We've
got to help solve this collective action problem. You know, you can think about the problem of
big tech as being analogous to the problem of fire debt in California. Until the settlers arrived,
indigenous tribes in California, they used to have managed burns on a regular basis to clear
out the dead wood, the old dying trees, to open the canopy so that new growth could emerge. And
when the settlers arrived, they declared war on fire and they stopped all the fire. And what they
got wasn't no fire. What they got was wildfire because now California has all this fire debt
and it just bursts into flame every year. We stopped the cycle of renewal that stopped tech
companies from collapsing when they could no longer come up with cool ideas because they were too big
by letting them buy their rivals. And now we've got all this internet fire debt and the big tech
platforms are on fire. And just like in California, we need to stop trying to make the places that the
urban wildlife interface safe and start evacuating those places so they can have the burn. We need
to let the platforms burn too and evacuate the users so they can't get harmed. We do that with
interoperability. On the one hand, we need to mandate that the platforms open up APIs so that
mastodon, diaspora, even commercial startups like Blue Sky can open up a gateway so that you can
leave Facebook or Twitter or any of the other big platforms, but stay in touch with the people you
left behind, remain in the communities, exchange messages and DMs, be part of the life of those
communities from somewhere else, not subject to their domain. And in the European Union,
the Digital Markets Act is going to force the biggest platforms to do that. But then we have
to go to Stage 3. We need to restore our twiddling. So we need to make it legal again to do reverse
engineering, bots and scraping. And the way that we repermit that without creating a system in which
it's a free-for-all where the next Cambridge Analytica could just go for it is by, sorry,
that's my plane tomorrow, I need to check in for it, is by having those privacy laws, those labor
laws, those fair trading laws so that when people help users escape the platforms, they're not allowed
to abuse those users in the way that the platforms were. We hold everyone to the same standard.
Now, getting the restoration of those rights to modify the services that we use that have been
so thoroughly whittled away over the last 40 years is going to be trickier. And I've got a lot of
ideas about how to do this. I've got a book coming out on September the 5th called The Internet Con,
How to Seize the Means of Computation. It gets into a lot of detail about this.
And I'm running out of time, so I'll just say one idea for this. The federal government buys a lot
of technology. And the federal government could say to tech companies, we won't buy your technology
unless you make a binding covenant, a contract, not to legally aggress against people who reverse
engineering your products for the purpose of adding interoperability. This is actually a really old
idea in prudent public administration. When Lincoln was arming the Union army, he refused to buy rifles
except from gunsmiths who would use interoperable tooling and ammunition for some pretty obvious
reasons, right? He didn't want his general staff to say, sorry, boys, the war has canceled this week,
the bullet factory decided not to make any bullets. He didn't want a single source supplier for
critical material. The same prudent principle should apply to every car bought for a government
motor pool, every server bought for a government data center. We should use the public purse to
encourage this. So those are the three stages. Limit the monopolization of these companies.
Limit their ability to attack us by changing the rules of the game as they're going along.
And the Darth Vader MBA, I've altered the deal, pray I don't alter it further, restore our right
to modify the services we use so that they serve us and not their shareholders.
And make all of it safe by having publicly accountable rules about what is and isn't permissible
by a platform, not rules that are dreamed up in boardrooms with shareholders first and users
a distant last as the priorities for that. I think all of this has the potential to give us
a much better internet. I think we all have a sense that it could be better, especially people who
work in tech. And that gives me hope because if you remember the first dream of the tech worker was
sure I'll work for a big dumb company for a couple of years, then I'm going to strike it on my own
and put them out of business. Gradually that idea, that dream narrowed to, well, I'm going to work for
a big dumb company for a while, strike it on my own, do a fake startup, which is going to get
aqua hired by the company I left. It's just like the world's least efficient way of getting a bonus.
And then the third phase of this, the one that we, is two back from the one we're living in now was,
well, I guess I got a job for life at a big dumb company, and there's free kombucha in the
cafeteria. And I guess I get massages on Wednesdays. And now we're at like the final stage of how
those platforms are treating their tech workers. And that's where it's like, I'm going to work for
this company until they fire my ass, like those 12,000 Googlers who got laid off six months after
the company did a stock buyback that would have paid their salaries for the next 27 years.
Nobody likes this arrangement, except for an increasingly small contingent of shareholders.
And those people, they can go fuck themselves. We need to seize the means of computation. We need
to get back, not the old good internet, but the new good internet it could have been. Deliberate
policy choices created the in-shutter net that we're living in. And new policy choices, which are
within our grasp, can give us a much better internet for our kids to inherit. Thank you very much.
I'm just going through the chat here.
Yeah, let's see. Pac says, I mean, you're younger than them, so I can't be old. No, no, no, it's just
you're even older. Sorry. Well, thank you all. Some questions in the Q&A tab, I'm told. Let me
see if I can locate that session. Q&A, here we are. Thanks. Show more.
Yeah, so what do users do? This is from Tobias or Tobias. What do users do about
in-shutification? How can we slow it? Well, look, there's limited stuff we can do as individuals.
I don't want to snow you here. I think that there's been, because of the kind of neoliberal
emphasis on the individual, there's been like 40 years of kind of deliberate forgetting
of the power of the collective in favor of the power of the individual. Think about the
phrase, vote with your wallet, which, you know, like organized boycotts can make a difference,
right? I've read my MLK, but voting with your wallet has pretty limited utility. For one thing,
it means the people who have the fattest wallets get to have the most votes. We know how that
works out. That's where we're living in now. But collective action can make a really big
difference. You know, I'm wearing my SAG-AFTRA shirt here today. And there are lots of ways
to get involved in collective action. So in particular, Tobias is asking about web
integrity environment. A web environment integrity is a terrible idea from Google
to allow web servers to decide which browsers they're going to permit by actually causing your
computer to cough of information about it, even if you don't want it to. This is a really bad idea,
but it should be understood as being downstream of some other policy choices.
Like in theory, if we didn't have all the laws that stop you from modifying your computer,
there would just be products in the market that would allow you to turn that off, right,
to spoof what's going out of your computer. The reason that Google is able to even contemplate
this ridiculous course of action is we are already kind of three steps down the grease
slide into hell. You know, as the old joke from Ireland goes, if you wanted to get there,
I wouldn't start from here. So you got to, you know, you may not be able to fight WEI
individually, but what you can do is be part of a movement that's trying to make all of these
things better. So tech workers, you know, there's tech workers unions forming and tech workers
solidarity organizations forming all over. That makes a really big difference. You know,
unionized workers can be the shield for their users because it is often the case that workers
in tech want their users to be safe, whereas their bosses want their users to be drained.
And, you know, we saw this with the teacher strike in Los Angeles where in 2019, their prime
demands were not about salary or work treatment, it was about making sure that their students had
green space, social workers, that ICE wasn't picking up their parents at the school gate,
a bunch of things that were related to protecting the people they served. And that's one of the
key roles that a union can play. In the case of legislation, and you know, there is a lot of
legislation around these days, you know, calling up your senator, calling up your lawmaker, making
sure that these get floor votes. You know, it was Chuck Schumer who prevented the vote on the
access act, which would have forced interoperability on the platforms. In the last session,
you know, making sure that your senator, that your congresspeople know that this matters to you
is, you know, a really big deal when there's legislation pending. So staying on top of this
through joining organizations like the electronic frontier foundation where I've worked for 22 years
so that you can get alerts when this stuff is pending in your state or with your senator or
federal representative, that's a really important thing to do because there are these inflection
points where just giving them a push can tip them right over. You know, I have this arch nemesis,
a guy called Milton Friedman. He was basically the architect of neoliberalism, Ronald Reagan's
court sorcerer, he's the author of our misery, but he wasn't dumb. And when people would say to a
Milton, how are you going to make your kooky ideas mainstream? He would say, look, there's always
going to be a crisis. And in the time of crisis, ideas can move from the periphery to the center
in an instant. And what we need to have are ideas lying around so that when the crisis strikes,
it won't go to waste. So we need to promulgate these ideas lying around because I'll tell you,
we are lurching from crisis to crisis in tech, right? The one thing that we can be sure that we
will not have in short supply in the coming years is crises. And so if we can socialize the ideas,
make sure that people understand that we need to stop trying to fix the platforms by passing rules
about, you know, how much moderation they have to do or who they must carry or who they must not
carry or whatever, just make it easier to leave the platforms, get out of the fire zones, stop
trying to make the urban wildlife interface safe. It's not safe. It's going to be on fire forever.
Then when the next crisis arises, there's just going to be more political will for making it
happen. All right. What's stopping content creators who make a living from having a website on
their own domain? The amount of work to FTP and HTML file seems very low. That's true. The problem
is that 90% of all the searches controlled by one company and, you know, two or three companies
control all the social media, which are the two ways that people find out about the stuff that
you're doing. You can send email, but about four companies control all the email. And all of those
services treat domains that they haven't seen as suspect and they claim, well, they might be fishing
domains, they might be, they might be crimeware, they might be porn, they might be spam, they might
be malware. And so if it's, you know, speaking of someone who runs his own mail server, it is
unbelievably hard to reliably deliver mail to companies like AT&T, Yahoo, Google, Microsoft,
and so on. They just periodically are like, yeah, we don't like this mail server. We're just not
going to accept any more mail from it. I had like a three-year period where I couldn't send or receive
mail from AT&T. This is the same thing that happens with websites, right? You put up your
own website and it's not on one of the major platforms and Google just like super down ranks
that in the index, social media is much less likely to recommend it or even show it to the people who
do follow you. And so really, you know, you have these choke points and, you know, I often hear
from people who are like, well, why don't writers bypass publishers in Amazon and go independent?
It's like, well, okay, so if you bypass your publisher, most, you know, the one distributor
that distributes to bookstores and the one chain of bookstores, they're not going to carry your
work, right? Now, Amazon will carry your work, but if you're on Amazon and, you know, that you're
exclusive to Amazon, you're not going to be anywhere else. And if you don't want to be on Amazon too,
because they're super exploitative, well, then you're like in a position where no one can find
your work, none of the retailers will carry your work, none of the distributors will distribute
your work, you're basically screwed, right? And so like we're solving the wrong problem. There are
a lot of platforms that are like, will help you print a book, will help you format an ebook,
and all of this will help you escape the hegemony of the distributors, the publishers, and the
one giant e-commerce retailer. And the thing that locks us in is not the difficulty of setting up
a print file or converting a file to an e-pub. It's all the things to get that book into a reader's
hand. It's the fact that like the app store is going to take 30% out of everything you sell. And so
if your gross margin is 20%, as is the case usually with, say, an audiobook, you're going to lose money
on every sale that you make through the audiobook store, or through your own audiobook store on the
platform. And so you're going to have to sell through Google Books or Apple Books. Otherwise,
you lose money on every sale, and then they get to charge whatever they want. Let's see. And
Shirley says, what about medium in shitification? It's a risk. I mean, the thing about in shitification
is that it's not the result of particularly wicked or particularly smart or even particularly
foolish tech leaders. The people who started like DAC and AOL and Sun Microsystems weren't worse or
better than the people who started Google or the people who started Apple, the people who started
Microsoft. The difference is the way that we constrain them. If AOL could have made competing
with AOL illegal, they would have done it in a hot second. So medium faces all the dangers that
everyone else faces. And there's lots of design choices that, while not abusive at the moment,
could become abusive, you know, rewriting URLs so that they're captured by an analytics engine,
for example. I understand that that's a way to catch spam, but it's also a way that kind of like
gives you a thing that you can turn on that lets you do lots of other mischievous things.
One of the best ways to avoid it in shitification is to anticipate that in the future, you might
have a lapse of judgment. You might allow a problem with your finances or pressure from an investor
to tempt you into making a compromise that in the cold light of day, you don't think should be
made. And there's a name that economists have for a way to avoid making these compromises.
It's called the Ulysses Pat. And it's named after Ulysses, you know, from Homer. Ulysses was a hacker.
And when he and his sailors were sailing through the sea of the sirens, he wanted to violate
protocols, the normal protocol to avoid hearing the song in the sirens and being driven mad and
jumping into the sea was to fill your ears with wax. But Ulysses, being a hacker, he wanted to hear
the sirens. And so he was like, tell you what, sailors, tie me to the mast. And no matter what I
say, don't release me. And I'm going to hear what no living person has heard, the song of the sirens.
So Ulysses didn't say, I will have the willpower to resist the sirens. He said, I am strong enough
to know that when the sirens sing, I will be too weak to resist them. And so I will use my strength
in this moment to prevent my weakness in the future from tempting me into a course of action
that I will later regret. We've all had a version of this, right? You go on a diet, throw away all
your Oreos. You can make binding covenants to not in shitify. So for example, for you know,
open source licenses, including the Creative Commons licenses, they're all irrevocable. You
can't change your mind about them. You can't take things out of the Commons once you put them in.
And there's a reason for that. And it's that if you do a startup and your investors come along and
they go, all right, hippie, we went along with this open source crap when we were funding you in
the first place, but like time is money, you're going to have to make all that code proprietary
or you're not getting your next tranche. And the 150 good old friends that you
tempted to quit their decent, reliable jobs and put their kids college funds and their mortgage
on the line and come work for you, we're going to put them out on the street. You can say to your boss,
that's terrible. And I would do this if I could, but I literally can't because the code is irrevocably
licensed. And so if medium wants to guard itself against insidification in the future, it needs
to think about how it can make promises that it can't renege on, right? That's things like
worker co-ops, open permanent open licensing, creating systems that allow users, including
writers to port their content out, you know, as a blob and redirect readers to a new website,
all of these things that say like that set up a situation where if you do cave to temptation,
something really bad will happen to the business so that when the temptation arises,
your own venal nature and not your best nature will stay your hand. Well, I think those are all
the questions. I can go back to the chat and see how that's going. Thank you, John, for that.
Yeah. Well, I think that's it, right? We're at 4.37. I think that's what we said we were going to do.
Someone come in the chat or wherever and let me know if that's right. Thank you all. Thanks for coming.
Oh, thank you, Beth.
Yeah, the ring is from a guy called Han Cholo who sells a Comic-Con. I bet you can Google him.
Oh, thank you, Jennifer.
All right, guys, I'm going to dial off. I'm going to go do more DEF CON,
see how badly my computer got hacked while I was connected to the hotel Wi-Fi. I'll see you later.
