Okay, I think we can get started.
Looks looks like we'll get
it all done. In any case, I usually have slides today. This is a bit of an experiment.
The idea is to
basically give an orientation of
a fairly small topic, but one which I think is interesting and amusing.
And then open it up for discussion for everybody who's here to participate.
Those of you who are students at Stanford, please don't put up your video.
Anyone else can put the video up or not as they wish because of
the requirement that you be able to attend anonymously if you're a student at the university.
In any case, the topic today is intellectual property and artificial intelligence.
And it's one which is interested and amused me for the last,
I think probably six months.
About six months ago, I sort of decided that we had had all sorts of things change.
So let's let's do this. I'm going to automatically include all the standard disclaimers about this isn't that and thank the people who participated in informing me a little bit about this.
And I want to tell everybody that no artificial intelligence program participated in the preparation of this talk.
And then I thought about that a bit and concluded that to the best of our knowledge, no, no artificial intelligence program participated in the preparation.
But somewhere some higher out there and in the space.
That might not be longer crew.
And so, sort of the conclusion I reached six months ago was that the singularity is almost here.
Now if you don't know about the singularity is probably not really transparent what's going on.
But the singularity is when the massive computing power reaches a critical point, and it begins to operate on its own.
And in a sense the chat GPT and number of the other AI programs begin to look like that might be the case. They're good enough so that in some ways in some places, it's very, very difficult to tell whether or not they're, they're real.
So all of a sudden our machine learning is and artificial intelligence are real, and they're just another piece of the toolkit that we get to use, except that they're not, they're much more powerful in some ways.
So the question really the word trying to address today is what happens next.
As a predictor of the future or rather a forecaster of the future.
I have not really a, a real clue as to what's going to happen.
I think this is a very significant point point where things are changing rapidly, and we're going to see very major changes.
We have a different opinion of that. And if you do, it will be really nice to have those expressed today, when this turns into an open for.
Intellectual properties are relatively recent acquisition in the, in the space of
things people humans do. But we do have a fairly long standing constitutional mandate for intellectual property in the, in the US.
And it's, we have two kinds of protections for intellectual property, and they are to promote the progress of science and the useful arts by securing
the mechanism which the Constitution proposes as the right one for doing that is securing for limited times to authors and inventors, the exclusive rights to their respective writings and discoveries.
That is to say, I'm not.
And we've evolved a number of different kinds of protectable intellectual property patents and copyrights being the primary one.
Tree secrets are somewhat different because unlike the previous to the patents and copyright tree secrets have to do with how the information is acquired, in some sense, we'll talk a little bit about that.
That's, that's what it is. Patents are what you can do with almost anything. There are very substantial.
There's a substantial set of law and examples which show that exactly how patents go together. The important thing is that patents are now first to file which says that, you know, ongoing research and development needs to be patented and patented
on a regular basis, if you're disclosing what you're doing to anybody. It's only, it's only after you are, you have it under protection, for example, with a provisional patent that you can really disclose much of the contents of your, your research or development.
There are a variety of different patents, the only one that is significant in some sense, because it is how things get done is our utility patents.
Now, patents basically take a collection of information and eventually provide a preferred embodiment for it, at least this is a traditional format.
And then also a number of different claims, and these claims have particularly particular constraints on them and rights, and that needs to be unique in the world of all previous thought, which can be difficult or can be straightforward depending upon what appeal you're in.
There are things that can't be patented. Discoveries, scientific theories, mathematical methods, aesthetic creation, rules for performing a mental act, presentation of information, and the procedure for scrugeable and therapeutic treatment.
You can't, you can't patent software and business methods that is non technical ones, technical ones are patentable to a certain extent, can't patent perpetual motion machines, inventions contrary to public morality.
Now we have the recently acquired Alice constraints to say an abstract idea does not become eligible for a patent simply because it's being implemented on a generic computer.
Copyrights are lesser.
The strong version of intellectual property.
It protects ideas does not protect ideas concept systems or methods of doing something. It protects something else.
What's there minus all of those those things so that it, it is a
the essence or an idea expression of the idea that is copyright, not the idea itself.
Well, original works of authorship for those done by people. There are all sorts of rules about how collective collective groups can work together to provide a collective work of authorship by transferring rights.
In any case copyrights are a relatively weaker form of protection, but one which is widely used. And of course when you write anything, a work of authorship is automatically copyright.
And it was copyright law.
Stumbles on the separation of ideas and expression.
And because what it protects is expression.
There's a lot of argument about what constitutes expression and what constitutes ideas.
It appears, at least in the experience I've had that that is going to continue to be that way. And what we have to do in order to to determine what what's expression and what our ideas is go off to court and to litigate it.
And there is a concept of fair use and while the copyright gives the
gives everybody a
gives the author or the
owner of the copyright right to control access to things.
There are
rules that allow some access under rules or something called fair use.
Trade secrets are quite a different thing.
These are secret and have to be maintained so I'd have to confer a competitive advantage which usually means that there needs to have been a
financial basis of why it's better to do it one way or another.
The information is has to be
subject to reasonable efforts to keep the secret.
Trade secrets are probably not something that at least at this point
is likely to be part of the issues with the artificial intelligence.
The real fundamental question for today is, can AI programs create is intelligence and creativity unique to humans can artificial intelligence is just
create something independent of human effort.
And that is really important.
Question is, should an algorithm and AI be granted to the person or it shouldn't be able to apply for and acquire
patents or copyrights on work that it generates.
Right now.
We'll see in a minute that the
reason is to create and provide patents and copyright do not allow that.
But it's an open question as to whether we should allow that and that's I think going to be something that is going to be fought over aggressively in the last next
years. One of the things we I would like people to think about and talk about is whether what the what the implications are of allowing AI programs to have the agency of doing their
own patents and so forth. And is that going to be a good thing or a bad thing for our society.
If you remember back to the constitutional mandate, the real purpose of copyrights and patents is not to give somebody a
monopoly on a piece of intellectual property, but rather to allow that person or those persons to contribute some something to the overall intellectual
intellectual bank of the society as a whole.
And the trade that's made is you get protection as a monopolist for a short period of time, and then you have to provide an adequate description of the invention or the work itself for use after the
copyright or patent expires. And if you do allow the AI's works to be created, who would own the resolving works and inventions.
Incidentally, copyright terms are often specified in terms of the author's age or years from their birth or something like that.
And if AI's don't have the finite lifetimes that's that's an interesting question itself is to what what the term of a of a copyright for a work of authorship by an AI.
There's lots of things we can talk about discussing.
I'm sure they should the AI be regulated intellectual property.
Have have an ownership who owns it.
Will we soon find AI in everything.
Including everything including the various these. I'm told by a couple of people in the security area that it's already doing that, but the chat GPT stuff is already been incorporated in some malicious software.
The thing is, I'm really interested in what the impact is. And since you're the, the users for this technology, you probably have a better idea of what it is to to do the live.
And it's also the thing that would always comes down to when people first encounter thinking about this is the question is, is, are humans important with creative process, or if you can't detect whether the output of the creating process was created by an
machine, or a human doesn't make any difference.
That's an important, important point, when you're trying to argue that maybe the AI should be allowed to do their thing without the interference or help of the human being.
Right now, the situation is, is, is exactly what you might expect for, for things.
Patent office does not accept inventions by non humans.
The reasoning for that is several fold, one of them being that since non humans can't sign the application, the patent office can't accept it.
So the Copyright Office does not support AI authors.
And just recently they, they, they said that that was the case, and
other organizations who take to copyright outside of the US have also been rejecting things.
A couple of countries have allowed for copywriting of materials written by a eyes under the AI's identification, but that is not the common case at this point.
And that's the end of the slide so what I'd like to do now is to move to an open forum.
Raise your hand or whatever, or just step in if there's a there's a break and ask questions make comments. Tell us, tell me a little bit about what you think the, the situation ought to be.
Have thought about this show and so I think, I think the implications of
the technology being used and being somewhat autonomous are interesting and perhaps somewhat disturbing the
the implicated if you adopt that position and note that the AI software is similar to many other different kinds of software and the, the, it looks to me like the, the
AI model, if it becomes propagating that it becomes fairly simple to have automatic this is and that's, which are not necessarily based on our current AI models but much simpler or much more complicated programs, which
will have the same agency and it is going to change the relationship between what is possible in in the intellectual property arena, and who makes money on things.
In any case, I'm going to drop the slides down now.
And openly, the thing, please remember to turn on your microphone if, if you're interested in saying something. Okay.
Here we go.
So, there is a question. Who would profit if I create some invention.
Creator of AI or guy who actually create ask it that AI to do some invention or it's maybe a poem, for example, scientific, I mean, technology invention or whatever.
I can't answer that. What, what do you think would make it would make sense.
I don't know. It's just new for me, at least for today.
Okay, well, you think about it as we go on and come back in if you come up with a good answer. I think, I think that's, that's going to be one of the more difficult ones, particularly since if you give agency to the AI's, and they can do
then it's possible that the slavery or anti slavery like things go come and get brought in because you're doing
survival work without pay for somebody else and not certain that applies but it certainly is an interesting thought I thought
right and we need to solve that as fast as possible because otherwise it would be solved in cars.
Yes, I think so and I think that I think by the way that the this is going to be dominant in the next.
I think we'll have in every AI. This is and that's everywhere in the next six to 10 months to a year and already you see it showing up in in various places which is a little surprising if you'll remember when
Benji Mencer spoke, he was talking about how the patching of images together into into a seamless hole is now being done with the use of AI and you can't disassemble it in order to tell whether or not it's it's faked or not.
I think I was thinking about this question as well. And the something I came up was that there are currently some licensing work, because in present artificial intelligence is technology.
So it is still not at the level of consciousness and imitation of consciousness does not mean that machine has it. For example, the touring test that states that if machine can imitate human, therefore, it is capable of human
thinking, but it is important to remember that there is a difference so syntax is also the same as semantics as Seattle, John Seattle point as well. And I agree with this opinion, but at the present since we view it more as a technology, or at least I do.
There are more of a licensing program on as well as currently you have to pay for certain types of AI.
And then you can own the work, otherwise the work belongs to the creator on the order the company. So there are also some decentralized networks that include AI.
That's a little more complicated, but I think it would really depend on the type of AI, what it does, and how we use this work because there are open licenses and for public use and not and private so I think it would maybe depend what is it, and what the creator decides.
I think that's a reasonable position, but
you're basically trying to set it up in such a way that the current the current ownership situation is as is as undisturbed as possible and says that you want to sort of maintain licensing and
ownership by companies and that sort of thing, and that may not be the right thing to do.
I think I just curious about exactly what else what are their options there might be.
Okay, so I understand your concern but currently also the companies create AI so it's more a private thing. So, it definitely would be good to have some government intervention, I think, at least partially because also there may be
a big difference because I'm in Europe, so we have a little different legislation, as well as Europe and Commission currently working on the policies.
So I'm not sure 100% what the situation in US, but I think that it would be good the process of collaboration, because it is a very powerful technology, it's also involves a lot of data.
There's also data collected and what it gives you as a result.
I think it should be at least thought together we should maybe set a common goal but at the present, since the technology is made by private sector.
I think at the at now, there is a short term licensing but if we look in the future, of course, maybe this technology progresses, it may change, and we have to be aware of this changes and provide new also changes and legislation or our ideas how do we perceive the technology,
particular AI as well.
Yes, okay, great.
Anybody else there.
Yeah, I'll go ahead.
Yes. Yeah, sorry.
The question was, so I'll reference a number of cases, specifically the case in which that I think it wasn't a cat took a picture of itself.
Selfie, and then the owners of the camera would let the monkey get a handle of it and then take a picture of it.
There you go. That's it. Yeah.
Try to accept copyright it over the images that the, that the primate took of itself. And then Peter sued the right for violation of this.
And it was based on of primates copyrights. And it was based on actually court findings that if it's not, I mean, yes, the copyright office rejected the proposition, but at the same time the courts rejected the proposition and non human of any sort can exert any
kind of copyrights.
And that's in the United States at least the jurisprudence is pretty, pretty unequivocal about that. There has been no, there's no successful challenges so that's to that formulation.
But the only other way in which the idea of ownership has been addressed Mary Rosenberger, who is the lead counsel for the authors Guild of United States in comments to the copyright office suggested that perhaps two solutions could be found that
analogous to the solutions found in the monkey case which were that if the photographer set the F stop. That's or the IS whatever if the photographer so much as intervene in any way, then by extension, it is the photographers copyright so
that's what part of the rationale is why the courts found in favor of the owners of the camera who had put that in. So I think that answers the questions to whether copyright in the United States jurisprudence is pretty unequivocal about
that. Mary suggested that any work of any copy or any work novel work, which over which there is no overfitting or plagiarism or anything like that, as long as a human being had some hand in it.
Even if it was transfer learning fine tuning, even if the model showed up, you know, pre trained and whatever that constitutes copyrights for a human and that's the, that's the entity that gets the copyrights.
So Paul Reignitz at Getty, who is the head of advocacy has been sitting. He's also a colleague of mine would sit and Paul on panels with his determination is his and we debate because his determination is that um,
now the question is how much input is the metric by which courts should award.
If not, then it either the thing was a violation the creation is a violation or goes into the public domain. So now a lot of policymakers are trying to find where's the magic spot where
you got just this is just right human intervention for it to constitute human creation.
And that's a relative, you know, people who are copyright owners are going to want more input from a human before others are going to want a lot less like I put a dot somewhere and that's enough.
I think that's from my understanding and I would, I would, I would encourage I'm going to put in the link I'm a rotten burgers brass and burgers comments to the copyright or illuminating in this regard.
And she would like to have licensing on any AI. So kind of like the a the HIA like the home recording act HRA, where, you know, they passed on all manufacturers of digital audio tape recorders had to pay a licensing fee before the object got in the market.
So copyright owners are advocating for that everybody anybody who makes an AI tech needs to pay a license to a anybody.
Do you know how do you do with the fact that everything that's written at every work of authorship by a human being is automatically copyright.
And it's sort of like you invented technology that can potentially in the process of its operation violate copyrights. Therefore, if you invaded invented such a technology, you are you have to pay a license to the original to whatever content you wish to, to use the
musicians, the authors, you know, Jack Valenti must be rising from the dead he's so happy, at least you know, he was the former lead console for the RA, the music.
I'm excuse me the movie industry. Right so he's, he's the guy who's family said something so egregious in front of Congress it was not even, it was not even worth commenting if you want to know you're going to look it up.
My, my, my comment on that I think it's, it's just not going to happen. The jurisprudence is pretty, pretty solid.
Yeah, so do you think you think that the, the emphasis G of the AI is will get impacted at all by the, the rush to having rules about how, how the intellectual property is meant.
It's not going to happen to be a chilling effect. I think, unless the tech industry doesn't get, because I'll tell you, Getty is in Europe, my Paul from Getty is in Europe, advocating for this kind of governance, and they're doing it in the United States and I don't see tech companies really doing anything.
They're doing something but they're not in there in the room really fighting, in my opinion.
So, so are you at, would you advocate for tech companies doing advocating for a much looser or a much tighter control on the.
I think there's going to have to be a middle ground I think Mary Rottenberger's comments on, let's say the aminuensis thesis that if we start treating it like aminuensis is anything that it makes is a work for hire in it.
And so, whether it's a patent. So, anything on AI makes becomes a work for hire and it's the aminuensis it just helped you. And then that way.
I think it's a good way it becomes less of a chilling effect people are more willing to say well okay, I had a help, as opposed to well yeah I did most of it and then nobody gets to benefit from the monopoly which was supposed to be an incentive, I think that covers it.
Usually you recently a number of papers have been submitted in to journals, where the AI program was left as a, as a co author.
The journal rejected them because they say only human authors.
Right I think it's going to be a normative like different fields publications will have different norms that evolve, but as a matter of law.
The boundaries are pretty are pretty well defined.
And you believe that the boundaries of law will prevent.
I would think the argument would have to be a common goods argument. I think something I've spoken other intellectual property attorneys who suggest that maybe a Nash equilibrium, or a national equilibrium or those kinds of economic studies of markets,
actually a looser copyright a looser intellectual property regime is better for the market as a whole and I think that argument can be made for AI since it's the potential to mass produce high quality functional tools.
So, and the market will benefit. So it's sort of, it inoculates against the Chicago school jurists, right and then also give some support to the incentivize and progress of the useful arts camp.
Yeah, okay.
Thank you.
So thinking about the thinking about the, the constitutional mandate is that there's a bargain here that we will give you a monopoly. If you submit to the, to the, to the public domain, eventually right so we'll give you a limited time.
So that's essentially incentivizing authors and patents and mentors to be able to put their things out. So that incentive is missing from machines, machines don't need incentives to be able to create.
And in fact machines can spit out millions and billions of things, whereas humans can't do even a fraction of that.
My thought is that constitutionally we don't have a way like we don't need to incentivize machines to blanket the world with copyrightable things and patentable things that incentive doesn't even need it.
So, as my personal example I've created a machine to spit out and copyright 417 billion melodies.
Once they're written to a fixed tangible medium, those are now copyrighted right under the burning convention. So, are all 417 billion of my melodies copyrightable.
I set the parameters, and that's the previous speaker just talked about the f stop right so I created the f stop I said to hear the parameters that I want to read me possible.
And then I said, and repeat this many notes, and then it spit out 417 billion melodies.
Do I have I now closed off every possible melody that's ever been and ever can be.
If any can I soon out people for every possible melody. I think the answer that clearly is no because my machine didn't need the incentive, the constitutional incentive to be able to respond to be able to, you know, get a monopoly of life of the author plus 70 years or for for a corporate
120 years if I'm remembering correctly, 95 or 120 years.
So, yeah, so none of those incentives is necessary for the machine. So I would argue that the only real good answer to on the output is no copyright, because machines don't need incentives on the input on what the machines like the LLMs of the large language models like GBP and Bart, etc.
So if you look at the input, if you look at the way the technology is done, they're ingesting the ideas, and not the expressions of those ideas.
So they're spread there I they're pulling in the ideas of what is, you know, what is a good thing what is a bad thing what is a car, what is a truck, and it puts all those things in vector space and a mathematical model.
And then jettison's the expressions of those ideas, it merely keeps those ideas themselves, and then outputs new expressions of those ideas. So to the, to the previous person's discussion about, maybe we need to put a tax on all AI systems.
The AI system in just, you know, grapes of brass, but it doesn't keep great to breath in the in the system. Instead, it just takes the ideas from grapes of brass, and then jettison's that expression.
And then maps, those ideas with all the thousands or millions of other books, and then the expression doesn't matter the ideas are the only things that matter.
So I would say that that really there's, there's really no reason to have a home recording act, because if you look at the Google scholar case that's the author's guild versus Google in the second circuit.
They said that it's fair use, because you, we, you can, it's for a transformative use to be able to say I'm, I Google and indexing all these books, and I Google can reproduce three or four pages of verbatim text from those books and that is for use as transformative.
Compare that with the large language models that again aren't even taking those expressions of those books, not even taking three pages of those expressions, but rather it's just taking the ideas of those books, and then reconstituting ideas not expressions but reconstituting ideas there.
So if fair use under Google books, then wouldn't it also be fair use under large language models.
The Google books has been argued to be invasive and non non conforming to copyright models, but yeah I agree with you I think that's right.
It's interesting that you see this as a separation of idea from expression, in terms of building with the knowledge base and which all of these things are based, and it's very interesting.
I think that it's because if you look at the models, the large language models, there is not an expression to be found in those models, there's merely ideas, it takes in vector space it takes the idea of Bob Dylan ism right, it takes the idea of, you know, of any human
language, and it doesn't, it doesn't have any Bob Dylan's lyrics in the system, it merely has the idea of what Bob Dylan, his use of language, right. So, anyway, there is no not an expression to be found.
Okay, that's great.
So, maybe I should also introduce myself a little.
I'm from Poland, University of Białystok, close to Warsaw. So, yeah, just to make it clear introduce myself. So, a couple of points that I mentioned here I think that reference to ideas and expressions may also have a little deeper connection to syntax and semantics of artificial intelligence
that artificial intelligence, at least as currently seen it's shuffling this shuffling the symbols physical symbols but it doesn't have mental content attached to it so when I say, I like ice cream.
As people have mental content attached, what is it ice cream. So, I think what it also implies here is that the machine is not kind of have this deeper understanding but it is shuffling the information the data.
And I think also, maybe regarding the authorship point I will start from the end from because I made a couple of notes. So, maybe it's not authorship that we can grant but I mentioned, so we can raise an awareness that this technology has participated in creation of this and that.
And because authorship implies a moral status and currently only humans have moral status. Of course, there were proposition in European Commission of electronic persons or electronic persons but it was kept just as an idea so it didn't come into life as an actual concept.
Not yet, and maybe not in very close future, but as I mentioned the idea of moral status, which also I think you called as legal personhood.
So, there is a deep ontological question. So, what is machine and how do we see it, do we see it as a, like, conscious or unconscious because we have animals as well we have children whose creation, for example, is kind of under parent guidance or animals.
When they create, it kind of legally belongs to the owner of the animal. So, where do we position artificial intelligence and whether we should position it on the scale of living or spectrum because we also have to understand the living beings, because non-living come into play as well.
So, it's important to think it through, I guess, and yes, in regards in the free market that I mentioned, I think it's, he mentioned exactly the looser control, and I guess this looser control is related to free market.
So, there is a kind of possible challenge or maybe even an issue that free market can lead to autocratic behavior in the sense that big companies own it.
So, basically, we have a free market economy, mostly, almost everywhere, and the thing is that now the big corporations control our, for example, media, like Facebook, who is meta, so they own many things, as well as other companies that own.
So, of course, I find it that governmental intervention is necessary, but not like that they control everything, but a certain degree of mix of support and just guidance, how do we guide the ethically,
development, ethical development of artificial intelligence, which also matters in these questions, because ethics is, can be both as well-being for human and understanding how do the grand authorship, how to make it right.
Do you think it's possible to write a description of what an ethical person, an ethical AI could actually be?
So, there is, of course, this is a very big question, how do we express our moral things, how do we can compute it? We can't explain the moral to each other, to humans, how we explain it to machine, into the language of machine.
So, currently, there are ethical ideas, what AI could look like, which is kind of respectful in a sense to privacy. It also can be that collection of data, the quality, so it's not biased, which is very important.
There's a very big topic right now in artificial intelligence, avoidance of bias, and because when artificial intelligence is biased, it reproduces inequality.
When it's put in the world, it can end up very not well. So, there is big fear that artificial intelligence, not even fear, but idea that artificial intelligence may harm us not because it's too smart and will outsmart us, but because it's not smart enough.
And it will reinforce these issues that we have. So, question of ethics of artificial intelligence is questions about us.
So, I think in all of these questions is how do we actually perceive artificial intelligence and how do we position it with ourselves, because we make the law, and this is a technology.
So, what place does it have? Of course, we can't really answer this all now, and maybe not many minds come together and they still can't solve it, but it's something to look forward to.
Yeah, so the question coming back to it, so what is ethical, I could be, well, we can now maybe realize the main points, but exact ethical ideas. I'm not sure even if we can express them, but we can understand some, what is good, more or less, what is,
what is beneficial, what is non beneficial. So, this is what we can also understand, but also another point, who does it benefit.
So, I think it's all for now.
Sorry.
It's interesting that you, that you're, you chose that particular point of view, I think you, you seem, you seem to have thought through this, this whole issue rather, rather nicely.
And you seem, you seem to be fairly certain that some of these things can be done. And yet, those of us who've tried, feel it's really hard.
So, I think, I think, I think that's what you're saying is that this is, this is a goal, not a place where we are at the moment.
Definitely, there is something to work tovert to. It is a new technology. It is not like so new that artificial intelligence is something just came up.
It's been very long, actually quite long in history, or even if not artificial intelligence as we have today, the idea of artificial intelligence been for long.
And what I mean that indeed, we have a goal to work because it's like when first internet came, it was a big change. So how did internet and ball, what was done for this.
I see it kind of shift similar to the internet, but it still has its own things and yeah, and thank you for pointing out I'm actually writing my thesis on this topic.
And I study philosophy and ethics. So maybe this is where my perspective coming from as well.
Yes.
Do you have any more comments out there.
I would like to warn that any kind of attempt to bind the person to legal, moral or ethical issues is very dangerous.
Because you and me may have a different view on what is moral, what is legal, what is ethical.
That's first. The second one, I just want to remind you that there is an old test proposed about consistency from Martin Minsky.
Artificial intelligence is artificial intelligence if you can't differentiate it from another human.
I don't remember exact voting, but it's kind of. And finally, I would like to mention that there are two levels of that and it seems like we sleep into a person and a human.
But in currently in many development in technology assumes artificial intelligence and much less than that.
There are two which could help to produce inventions or development or whatever.
So for that reason, it's a way interesting who would own the result because one company may produce a tool.
Even actually more companies may produce a tool.
And another company may just use that tool to create invention or some kind of work which may be copyrighted or whatever, who owns this.
That's an issue because if we default without tool creator copyrights, you have a right on copyright.
It's a path to hell, basically, in my mind.
Otherwise, it's actually where tool creators spent very big efforts to make that working.
So some, I mean some thin line need to be put here.
Maybe I just think about that if there is no explicit legal agreement between tool creator and user of that tool, when by default the right of work belongs to user of that tool.
Yeah, again, I'm talking about what is usually assumed right now, what is artificial intelligence, it's not here about human or whatever, whatever.
We close to that but we still don't do not jump to this.
I mean to have human in a computer or in somewhere.
Okay, please go ahead.
Do you have a comment here.
Yeah, so why we were talking about this because it was actually a question, how do we, whether the artificial intelligence should be given a legal person hood and how do we perceive it so this is reason why I opened the discussion.
I will start from the beginning so we don't know what is moral for everyone. Therefore, we should not be concerned with this. It's a fine that quite.
I don't know how to explain but we should not give up on the morality and ethics, if we have a differences. It's like we, it is commonly perceived that murder, for example, is not good.
It is unethical. So to say, in the softest sense. So, it is something common. Most of us understand it.
And we just should look toward common grounds, of course it may not be so simple. Also, artificial technology is not fully international so each country has their own but international technology should have also aim for the international
which is very important in the development, as well as copyright and the, in terms of law.
So, the second about the argument of means key so whether if machine can imitate consciousness does it has consciousness.
It is that during test as well. What states it, and as I mentioned before, imitation is not recreation.
So imitation of consciousness does not mean you have consciousness just because you can imitate it very well.
Sorry for interrupting you here.
But you can say that it is imitation.
If you cannot detect that you cannot say.
Okay, but what to say, it's like, I can produce such a beautiful artificial flower, you won't be able even to distinguish it's real.
Does it make it real?
You don't know.
I don't know as a customer, but the creator knows.
The fact of ontology of its creation is known. It is artificial.
It's not real.
Well, it may be many reasons for creator to hide that or whatever.
It's also a rise.
It's also as an issue if women create a child.
What is it?
This is a different question for you. It may look similar or same, but it is very different.
Women don't give birth to artificial children.
This is a living human being who possess a full moral status, like you and me, I guess.
So this is totally another topic, but let's come back to the artificial intelligence and the example of flower.
So in this, they may hide it, but it doesn't change the fact that it is artificial.
Okay, let's assume that the creator of artificial flower dies.
You don't know.
Creator died.
He don't live anymore.
This is already some sort of fairy tale or a story.
Okay, you have a flower. You cannot ask creator because creator died.
So this is already certain, I don't know, a puzzle, but the idea of creation of artificial thing does not make it real.
The creator died, whether it was hidden, whether it was sent to space, I don't know, the thing, if it's artificial, it doesn't make it real.
I hope it's quite clear.
The point is that we, as mentioned at the beginning, that we moved over the other idea of moral status of artificial intelligence.
But indeed, it's important to understand now it is just a technology. It's complicated, powerful technology.
It's important to understand how we deal with it now, but it's also important to keep in mind the possible changes.
So certain perspective to the future should be kept, how it may change, but we need to focus at present, because going too much into what it could be, even we never may ever reach singularity.
It may not ever happen.
And it is like this, like that. So, and it is quite prevailing. So, we have to focus issues we have now, like bias in artificial intelligence, the ownership, authorship, and the big tech.
So, which is again the question of ownership and authorship, because if it's such powerful technology owned by single, like one, two companies.
It's such a big issue that because such technology will be owned by a single person who can basically decide and reinforce wherever they desire, which is, I think, important to regulate.
That's, that's definitely an issue here. And that's one of the, one of the big questions that we have is that we need to somehow arrange that this technology is widely available to everybody without much concern about their economic status and
ownership with other entities. And, or do we just allow the large monolithic companies to battle over the intellects of the of the populace which interact with these AIs.
I don't know. It's, it's, it's a difficult question.
It's, it's exactly what we're trying to figure out I know. And the thing is, I don't think we have a whole lot of time. I think that this is a powerful enough technology that we'll see it moving rather rapidly into almost everything we do.
And I don't know whether it were too late to actually build a control system for it or not.
But Dennis, I have a response to the points which are, I think, I think the second paper I posted on there for, I think that will be right up your alley when you mentioned about the vectorization.
The findings of the courts when, when they found was the transformation between the content. So in the courts, the only people really making a stink really are intellectual property owners existing intellectual property owners that are assessing really like staying up at night and
that someone used in their training corpus or their transfer learning corpus copyrighted goods. Right. And they, and by in by a function of their process made copies and use those as inspiration for the generating the model and so the model is in a sense has the vibe.
It's kind of like Billy Joel had the vibe of Bob Dylan when he sang piano man because it sounds a lot like tambourine man. Right. So, the, so it's almost as if the human influence and transfer learning but the copyright owners would be trying to prevent that because there was an actual objective
copying made, but the courts found that the transformation to a data matrix like a mate like a vectorization of that is enough of a transformation for it to be transformative and therefore fair use is all good.
So how do you define transformative just because that's the trans. Yeah, it's always been a it's always kind of a slippery slope between transformative work and derivative work derivative work is a like the original enough and this can be subjective and it depends on the type of content we're using if it's a book, a story versus a movie versus
a song, right, different types is this is a is a tonal structure the same are the sound progressions are the notes of progressions the same for how many bars.
And you have music colleges will go through an entire piece just to find enough overlap enough overfit to blame whoever made the new side through AI or on their own to claim copyright violation.
So it varies on content on the on the on the type of media we're talking about like what is derivative or versus transformative.
But in the case of data when content becomes a data form, it is transformed. The courts did not extrapolate to other media forums like film or music, but it is a logical extension of the reasoning that you could indeed do that.
And that really puts a brakes on copyright owners arguments against, you know, against anyone using AI, and makes the admin you insist this is a lot more palatable. Right. Otherwise, they'll they'll just sort of this kind of
they'll never get anywhere it will be an argument that goes and doesn't go anywhere. But to answer the question about moral, moral rights, I'm assuming you're referencing Conn I that's the last time I heard it in the legal philosophy and it was the moral rights and those are continental ideas,
at least in the US and the UK. That's a different story right and that's it's applicability, applicability to an extension of the self. Right so in the United States, the self ends with a self ends.
Right and privacy laws may extend that the health like hip or whatever. But so that the moral rights argument in the United States and might be a hard sell, I think you're right to much easier sell in the UK in the content.
The European copyright law has a has a concept from France of moral right, which is a right that cannot be sold or taken away.
Correct and it's an extent and it goes beyond it goes into personhood that anything that a person like your visage, the things that you make it's like you put your soul into it I mean they took that metaphor, literally, right so it's, it's extension of the person.
I think if you're going to think about it internationally we'll run into the same things kinds of conundrums that we get into in privacy right the GDPR provides the kinds of protections for European citizenship data that we don't afford here for American citizens so
there's weird space like well, are we going to become divergent in our international treaty obligations to observe copyright right if we can agree on whether the AI, even by using an original work to learn to make its own original
original work has in fact violated the moral rights of an existing author or person or photographer. So that's a that's a more but a legal person is a different definition than a moral person, and we're talking about two different things it seems like if we're going to start
talking about AI as a moral person we have to do that first in an argument that we in a way that we can all get on board, and then try to sell that to the policymakers who are just thinking of legal persons.
Otherwise, they'll be like well that's a nice argument congratulations but you know it has it's not practical, and so they'll build a mirror.
Do you really want to leave leave to the policymakers decide no but we need to get on it because we need to get on it right because people are doing it highly paid attorneys for the copyright or industry and media industries are on it.
Yes, I know.
You know, so I hope you enjoy that one I think your point is quite correct that this is the vectorization changes what that thing is. Yeah.
And the transformational transformational change is one of the the arguments for allowing for use.
And it's not been it's not my it's still case law has been not been migrated into the actual actual copyright law itself I don't believe right yeah so transformative.
I just want to be press transformative any use. Therefore, the use of the original content you make copies you perform it on. Doesn't matter it was fair, because at the, at the other end, you produce something unique, but also want to point out if the courts that found for the rationale behind
the creation of content into data, also forgot to cycle back to the market so in other words, what if I take a corpus of music, and I design, and I, you know, I transfer and something and thing makes music.
Right and then I take that music and sell it back in the same market, in which I drew the music from that was never addressed and in the findings of the court. That's a, that's the kind of words waiting to be open and it will.
That will be open to have your hand go forward.
I think was first so I can go.
Oh, he's over there okay.
I'm able to speak.
So the. So to the first point, I'm looking forward to reading that that article, as soon as I'm in front of the machine. To the second point, there's another analogy with Ram. You remember the late 1990s, nearly 2000s, there was a copy made in Ram, but it was a
transitory copy. It was there and then it's gone similar with vectorization right you've vectorized the music and then you jettison the expression right all that's left is residual ideas so anyway that's all I wanted to say that that's a second analogy of why this is
not a copy of the original and to the third point about essentially a snake eating its own tail where the machine is going to eat more of the machine's output which is going to eat more of the machine's output.
That is something that yeah I worry about millions and trillions of monkeys typing Shakespeare right and then we just the outputs just merely mush, but yeah that's that's another reason why the output should not be copyrightable.
Okay.
That's an interesting thought. Okay, next I guess.
Yeah, so I had an idea during the first talk, and he was mentioning this also a question of authorship and how do we manage this and gratis so I was thinking maybe about.
Maybe or pointing out very kind of in a clear manner that artificial intelligence technology is present. And I think it's also easier in terms of legal reinforcement.
So in this sense we may not okay deal on who is the author whether AI is the author, but we can make it clear that it has participated.
Another further step could be we could mention what the percentage that artificial intelligence contribute. It may also not be as like accurate like 67.5 or something but it could be like 60 to 70 30 to 40 something like that.
So this idea I had that we should not hide the fact that technology as artificial intelligence participate, but show it. And I think, again, it's maybe easier to legally reinforce since it doesn't require us to deal.
What is AI, and should we give it authorship. Well, we can consider it from a more technical point of view, and say, yes, it is just a technology, maybe at present.
We just need to show it has taken part because it also influence our judgment of the work. So how do we perceive the work.
Especially why percentage is important. If artificial intelligence create 90% and human input is 10. We may question like what is the input. Of course, it may be significant because guidance management is also a work and sometimes very, very significant which creates actually the flow.
So, yes, this is the idea I got during the talk. And yes, I think I had another point also mentioned about the circularity that AI keeps feeding on machine.
Indeed, I think this is where the significant human element comes into play that we need actually create ideas, more like human ideas, because of course, big part of our history and knowledge is combining knowledge previous knowledge into new one and then into new one so this kind of mixing and matching
but there's also something creation of new which machine may not able to do. Of course, it takes time to explore what it can with it cannot what we can what we cannot.
So, also, it may not should be seen as competition with machine, but we should maybe work together toward a common goal, whether human or machine achieves it first, we set it higher than.
So, this is one of the things that we have in the Western culture, the narrative of competition of technology on human, which also can be seen in the times like, like, Kant, Kantian philosophy, and also transcendence which also goes back to Plato.
It's also going beyond human self but it's a little bit different but still interconnected that yes this kind of difference. Again, what makes us human, but back to the topic.
More concrete and present because it's all about human nature as well, but yeah so awareness pointing it out percentage at best.
I was just saying it has taken place and we should show it. And yes, of course, it may all seem very confusing and difficult as follows implementing ethics. It's very important, but we should not give up.
This is why we're here. This is why we're working on this and thinking so we should not give up when it seems challenging because food is challenge we will achieve something great.
I think I think we have an opportunity to, to make a very large difference in how this shift of technology is going to impact everything else.
And my concern is that right now, the drive is to bigger and greater profits for larger organizations, and increasing the cost of being of existence for people who are in the middle and lower range range of things.
And maybe that's not the ideal thing to do.
And so, I think we need to to examine what is possible, because we have this.
Well, I think I think the, the GPG chat is really, it's magical.
It's also wrong sometimes.
I mean, because it says it works only the semi addicts of the, of the internal data that's been stored, and not upon any understanding of what's really happening.
And that may be the real difference between AI is and humans for quite a while.
If you can't tell the difference between an AI and a human by asking questions.
It's sort of hard to say that they're very different.
You know, we're experimentalists and the way we deal with the universe.
And so we need to work at it.
Go ahead.
I think that during test is still valid.
So it can be seen, as you mentioned that we can distinguish, not as test for existing that it is real, but as a evaluative test that it is good technology if it can replicate it so well, it means it's very good.
Be more on an assessment evaluative side, rather than saying that it's actually has something, of course, it may have.
But as for example, John Seattle pointed out, creating consciousness takes something more than just syntax, which you mentioned shuffling also this ideas that it doesn't have understanding, which is semantics, attaching mental content.
So, yes, it can be very powerful, as I mentioned before, and it's more can be to the side of assessment again.
So, yes, I think this is pretty much it.
Okay.
Send a link for so I mentioned that Paul my buddy Paul is working for Getty images and he's in Europe trying to get some sort of regulation and I'm going to send this link up.
So, a lot of the Getty images are not the Getty folks are now having models sign consent forms that they're biometrics their images may be used for biometric or AI training.
Right, so this is like, but that's an extension of the moral person, right, because well wait a minute right so it's very clear that agencies advocating for this sort of control they are going to leverage that argument you might want to, you might
want to review some of their position papers because it might give you some some ammunition for your argument right to create a much more.
I guess not to argue for artificial intelligence personhood but rather that.
Well, I guess that people that there is some form of extension of the moral rights and that is enough to give artificial intelligence, put it put some sort of regulatory fence around it.
In the way copyright may not be the best regulatory fence it's it has showing effects and.
People who've been arguing that we should have a different category of intellectual property, which is that created by eyes.
Or make the artificial intelligence of public utility, kind of like telephone lines and electricity.
Yeah, our experience with telephone companies and power companies is great.
Yeah, it took a few decades.
I wonder though I mean that we're talking kind of quasi personhood for machines, but at this point they're all tools, right, this is a tool that I, and when I created my 417 billion melodies I hit a button and then it output right so I.
I think it is not an agent of me it is merely a tool much like a word processors a tool so I think I think we're getting ahead of ourselves to say that it's it's fully autonomous because it's not so I think that's that's thing number one.
Thing number two is that we have kind of quasi autonomous bots already. If this happens then that I do this right.
So that is you know if the stock price dips below this then sell my thing right.
Well, no, I mean it's still a tool right, but it but it seems autonomous because it's doing it by itself. So anyway, so I mostly I'm thinking this, this idea of providing personhood for the machine I think that's putting our, you know, going over our skis a bit and I don't think we're quite there yet.
The second thing is talking, I made for somebody else was talking about to what extent is there a human additions to the machine created works.
And so I would say that that that's really tricky because I, you know, you can go to boomie calm and say I want an electronic dance music that's 120 beats per minute, and it outputs a fully realized song that under my proposition is is a fully machine created
therefore uncopy rightable. If I change one quarter note.
Is that does that make a copy rightable. Same thing with chat GBT right if I change one letter, or if I change a punctuation mark right is that now copyrightable and putting a threshold on human contribution to machine created work.
I think it's that's that's folly.
I think it's worse than that I think it's criminal.
That's a different matter.
I mean, our feelings on it are notwithstanding our, I mean, I hear you in the quarter, the way that things are going, those are irrelevant on how we feel about it is relevant.
The copy owners are going to want humans to have a lot of input before they can, they can have the copyright but people using AI to be creative, or to have stuff done quicker, maybe get a story started.
They want minimal, like yeah, a space something and which leads me to an analog if you're a fans of literature on Tom Wolf wrote you can never go home again, but his relationship with his editor was quite was quite intimate they were quite good friends and his editor did a lot of work to shape.
So to show the final product right so is should his editor had been a co creator of that we never we just put the editor was there we don't realize how much work creative work actually editors do good editors.
So, the analog in our life is that the many nuances or someone who works a lot doesn't, you know, if you said if you were the first to get the ideas on paper or even put a dot and anything that subsequent is someone helping you but you're the original right so I think the
analog in real life in between humans exists.
And it's just an extension of that way.
That's right. And if Tom Wolf didn't disclose that editor, the copyright office would never know that that that was and that's the other questions.
And so I asked my attorney friends I said so we're going to get subpoenas to look into people's hard drives to see if they're they're they're training court corpora had copyrighted works.
They're going to hit delete right or they're going to, you know, they're going to fry that it's going to vanish.
The thing is that the copyrighted works that are used in some sort of information knowledge base that's used to drive to drive things like chat GPT is is is a reduction it's it's it's been decomposed into pieces that are very small and mixed with other pieces
structure discovered amongst that. And it's not at all clear that that there's much of the actual original copyrighted material there.
100% agree and I would also say that if I went to booby.com exported a thing and then filed it with the copyright office, they would not know that it was machine created right the reason that Thaler and the Thaler lawsuit got dinged is because
Thaler said yet the machine created it. If I don't disclose that they're not going to know so we're on no legal obligations right there are no legal obligations disclose.
That's right so so number one is the copyright office going to ask hey is it is there any amount of machine createable portion of this that's maybe one one way out of this.
The thing too is that if I filed with the copyright office, they don't ask that I get a presumption of copyright on the thing that I've just created. If I sue somebody over that thing.
Then they don't know that that was machine created, right. And so that that am I going to be able and am I going to be required to disclose maybe in a deposition that how what percentage of this was machine created, therefore uncopyrightable.
Anyway, that's it.
You're not able to tell that.
I could lie, right. I know you may not know me.
Oh, right, right. Yes, sir.
What percentage is that is how much glad.
Yeah, I may try maybe to address it from the last so the question also editors, how much actually one person may put work into work.
They may publish and their skills, while the other one is praise so this is common even among humans. And it's part of the research integrity or just general publishing integrity that you should also make authors in right order.
If it's scientific paper, and like that you should actually assign otherwise it is a fraud or misrepresentation, which is also not good.
Yeah, another question that was before is that we were already kind of currently agreed, I think it is also more widely agree that it is at the technology, it is technology it is not a person artificial intelligence so as pointed out.
And it is not fully autonomous in the yet the consequences that artificial intelligence already do has ethical implications on humans on us, for example, self driving cars.
So of course, here is a topic more of the copyrights but it's also important on this more simple example how ethical in ideas actually can be significant also in copyrights, because it may be more intricate but ethical ideas are very important in artificial
intelligence, how it's built, and how it operates, because, as I mentioned, it collects data and uses this data. So how it will be used because also, it's important to think of artificial intelligence not only as author.
It also present in governmental systems, for example, compass, artificial intelligence algorithm that helps in courts to convict or either make certain decision for the court.
This is also not only about ownership, it's also about the court system and how it is embedded in the government, which also I think important thing. So, yes, another thing was mentioned about limiting AI data how it feeds on it.
So, of course, model release forms is very popular thing, which means that model may not give consent and their photos were used. This is where popular or so not before artificial intelligence and still is reinforced by artificial intelligence.
So, one idea that I also had is that maybe we could put certain limits how AI feeds on the data, because in art, it's very big issue in terms of copyrights and ownership when AI copies styles of artists.
And these artists lose their income, because people, they can just order from artificial intelligence for much lower price in any way they want, and then they have to pay artists while machine feed on artists style.
So, I think it's a fraud, but I don't know how to solve it yet. But, yes, so maybe there could be limits how it feeds on data. So, either say that collaboration with artists, so we use your style, we give you some a fee for this.
So, you have this system of payment and the contract, which is I find very favorable, but it's also important to understand when AI feeds on someone's style and when not.
So hard to find styles.
Yes.
For example, there's a provision in the copyright law that says you cannot copyright a fund.
The reason you can't copyright a font is that it's not possible in any reasonable technology to compare one font to another.
It is so, but certain also artistic styles, they're so recognizable, like Picasso, for example.
Like, it may be a little bit more free in terms of Picasso, but there are modern artists who actually experienced this because their style is so distinct.
Like there was Brazil, not Brazilian Spanish artists who has such also abstract type of style and artificial intelligence became really popular. Many people tried to recreate it.
So, this is more modern context so how it copies the styles.
But I wondered though the the style if I as a human sound like Bob Dylan.
So I sing in the style of Bob Dylan Bob Dylan can't sue me for copyright infringement, because that's, you know, how many singers sound like Bob Dylan right how many, how many people look like, you know, painted like Matisse right so that the style of somebody is not copyrightable.
So, similarly, if a machine copies the style of something is that copyrightable, and I'd argue no right, because it is the idea of Matisse, it is the idea of Picasso, it is the idea of Bob Dylan, and again ideas are not copyrightable only the expressions of those ideas.
So as long as I'm not copying the expression of Bob Dylan, as long as I'm not copying the expression of Matisse, the expression of Picasso, there's no copyright infringement.
So can you really copy the idea.
You think that Bob Dylan singing style is not copyrightable.
I think it's not.
Well but but how many, how many singers sound like Bob Dylan, lots of them are Billy Joe. I mean if you're a fan of Billy Joe and you're a fan of Bob Dylan and you know piano man, sing as a song you're a piano man and then hey Mr tambourine I mean seriously, and then I've been to a Billy Joe event where
you sit and ask questions with the guy and ask them so what's the deal with piano man.
Bob Dylan from is right so I mean it, but we don't hold artists accountable for these sorts of what what otherwise would be right but but we're trying to hold a accountable for these sorts of transgressions transgressions.
They're not really they're just the way we do things. I think what happens is human people see that our machine is doing exactly what we did but in a computational way and then we feel a lot less special about ourselves.
So the basic response is to sort of go after you know find some element of our uniqueness but the fact is it's it's just not that's right it's a variance.
And I would also say that there's there's a trademark law, right so if I were to pass something off as Bob Dylan or pass something off as you know Billy Joel.
That would be trademark so there's a bunch of cases where there's there's a Vanna white said that you have a robot that looks like me there's Tom weight said you sound like me so there's there's the trademark aspect of it.
And then is not doing that you know if I use chat GPT say right in the style of Tom Wolf. And then I put it out as something that is Tom Wolf like that might be a trademark infringement, but that would not be a copyright infringement.
Okay.
Well, I think I think that's, that's interesting because I think there is case law.
I put my finger on it immediately where the, the expression the style of writing is in fact, what got copyrighted in the story content was nothing.
The problem is, if you really, in my opinion, the copyright law does not really differentiate things properly in a way that you can actually apply it.
It's not true of patent law in some ways as well. It's very very difficult to write a patent that is bulletproof and doesn't somehow have prior out out there that will kill it.
It's very hard. And, you know, we, we chose to, to maintain patterns of protection which go back to 100 years 200 years and more.
And it's very difficult to have anticipated 200 years ago, the conflicts that we have, trying to figure out whether chat GPT is just going to be able to be make output which is copyright or not.
In terms of what what we're doing today. I don't remember the exact number, but I think about half of Forbes magazine is generated by a computer from from financial data without the interference of any human being.
There's a guy that built build a system that looked a lot like GPT.
Some years ago, who's a professor at North, Northwestern and started a little company and immediately got all of the major financial and sports magazines on his, his customer list and you haven't heard of her to him at all, but he puts out lots of magazines.
That goes to, you cannot copyright facts as well so if if a machine is merely taking financial data facts, and then just expressing those facts that is not copyrightable there's nothing creative or original about expression of facts.
And it had it had a knob in the in the UI to allow you to choose the financial commenter style was you wanted to use for each particular article. And so it's, it's, it's kind of it's going to have some knowledge of what that expression is in some sense, because it makes it
something that's recognizable by humans.
I suppose that also recognizable by machine as a result.
We're coming up to 530 and I gotta say I think I really like this. Could you say the last thing here. And then if everybody, if everybody who talk would send me their email address I'd really appreciate that.
Okay, thank you so yeah so because it's maybe hard to understand maybe the copyright and ownership concept this is why I thought the awareness is much easier, and at the same time it has similar impact to the ownership and copyright notions.
So that we kind of show that in this article AI participated, because of course data.
Why artificial intelligence is so powerful and good because it can process much more data than a human can. So it can feeds on so many different types of information, and we make sense of it.
Or the I may pre make sense of it and then we kind of at best it would be very favorable if we control this process and say yes this is correct conclusion this is maybe not.
This is why the awareness of for example in the articles we can point maybe not even percentage that would be maybe too good, though can also raise questions that yeah you did 30% as a human but this 30% can have a big impact.
So, yes, back to the awareness, and it may be a good solution, as I see it also, because we don't have to really go deeper into what AI actually is, but at the same time, it has similar impact as the ownership dispute.
Is anybody want to say the very, very last word.
Anyhow, thank you very much it was really I, I think this is a successful experiment I was really pleased that we ended up having a nice, nice collection of comments, and I think we actually move the ball forwards.
Thank you very much.
And for your participation and call it good evening. Thank you.
Thank you very much.
