Hello friends this is Moin from Curious Techie and in this video I'm going to
show you how to resolve multi array error which is going to be occurred in
Python programming language. So in this video I'm going to take cues of OpenCB
library and how the multi array error occurred in OpenCB while importing
OpenCB library. So let's get started. Open up your Python ideally and I'll
just import numpy package. Importing numpy package, import numpy. Yes this is
successfully installed so we are getting like this. So while importing CV2, that
means OpenCB, I will get this traceback error called as multi array error and
something numpy version x something. So this this usually occurs when one of the
libraries and Python programming language isn't compatible with some
of the versions of the libraries. So you have to you have to install the
compatible version which is suitable. So I'm using Python 2.7.5 version here and
let me show you the numpy version.
So my numpy version is 1.9.2 and my numpy path is installed at so this is the
path where I installed this numpy package. So I'm using latest version of
numpy 1.9.2 and I'm using OpenCB of 3.2. So that is the latest version of OpenCB.
So here usually the error occurs because of OpenCB 3.2. It is an
incompatible with Python 2.7.5. So we have to install 2.4 to be
compatible with Python 2.7.5. So let's remove OpenCB 3.2 from where it
is being installed. So go to C drive and go to C drive and delete this OpenCB
folder from here.
Okay so after deleting this go to Python file Python 27 and go to
libraries and site packages. So here you will find Cb2 file and just delete that
file. So it is a 3.2 version file. So just download the OpenCB 2.4 version. I will
provide the link in the description below so you can download it from there.
Just install the OpenCB 2.4 which is compatible with Python 2.7.5. So just
install this package in C drive. So after successfully extracting all the files
in C drive just go to just open that folder and go to build and just open
Python and select your desired PC version. I'm using 32 bit here. So copy this
Cb2 file and do as usual paste it in Python 27 folder, libraries, site
packages and just paste it here. Now just open the Python software. Let's take this.
Yeah I'm importing NAMPAI here. So NAMPAI is correctly installed. So while importing
Cb2 let's see what happens. Yeah that's a difference. It is compatible and it supports
Cb2 now. So that's why you get an error. So you have to change the versions of
your libraries. So that's it friends. Hope this video helped you. If not please
comment your issue in the comment bar and friends don't forget to give a
huge thumbs up on our video and please subscribe to our channel to get latest
technical updates and this is Mohin from Curious Techie signing off.
