What's up everybody? I am the professor Junichiro Swanson, and today we are going to be covering
a very detailed worked example from physics. It is a sort of homework or exam question
that you may find in classical mechanics or in statics, and it is pertaining to static
friction, so if you are in one of those courses, you'll probably find it in the static friction
unit of such courses. And if you got this question on an exam, it would probably be
a final exam, and if a teacher is being fair, you'd probably give you 40 minutes for it.
It looks like a simple question. This is actually the whole thing about this line, but it is
actually sort of hard mode. And if you got this question on an exam, you probably would
not want to be writing this many words on it, because you wouldn't have enough time for
that. However, I decided that I'm going to write a whole lot of words on here, in addition
to the equations and diagrams and such. And I'm also going to be uploading a scanned
version of this, so this tutorial does include a little more discussion than you'll find
on these papers, and then you can watch that, and then afterwards you can read the scanned
version to review it. And this example comes from the book called Applied Mechanics for
Engineering Technology by Keith M. Walker, 8th edition, and it is number 719 in that book.
There will also be some discussion of some topics you'll typically find in courses other
than statics, such as formal logic, linear algebra, and TI programming. But just enough
of those things to be super useful, if you have not studied any of these courses, even
better, you're going to learn a lot today. Alright, let's have a look here at what we
are being asked to solve. We have this diagram here, there's a ramp, block B is resting on
top of that ramp, block A is resting on top of block B, we've got angle 10 degrees here,
15 degrees here, 15 pounds and 5 pounds, and a force P here, and it says determine the
minimum force P that will cause impending motion, the coefficient of static friction
for all surfaces is 0.25. So the way to think of this is first imagine there's no force
there at all, and we just leave these things here. Now there are angles, but there's enough
friction there that even though this ramp is at a little angle there, and there's an
angle here, there's enough friction that everything's going to be held static, no sliding yet.
And now we imagine that we apply this force very, very gradually. Start with one little
ounce of force pushing there, when it's one ounce of force it still won't be enough pushing
to cause stuff to be moving, there will still be enough friction to keep it static. And we
imagine we increase that force a little bit more, a little bit more, and how many pounds
will we have to be pushing there before something starts to move. And the reason why this is
sort of difficult is because there's two different ways that it might move, and we don't know
which of those is the one yet. So let's call them mode 1 and mode 2, and now just for a
second here, let's imagine that the ramp is made of rubber, let's imagine block A is
made of ice, and block B is made of a block of ice stapled rigidly to a block of rubber.
And in this situation the coefficient of static friction between these two surfaces would
be very great, the coefficient of static friction between these two surfaces would be very slight.
And now imagine that we start pushing block A with a force in this direction, and clearly
block A will slide to the left there, while there still remains enough static friction
here to prevent any movement between B and the ramp. Now let's also consider mode 2.
Suppose our ramp is made of ice, and suppose that block A is made of rubber, and suppose
that block B is made of, again, of a block of rubber stapled to a block of ice rigidly
that they act as one body, but now that the rubber is on the top and the ice is on the
bottom. Okay, so and now we apply a force here, and clearly what will happen is these
two will move together, there will be sliding along this pair of surfaces here, but there
will be enough static friction on the rubber to rubber contact that those will stay together.
Now our question said that the coefficient of friction for all surfaces is 0.25, so that's
what you'd get if basically all of them were metal, so that was just a little thought experiment
where we imagined mixing up the surface types. And here we have on one page mode 1 and mode
2, mode 1 sliding here, no sliding here, direction of motion here, mode 2 sliding here, no sliding
here, direction of motion there. Okay. Okay, and these words here basically is just what
I just said, assume it's static when the force is zero. As it's applied, there's two different
modes it might move with, this is just defining those two modes and words, and this says you
can make any variation of this you want. We just tried varying the coefficients of friction
to get a good sense of the two ways this might start moving, but you could switch up the angles,
say that's 20 degrees and that's 35 degrees, you could say this one's 20 pounds and this
one's 10 pounds, infinite variations on how you might vary this, and in some of those,
mode 1 will happen and in some of those, mode 2 will happen. Okay, now our solution strategy.
You have to start by guessing one of the modes. Let's say P1 is the amount of force that will
cause it to move, assuming mode 1 is the mode that will happen, P2 is the amount of force
that will cause it to move, assuming mode 2 is what will happen. Now the simplest way
to solve this is find P1 and find P2, so that's assume mode 1, find P in that mode,
assume mode 2 and find P in that mode, and if you do that, you just compare the two and
whichever one is less corresponds to the mode that will actually happen, and whichever one's more
is the mode that won't happen. There's a little variation on how you can do this, because what
you can do, if you have come up with your first guess and if you're confident in it, let's say
we guess mode 1, and let's say we're confident in that guess. What you can do, assume mode 1,
find how much force P there to cause it to move in mode 1, and then instead of solving for P2
and doing all the considerations for mode 2, what you can do is you can then do a check. And now
if this check, if it passes, then we know that mode 1 is the mode and we know the force then,
then we have our full solution and we don't even have to start calculating things in mode 2. Now
if you do mode 1 and then you do the check, and now if that check fails, then that means mode 1
actually wasn't the mode, and then you have to calculate mode 2 anyways. So this is a little
gamble, and it depends on how confident you are with your guess. Now if you're very confident,
you take this gamble and you pass the check. This check is a little less work than solving for
P2, so if you win that gamble, then you've saved yourself a little bit of time. If you lose the
gamble, let's say you're confident that mode 1 is the mode and then you solve for mode 1 and do
that check, and if that check fails, then you have to do mode 2 and you just cost yourself this
much extra time over this one. So this one you could call it hedging your bets, and this one
you could call it putting some poker chips on your first guess. Okay, still page 1 and at this
bottom of page 1, I've basically started explaining that. So this is saying you can solve for P1 and
solve for P2, and now on page 2, this says the second part of the thing I just said, it says you
can solve for P1 and do that check, and then if that check passes, then you don't have to solve for
P2. Okay, so let's start with the guess that mode 1 is what will happen, and to foreshadow, it's not.
So in this solution, I am going to be actually doing the gamble. We'll do solve for P1 and mode 1,
and then we'll do the check, and then the check will fail, and then we'll have to solve for P2
anyways. So that's why this is a very detailed solution. And the first time I actually came
across this one and solved it, my guess actually was mode 1, and then it was wrong, and then I did
do that check, and then I did do P2. Okay. So this again, in mode 1, there's impending motion between A
and B, a no impending motion between B and the ramp. So therefore, in mode 1, force of friction,
when I say F subscript FR, that's force of friction, when I say F subscript N, that's force normal,
or normal force, and AB means the force from A on B. So this, and then one is short for mode 1.
So FFR AB1 means the force of friction of A on B in mode 1. Mu is the coefficient of static friction,
and force FNAB1 is the normal force of A on B in mode 1. Okay. So in mode 1, force of friction
equals mu FN between A and B, and W's wall. But in mode 1, force of friction does not equal mu FN
between the wall and B. Well, it's actually a ramp, but I always use W for a wall or a ramp.
So FFR WB1 means the force of friction of the ramp on block B in mode 1. FN WB1 is force, the normal
force of the ramp on B in mode 1. So what do I mean by this? Let's recall a very simple situation here.
Let's say this is a very heavy weight, 10,000 pounds. There's a gravity force on it pulling down,
normal force pushing up, and because this is a horizontal surface, the normal force and the
gravity force will be equal. And now let's say we push on this to the side with a very, very light
force, and let's assume mu is 0.25. It's like metal on metal. If we push it with a very, very,
very light force here, there will be a friction force here to counter that. But of course, if this
is a very light force, and this is 10,000 pounds, so FN is 10,000 pounds, FFR is a tiny, tiny force.
Obviously, force friction over force normal is not 0.25, it's maybe 1 over 100. It's, if I were to
push this thing so hard, that motion is impending. That's when the friction force is, we say,
maxed, and then that's when the friction force equals mu times FN, okay? So mode 1,
in mode 1, we're assuming that as we apply this force, there's going to be sliding of A over
B, along B, between these two surfaces. Because we're assuming that, that means that the force
friction there is maxed, which means that between these two surfaces, force friction equals mu times
FN. But there's no sliding here, which means the friction here is not maxed, which means that there
is some amount of friction force resisting this motion here. But since it's not maxed,
force friction is not equal to mu FN, force friction is less than mu times FN in mode 1,
assuming that's what happens. And, you know, as I foreshadowed, it's not what happens. But
since we're calculating P for mode 1, we use all these assumptions that pertain to mode 1.
Okay, let's get to work. If we do a free body diagram of A and then do force balances and math,
we can find min P for mode 1, but then a check is necessary. Okay, so this is body A, we got
four forces here, the gravity force, force P is inclined 10 degrees to the horizon that way.
And these two are along with this surface here, this surface is inclined five degrees to the
horizon that way, force friction is in line with it, force normal is perpendicular to it,
and they're perpendicular to each other, these two. Now I said here AB, and here I've said BA.
Okay, this AB means of A on B, BA means of B on A. And because of Newton's third law, we know those
are equal in magnitude and opposite in direction. So whatever the force of friction of B on A,
when we consider B, the force of friction will be in the opposite direction. Normal force of
B on A is this way, normal force of A on B, when we consider B, it will be that way. Okay.
Now, we know that force friction is mu times force normal, that's for these two, between A and B.
And we know mu is 0.25. So we know exactly the ratio of this to this. That means whenever this one
appears in an equation, as soon as this appears in an equation, we can just sub in 0.25 times this.
So we can always eliminate this in the equation and turn it into one of these. Because of that,
we can consider these two as one unknown. So how many unknowns are in this system? There's this one
effectively here, and one more here, that's a total of two unknowns. And if we do two force balances,
like in x and y, for example, that's two equations in two unknowns. And that means we can solve for
all of those. Okay. When I said a check is necessary. Okay, so we got two equations and two unknowns,
and we can solve for P. And then we'll have P1. And then we wouldn't even have to do a free body
diagram of B before finding P1. However, like in that two possible strategies thing, if then you're
doing the hedging your bets mode, you just go right into mode two and do whatever you need to do to
solve for P2. If we're doing the gamble, where we do the check, that means we've got to consider
block B in mode one. And we'll, I'll show you what that is later, what that check is. Okay,
so let's call the orthogonal directions x and y. And let's define an inclined coordinate system u
and v. And let's say that's inclined 10 degrees to the horizon this way. That's going to isolate this.
It's not going to isolate these, but let's just look ahead to our free body diagram of B.
It's also going to line up with these. So it's going to isolate this, this, and this.
That's not going to isolate these, but that's how we get the most amount of isolating things
with an inclined coordinate system. Now, after this solution, I'm going to show you a solution
that relies heavily on solvers for systems of linear equations. However, in this first solution,
the first time around, I'm going to assume that our only algebra skills are adding,
subtracting, multiplying, dividing, and calling sign and cost. I'm not going to assume we know
any more math than that. So that's why I want to use inclined coordinate systems to isolate things,
because I'm assuming that I want to simplify the algebra as much as possible. Okay, and the force
normal of A on B in mode one is equal to the force normal of B on A in mode one. And if you replace
those both ones with twos, that would also be true. And we know that by way of Newton's third law,
because they're equal in magnitude and opposite in direction. And a little note on notation,
we could use F with a hat to refer to a force of direction and F just a letter to refer to just
magnitude or we could use F just a letter to refer to a force of direction and F between
vertical bars to refer to just the magnitude. Let's just use the notation F in all cases,
or really in a diagram like this, we could say, oh, the arrow refers to the direction and the letter
F refers to just the magnitude in an equation or in a diagram. And now we're not using one
name to mean two different things. Okay, this here is just needlessly verbose. This shouldn't
really be here. It's just saying force friction between A, A, B of A on B or of B on A equals
mu times force normal of A on B or of B on A and both of those are equal to a quarter times force
normal just because mu equals a quarter. There's no reason for that to be there. Okay, next page.
Let's resolve force of gravity, force normal beyond A and force friction of beyond A into
u and v components. And that's what this is here. So there's a force of gravity, it's straight down
and we're going u component and v component. There's the force normal, it's up at this angle,
u component v component and the force of friction, it's at this angle u component and v component.
Now, remember, when you are resolving something into components, you want the arrowheads to be like
saying this arrow goes from here to here or this pair of arrows goes from here to here.
So this start and the end in the same place. I mean, this path and this path will start here,
both end here. So you want the arrowheads like that as opposed to when you're doing a force balance,
a geometric one, like let's say you have three forces and you know that they're balanced and
you want to do a geometric solution of that, then you want the arrowheads going in a cycle like that.
Okay, so make sure you don't get those mixed up. Okay, now if you don't want to skip any steps,
you know, you might say, oh yeah, what is so katoa size opposite over hypotenuse and then solve
for that component. So katoa cos is adjacent over hypotenuse and then solve for that component.
If you are in grade 10 math, then your teacher would probably want you to show all these steps,
but we can skip a little step. It's such a small step that you could call it skipping a half step
and you can call that perfectly acceptable. I'm not a big fan of skipping too many steps, but
just remember that when you're breaking something into components, like say,
U and V components, one of those components is always going to be the original times the sign
of something and one is always going to be the original times the cos of something. So
you're never going to have this term divided by this term or this term divided by this term.
Okay, so this force here, this component, is the original times the cos of this angle and this
component is the original times the sign of this angle. And likewise, the component is the
original times the cos of some angle and the component is the original times the sign of some
angle. Okay, so this gravity force, it's five pounds and I've reported these components as
five sine 10 degrees pounds and five cos 10 degrees pounds.
So let's talk about indicating the units.
This is what I just did there
and this is perfectly fine notation.
You could also say five pounds sine 10 degrees
and five pounds cos 10 degrees.
This is perfectly fine notation as well.
In both of these cases, it's a force, it's in pounds
and the rest of the things are unitless numbers.
Now you can report these components as,
oh, this component's five sine 10 degrees
and this component is five cos 10 degrees.
As long as you put a note somewhere
that says all force units are in pounds,
this is acceptable, I don't prefer it.
Or if you really wanted, you could report them
as five sine 10 degrees and five cos 10 degrees
and not include any note on the units,
like saying they're all in pounds.
This is not acceptable and some people will tell you
it is acceptable, they're wrong.
My preference is to indicate units
a lot of the times when it's optional.
This is from a different course,
homework from a very long time ago,
but I like to even go as far as including
all these big convolutions of units here
and making sure they resolve into the unit type
that it is expected.
I think it's a useful check as well as just good practice.
And it's sort of like grammar or let's think of it this way,
the classic textbook logical argument.
Premise one, all men are mortal.
Premise two, Socrates is a man.
Therefore, conclusion, Socrates is mortal.
This is a valid argument,
the truth of the premises guaranteed,
the truth of the conclusion.
Okay, let's say premise one, all men are mortal.
Premise two, Socrates.
Therefore, conclusion, Socrates is mortal.
This is not a valid argument.
There's something in this study of logic called
not even wrong, well, premise two here,
this is not even a statement, so it's not even wrong,
but it turns the whole thing into an invalid argument
just as well as if you had an incorrect statement there.
You do get to the right conclusion,
but since you bungled that,
it turns your whole thing into an invalid argument.
Likewise, if you report that this force is equal
to some unitless number and then just throw the word
pounds in at the end when you got to your solution,
you've just turned your whole solution
into an invalid argument.
It's not a cool thing to do.
You could call that pedantry, I call it good practice.
And while we're on that topic,
let's also mention keeping exact values.
Here's what I've just done.
I've reported these as five sine 10 degrees pounds
and five coast 10 degrees pounds.
If you prefer, you can start throwing in numbers
this early into the solution process.
If that's what thrills you,
you can put these little equations on the side,
resolve that into a rounded number.
This is a rounded number, it will actually go on forever
because it's a sine of an angle.
And then this also rounded number here.
And then on your triangle, you can say this is five pounds.
You can say this is 0.868 pounds
and you can say this is 4.92 pounds.
And then that gives you a little reality check
like this five, 4.92, yeah, that's almost as big as this
and this is about a six of that.
Okay, so that gives you a little check.
If you start introducing numbers in this early,
rounded numbers, you'll get more round off error
in your result.
If you don't care about that, then yeah,
go ahead and throw these numbers in as early as you want.
Okay, and at this time or probably earlier,
you might've been thinking, hold up,
how did you get all those angles on there?
How are you sure those are right?
I don't know where you're getting these numbers from.
Okay, now one of my favorite things about this question
is there's all these finicky small angles,
so your geometry game must be on point
in order to get all the solution stuff.
So let's look at this diagram here
and let's consider how we got from the original diagram
to these angles on this free body diagram of A.
I copied this straight out of the book
and it draws force P as perpendicular,
I mean, it's parallel to the top surface of this ramp
and it indicates the ramp is 10 degrees above the horizon,
so that's where I get this 10 here.
Preferentially, if I were designing this thing,
I would've made a little indicator there
that it's parallel or drawn another 10 degree indicator
there, but anyways, that's where I got that.
It's drawn parallel to this,
which is measured to the horizontal.
Now this five degree angle, how did I get this?
This is the sort of informal way
that I think of it this way.
So this is top surface of this ramp
is 10 degrees to horizontal.
Now this indicator here is saying that this angle,
the angle of this surface to this surface is 15 degrees.
So I just kind of like, think of it this way,
is put your hands like this
and now for this 10 degree angle,
incline them both 10 degrees to that
and then for this 15 degree angle,
incline this one 15 degrees to that.
So the 10 of these and 15 of those,
well, these are in opposite directions.
So you can say cancel out 10 of one and 10 of the other
and this is five degrees left.
That's the informal way.
If you wanted to be more formal about it,
you could take this diagram here,
draw this horizontal line here
and now the top surface of that ramp,
this I'm exaggerating the angles here.
Now you can draw this is 10 degrees
and now you can draw another horizon here
and then from that geometry rule that says,
okay, well, these two are parallel
and that's 10 degrees to that.
So that's 10 degrees to that
and now you can draw this angle here.
That's the surfaces A and B where they meet
and now 15 degrees that's indicated
from there to there is 15 degrees
and now you get likewise 15 of these minus 10 of these
means this one's five degrees.
Okay, geometry game's not quite over yet
but that's how we got that 10 degree
and that five degree there.
So let's continue this on
and now, okay, so the force of gravity here
and I've drawn a 10 degree angle there.
Well, we define our U and V coordinates like this.
U is 10 degrees above the horizon this way
and V is perpendicular to U
which means that if U is 10 degrees
above the horizon this way
then V is 10 degrees this way of vertical.
So that's where I got gravity straight down
and V 10 degrees to that.
So that's where I got that 10 degree angle.
Now let's look at this one
and I'm about to show you a diagram of this one.
Okay, so this one, this friction force
is five degrees to the horizon.
It's five degrees to the horizon there
and then U component is 10 degrees above the horizon.
So we got the five degrees below
and the 10 degrees above those add up to 15
and now the vertical ones.
So if this one is five degrees below the horizon this way
and this is perpendicular to this,
so they go like this.
So this one's five degrees below that way
which means that this one is five degrees
this way of a vertical line.
So this one's five degrees this way
of a vertical line like that.
And now this component, again,
because U is 10 degrees above the horizon
and V is perpendicular to U,
the angle between V and vertical is 10 degrees.
Now I said I'm gonna show you a diagram of that.
There we go.
So this five degrees,
because this is five degrees this way to vertical,
10 degrees because this is 10 degrees this way to vertical,
you add them up
and the angle of the triangle is 15 degrees.
So that's where I got this 15 degrees.
Likewise, the 10 and a five is 15 degrees there.
Okay.
As with many aspects of this,
there are different options on how you can proceed
and get to the correct answer
in a number of different ways.
For example, I could have measured all the angles
to the U direction
and then called sign and cos on those.
For example, this triangle,
instead of saying that this angle is 10 degrees,
I could have said this angle in 80 degrees,
and on this triangle instead of saying,
oh, this angle is 15 degrees,
I could have said this angle is 75 degrees
and this one 15 degrees.
So that's,
this is the U component measuring this angle to the U.
This is the U component of measuring this angle to the U.
This is the U component measuring this angle to the U.
If I do this, then all these are measured to the U
And then I can say that all the u-components
are going to call on a cos.
So this is u-component, u-component, u-component.
These are all going to call cos,
and none of them are going to call sine.
Likewise, if I do that, the v-components, this one,
this one, and this one, all of these are going to call sine,
sine, sine, and none of the v-components
are going to call cosine.
That's a neat little, gives you a check
because then when you do the algebra
and you do the force balances,
you're going to have one equation
where all the trigonometry terms are cos
and another equation where all the trigonometry calls are sine.
However, if I had to pick between that
and the way that I actually did do this,
I prefer it this way because this is more intuitive.
Like I just told you how I reckon
those 10 and 15 degree angles,
that's the most intuitive way to reckon those angles.
And so if you do it this way,
the disadvantage of that is that this is not so intuitive.
Just say this is 75 degrees and say this is 80 degrees.
It's not quite as intuitive as saying that's 10 degrees
and that's 15 degrees.
So there's little advantage and disadvantage to each one.
If you do it this way, you get the little check
with all your cosines in one line
and all your sines in the other line,
but the angles are less intuitive.
If you do it this way, the angles are more intuitive,
but then your equations are going to each have a mix
of sines and cosines in them.
And that brings us to the topic of redundancy.
In ordinary parlance, the word redundancy
has a negative connotation, but in the engineerings,
the word redundancy has a positive connotation.
For example, a large airplane may have three oil pumps
that are all redundantly connected
to the same inputs and outputs.
And that way, if one of them fails,
you can switch on one of the other ones.
And if two of them fails, you can switch on the last one.
And that's going to prevent many people from dying
because if the hydraulic oil pump on an airplane fails,
then you can't control the control surfaces
and you'll crash for sure.
Likewise with the spider web.
So this is a good spider web.
This one has fewer radial lines,
but just as many circumferential lines as the good one.
This one has just as many radial lines,
but fewer circumferential lines than the good one.
And let's say that there's one spider
who built his web like this
and one who built his web like this
and one who built his web like this.
If a small and slow moving fly
bumps into this one, another one to this one,
another one to this one,
then all their spiders are going to have lunch that day.
Although if a particularly big and fast moving fly
hits this one and another one this one
and another one this one,
it might break through this one and break through this one
and not break through this one.
And if all three spiders happen to be very hungry that day,
this is the one who's going to survive
and the one who built this one,
the one who built this one
are going to starve to death that day.
So that is an example of how redundancy
is a very good thing to have.
And your brain is shaped very much like a spider web
and having different ways to traverse it
is very much like how thoughts and reasoning works
and an exam is very much like a ballistic test
of a spider web.
So just as the airplane designer
who builds redundancy into his oil pumps,
just as the spider who builds redundancy
into his design of his web all survive,
the student who builds redundancy into his synapses
will prevail on an exam where others do not.
And the way I just showed you,
there's different ways to reckon those angles
and call sign and coast on them.
Those are redundantly equivalent.
If you know both of those ways,
you get to choose which one of those you want to do.
And speaking of redundancy,
how did I draw this friction force this way
and not this way?
It's because this is the right way,
but how did I know that?
Okay, well, there's two redundantly equivalent ways
to deduce that.
So this is body A.
The applied force is this way.
So there's going to be a tendency for it to move this way.
The body that we are considering A to move this way.
The friction force will be in the direction opposite
to the direction of the tendency for this one to move.
Another way you configure the same thing
is you can think of B is gonna be moving
this way relative to A.
So you imagine, like, I mean,
B is gonna be a static to the ramp,
A is gonna be sliding over there.
But if you imagine you attach the little camera onto A
that always moves along with A,
what that camera is going to see,
it's going to appear that B is moving this way
relative to A.
So you can also say that the friction force
is in the same direction as the way
that the other body is moving relative to this one.
So if you understand it in both of those ways,
you have that redundancy.
And you can just check both of those
and make sure that they agree.
And by the way, if you got the wires crossed in your brain
and you think that, oh, well,
A is, B is moving this way relative to A.
So the friction force is in the opposite direction.
Well, you just got it all mixed up.
But anyways, there's a huge number of those redundancies
that go into a solution like this.
And if you strive to have redundancies
in the way you understand things,
you are going to avoid a lot of mistakes
throughout a solution like this.
Okay, returning to the page we were on.
I mentioned we're going to do a pair of force balances.
And you might be wondering,
don't we usually have three balances we can do
on each body?
Like normally I'd say balance the forces in the X direction
and the Y direction and moments around some given point
on any given body.
Well, in the way the question's posed,
we didn't get any distance units.
It doesn't tell us how tall this is
or how far anything is from anything else.
So if we were to do moments around any given point
on any given body,
that's going to result in a bunch of unknowns.
And basically it's never going to get us any inferences.
It's never going to give us any clues
that help us combine with anything else.
So this is always going to be a dead end
if you take moments around any point
on any given body in this problem.
So normally you do forces balances in X and Y
or since we defined our inclined coordinate system,
U and V, you can do force balance in U
and force balance in B.
If you do all four of these,
then two of those are going to equations
that result from that are going to be redundantly equivalent
to two of the other equations.
In that sentence, the word redundant
does have a negative connotation.
So anyways, we're going to do these two force balances on A
and that's going to give us two equations
and that's the best we can do that way.
And on body B we're going to do these two force balances
and in total that's going to be four equations
from balances and that's the most we can do
that are going to be useful.
Okay, onward.
Now we have U and V components for this, this and this.
That's the gravity, the force friction,
the force normal between A and B.
Additionally, we have expressed force friction B A
and its components in terms of force normal B A.
Oh yes, right.
So there's a few things I didn't mention here.
I did mention all this and all this.
And like I said, as soon as you see force friction
in an equation, we're going to sub in 0.25
times force normal as soon as we can.
So this U component and V component,
one was force friction, cost 15,
one was force friction, sign 15.
Now right away we're going to say,
actually it's 0.25 times force normal times cost 15
and 0.25 times force normal times sign 15.
So now, this, this, this and this
are all expressed in terms of force normal
and none are expressed in terms of force friction now.
Okay, so we're going to do a pair of force balances on A.
Like I said, that's two equations and two unknowns.
And force P has no V component
because it's already in line with U at that angle.
And so this system is a little easier
than a general two equations to unknown system.
We can do force balance in the V direction on A
and get some results and then do the force balance
in the other direction and just have one unknown
and solve for that.
Now, and here we start to do that.
So what I've done here is I've gone general then specific.
So I've outlined the plan and then executed it.
Now, if your understanding of this stuff is shaky,
you would probably prefer that I show you the specific
and then the general as in do these equations,
solve for whatever thing and then explain
like why that approach was the one that works.
If your understanding of this stuff is strong,
then you probably prefer that I go general then specific.
Okay, that brings us to this topic of progress,
improvement in your understanding,
solution by dead reckoning.
What does this mean?
Solution by dead reckoning means you get to the question
and you just start throwing in some,
drawing some free body diagrams,
writing the balance equations and the equations
and then you see what's up.
You look at those equations and you think,
oh, okay, looks like I'd be able to solve
for the thing I'm trying to get by doing this.
Okay, if you want to improve,
the way to do that is practice, redundancy
and introspection and if you do these practices,
you will be able to do a solution by planning first.
Now, you might be at this level right now
or you might be at this level right now.
If you are at this level right now,
I would recommend that you strive
to be at this level sometime soon.
If you are at this level now,
I would be willing to bet that you started sometime before
at this level and then did these things to achieve this.
If you are good enough that you can do a solution
by planning first, that's less wasted time
because you know which things are gonna be dead ends
and then you don't bother indulging in those dead ends
and all the things you do are things
that are getting you toward the solution.
So practice, there's no substitute for practice.
If you're gonna be able to plan ahead,
it's because you have so much practice
that you know what things are gonna turn into.
Redundancy, like I said,
have multiple ways of understanding how a thing works.
Then you can pick between them,
you can figure out which ones have advantages you want
and then pick which one you want that's gonna work better.
Introspection means that once you get a solution,
say you're doing some homework, once you get a solution,
don't throw that away and just start doing
your next homework question.
Look at your solution and ask yourself
which things led to dead ends,
which parts of these led to the steps
that got me to those solution and why.
So this is the direction of get good
and these are necessary but not sufficient conditions.
That means if you wanna get good,
you need to do these things,
although there are other things you need to do
such as understanding the concepts in the course,
being able to type quickly on a calculator
and all the rest, okay.
So sum of forces in the V direction equals zero for body A.
Now in this line I've said the force normal
equals the force gravity V component
plus the force friction V component of each of those.
That's because, let's see, the V component,
this one's down, down a little to the right,
this one's down a little to the right,
this one's up and a little to the left.
And by the way, these forces are not drawn to scale
because there's so many tiny angles.
I haven't drawn these to scale.
If I drew these to scale, this triangle would be
exactly a quarter of the size of this one.
But this is about as small as you wanna draw a triangle
on this page and I didn't wanna draw this one
like, well, that'd be like this big.
So I didn't draw these to scale.
Components are to scale to the diagonals anyways.
So on this side of the equation,
I have put the one that's up and a little to the left.
And on this side of the equation,
I have put the two terms that are down
and a little to the right.
Now, there's a redundantly equivalent way
you could have done this.
And that is, you call the force balance
and then you say this term minus this term
minus this term equals zero.
So this one's positive because it's in this way,
this one's negative because it's this way,
and this one's negative because it's this way.
Okay, now this is sort of better practice
because this equation does mirror this equation.
You've put a sum of a bunch of things here
and a zero on this side
and then you start rearranging them.
So this is another one of those things
that's sort of like skipping a half step.
You could say it's a matter of preference
or you could say that, yeah,
this one's kind of skipping a half step.
So the way I do it is, yeah,
the force is one way on one side of the equal sign.
The force is the other way on the other side
of the equal sign and then start rearranging.
Again, both of those methods
are gonna get you to the same answer.
You decide which one's your preference.
Okay.
So, force is one way on this side,
equal force is the other way on that side.
I wanna isolate for force NBA one.
So I'm gonna move this friction term to the left side
because now we're gonna express this V component
as force normal times the cost of that angle.
The V component of force friction
is a quarter times force normal
times the sign of that angle
and the V component to gravity is this.
I'm just ripping those all from here
that we've already expressed that way.
And now to isolate this,
we can just factor out the force NBA
multiplied by in brackets,
the multipliers this from this
and this and this from this equals this.
And that's just some number in the unit's pounds.
And now finally to isolate this,
divide all by this.
So we got force NBA equals this stuff over this stuff.
And that's what this is.
These now are all numbers.
You can plug these into your calculator
and get 5.464 pounds.
And now when we do the force balance in the U direction,
now the P term is there,
but we've just solved for this
and we know this is a quarter of this
and this was given all along.
So now there's only one equation left
and one unknown left
and we got one unknown in one equation.
We can definitely solve for this now.
So we got first the balance.
P1 was the call in this direction,
left and a little down.
And on the same side of this equation,
force gravity U component, left and a little down.
On this side of the equal sign,
force normal U component, right and a little up.
Force friction U component, right and a little up.
So these are the ones that are this way
and these are the ones that are this way.
Okay, now isolate P1 by subtracting this,
move that to that side.
And now express the U components
in terms of these things we've already done,
force normal sign 15,
quarter of force normal close 15,
this is five sign 10 degrees pounds.
And now factor this out to make it as clean as possible.
These are the multipliers of this
and now these are all numbers.
This is 5.464 that we just got from the last equation
and these are all numbers and sign and cosine of numbers
that you can type into your calculator
finally get the value of P1.
And the reason why I'm doing this with gloves on
is because I have a lot of like scars
all over my hands and arms.
If you saw me with short sleeves and no gloves on,
you'd think I look like a drug addict.
Those scars are because of something I call speed training,
a certain type of speed training called cat kung fu.
It's a type of speed training
that will make you very fast.
It will also make you very stabbed.
It's also a tip of the hat to buy heart, I guess.
Okay, we solved for P1.
The amount of force P that will cause motion,
assuming mode one is what happens.
Careful, that's the meaning of that.
We don't know if mode one will happen.
Maybe mode two will happen.
We have not yet determined whether mode one
or mode two will happen.
So this is that check thing.
Now, if you're doing the hedge your bets mode,
this is when you'd go straight to mode two,
solve for P2 and just compare P1 and P2.
So this is that check that's gonna be a little quicker.
We're gonna draw a free body diagram of B
and solve for these two things
and then we're gonna compare them.
The friction force between the wall and B
and the normal force between the wall and B.
If force friction is less than mu force normal
between the wall and B,
that means the friction between the B and the ramp
is indeed sufficient to keep B static as A slides over B.
If we solve for these and find that force friction
is greater than mu times force normal,
that means there never was enough friction
between B and the ramp to hold that still as mode one happens
and mode one is not what happens.
Okay.
And so here's our free body diagram.
This was given the weight of B.
These we just solved for force friction between A and B.
Well, we solved for of B on A force normal,
which was this way.
And now this is equal in magnitude opposite in direction.
We solved for force friction of B on A,
which was this way.
This is equal in magnitude opposite in direction.
So we know their magnitudes and their directions.
This is just our UNV components again.
Recall in mode one,
force friction equals mu times force normal between A and B,
but force friction does not equal
mu times force normal between the wall and B.
So we do not know the ratio of this to this.
This does not equal a quarter of this.
So how many unknowns are here?
One, two.
These are two unknowns.
And we can do two force balances
and we'll get two equations and two unknowns.
And even nicer,
these directions are in line with these directions.
So if we do a force balance in the V direction,
this one won't be present.
We can solve for this one.
Do a force balance in the U direction.
And this one won't be present and we can solve for this one.
Okay.
Let's resolve the force gravity
in force normal AB and force friction AB
into UNV components.
Sort of redundant, not really redundant,
but this is just this, but the other way around.
So this was this way.
This one was this way.
This is just this, but the other way around.
So this one's this way.
Whereas that one was that way.
And very similar things here.
The force gravity on A was five pounds.
Force gravity on B was 15 pounds.
Components are very similar, literally.
Now a force balance in the V direction.
So force normal wall B was that way.
And it's all exactly in the V direction.
That's why we didn't have to resolve it and draw a triangle.
And that way, force friction AB is this way
and an equal sign.
So the one on this side, down and right,
this one down and right.
Very similar rearrangements that we've just seen.
We're gonna express force friction
in terms of force normal.
So these are all numbers.
And this is the one we just found on the previous page
or two pages ago.
And you can plug that into a calculator.
Get this value for force normal wall B.
Some of the forces in the U direction equals zero.
Force friction wall B, again,
that was exactly in the U direction.
So we didn't draw a triangle for it.
And that one was this way.
That's the only thing on this side of the equal sign
because this one and this one and this one down and left.
I left them down and left them down.
Okay, very similar rearrangement thing again.
And we've now solved for force friction wall B.
Note, these values of force normal wall B
and force friction wall B for mode one are speculative
as part of our check to determine
if mode one is the right mode.
Okay, I just said a bunch of this stuff.
If it's less than 0.25 then mode one is indeed the mode
because there is more than the friction there.
If it's more than 0.25 then there was never enough friction
between the wall and B for mode two and for mode one.
Okay, so force friction wall B over force normal wall B
is it less than 0.25?
Here's those numbers we just got on the previous page
and we take the quotient of them and it's 0.27.
So now we have 0.27 is less than 0.25.
No, our check has failed.
So the inequality 0.27 is less than 0.25
indicates an impossibility.
It means that there was a false assumption.
The false assumption was the assumed premise
that mode one is the mode.
And now, as I said, we're gonna learn some formal logic.
Since the assumed premise of mode one
has led to an impossibility,
we now know that the assumed premise was wrong.
Mode one is not the mode.
Since there are only two possible modes
and we just proved it's not mode one,
then it must be mode two.
Most of the work up until now was under the false premise.
There is a much work left to find min P for mode two,
although less diversions in this discussion of it.
Okay, well I said there's gonna be
just enough formal logic linear algebra
and TI programming discussion to be super useful.
That might have been a lie.
This little formal logic diversion is mostly just for fun,
not particularly useful.
But I wanna show you what you're gonna learn
in formal logic if you ever take that course.
So we had mode one.
Now this was an assumed premise.
Assumed premise was that mode one
might be the one that happens
and let's just see what it leads to.
And then there was led us to a bunch of things
and then from that we concluded the 0.27 is less than 0.25.
This is a contradiction.
When an assumed premise leads to a contradiction,
you draw a line like that.
And that means that whatever your assumed premise was wrong
because it led to a contradiction.
So then we can say it is not the case that mode one happens.
And from much earlier,
we also said that either mode one will happen
or mode two will happen.
And since we proved here that mode one does not happen,
well this part was called a reductio ad absurdum
and then you combine this statement with this statement.
Either it was mode one or it was mode two.
It was not mode one.
Therefore, it's mode two.
This little logical argument is called
a disjunctive syllogism.
And this is what I just said all this stuff here.
We've proved that mode two is the mode.
If you find this formal logic stuff arousing,
then please take a course on formal logic,
especially if you are a student in university
for engineering and a course on formal logic
is not part of the curriculum.
Please take one anyways and while you're at it,
kick your course direct curriculum designer in the balls
for me while you're at it.
Okay, analysis of mode two begins
and let's recall that in mode two, there's the force there.
There's sliding here between B and the ramp,
no sliding here between A and B.
So they're sliding together like that
with no relative motion between them
because the sliding is here,
there is the friction force there will be maxed,
which means that force friction equals
mu times force normal here between B and the ramp.
But because there is no sliding here,
the friction force there is not maxed,
which means that the friction force
does not equal mu times force normal there.
Ideally, if everything's gone right,
force friction will be less than
mu times force normal there.
So in mode two, we do know the ratio
of the friction force to the normal force here.
It's a quarter.
We do not know the ratio of the friction force
to the normal force here in mode two.
And that's what all this says.
Now on the next page, this is another one of those things
where I'm gonna explain the plan of attack
for how to work out all the algebra
before showing you the algebra.
And if your level of proficiency on this
is less than proficient, you would probably prefer
that maybe I show you the algebra first
and then explain why that plan of attack worked.
Let's just look ahead a little bit.
So on the next page, we do start that algebra
after explaining that plan of attack.
On the next page after that,
we get to the answer in a box.
On the next page after that, page 10 now,
we do some redundant checks just to make sure
all parts of that solution are consistent.
And then on page 11 and 12, we do an alternate solution.
And in that alternate solution,
we are going to use a solver for systems
of linear equations.
And if you don't know what that is,
good news, you're about to learn what that is
once we get to those pages, page 11 and 12, okay?
And also another one of those random studenting skills is
if you have an ordered stack of papers
and you move one from the top to the bottom,
it preserves the order.
But also if you take any number of them
and move them from the top to the bottom,
it still preserves the order.
So the whole time I'm doing this,
just pick up any number of them,
move them from the top to the bottom.
They're still in order, okay?
Might help you someday.
Where are we?
So now 11, you just go like that.
Okay, page number, number sevens.
Okay, it's plan of attack.
So let's look at those free body diagrams again.
There's B and there's A.
Okay, and we're going to start using the subscript two
because now it's mode two,
whereas before we were using the subscript one
to indicate mode one.
And here's those two free body diagrams
from before, these all have ones in the subscripts
because I didn't redraw them,
but now if you imagine all these ones
in the subscripts are now two,
then basically we have our free body diagrams for mode two.
Now, in mode one, we knew the ratio of one of these
to the other, the friction force and normal force
between A and B.
So we could treat these two as one unknown.
We could treat these two as one unknown.
But now in mode two,
we do not know the ratio of one to the other.
So we've got to treat these as two different unknowns.
Treat these as two different unknowns.
Although in mode two, as in mode one,
these two are equal in magnitude and opposite in direction.
The forces from A on B and the forces from B on A
equal in magnitude and opposite in direction.
These two as well equal in magnitude
and opposite in direction.
So we can treat these as the same item
when we're dealing with just the magnitudes.
Treat these two as the same item.
In mode one, we did not know the ratio of these two,
the force friction and the force normal
between the ramp and B.
In mode two, we do know the ratio of these.
This is a quarter of this.
So in mode two, we can treat these two as one unknown.
Now I've been making a lot of use of this talk
of X number of linear equations
and Y number of unknowns.
If you haven't heard of this stuff before, great.
You're gonna learn a lot today.
But when X equals Y,
when I'm saying the number of equations
is equal to the number of unknowns,
then we can solve for the values of all the unknowns.
Like all the times that I said one equation
and one unknown or two equations and two unknowns,
we could solve for all those values.
When Y is greater than X,
in other words, the number of unknowns
is more than the number of equations,
then we can't solve for the values of all the unknowns.
And in general, we can't solve for any of the values.
For example, when I say one equation and two unknowns
or two equations and three unknowns
or five equations and 21 unknowns,
that means that we can't solve for them
and have to do something else if we wanna get those values.
And there was an asterisk here.
When you got equal numbers of equations and unknowns,
you'll be able to solve for all of them.
Unless some of your equations are redundantly equivalent,
in which case it's gonna count
as you have fewer of them, or if they're contradictory.
If you have two statements that are leading you
to contradictory conclusions,
then either you've made a mistake somewhere
or the guy who posed the question to you was lying
or has crafted his problem wrong.
Okay, and I've assumed we don't know how to use a solver
for systems of linear equations,
and I'm assuming we have only the most rudimentary
of algebra skills.
So I've optimized this solution to be as easy as possible
on the algebra, although it does get pretty intense
that way because this is a tough problem to solve.
Okay, so let's suppose we do two force balances on this
and two force balances on this.
How many equations is that for?
How many unknowns is that?
The P2 is one, these are two, and these two count as one.
So that's one, one more, and two more for a total of four.
So we'll have four equations and four unknowns,
which means we can solve for all of those.
But if we have only the rudimentary algebra skills,
we can't solve a general system of four equations
and four unknowns.
We'll have to have some kind of plan of attack
for isolating one at a time or something like that.
So let's consider just A.
If we do two force balances on this,
how many unknowns?
One, two, three, that's two equations, three unknowns.
So it's not gonna be that easy.
If we do two force balances on this,
how many unknowns is that?
One, two, three, that's two equations, three unknowns.
It's not gonna be that easy.
Okay, so that's what all this says.
Now what exactly is meant by counting two unknowns as one
because we know the ratio of the one to the other?
What it means technically is we have five equations
and five unknowns.
So those unknowns are one, two, three, four, five,
and those five equations are a couple of force balances
on body B, a couple of force balances on body A,
and the equation force friction wall B2 equals mu
times force normal wall B2 with mu being unknown value.
But this equation is so simple
that as soon as we see force friction wall B2
in an equation, we're right away just gonna sub in
a quarter of force normal wall B2.
So we know that we can just get this thing out
of any equations as soon as we see it.
And then this will be one of the other unknowns.
And then we say that, well, ignore this.
And then we got four equations,
the two balances on the two bodies each in four unknowns
counting these two as one.
Well, technically we have seven equations
and seven unknowns.
Those, because we were treating these two as one thing
and these two as one thing.
But if you wanna treat them as two different things
because they do have two different names,
these are two different names, one goes AB,
one goes BA, and these are two different names.
Then how many unknowns you got?
One, two, three, four, five, six, seven unknowns.
And our seven equations are the two force balances on A,
the two force balances on B.
Force friction equals mu times force normal
for between the wall and B.
And force normal AB equals force normal BA
and force friction AB equals force friction BA.
So really, really technically we've got these seven equations
and seven unknowns.
But because all these three equations are so simple,
we're treating that as four equations
and four unknowns effectively
and treating it that way does work.
Okay, okay, plan of attack.
And I'm not gonna read you that paragraph,
I've got a little point form version of it here.
Okay, so as I said, if we do the pair of force balances
on B, we'll have one equation in,
we'll have two equations and three unknowns.
That's one, two, and three.
And what we can do is we can boil that down
to one equation and two unknowns.
See, if we do the force balance in the V direction here,
that'll be one, two, three unknowns.
And if we do the force balance in the U direction,
that'll be one, two, three unknowns.
And then if we take that first equation
and we express it as this is some function
of these two things.
And then the second of those, we got this,
we sub it in for a quarter of these.
And now we get this in the form of this equals
some other function of these two things.
So that's what I'm saying here.
One of those is gonna be this is some function
of these two things.
That other equation is gonna get us to the same thing
equals some other function of these two same unknowns.
And then, because this equation has just one
of these guys on the left and this equation has just one
of these guys on the left, this equals this.
So this equals this, we equate these two.
And that's what this line is.
Function one of these two things equals function two
of these two things.
And these two are these two.
So now this is one equation in two unknowns.
Force normal AB and force friction AB.
Then we can do force balance in the V direction on A.
Force P would not be present in that one
because it is already in line with you.
So the force balance in the V direction
will have one equation in two unknowns.
One equation in two unknowns.
Force normal BA and force friction BA.
So our two force balances on B boiled down
to this one equation in these two unknowns.
Our force balance in the V direction on A boiled down
to one more equation in these two unknowns.
And hey, what do you know?
The same two unknowns.
So you combine this equation and this equation
and that is now two equations in the two unknowns,
the force normal and force friction between A and B.
Then we can solve for those.
And then we have only one force balance left in our arsenal,
the force balance in the U direction for body A.
And we just solve for these two.
We've got values for them.
That leaves one remaining unknown.
That balance will become one equation and one unknown P2.
And we can solve for the value of it.
And that's what all this says.
Now do.
We are going to set up these equivalency things
for the components.
And we can just adapt those from before that we had from B.
Okay.
These U and V components for force gravity are all the same.
U and V components for force normal are all the same.
Only now we're just turning these subscript ones
into subscript twos.
That's what all this is.
I didn't put subscript ones and twos
for the force of gravity because it's equal in both modes.
Now, up here when we did the force friction,
remember in mode one, we knew that force friction
equals a quarter of force normal.
So we put those values in right up in this step.
But now force friction between A and B
is not some known ratio to force normal.
And so here in these components, we've stopped short of that.
So now we're just saying this but with a subscript two
equals this but with a subscript two.
And likewise for this one.
Okay, next, so force balances.
I'm not going to go through all the particulars every time,
but we do force balance in the V direction on body B.
Things in one way on one side of the equal sign,
things the other way on the other side of the equal sign.
We want to isolate one of these on this side.
So we're going to subtract this from both sides
and put it there, that's what this is.
And now sub in all these equivalent things.
So this line express doesn't express things
in terms of components anymore.
It expresses it in terms of unknowns
we want times trig functions.
And we have now isolated one of these on the left side.
So force balance in the U direction on B
forces one way on one side,
forces the other way on the other side.
Sub in a quarter of force normal wall B two
for force friction wall B two.
And then sub in these equivalent things for components here.
And finally going to multiply both sides by four
in order to get one of these on the left.
And that's what this is.
These things are all these multiplied by four.
And now we got this equation
is one of these things on the left equals all this.
This equation is one thing,
this one thing on the left equals all this.
And these are in terms of the same unknowns.
So now because this is the same as this,
we can say that all this must equal all this.
And that's what the next line is.
It says that all this equals all this.
Now what we have done,
we've gotten this far in this plan.
So we did the two force balances on B.
And what we've just done is boiled that down
to one equation and two unknowns by saying this,
one function of these two unknowns is equal to this
function of these two unknowns.
Now to prepare it for combining later,
we wanna isolate again.
So we've got these two unknowns,
force normal AB2 and force friction AB2.
I am going to choose to try to isolate
force normal AB2 onto the left side.
So there's force normal AB2.
There's these two terms,
one on each side of the equal sign.
So you're gonna subtract this from both sides.
And that's that these two are these two,
but with this moved over to this side.
Force friction AB2,
we got one term on each side of the equal sign as well.
We wanna put them both on the right side of the equal signs.
We're gonna subtract this from both sides.
And now that's what this is.
These two are these two,
but with this on this side of the equal sign.
And finally the constant terms,
this one is this.
And we wanna put this on the right.
So subtract this from both sides.
These two constant terms become these two constant terms.
So now we got force normal AB2 terms on the left,
everything else on the right.
Now we're gonna factor out force normal AB2.
So this is now force normal AB2 times this thing in brackets.
This comes from this, comes from this, comes from this.
And force friction AB2,
we wanna factor that out as well.
So this is force friction AB2 times this thing in brackets.
This comes from this, this comes from this.
We'll left these the same in this step.
And now we can finally express force normal AB2
on the left side of the equal sign
by dividing all terms by this.
So this is force normal AB2 equals this
quotient of force friction AB2.
This quotient is simply this over this.
And this constant term is simply this over this.
And now we have force normal AB2
equals some function of force friction AB2.
And you may have noticed that I like to keep things
in exact form for perhaps a little longer than ideal.
But in the very next step, I do around these.
So this next line just says
all this stuff equals approximately
squiggly equal sign by the way,
equals negative 59.445 and all this equals
approximately 62.771.
So now we got this equals some function of this.
And now next thing to do is force balances on A.
First we'll get these component equivalences ready.
And likewise, they are adapted from an earlier page.
Directions are all the same.
These are all the same as these, these same as these,
just sub in the two for the one.
And remember, we don't equivocate force friction BA
with a quarter of force normal BA in mode two.
So we stop there, that term's that term.
Stop here, this term is this term.
Okay.
Force balance in the V direction,
forces one way on one side,
forces the other way on the other side.
We wanna isolate force normal BA two on one side,
which it already is there.
So this is just subbing in the values for components.
So we're expressing these in terms of the unknowns we want
instead of in terms of components.
And to isolate this on one side,
we just divide all by this.
So now we got this equals this function of this.
Sub in approximate values now.
So this is approximately 0.26
and this is approximately 5.09.
And now we have from our pair of force balances on B,
this is some function of this.
From our one force balance on A,
we got this is some function of this.
And what do you know?
This equation has force normal AB two on one side.
This equation has just force normal AB two on this side
because this is clearly the same as this.
That means all this equals all this.
And that's what the next line says is that all this
is equal to all this.
Finally, collect like terms.
There's one of these on this side,
one of these on this side,
so add this many to both sides, get that on that term.
There's a constant on both sides,
so subtract this from both sides, get that on that term.
And then finally divide both sides by this.
And we have a value for force friction BA two
and that is approximately 0.96585 pounds.
And now if we wanna get the value for force NBA two,
we'll need that later.
That is a very simple matter of taking this value
and plug it into this equation
and you will get five point whatever for this.
Optionally, you could also take the same value,
plug it into that equation.
And we hope as long as we haven't made any mistakes
that both of these equations will come up
with the same value if you plug this into this
or plug this into this.
And that will be this many.
Okay, now there's only one force balance left
that we can possibly do.
I should mention, in the question,
it should have mentioned that assume that sliding will occur
and that tipping will not occur.
And it's gonna depend on the dimensions of these boxes.
Like it didn't say their dimensions,
which means that, and you know,
you should never scale off the diagram,
which means that these boxes might be very narrow and tall
or they might be very stout and wide.
If they're actually very narrow and tall,
then you're gonna get tipping.
If they're very stout and wide,
you're gonna get sliding.
So they should have said assume sliding and no tipping.
Anyways, final force balance left we can do.
U direction balance on A.
Forces one way on one side,
forces the other way on the other side.
And we just got the values of these two here.
I wanna isolate this one final unknown on the left
by subtracting this from both sides,
put it on that side.
And now express the components in terms of the unknowns
we want and the trig functions.
And would you look at that?
This is known, this is a number, this is known,
this is some number, this is this.
And all these are numbers now.
Type that into your calculator
and you get the value of P2 equals 1.45 pounds.
And we're gonna mention the mode here,
but the question had no mention of mode one and mode two.
Those are some nomenclature that we made up along the way.
So we wanna express our answer in terms of things
that make sense given just the question,
such as A and B slide together down the ramp
with no relative motion between A and B,
which is our verbal definition of mode two.
And since P2 is less than P1,
that means P2 is the mode that will happen,
which means that this is the answer we want.
And speaking of keeping exact numbers
or introducing rounded numbers
and when you should do that,
it's likely that different teachers
will want you to take different approaches that way.
And if you've got different teachers for different courses,
that's a good thing because different approaches that way
are appropriate for different courses.
For example, in calculus class,
you probably wanna keep your numbers in exact form
even to the, when you're reporting the solution at the end.
Like if you're learning how to do derivatives
of trigonometric functions,
it wouldn't make sense to start putting in rounded values
as early as possible.
In a course like this,
statics or other physics courses,
I think it's pretty typical that a teacher
will want you to report the solution to three sig figs.
And then if you're doing that,
well, if you're putting in rounded numbers early
or even in the middle of this game
and you're only reporting them to three digits
and then you're typing them into your calculator
into three digits,
you're gonna have a lot of roundoff error
and your solution that you report
is probably only gonna be good to two digits.
Your third digit's probably gonna be off.
Whereas when you introduce the approximated numbers,
if you keep them to five sig figs
and keep typing them into your calculator as five sig figs
and then only round down to three
once you've got the solution
that you're reporting right at the end,
then this is likely to be good to three sig figs.
And I think I had one teacher once who said,
report your answer to three sig figs.
And then I was doing stuff like this,
keeping five in the intermediate values.
And then he was docking marks saying,
oh, you reported those to too many sig figs.
And then instead of starting to report
intermediate values to three sig figs,
what I would do is I'd put a little note
by the solution saying,
this solution is reported to three sig figs.
Whereas more digits are shown in the intermediate values
just in order to reduce roundoff error.
And then I would continue to report these to five
and this to three in because of that note there,
he stopped docking marks.
That is very stupid.
But yeah, if your teachers want you to do
one way for calculus course
and another way for physics course,
that makes perfect sense.
And as you may have noticed,
this is not just a walkthrough
on how to do one physics thing.
There has also been much discussion on a requisite skills
and such a set of discussions would not be complete
without some words on calculator kung fu.
And I have not yet typed anything into the calculator.
So what I'm gonna do is I'm gonna show you
how to calculate that in exact form.
Not because there's any good reason for that,
but just to give you an idea of how nimble
you wanna be on the calculator.
And bear with me for just one second
because I'm working with some awkward angles here
with the lamp and stuff.
But recall, when you call a trigonometric function
on the TI, it gives you an opening bracket.
So you can type in sign of some number
and then closing bracket.
Or you can just type in sign of some number
and no closing bracket.
And the closing bracket is implied.
But if you have to type in anything after that,
like let's say for example,
I wanna say sign of 10 plus cos of 10,
I'll have to go sign of 10, closing bracket
plus cos of 10, but then that other second closing bracket
can be implied.
Okay, so let's see, this should be an angle.
Okay, negative four cos 15 closing bracket
minus sign 15 equals divided by opening bracket
for sign 15, closing bracket minus cos 15.
And that's the right number.
Now I'm just gonna go negative answer,
and I'm gonna stow that as A
just because I wanna stow these as positive values.
And now let's continue 15 cos 10 degrees closing bracket
minus 60 sign 10 degrees implied closing bracket equals
answer divided by opening closing bracket
for sign 15 degrees closing bracket minus cos 15 degrees.
And that is the right number.
I'm gonna stow that as B.
And next one is simply sign 15 closing bracket
divided by cos 15 implied closing bracket
and then I'm gonna stow that as C
and then the last term there is five cos 10 degrees
closing bracket divided by cos 15 equals
and I'm gonna stow that as D
and I'm gonna cheat here
because I have this written down A plus C
and I'm gonna stow that as E.
And now B minus D
and I'm gonna stow that as F
and finally F divided by E.
Oh, there it is, 0.96585
and plus whatever comes after that.
And now I said exact form,
but the calculator isn't actually storing this
in exact form in terms of actually still remembering
that it's a sign of an angle and a cos of an angle.
But what it does is it keeps this
to at least this many decimal places.
It reports 10 and it's keeping one or two more.
So what this really is doing is it's rounding off
just like this is rounding off,
but this is rounding it off to approximately 12 digits
whereas this is five.
Okay, and now onward.
What this says, yeah, P2 is less than P1,
so then we know mode two is the mode
and that force is lighter than the other one.
So this is the answer we want.
That means that as you gradually apply that force
from nothing to a little more to a little more,
the thing starts moving when it's that many
and it moves in that mode.
Okay, so that's all this.
We don't need to do another check
because we found both P1 and P2.
But let's do a page of redundant checks here.
And we're gonna compare force friction with force normal.
Between A and B, that's the ratio that we don't know yet
and let's take those two numbers
that we just found on the previous page, divide them,
and you get 0.18, which is less than 0.25,
which means that check passes.
Speaking of that check and that gambit from before,
of course there is a perfect mirror image to that.
Just like every gambler's fallacy
has perfect mirror symmetry, this gambit also does.
That was a horrible comparison and completely pointless.
But let's say if we did mode two first,
and if we wanna hedge our bets,
we'd go find P2, then P1 and just compare them.
But if we wanted to gamble, we can do a check after P2.
And then if that passes, then we know the force two
and this check tells us that mode two is indeed the mode.
And if that check fails,
then we have to solve for this one anyways
and it costs us that much extra work.
Although in mode two, that check is a tiny amount of work
because we've already solved for those things.
So that's that gambit.
If we had started with mode two,
found all those things, divided that
and found that this is less than this,
then that would confirm that mode two is the mode
and we wouldn't have to do any of the calculations of mode one.
We could report our answer and know that mode two is the mode.
Right, and what that means is that the friction
between A and B is not maxed,
which means that the surface-to-surface contact
between A and B is more than friction-y enough
to keep prevent a relative motion between A and B
as B slides relative to the ramp.
Next, more redundant checks is I've calculated the values
for our five unknowns.
We actually didn't calculate these,
but we calculated these three.
If you just take these and throw them into earlier equations
and crunch those, you get these values.
I've kept them to the 12 digits that this thing stores.
And now I've got the force balances here
in their original forms that I had them in
right after calling the balance.
So now we can confirm things like D plus A sign 15
is equal to B cos 15 plus 15 cos 10.
These two numbers are exactly equal to the number
of digits shown, and you can do the same for these.
Confirm that all these are fully consistent.
Another redundant check that I've done is a geometric proof.
I have drawn all these forces with their angles
and at a scale of one centimeter for one pound.
And now we can confirm things like A is five pounds,
B is 15 pounds, and this is a very, very large number.
And this is like three times that.
And then the force friction between wall and B
and force normal between wall and B,
we think that's exactly a quarter.
So we go like this and like this.
That's one of these two, one of two of these,
and two of two is four.
Yeah, that's a quarter of that.
And then the force friction between A and B
and the force friction between A and A
equal in magnitude opposite in direction,
force normal between A and B,
force normal between B and A,
equal in magnitude and opposite in direction.
And we'd hope that this is less than a quarter of this.
And if you go, yeah, one of these two, two and four,
yeah, it's less than four of these to one of these.
So all these things check.
And like I said before,
if you got those arrowheads in a cycle,
like this arrow's pointing this way,
this arrow's pointing this way,
and this arrow's pointing this way,
and this arrow's pointing this way,
and this arrow's pointing this way.
So it's like a cycle.
That means that all these balances,
all these forces balance to equilibrium.
And likewise, these arrowheads are all in a cycle.
So that's a whole bunch of redundant checks
just to make sure that all ports of the solution
are consistent.
Okay, and finally, we have an alternate solution here.
This one's much quicker.
Suppose we know how to use a solver
for systems of linear equations.
And suppose we had guest mode two first.
System of two equations and two unknowns.
Okay, TI calculator doesn't come with solvers,
but it comes with something really close.
So you can program them in very easily.
If I want to call my solver for systems
of two equations and two unknowns,
I'll press the program button.
And I have a very long list of programs here.
I could scroll all the way down to letter S,
or I could just type in letter S,
and then it will give me the program starting with S,
and then I can scroll down to solve two two.
That's my solver for a system of two equations
and two unknowns.
A little quicker is what I've saved a program called A.
So I just go program and then enter.
Now program is one symbol, and A is one symbol,
which means you can overwrite that
with the name of whatever you want.
So what I do is just program, enter, left arrow,
and then I type in sol two two,
sol two two, and that brings up my solver
for a system of two equations and two unknowns.
Let's use an example here.
Here's a system of two equations and two unknowns.
Seven x plus three y equals one,
four x plus nine y equals two,
and now if I just go seven, enter, three, enter, one,
enter, four, enter, nine, enter, two, enter,
and then it says these two values,
and it's saved them as x and y.
So now I can call x or y, and it's the same numbers.
Now I can confirm seven x plus three y equals one,
four x plus nine y, sorry,
I'm looking through the camera lens this time,
so I'm very clumsy on the calculator this time.
Okay, so that confirms those.
That means that any time you have a system
of two equations and two unknowns,
if you just set them up into this format
and you just program that into your calculator,
then all you gotta do is call that program
and type in the numbers just like reading them off there.
Okay, very similar for a system of three equations
and three unknowns.
It's like, okay, I've got three equations
with three unknowns, and I've set them up into this form.
I know that this many x's and this many y's
and this many z's equals this amount,
and this many x's, blah, blah, blah, blah,
I set them up all nice like that.
What values of x and y and z will solve that?
And oh yeah, this is how I write it
when I'm detailing a solution.
I'll put those little stars,
a three equation, three unknown solution.
That means I called my calculator for this,
and the calculator's gonna give us this.
I'm assuming we know this much,
and then we wanna find these.
And that is as simple as going,
program,
a,
three, three,
seven, and 89, 94, 41,
just like you're reading them right off the thingy.
32 and 80,
oh,
86,
24, 21,
46,
37,
89.
And okay, it looks like that worked.
And those are saved as x, y, and z now,
and I can go seven x,
what the heck?
I'm looking through the lens this time,
so I'm very clumsy on the calculator now.
Seven x plus 89 y plus 94 z.
Likewise, confirm the rest of those,
but it's told me,
hey, if you got these equations,
you wanna know what x, y, and z are to satisfy all these?
Call that solver and you get these.
Now let's look at how I programmed that.
Okay, to examine that program,
let's press the program button,
go over to the edit tab,
and then type in the first letter,
and that'll bring us down close to here,
and now let's have a look inside the code.
Sol 33.
So these are input, means it asks the user for an input,
and then it stores it as this letter.
So first, I'm just getting all these inputs from the user
and storing them as letters,
and then all I'm doing is taking all those letters
and building a matrix of them.
Matrix means like a two-dimensional array of numbers.
Well, it can be in any dimensional array,
but on a TI, you only got two-dimensional arrays.
And then, so all that was just getting and setting,
and then this is the one line that computes something.
It says RREF of that matrix and store it as a new name.
And then these are just getters.
It just reads some numbers off of that matrix
and then displays them and it tells you to save to those.
So RREF is short for reduced row echelon form,
and that is a concept from linear algebra,
and I will not be explaining
what a reduced row echelon form means really theoretically,
but let's examine that matrix.
After it asked us for the inputs,
it stored that as C, matrix C.
So here's our matrix C, and would you look at that?
This is just those numbers that we just typed in
and read off here.
So these numbers are all the same as these numbers
in the exact same form.
And when it did RREF, the reduced row echelon form on C,
it saved that as matrix D,
and now what we have on the main diagonal is a bunch of ones,
and we got for all the columns except for the right most,
zeros and all the other entries.
And what that means was that none of the equations
were redundantly equivalent,
and none of the equations were contradictory.
That's what it means when you get ones on the main diagonals
and zero for all the other entries for all the columns,
except for the last one.
And the last column is the values we want.
Those are these values,
the ones that satisfy this equation.
So that's all I'm gonna tell you about the meaning of RREF.
What it means is, if you have this system
and you've set it up that way,
and then you load a matrix up with those numbers
just as they're presented there,
and then you run RREF on that,
what you get is a matrix with some ones and zeros
to confirmed it works,
and you get the values that satisfy
that system of equations.
So that's all we're learning about RREF today.
And that program is just ask for inputs,
sets a matrix up,
does the one computation, that's one computation,
that's RREF, and then gets the values from that,
setters and getters, and one computation,
and then stores those as X, Y, and Z,
and tells you that it stored them as X, Y, and Z.
Okay, now given that crash course
on just what we need to know about linear algebra,
let's do a solution supposing we know how to use a solver
and guess mode two first.
Here's these five unknowns,
and I haven't even used the incline coordinate system,
U and V, I've expressed them in terms of X and Y,
which means that supposing we had done
like a fully detailed solution,
we wouldn't even need to make these triangles
to break the components down to U and V,
because we know all the angles,
we've measured the angles to the horizon already,
so we know these are all cos of 10, sign of 10,
cos of five, sign of five,
and the complements of those 80 and 85.
So those are the X components of all five unknowns,
the Y components of all five unknowns,
and here's our four force balances,
in X direction on A, Y direction on A,
X direction on B, Y direction on B,
and relating force friction wall B
as a quarter of force normal wall B,
that's five equations in five unknowns.
The next thing we would have to do in this solution
is to rearrange them into the format
such that we can type them into the solver,
and all you gotta do in order to do that
is a little algebraic reorganizing the terms,
and now each of these lines says
some number of force P plus some number of force NBA,
plus some number of force friction BA,
plus some number of force normal wall B,
plus some number of force friction wall B
equals some constant.
Now I don't have programmed in a solver
for five equations in five unknowns here,
but we can just go to matrix button,
and we can make a custom matrix by going edit,
let's call it matrix B,
and we're gonna want a matrix that is five numbers
by six numbers, that means five numbers tall,
six numbers wide, and let's go jump cut.
And now I have entered in all those values for matrix B,
just read them right off there and typed them all in,
they round them all, they show them rounded to a few digits,
but they're all actually stored to many digits,
and now we can simply go matrix math,
and call RREF on matrix name B,
and we get the ones on the main diagonal
and zeros everywhere else for all the terms
except for the rightmost column,
and would you look at that,
the rightmost column is those values
for the five unknowns, as we computed them before,
these are the same ones.
Okay, and then next we would report those numbers,
we don't even need to report all of them,
although in this fictional story,
we started by guessing mode two first,
and then we used our solver,
we have not yet confirmed that this is the right answer,
because now this is P two,
now we would either have to go to mode one
and compute the P for mode one,
call it P one if you want, or do that check.
So now we would take force friction VA
divided by force normal VA, this divided by this,
confirm that that's less than 0.25,
and then we would know that mode two is the mode,
and then we could report that,
so that confirms mode two is the mode,
then we can report the answer, P equals this many,
and then the verbal description of mode two.
So that is our second way of solving this,
what we call the alternate solution,
and that's the last page of this.
So solution, the first time around, it was 10 pages,
lots of discussion, plus all the equations and diagrams,
and such, again, if you're writing this on an exam,
you'd probably go slightly fewer words,
and then we did redundant checks,
and then our alternate solution, just the last two pages,
that's a little misleading,
I'm not saying that using a system solver
is gonna save you 80% of your time
comparing two pages to 10 pages,
because let's say if I had done the solution
the first way around,
and let's say I'd guessed mode two first
on the first time around and been similarly verbose,
and let's say I did the solver method way
and guessed mode two first,
and been similarly verbose for that one too,
then it wouldn't exactly be one to five,
the ratio would be still a very decent savings
of about like 40% of your trouble, really.
So what does all this mean?
Because when I was, I have to mention, I am very old,
so a lot of these opinions might be outdated,
but when I was in high school,
we started learning this static friction stuff
in like grade 11 physics,
but we never had heard of that X number of equations
and Y number of unknown stuff,
so when I talked about solution by dead reckoning,
really all of our solutions had to be by dead reckoning,
like you couldn't really plan your solution
with how much they taught us about the theory of the math,
and stuff.
So I would just start writing balances,
start drawing free body diagrams and stuff,
and then just see whether the algebra pops out
as something that could solve for the answer for.
And then, let's see, in first year of college,
we learned all this stuff again in statics,
and then it was like, yeah, first year math in college
is when they taught us that linear algebra,
and that was kind of maybe second year, really,
when they taught us that linear algebra,
and what that means in terms of number of equations
and number of unknowns, and reduced row echelon form,
and it's only after second year of college
when I would have been able to use a system solver
like this for stuff, physics that I learned in 11th grade.
So I would recommend that when you're training,
doing homework and stuff,
prefer the system solver, use it most of the time,
but I would also highly recommend
that some of the time, just solve it in some other way
and make sure you're training all your muscle groups.
Hit all those muscle groups
from as many angles as possible.
So sometimes, you get the question and you think,
okay, solver mode's gonna be the most,
the quickest, most efficient way to solve it,
and then do that.
Sometimes when you get the question,
and you can be like, oh, solver mode's gonna be
the quickest, and then just decide, okay,
I'm gonna willingly do this in some way
that's not necessarily the quickest,
just because I wanna make sure I'm training
all those skills.
As far as curriculum design,
I think they should teach you this R-R-E-F stuff,
just in the crash course,
not even doing all the theoretical knowledge,
but just what it means in terms of building a system solver
into your TI.
They should be introducing that as soon as 11th grade,
but it's been a very, very long time
since I've been in a school,
so I don't wanna yell too loud about this or else
I'm gonna sound like your racist grandfather
because I don't know how things are done these days,
but I did hear something once that seemed to suggest
that they are starting to do it more like that these days,
so I don't really know, though.
Speaking of pointless and inefficient solution methods,
I've decided that here's another way you can do this.
Express it as seven linear equations and seven unknowns,
and then the force balances on A don't call AB,
they all call BA, and the force balances on B
all call AB and don't call BA,
and then I've got this line here that says
that one of these minus one of these is zero
or in other words, this equals this,
another line that says one of these
and negative one of these is zero,
or in other words, one of these is one of these,
so like when I showed you that seven equations
and technically seven equations and seven unknowns,
and then I did type those into A,
that's what that looks like,
and then if we do matrix math,
R-R-E-F on matrix name A, hey, it works, okay,
one's on the main diagonal, zero's everywhere else,
except for in the right most column, same values there,
and now we have some, this line 5.356 is the same
as this line 5.356 and this line 0.965
is equal to this line 0.965,
so you can get as creative as you want
in terms of which pointless techniques you wanna learn,
you know, as you might have guessed when I'm in the gym
and I'm doing my neck curls and wrist curls
and calf raises, I'm treating those as just as important
as the bench press, yo, never skip leg day and all that.
Okay, today's document camera presentation
has been brought to you by Welfare and Ducktape,
please help me financially.
What's up everybody, I hope you enjoyed that walkthrough,
my name again is Junichiro Swanson,
and unfortunately at the time of this recording,
I have not made a huge corpus of work,
although I would highly recommend you watch my video lecture
called The What and Why of Functional Programming,
it was a thousand hours of work to make a two hour lecture
video, it's on computer science,
and subscribe to both of my channels,
check out the catalogs of those,
you might see something you enjoy,
that cat kung fu videos in there,
and at the time of this upload I am also uploading
a call for collabs on my other channel,
thanks for stopping by.
