That miracle journey was during the night time and Allah Subhanahu Wa Taala sent a beautiful
heavenly baby white horse named Barak to take the profit through the journey.
Isra was known as the journey between the Kaaba and Al Aqsa Mosque in Jerusalem Palestine.
And the Miraj was known as the journey between Al Aqsa Mosque and the Heaven.
Allah Subhanahu Wa Taala mentioned that night in Surah Isra verse 1 or another name of that
surah is Surah Bani Israel.
The details of this story is very big and that's why we found several different versions
of the stories from different sahabas who were all mentioned in the great tafsir Ibn
Qathir.
After a really long time of studying and researching the story, inshallah we will try
to tell you the most logical version of the story from Ibn Qathir but as always Allah
Subhanahu Wa Taala knows the best.
During the 10th and the 13th year of Muhammad Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam's Prophethood,
one night in Makkah after praying his ishah prayer, the Prophet was taking a rest next
to the Kaaba.
At that time angel Jibril peace be upon him came with a small white horse and it was called
Al Burak.
First, Jibril peace be upon him opened Muhammad Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam's chest and cleaned
his heart with the Zamzam water, afterwards he put it back into his chest.
The angel requested Muhammad Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam to ride the Burak.
Instantly the Burak started to fly.
One step of the magical creature covered a great long distance and because of that within
a very short time they reached a holy place which was Masjid Al Aqsa.
Then Prophet Muhammad Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam went inside the mosque and prayed to Raka
to respect the mosque.
That prayer that he prayed is called Tahiyatul Masjid.
Then Jibril peace be upon him offered a glass of milk and a glass of wine to Muhammad Sallallahu
Alaihi Wasallam as a guest.
The Prophet rejected the glass of wine and instead accepted the milk.
Jibril peace be upon him became very happy and said that that was a very good decision
to accept milk and reject the wine.
Even though the Prophet had just went on a journey from Mecca to the Masjid Al Aqsa,
there was still another journey that was waiting for Muhammad Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam.
Then after they were well rested, Angel Jibril and the Prophet started their journey to
the sky.
When they reached the first sky, Jibril peace be upon him requested angels to open the
sky door.
Many different books use the word sky and heaven as the same thing.
But many scholars agree that the sky and the heaven are two different things.
So after they went through the first sky door, Muhammad Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam saw
our father of mankind, Prophet Adam peace be upon him.
They were both very happy and gave salam to one another.
Muhammad Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam saw that all of the good people's soul were on the
side of Adam peace be upon him and all the bad people's soul were on his other side.
So Muhammad Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam became very sad and started to cry.
Muhammad Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam and Angel Jibril peace be upon them continued on with
their journey to the second sky.
Jibril peace be upon him again requested the door angels to open the gate.
After entering the second sky, Muhammad Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam saw two prophets, Isa
or in English Jesus and Yahya peace be upon them.
They all gave salam to one another as soon as they met.
Then Muhammad Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam and Jibril peace be upon them moved their journey
up to the third sky.
After the third sky gate opened, Muhammad Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam met the most beautiful
and handsome prophet in the world which was Yusuf peace be upon him.
The fourth sky Prophet Muhammad Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam met Prophet Idris peace be
upon him.
Then in the fifth sky the prophet met Harun peace be upon him and then after that the
great prophet Musa peace be upon him on the sixth sky.
When he saw Prophet Muhammad Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam, Musa peace be upon him started to
cry that he had less followers in the heaven and he also said that Muhammad Sallallahu
Alaihi Wasallam would have more followers in the heaven.
When Muhammad Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam reached the seventh sky, he saw a prophet
Ibrahim peace be upon him.
He was rest next to the Baitul Ma'mur mosque which was located directly on top of the Kaaba.
But every day only 70,000 angels are allowed to pray in that mosque and that is a chance
that they only get once in their lifetime.
How does the Baitul Ma'mur mosque look like?
According to some scholars, Baitul Ma'mur looks just like the Kaaba but Allah SWT knows
the best.
After meeting Prophet Ibrahim peace be upon him, Angel Jibrael and Muhammad Sallallahu
Alaihi Wasallam both went to the highest point of limit of all creation and then they saw
Sidratul Muntahar which was the biggest tree in paradise, its size of its fruits and leaves
were extremely big.
It was also covered by golden butterflies.
It was so beautiful that no one could ever explain it.
Over there Muhammad Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam saw Angel Jibrael peace be upon him in his
real form and shape.
He was very big and the Prophet saw that the Angel Jibrael had 600 wings.
At that point Allah SWT talked to Muhammad Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam.
According to some scholars, Angel Jibrael peace be upon him stopped there and Muhammad
Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam went beyond the tree to talk to Allah SWT.
But Allah SWT knows the best.
Did Muhammad Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam see Allah SWT with his own eyes?
No, Muhammad Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam did not see Allah SWT.
No human eye can ever see Allah SWT.
Allah SWT talked to him like Musa peace be upon him and gave him a special message to
the Muslims.
Allah SWT and Muhammad Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam were there talking about the daily prayer.
At first the daily prayer was 50 times a day.
After receiving Allah SWT's message, Muhammad and Jibrael peace be upon them started their
journey to come back to the earth.
On their way, Musa peace be upon him stopped them and wanted to know what that special
message was.
When Musa peace be upon him knew about 50 times daily prayer, he advised Muhammad Sallallahu
Alaihi Wasallam to go back to Allah SWT and request to have a less number of daily prayers.
Muhammad Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam did not know what to do.
Then he turned to Jibrael peace be upon him for his advice.
Jibrael peace be upon him told Muhammad Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam that he could go back and
request for less prayers.
So then he went back to the Sidratul Muntaha and requested Allah SWT for less number of
prayers.
Allah SWT accepted his request and lowered it to 10 times of daily prayer.
And then the Prophet started their journey back to Makkah again.
Again Musa peace be upon him stopped them and advised him to request Allah SWT to have
less number of daily prayers.
Muhammad Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam went back again and requested Allah SWT for less
number of prayers.
This time as a gift to Muslims Allah SWT gave only 5 times of a daily prayer.
Again on the way Musa peace be upon him stopped them and advised for less.
Musa peace be upon him told that Allah SWT wanted his people to do less but still his
people did not do their duties.
At that point Muhammad Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam did not feel comfortable to go back
again and ask for less daily prayers.
Suddenly the Prophets could hear Allah SWT's voice and then Allah SWT told them that it
was an easy order to follow for Muslims.
Allah SWT also said that if we pray our 5 times daily prayer Allah SWT will give us
the same reward as praying 50 times a day and his order was final.
During the journey of the Mar'aj Jibrail peace be upon him showed hell and heaven to Muhammad
Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam.
Others have different opinions about that but Allah SWT knows the best.
Jibrail peace be upon him also showed the most beautiful cauldron, river and stream which
Allah SWT gave Muhammad Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam as a gift after his young son Abdullah
had died.
On his journey he also saw the angel named Malik without a smile.
He was the angel who was the guard for hell.
In different Hadiths we know Allah SWT showed some examples of the bad people's punishments.
Muhammad Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam once again returned to the Masjid al Aqsa before
the morning prayer fudger time.
All of the Prophets came and got together for the first mandatory prayer of the day
which was fudger prayer.
That prayer was the first official prayer that was prayed in Islam after Allah SWT finalized
the daily 5 times prayer.
Angel Jibrail peace be upon him asked Muhammad Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam to lead the prayer
and because of that it was proof that Prophet Muhammad Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam was the
leader of all the Prophets.
And after the prayer Jibrail peace be upon him and Muhammad Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam
started their journey back to Makkah.
On their way Muhammad Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam saw a group of people who were coming to Makkah.
Muhammad and Jibrail peace be upon them returned to Makkah before sunrise.
