Hi, so we've all been fascinated by what you can do with slush language models.
And when you have chat to PT, you can talk to it and do things thanks to new plugins
that got published a couple of days ago.
But you cannot make it your own, there are some wrappers down the road made by different
small teams.
Well, what we're building is something that will give you much more flexibility or what
you can do with slush language models.
Basically, you can grab one of these models about this assistance or build a new one from
scratch that will get you attention for assistance that you can share with these people.
The number of assistance we have here and you can, it has skills.
Skill is a build of a system to do something for you.
This is a copy and so on.
You can add as many skills as you want and each skill it has a prompt inside it, it may
have a prompt or it may have a connection to an API and you can just talk to it.
This is a script I took from Prometheus movie, viral video, kind of like a decade ago, David
8.
I mean, we're just getting there.
I'll type, who are you?
And this is a GPT-35 fence ring, so it takes some time to go open the API and this is it.
You can change the model to blooms, for example, save and test, who are you?
The thing is, you will see how different these models are, so 7.1, the probability of blooms
is much weaker than GPT-J, save and test, and it's going to behave also in a very simple
manner, David, and if you talk to GPT, save and test, click on you, you'll probably see
something a little bit more intelligent than the GPT-35, oh, not really, what can you do
with it?
And yeah, it basically uses a script you put it here, not bad, and once you're happy with
what you've done, you can click here, share, and once you share, you'll be over right here
and then you will be able to talk to it, help me to organize my project work, and this is
an end user experience where people can talk to your assistant and they can do it visually,
in a typical way like here.
So this is a very simple thing, we've been working for a few last months, I wonder what
you think, and what to do with it, let me know.
