Hello and welcome, everyone. It's July 22nd, 2024. This is active inference guest stream
82.3. The projective wave theory of consciousness. Robert Warden will give a presentation. And
we have several others to join and comment and give their insights. So thank you, everyone,
for joining. And Robert, please begin the presentation. And also, Robert, close the
YouTube on your side. All good.
This is active inference guest stream 82.3.
Right. I've...
It's coming through on my loudspeaker, which is a problem.
Yeah, it's all good. Like, all good.
Okay. So this is a talk about the projective wave theory of consciousness. And there's
an already a paper about it on archive this month. So you can look at the paper if you
like. But let me start by describing roughly the road map for the talk. The projective
wave theory is very closely related to the projective consciousness model PCM. And we're
fortunate to have three of the authors of that model on the call today. But I'm going
to give this talk in four different parts. The first part is talking about data. And
the idea is that any theory of consciousness has to fit the data has to fit some data in
order for us to believe it. And so the question is, what kinds of data is there about consciousness
that the theory has to fit? And I shall be arguing that the main kind of data we have
is spatial consciousness. So that's part one of the talk. Part two, I shall talk about
the projective consciousness model PCM. And to my mind, the big virtue of the PCM is that
it does predict account for just that the spatial nature of consciousness. And in that
it's a great deal. It does a great deal better than many neural theories of consciousness.
And I shall probably pause at that point after parts one and two and have discussion about
the first two points there. But before that, I think the PCM has great strengths. But I think
in common with all neural theories of consciousness, it has three problems. And I shall talk about
what those problems are. But I shall emphasize that those problems are not specific to the PCM.
If you buy into the classical neural model of the brain that neurons do everything,
then whatever your theory of consciousness, I think you're going to have these problems. And so
in order to get out of those problems, we have to do something that's not in the classical neural
model that assumes that neurons in the brain do everything. So we have to add something to
the PCM. And the something we have to add is there in three. The assumption we're going to add to
it is quite a big one. It's an assumption that there is a wave in the brain which stores 3D
spatial information. In other words, neurons don't do everything. And then part four of the
talk, I shall bring those two and three together to a projective wave theory of consciousness and
talk a little bit about firstly how it solves the neural problems, but secondly, how it fits the
data and some more general considerations about it. So that is the root map of the talk. So
we start off with what are the reasons to believe some theory, whether it's theory of
consciousness or anything else. Why do we believe it? Basically, we believe a theory because it
fits data. And there's a complexity measure here that needs to fit more data, which you can measure
in bits, if you like, than the complexity of the assumptions you put into it. If you just put in a
huge number of assumptions and fit a small amount of data, that's no use. So there's a kind of
Bayesian balance between the assumptions you put into a theory and the data it fits. And I've
illustrated the Bayesian balance a pair of scales here. And I've measured the complexity of the
theory and the amount of data it tests by a so-called zip test, which simply says you describe
these things in text files, you zip them up and you see how big they are. So established theories
in science, like the theories of physics or chemistry, have a hugely positive Bayesian balance.
They have quite few assumptions and they account for huge amounts of data. So how can we get to
that point with the theory of consciousness? How can a theory of consciousness produce a positive
Bayesian balance between its assumption and the data it accounts for? So the question arises,
what is the data we have to test theories of consciousness? And there's a big problem,
which is well known, that consciousness is a private experience. So there's not much public
data about it. But there are several kinds of data we can use, such as data about levels of
consciousness, alertness and being asleep and so on, data about quality. And they are problematic
because they're private phenomena. But nevertheless, two people can agree something about similarity
scales of their quality, like different colors being similar or different. And the form C is the
shapes of things in spatial consciousness. And I shall argue that the main manifestation of
consciousness, which we have, what we're experiencing right now, is a 3D spatial model of the world
around us. And that 3D model is very detailed and quite faithful to the real world around us.
And so that has a large information content. Going down the list, there's conscious imagination,
there is consciousness of the self, there are anomalies and illusions of consciousness,
and there is the hard problem, if you like, the existence of consciousness itself.
Now, I shall argue that point C, the shape of spatial consciousness gives us much more data
to test any theory than any other type of data. So what's the testable data in spatial consciousness?
Spatial consciousness is like a 3D model of the real world around you. That's what you're
experiencing right now. And it has a lot of the geometry of the real world, and particularly
straight lines in consciousness correspond to straight lines in the real world. And you can
test this. I won't go into the years of how. So this agreement between our conscious experience,
which is quite information rich, and the real world around us, which is obviously information
risk, gives a lot of data to test any theory of consciousness. And I suggest roughly it gives
us thousands of bits, even in a few seconds. And I shall suggest that no other form of data
about consciousness comes anywhere close to this in terms of testable information content.
So if you really want to prove your theories right, then it's got to account for the spatial
form of consciousness if you're going to believe it. And down at the right here, I put my conclusion
that spatial consciousness is, if you like, the elephant in the room, consciousness theory.
So we have to consider how the brain does spatial cognition. And all animal brains pretty much do
that. They have to understand 3D's local space for a very fundamental reason,
just to control their every movement, to move every movement of their limbs. They have to
understand 3D space around them. And there's been huge selection pressure to do this well.
And we believe that animals do it very well, even insects do it quite well.
And also it appears that most of the animal brain is devoted to that.
Now, if we assume a Bayesian hypothesis about cognition, then the way animals do that is to
build a maximum likelihood 3D model of local space in their brains from their sense data.
So it becomes fairly natural to expect that spatial consciousness is going to be linked
to this spatial model. And the question is, is it a purely neural model as a classical
neural models of the brain? And if it is, how does neuron firing represent 3D space? And this is
quite a typical problem. And really, there are very few viable solutions to it. But I shall
switch now, I shall put that problem on one side and switch to the projective consciousness model,
PCM, which has been developed by David and his collaborator since about 2017,
and it's built on the free energy principle. So it's based on a Bayesian model of local space
in the brain. And for its neural process model, it assumes the process model of the free energy
principle. And so the PCM assumes that the brain holds a 3D projective transform model
of local Euclidean space. And the key thing is that PCM then predicts that spatial consciousness
consciousness is like that model. And this is a very good prediction. It agrees very well with
data. For instance, the trivial fact that straight lines in your consciousness are straight lines in
the real world. So the PCM has a good Bayesian balance. I should say this is very distinctive
amongst many theories of consciousness. Very few of them talk about the spatial nature of
consciousness. And if they do, they probably treat it as a bit of an afterthought that the PCM
puts it out in the front. And I think that's a very positive feature of it. And it has a good
Bayesian balance. And it does make various other predictions, which people have talked about in
the papers, makes predictions about illusions of consciousness, and makes predictions about
predictive imagination and planning actions. Now, I don't think those are quite as significant
in the Bayesian balance in the agreement with the data as the basic agreement with the form of
consciousness right now. Consciousness from sense data. But I shall say the PCM has three
difficulties. I shall emphasize they're not difficulties of the PCM alone. I believe they
are difficulties of any neural theory of consciousness. And I'll just list them briefly
here because there's going to be a slide describing them. The first difficulty is neural
selection. How do we pick out just those neurons which cause consciousness from all the others
that don't? And the second one is neural precision and speed. We know that our conscious model of
space is a very detailed and precise one. Can you do that with neuron firing? I would suggest you
can't. And the third one is a complex decoding problem that, anyway, I'll come onto that.
So I'll describe these three in a minute. But the emphasis is that they are not just problems
of the PCM. They are difficulties for any neural theory of consciousness, for instance,
the IIT or Global Neural Workspace Theory and so on. So what are the three difficulties?
The neural selection problem. Most neurons in the brain are not linked to consciousness. We know
that from cortical lesions. We don't interrupt consciousness. Or the cerebellum, or beyond
Merca, has written quite extensively about this. But neuron theories of consciousness say that the
activity of some neurons causes consciousness and not others. So the question is how are those
special neurons selected? And as far as I know, there's no sound physical basis to pick out some
neurons from all the others. So you build in some selection assumptions into your hypothesis,
but those form a debit in your Bayesian balance. So they're a debit for any neural theory of
consciousness. The second difficulty is how do neurons represent space? Now, there are several
possible ways of having neurons representing 3D space. If you represent 2D space, can you return
to sharing the screen? Oh, sorry, I've lost sharing, have I? All good.
So how do neurons represent 3D space? There are several ways they might do it,
but they all have problems of precision and speed. For instance, there is a Bayesian computational
model of how animals build 3D internal model of space from their sense data. And this is already
on one of the AI live streams that this YouTube address. But that model shows that in order to
build a 3D model of space, even for a small animal like a bee, you need memory storage errors to be
roughly the order of 1% as small as that. Whereas if you model neurons accurately,
properly, they don't give you this precision because in a neuron, most theoretical models of
neurons are ideal abstract neurons whose outputs are real variables of high precision.
And that's shown in the top of this picture here. Whereas actually, neurons' outputs are spike trains,
which in the short time scale gives very limited precision. For instance, in a fifth of the second
possible time scale for consciousness, you may get about 10 pulses. And that gives you a precision
of only 30% in that time scale. So the precision you get from neural representations
is very different from what you need to build a decent 3D model or what we experience in consciousness.
And this, I think, hasn't been really spotted very much because most of the neural models that
you see in the literature, they don't model spike trains. It's difficult enough to model
networks of neurons. And so they use abstract, precise neurons. So that's the second difficulty.
How can neurons store a precise and responsive fast model of 3D space like the one we experience?
Finally, can you see that change? Third difficulty? The third difficulty is what I
call the hard triangle because conscious experience, which is C in this picture here,
is a faithful, hardly distorted model of the real world. And there's the real world, A,
and there's consciousness awareness C. But what the model we have found in the brain are two
dimensional models and very distorted models. And so they're many different models, and they're
highly complex encoding to get from A to B. So if you want to get back from B to C, you have to do
very complex decoding to undo all the complex coding that most species brains do. And so ABC
is the hard triangle. You have to have complex decoding assumptions in any neural theory of
consciousness. And the worst thing about maybe is that the decoding has to be species specific.
It can't be universal decoding. So those are the three difficulties for any neural theory
of consciousness, including the PCM, I believe. So that's where we've got to I've covered
topics one and two of this talk. And now I think we'll break for any
discussion or contributions. Thank you very much, Robert, for your presentation.
Up to now, I can follow it very well. I think you point out very important issues.
I should say, and perhaps, you know, we scan that from the standpoint of the PCM,
even though indeed we have framed it in the context of active influence and more specifically
the free energy principle, we do not necessarily
entail, it does not necessarily entails that we buy or we endorse or we believe in
the current neural network models that are used in this context. Personally, I've been
a neuroscientist for many years. I've done a lot of electrophysiology, lesion work with human
patients. Also, I worked with Rodent. I've done a lot of functional imaging and modeling.
And at some point in my career, I thought that I did not understand the brain well enough and I
stopped doing neuroscience. I stopped caring quote unquote about the brain. And for us,
what is the most important in the PCM as this point is all you say is that we can capture some
aspect of this phenomenology that seems essential, etc. So personally, I have given up at this point
trying to devise or figure out any realistic neural network models. And when you take just
one neuron, as you said, Robert, it's a universe. You just think about how receptors are up or down
regulated through fast gene expression or dendritic trees and their complexities and their geometry
plays a role in computation. I don't believe that the spiking of the neurons, which we often call
the output of the neuron are necessarily where we should be looking at. And I don't know where we
should be looking at. I committed an odd paper a long time ago in 2015, in which I kind of said,
well, I explained why I'd given up hope at this point about brain science to account for that.
Because I think we don't understand the brain. I think they are principal. We haven't figured out
yet by far. And my guess was that a bit like by analogy with computer science, there are layers
of abstraction, mechanism of virtualization that hide the detail of the hardware, which we don't
understand at all. And so far, it's a very open-ended thing. So to me, what matters the most about
the PCM at this point is with respect to the brain, it is neutral. We don't know. At this point,
I have absolutely no hypothesis, except very gross anatomy of hypothesis, but also possible
details about, but you're right. That's the hard problem. And personally, I have given up on trying
to account for it. Thanks, David. I find so much to agree with there. And so, yeah, we don't understand
what's going on in the brain. Maybe neurons are doing something much more complicated than simple
spike trains. But maybe there's also this wave. And we'll talk about that. Carl, Ken, do you have
any comments at this stage? Carl, you want to go ahead? Or I can, if you don't mind, I'll just follow
up with, I completely agree with what David said. And I will say my own sort of approach to the
problem has always been sort of agnostic about the underlying realization. So I've kind of started
from, in my own thinking anyway, always from the point of view of phenomenology with some kind of,
you might say, general acceptance of some sort of physicalism, but agnostic about the details of
that physicalism. So agnostic about whether it's exactly what goes on in the brain or what level
and so on. I guess I've tended to, even though I agree you can't exclude it a priori, I've tended to
kind of think, well, quantum mechanical theories are probably barking up the wrong tree. But that's
just like my gut on that. And then I'm sorry, personally, Ken, at this point, I'm so confused
about the brain and about the physical nature of the universe that I'm even totally open that the
whole thing is quantum. I have no idea. Okay. Yeah, as I said, it's just sort of like my gut on that,
but not I can't really defend it in detail for a number of reasons, going to my own ignorance.
But and I would just add that, and I agree, I think the way you presented the PCM
generally was exactly right. You did mention that we do have something to say about
imagination, like action planning, and about anomalies and illusions. And we,
you know, we agree with you, I think that the main set of data we aim to capture,
or the spatial, the spatial component of consciousness, and the perspectival spatial
component, like, you know, the project, what we use, projective geometry to capture. But then we
do try to, as you know, try to derive certain other bits of parts of the relevant data from
that basis. So accounting for illusions, like the moon illusion and the AIMS room illusion,
and accounting for imaginative action planning. And also, I should add some data about
self awareness. So we have a paper on self awareness in this context as well.
So yeah, I think that's all I got so far. But this is this has been very interesting so far.
Great, thanks again. Carl on.
Carl, can I make any comments?
No, I'm just enjoying this as a spectator, accounting for both sides.
One comment, it seems to me that we're focusing on the distinction between
principles on about how the brain makes sense of its world and the process theories that attend
those principles in terms of instantiation. And there's an agnostic approach I think you
can take in relation to process theories. So I'm interested to see how much
Robert's focus will be on the process theory and the actual substrates which
I think is interesting from the point of view of actually simulating this kind of
inference and also being able to reproduce it in silico in terms of creating
a kind of artificial intelligence that has this kind of competence. So there may be a more
pragmatic focus. I was intrigued by the previous slide, this hard triangle
Just go to it there.
Yeah, I didn't quite resonate with this. I think for a start the notions of encoding and decoding
for people like me should be usefully unpacked. So everything in terms of belief updating
is some kind of mapping or morphism or relationship. So I'm assuming
Mapping is a good word for it. Yeah.
Okay, so the world generates sensory inputs and then the brain represents those inputs.
I mean for B you just imagine the visual cortex with a highly distorted
version of space in it all around the fovea and so on and all the other cortical maps a highly
distorted representation of space. Somehow you have to tram all those back into an undistorted
representation. So you've got to decode the encoding that's gone on.
I see. Right, so the conscious awareness is still part of the brain somewhere.
It must come from the brain somewhere, I think.
Yes, we all. I see. So you're using encoding and decoding in a sort of
distorting, undistorting. It's like a distorting merely but undistorted.
But I guess it relates to Carl's distinction between neural substrate and process theory.
Because indeed if you look at the classical sort of quote unquote 2D maps in the cerebral cortex
for instance the visual cortex with your retinotopy where you see a lot of
deformation but also somatosensory cortex you think about the classical you know map of the body.
And you are saying well if that's the way it is kind of represented quote unquote at the level of
that substrate then since it is deformed and we don't experience it that way we should somehow
have a process on top of that that use some morphism to transform this deformation.
I'm saying our theory of consciousness has to tell us how that unscrambling distortion happens.
Yeah, but I believe that the level of observation that we are considering here
for instance those 2D quote unquote 2D because they are not really 2D but
cortical maps retinotopic or somatotopic or you know topic maps are a very quote unquote
lower level of processing which might be very far away from what is going on.
It might be some of a super representation somewhere but not far yet.
Yeah and it might not be visible at the level of the anatomy.
Well yeah those are alternatives I agree.
Okay so sorry Carl I interrupted but I wanted to make this precision too.
Yeah no that clarifies it thank you.
But Carl I mean I think we can all be agnostic about certain things in the process model.
I think you and I at least are not agnostic about Bayesianism.
Yeah I would put the sort of you know the notion of
sentience of the kind we're talking about as a process of Bayesian belief updating.
I put that at the sort of principle level sort of at the mechanics that doesn't commit to
an infrastructure or a realization or a process that realizes that
you know that kind of principle that kind of mechanics.
So I think the spatial wave theory is really a commitment to a process theory
that could you know happily accommodate Bayesian belief updating
and its particular application the context of spatial perception and
projective you know the projected consciousness model.
You're muted.
Oh yes.
Okay so moving on.
So we've done one and two and what we're going to do in three is add something to the PCM
and the thing we're going to add is not a little thing it's the assumption the hypothesis that
neurons don't do everything but there is a wave in the brain which stores 3D spatial information
so that's what I'm going to talk about next. So here's the hypothesis there is a wave in
the brain that represents 3D space so it assumes there is some nearly spherical region of the brain
with a diameter d and it holds waves which couples the neurons and there the sphere is illustrated
and a couple of waves wavelength lambda two that green wave and wavelength lambda one a
shorter wavelength that red wave and those waves represent things in space and they represent
the red thing r1 and the green thing r2 so there's a kind of inverse relationship there
the shorter the wavelength the longer the distance to the thing that's being represented
but obviously if it's a if it's a spherical region you can have waves in any direction
so you can represent any direction and any distance up to a maximum which is defined by the minimum
wavelength so that wave can represent lots of different things and the hypothesis is that
that wave acts as a working memory for space it's really like a hologram now one issue with that is
that if you want to represent objects at very large distances away then you get into wavelengths
that's too short so that's why you may need a projective transform of space to pull in those
long distances to be able to represent them on the brain on the wave by the way the evidence
for this wave is going to be described in another youtube livestream which we're making next week
is going to be at that address so oh well there's a wave based spatial memory form
it can represent approximately d over lambda cubed independent positions which is quite a lot
and it can give you spatial precision the order of lambda over d and the point is that this can
easily be one percent or better which is the precision you need so there are significant
benefits to wave storage it has high capacity you can put many objects in it there's a high
precision it can be fast and it has low spatial distortion it is just like a hologram
and it's a very simple and direct representation of space so a spoiler looking at part four of
the talk is that this is very much like spatial consciousness question is there any evidence
for such a wave i think there is evidence and there's three kinds of evidence first two come from
brain anatomy because there are spherical regions in the brain which are very well suited to hold
this way and the mammals there is a thalamus and that's shown in green on the left of the picture
and you see it's approximately spherical and that is very suitably connected for holding spatial
information it's connected to all the sense data and it's connected to all the bits of cortex that
work out what to do with the sense data and similarly in the insect brain there is a
central body in the very center of it that is approximately spherical and it's very well preserved
shape in all insect species so those are both pieces of evidence for a wave in the brain there
is a place for it uh so i believe there are three lines of evidence for a wave one is the
computational neuroscience which i've mentioned before that spatial cognition is a very important
thing but neural memory for it is too imprecise and too slow whereas a wave storage model can
possibly overcome these problems so that's the yellow evidence there's evidence from the
insect central body that is nearly round very central very well connected and there's evidence from
the mammalian thalamus it's also round and well connected but there's also what i call a smoking
gun for a wave in the thalamus that if you don't assume a wave the anatomy of the thalamus doesn't
make sense but i won't go into that in this talk so together i believe these give quite strong
support for the wave hypothesis in fact they give it a probability of 0.5 approximate even if you
try and weight the odds against it as i say you can see the discussion of this in another youtube
livestream we're about to make so then that's on from part three to part four of talk
assume there is a wave in the brain which holds the near projective transform of 3d space
and this wave is serving a very essential role to understand space to control all movements for
any animal and the hypothesis simply is the wave is the origin of consciousness that neurons have
nothing to do with consciousness at all it comes entirely from the wave this solves three problems
the three problems that i outlined before firstly the neural selection problem you've no selection
problem because neurons have nothing to do with consciousness the precision and speed problem the
wave has sufficient precision and speed to do it and the decoding problem the coding in the wave is
just a Fourier transform so it's a very simple coding in encoding and it's a very simple decoding
to give you back conscious experience so it has solved those three problems of neural theories
but the main thing is that spatial like the PCM preserving the merit of the PCM the spatial form
of consciousness agrees very well with our conscious experience it has to have a has to be
projected because we need the projection transform to pull in objects from very large distances
to represent them by a minimum wavelength so in summary the projective wave theory has a
positive basing balance doesn't have any nasties about it and it agrees very well with the main
source of data about consciousness so just some aspects of this theory what is the physical
nature of the wave a big objection might be we've never seen it in a way because i believe
it's probably not an electromagnetic wave or an electromagnetic field and the main reason i believe
that is that electromagnetic fields on their own don't store information for the time periods we
need to store information and now electromagnetic fields might be part of the answer but i think
they're not the whole answer and the big question then is why have we not detected this wave and
brain it has been there all these years i think the reason for that is we will expect if there is
a wave representing space we will expect it to evolve to have very low intensity so its energy
consumption is very small and having that low intensity we simply haven't known how to look for
it now coming to quantum possibilities the wave might be a coherent quantum excitation
and those increasing evidence that quantum effects do have a player a role in biology
and it might even be a boson condensate a be seen are those examples of those
are superconductors and superfluids they're very rare state in nature but the key thing
about a bc is a superconductor can hold information for unlimited time so it would be good for memory
and they're a very rare and distinctive state of matter and so if you assume that consciousness
comes from them you don't get to a trough of panpsychism or it might not be a quantum effect
because i think that this question is entirely open so we'll set that on one side and that's future
exploration there is an issue about the evolution of consciousness uh we know that consciousness
is our consciousness is like the real world it's very like the real world and the question is why
is this and you think well it must have evolved that way because there's some need for it to be
like the real world but in neural theories there's a problem because neural computation in the brain
the classical neural model is classical dynamics not quantum physics and is local and so consciousness
is a non physical non local effect and they don't have any effect on neurons firing so the result
is that consciousness in a neural theory has no causal effect on fitness that means there's no
selection pressure on it to make it the way it is so in a neural theory of consciousness we're
driven to this slightly awkward conclusion that the special form of consciousness that we have
is just a bit of an accident that seems very unlikely whereas in the projective wave theory
there is a good evolutionary reason for consciousness being like it is that is that 3d spatial cognition
is very important wave is an essential part of it so the wave has been shaped by evolution
and it's been shaped to be just like the real world because that's the best way
of controlling so consciousness then is determined by the wave and that means consciousness has evolved
to be like well so the wave theory solves another problem there finally the unity of
consciousness uh you may ask this question occasionally why do i only have one consciousness
and not several parallel consciousnesses and this also is something with difficulty neural
theories because we have plenty of neurons in the brain to have many parallel consciousnesses
and brains can do some things in massive parallelism and if we had multiple parallel
consciousness it might be useful for instance for parallel planning of action to see which one works
that's a difficulty for neural theories the wave theory doesn't have this difficulty because it
accounts for the unity of consciousness there's only one wave in the brain that is the source of
consciousness so there can only be one consciousness
i think i'm on to the last slide now pretty much the last slide
if this theory is taken seriously it makes consciousness into a scientific problem rather
than a philosophical problem because a wave in the brain if a wave in the brain is the key
to understanding consciousness well if there's no wave then this theory is wrong get about it
but there is a wave i think there are very strong reasons to link it to consciousness
because it has such a good fit to consciousness so the exist whether or not the wave exists
that's a scientific question it's not a question for philosophy and i think there's a good prospect
of answering it in the next 10 years so in 10 years time either this theory will be the only
theory of consciousness or it'll be wrong and forgotten i think that's a virtue in a theory
so um finally last slide on the hard problem david charmer's hard problem the
predicted wave theory doesn't solve that problem what i'd say about that is all science has hard
problems there's the hard problem of consciousness why is consciousness linked to matter there are
hard problems in physics like what is spacetime or what is the most fundamental particle
or the hard problem of cosmology why is there a universe so hard problems just don't have an answer
scientists were like children keeping asking why say why this why that and we can go on asking why
for as long as we like so for instance for fundamental particles we thought there was
matter we thought there were atoms we got to protons we got to quarks and we keep going on
and we'll never get the final answer but we still do science so i'm not too worried about the hard
problem consciousness uh so that is all and i've just laid out a few questions one might want to
discuss in the remaining time maybe you could share your slide again so we can see the question
if you have them on the slide uh sorry is it not sharing now i see the slide still um yeah so you
can leave it maybe check your view david and then you can leave that up and we can have a panel
discussion okay well thanks a lot um those who are here can and carl and david please feel free to
comment and also people will write some questions in the chat and i'll read one in if if you pause
but anyone here who'd like to give a reflection or or any comments that would be awesome
could i go ahead can you hear me yeah so uh if i may i i basically agree with what you say about
the hard problem just to take the very last thing that you mentioned about the hard problem
and this is why earlier on when you said that um you had kind of a list of sort of um you know when
you're i the idea of the bayesian balance for theories of consciousness and you mentioned the
existence of consciousness as itself something that might be a problem for all neuronal theories
of consciousness i think you did that and on the slide too yeah yeah so i i agree i think it's a
problem for any theory of consciousness even the kind of um more metaphysical theories that people
who reflect like chalmers and others uh panpsychists who reflect on the hard problem a certain way
end up with you can actually raise the same set of questions for for them so there's really no
progress there in my opinion so in other words if you take the hard problem as a kind of indication
that um well consciousness couldn't be physical or or either that or the physical world itself
must just be consciousness which is kind of the two directions they they go there i think that's
kind of misguided i mean we we have to sort of um accept that our ability to penetrate you know
cognitively um a priori into the nature of the cosmos is is limited so our the best we can do
is make models and you know based on the phenomenology and try to arrive at a model that would give us
some kind of neural uh or physical to speak more broadly uh physical um testable you know
hypothesis hypotheses we can test about the physical world what we think realizes consciousness and
it seems to me like that's exactly what you're doing and that's what i would think is is right
too but i i did want to ask you um when you say that um no neurons are linked to consciousness
in your own model um do you mean maybe i just don't understand exactly but then they're not
linked directly to consciousness okay but they're somehow involved in the realization of of the
wave is that oh they are absolutely they're controlling the wave they're setting up the wave
they're all on the cortex they're using sensitive to to fix the wave and it's the wave that makes
consciousness okay and on the issue of unity well so suppose we identify this type of wave
um i mean it's at least you know conceivable that we would find multiple such waves would you
think conceivable i think the evidence in the thalamus and the central body is one wave
okay and i think one wave is what you need to understand one space around you
okay so but if you found multiple such waves oh yeah absolutely that would be an issue
yeah okay i mean would you conclude that there must be multiple consciousnesses then in a single
brain or would you would you think that the theory is wrong no i would have a selection problem just
like neuron theories have a selection problem selecting neurons i'd have a problem selecting
which wave is conscious i see rather than conclude that there are multiple you want to avoid that
and my experience is i don't have multiple consciousness yes right but that might just
be because only one of them gets to report yeah absolutely you know like like the way they you
know i know it's debatable but the way they um you know often interpreted this the split brain
cases coming out of you know good question good question i mean i say one wave but we have two
thalamai so the assumption there is that those waves are linked and perhaps in split brain they
don't get linked okay i think two thalamai have one wave in them but that's a detail
i see and then when it comes to the kind of wave like so you you don't think it's an
electromagnetic wave uh you you think it might be a Bose einstein condense it that's that's a
hypothesis i think that caron's uh smith wants uh flow it's been around for some years yeah
alan sander caron smith in it and the book uh that's the yeah not not the book on the
origin the famous book on the origin of life but he wrote a book on consciousness back in
the 90s i think um yeah there was michael loughwood as well in the 80s i think it's a long history
okay so how um when you say that you think we'll be able to probe this within the next 10 years i
mean could you sort of sketch how that might go how we might be yeah i mean just this is not this
is probing the idea of the wave right as i say i think there are those three pieces of it says
neural models that you can't build decent neural models there is the thalamus and there is the
insect central body i think we can go further on each one of those we can test them we can test
the thalamus ideas much better using connectome data we can test the central body using
connectome data and we can test the computational models by just trying to build them and see
if we get in so there is science to be done to falsify this hypothesis and it may succeed in
falsifying it okay um but how would you measure uh such condensate i mean if you want to be able
to demonstrate the existence of the problem ideally you'd like to actually directly detect it i i
think it's a bit like when pauli in the 1930s predicted the neutrino he thought it's absolutely
impossible to detect neutrinos and it took 25 years to find it and i think it'll take a long time to
really find this wave in the brain because it's very low intensity probably and because we just
don't know how to look for it and i think we have to do the biophysics until we have a convincing
case for ours this kind of wave and then we can build a detector but until then i think we won't
detect it like neutrino or like dark matter similar thing predicted theoretically years ago but still
not detected i'll read a question from the live chat okay andrea val wrote thanks for sharing such
interesting ideas i wonder how the pcm or 3d model can explain or deal with the
unslash consciousness of emotions so where is affectant such in this kind of specialized model
yeah so maybe you want to join the pcm first david uh if it's okay but uh or probably maybe you
have read some of our recent work on that but we we we i have a specific answer to that question
yeah you go first yeah sorry about that uh well one thing that we realized working with that particular
geometry is it transform information in the sense of information in space you can think about
distribution in space for instance that are going to be changed by projective transformation
uh in a manner that affect directly entropy so if something is very far you know and you
have some uncertainty about the localization of these things so there is a probability function
about that represent that uncertainty about the localization of that thing uh uh and there is
only one thing in your field of consciousness to simplify the problem uh then the entropy of the
whole space if you if you consider the whole 3d space uh and some scalar on it that would
represent probabilities uh is uh uh uh is very small whereas uh when you get closer
for instance by imaginations the projective transformation that anticipates action you
get the object closer and you transform also the information the the variance if you wish of your
distribution so it became broader so the entropy increase actually has an effect of projective
transformation of the this on the distribution of information so how does that relate to emotion
what we realized is that it's kind of counts for some drives that are related to exploration
or exploratory behavior or search behavior to reduce reduce uncertainty or maximize information
uh and that just does that so basically the projective transformation uh uh by in virtue of
making probabilities function in space uh change their shape uh as a function of perspective taking
if you wish until or induce a drive to approach or avoid things or in in this context to approach
uh to have the approach behavior either through imagination or through actual
behavior because that will maximize information by increasing entropy of the object and you
have more details so that's something that we wrote a paper that is currently under review in
biological cyber analytics about that with Carl with uh sorry Grégoire Sergent-Pertu as first
author with a bright mathematician and we can do a demonstration and actually derive theorems about
that and also simulations that show interesting behaviors that depend on projective parameters
that will show that the behavior of the agent uh depending on the parameter will be more focused
so they will tend to always approach one object uh because they are driven by this anticipation
of increasing information through projective transformation uh but uh uh with other parameters
or values of the parameters on the contrary they start now oscillating between objects
they start losing focus as if they were kind of ADHD uh so there is a deep link between let's say
the evaluation of space the appraisal of space uh the drives that are uh that unfold from this
information and the behaviors that you have for instance approaching uh uh and that geometry
that very geometry we are talking about yield that type of thing so here we are talking about
what is typically described as epistemic emotion basically curiosity so we have natural curiosity
and part of it that drives behaviors is a result of the very geometry that represent information
and appraisal according to that theory we I cannot enter into the detail on that but you can also look
on uh papers that we wrote in what was that 2022 in uh uh the Journal of Theoretical Biology
in which we use little robots uh to demonstrate uh adaptive and maladaptive behaviors uh with
principles also derived from the geometry and the free energy principle or something equivalent uh
to get a wealth of effective behavior of approach avoidance but also uh a social cognition you know
you kind of we can kind of simulate social anxiety um we can we obtain joint attention
behavior as a result of mutual perspective taking uh and there are a lot of things we could account
that we can use in this model in this framework to account for emotion there is a lot of work ahead
but we believe that there is and we have good reason to believe there is a deep link between
space and emotion that's actually called aesthetics that consciousness is a form of aesthetics where
space and emotion are uh uh untangled and that we can fairly well uh account for many phenomena
that relate to emotion and behavior through this model but that's sorry for the long talk
that's great shall I give my my sole answer it is very much along the same lines that emotion
and space are deeply linked um in the wave model I mean the project the the model of space contains
all of space the external space and the internal space of the body and an important part of emotions
is feelings in the body and they are part of your conscious awareness part of the uh the wave model
or projective model just like the others and so basically this the pw theory and I think the pcm
says all consciousness is spatial we have qualia but they exist in space you hear a you hear words
you experience colors you experience all of those and you experience feelings all of them in space
so if you look at all the components of emotion human emotion for instance the words we
say to ourselves and the feelings we have in our bodies they are all represented in that
that conscious space so human emotion is a complex story which perhaps we don't want to go into but
basically it comes down to the way we experience it is in that model of space
and if I may I would have that if you take the standpoint of pure phenomenology and you ask yourself
when I experience an emotion for instance a deep anxiety or fear something very intense that is
very salient you can ask yourself how much of that phenomenology of that experience is actually
quote-unquote reducible to some spatial experience things for instance you know the experience of
the body with the heart that starts pounding in your chest and you feel it stronger your lungs
that change there you know you breathe faster for instance and you can feel that movement in your
body and all of that is spatial what you feel in your gut or your intestine get kind of stretch or
whatever we have metaphors but actually a lot of the details of the phenomenology of emotion
of feelings let's say I believe is actually spatial but it's overlooked people don't think about it
but in part about bodily awareness there is a lot of spatial stuff going on here
yeah I agree and mindful meditation talk a lot about space and talk a lot about the body
I think they put emotion in the right place
Carl or Ken want to add anything or I can look for another question in a live chat
well I have one question so I mean your current hypothesis is that this wave is
realized in the thalamus is that is that right that's right yeah um okay so that's sort of
would you know there's this kind of debate about whether or not consciousness is cortical or
or subcortical so this would definitely be on the sub yeah I mean I think there's a lot of
sense in the global workspace theory and they were talking originally about a workspace involving
the thalamus and the cortex I think it's it the consciousness really comes from the thalamus
integrating all that spatial information yeah so it is down so when the this follow-up uh but
yeah that's fine with me uh frankly but the follow-up question is um well it's not exactly a follow-up
to that it's more a general question about your way of thinking about it how I mean I know maybe
you can't really answer this until we have a more specific hypothesis about exactly what kind of
wave it is but could you say something generally about how the wave um integrates with or or
what's what's the right way to put it use it recruits and you know the kind of computational
apparatus of the brain so that you know you end up you decide to uh oh I'm gonna reach out you know
yay far and grab this this bottle how does the um how does you know computationally speaking
how does the wave integrate yeah I think that's a very good question and could have a very long
answer but basically um the wave integrates information from all the sensitive so from your
hands from your ears from your eyes all that information goes through the cortex and cortex
decides where it's coming from and broadcast signals back to the thalamus and the thalamus wave
integrates all those signals together to produce the Bayesian best model of what's happening at this
moment based on touch proprioception hearing sound hearing vision and so on so the computation
it's an integration of many sources of information uh possibly in a cycle between the thalamus and the
cortex okay but if if you need to um you know for example program and action so you've that's
kind of the you got your sensory um the integration of all your sensory information now you need to
program and action how to and maybe this is just my ignorance how how do waves how can waves be used
in a way to well generate programming of an action and then give it back to your your neurons I mean
I've only got beginnings of answers to that but basically a wave is very good for representing
3d geometry and for calculating displacements I know where my hand is I know my coffee cup is
so the wave helped me calculate the displacement which way I have to move my hand to pick up the
coffee cup so it's that kind of spatial calculation that the wave is always helping us do just to move
our limbs
I have a follow-up question on that if I may Ken do you mind yeah no go ahead go ahead you invoked
earlier Fourier transform and inverse Fourier transform so at least 3d Fourier transform
and inverse Fourier transform uh in order to do the encoding and decoding uh to you know go move
from the wave to the neural substrates back and forth um of course uh as you know uh there is a
limit in resolution uh when you do a Fourier transform uh you have the uncertainty principle
that rules the absolute yeah spatial resolution that you we can have of course it depends on
the number of samples I mean there are a lot of arithmetics behind it that you know you can be more
more and more precise as you have more and more bits of encoding if you wish um so uh you you
say that you know neural classical neural theories like build upon uh substrates that lack
enough precision uh in spatial resolution for instance to account for our experience would you
think that in the context of a wave theory uh the type of uncertainty principle uh that are attached to
it uh could cause a problem of resolution too or that it's the the granularity there is a problem
yeah there is a problem resolution alluded to it in the sides that is that if you got a minimum
wavelength lambda and a diameter of the sphere d the maximum precision is lambda over d and that
can't be infinite precision so that's the uncertainty principle but the idea of the Fourier
transform is not that something the brain of the Fourier transform it is the fundamental
bridging law for consciousness does the Fourier transform it says that consciousness is a Fourier
transform of the wave full stop and Fourier transform is there in fundamental laws of nature
like uh like quantum mechanics for instance so it's saying this is a fundamental law of nature
just like quantum mechanics says momentum is a Fourier transform position so the bridging law
for consciousness says the form of consciousness is a Fourier transform of the wave
i'll i'll make a short comment or carl do you want to
okay yeah just so thank you for the presentation and it's it's really interesting on on many
levels first you and the the paper goes into more detail on this you lay out what your priors are
and kind of the dependency structure to actually reach at least an estimate of probabilities
which is it's it's really interesting it gives a lot of opportunities for people to dig in
and say yeah i think that's 10% likely or no it's a zero this is not possible and kind of close
off a branch of inquiry um and also this discussion here about uh the algorithmic and the substrate
realization interaction with the substrate um and even this poly computation idea of of the
observer's model of what's happening in a process and kind of like the dark matter there like the
observer might suggest that there's a cryptographic process though they couldn't decode it and then
that would have an entropy distribution that that wouldn't be distinguishable in the absence of the
decryption from a noise but it would be like still a hypothesis kept alive and you could say
i think it's a one percent chance of this being the case um one one thought is how high precision
really is the spatial generative model in that there could be visual upscaling we know there's
attention play to make the periphery look sharp and have color vision yeah and so it's possible
that especially for like distant objects small objects that that they could be bundled and
just seen as a assembly as a larger object if they're touching like the car body and the wheel
and then and then the same way that in the periphery color and visual attention seemed to
give this extreme like wow that's like exactly this angle if you were to go over there with a
protractor but that could be as we're sort of seeing with diffusion and generative ai models
that could be quite a low resolution structural inference followed by a just compatible visual
realization that that also and then just last comment really interesting to explore how does
evolution and intergenerational change shape the substrate that the sense data wash over
so that non-stationary stable states whether they're rate encoding of neuron whether glial
electro and all these other even potentially more exotic options how are those stabilized
wow you I mean those are real questions to investigate particularly the precision of
our conscious experience and how much is quotes and illusion but I personally think that if you
look at something which is a straight line you experience it as a straight line with some kind
precision that's of the order of one percent a deviation of one percent from a straight line
would show and so that's a lower bound on the precision of your model but again there can be
lots of discussion about this yeah interesting coral any thoughts well just a few sort of
practical and specific questions um so the nature of this wave if I wanted to model it I mean are
we talking about a standing wave are we talking about a soliton are we talking about spherical
harmonics on a on the surface of the the thalamus are we talking about you know what kind of basis
set might I might might I use for this kind of wave even before asking questions about what
what the wave amplitude actually means what so what what's a functional mathematical form of this
wave are very good questions whether a standing wave or a moving wave I don't know the nice thing
about a boson sign condensate is that it acts like a long-lived quantum mechanical wave function in
other words it has phase which can be detected and it preserves phase for long times and the
wave might have to preserve phase in order to represent positions if you have a standing wave
like cos theta in some direction in this sphere then there's an ambiguity it represents plus
a direction and the minus direction and what happens to the minus direction so I would rather
have phase in the wave like a boson sign condensate but they are very deep questions and I don't do
the answers I mean we could start modelling and and see what happens just propose some answers
basically you just need a spherical volume that holds a wave excitation with a certain
maximum wave vector and we could try out standing waves moving waves and so on
I mean what would differentiate a condensate from a formulation in terms of a time dependent
spreading a wave equation um well I think your time dependence spreading a wave as everybody
knows the problem with quantum in the brain is that decoherence smashes it in 10 to the minus 20
seconds but that doesn't happen to a boson sign condensate a boson sign condensate is a long-lived
quantum state and so that's you know an ordinary spreading equation decoherence is going to smash
you in no time at all unless you have some incredibly clever insulation like in a quantum computer
right I mean you're lifting from the microscopic to the macroscopic I mean that that would suggest
that you you need very very low temperatures thermodynamically speaking yeah I mean yeah
nobody's observed a bc at room temperature yet but we've got close and the idea is that nature
might be clever on the wheel one angle perhaps from the quantum fvp from from carl and chris fields
and others is and so what I heard in the quant in the basis set question carl was um this brain
region that hosts the functionality or a core aspect of the functionality like one option is it is
like the the the wave is represented inside of that sphere like just there's probably multiple ways
even that could happen but it's like a little reconstruction wave but symbolized another option
would be like a holograph the representation of space is encoded on the interface of that region
with other regions and so that kind of surface is maintained and stabilized and has has information
flowing through it and then there wouldn't necessarily be some in the middle but it'd be
more like a ripple on a surface which was the the basis set question daniel that is very interesting
because in the thalamus there is the thalamic reticular nucleus trn which is a thin skin around
the surface of thalamus and you could just say that is holding the surface wave
and the wave is projected inside from the surface
it would be useful um if um to engage chris fields here there are two very distinct uses
of the word holographic here you could be referring to the holographic principle
yeah whereby all the information on the bulk on the inside say of the thalamus
was on the surface on the you know the reticular nucleus and the thalamus for example or just on
the surface you know in in one sense and and that is what the rest of the brain sees and possibly
consciousness sees um as a but that's a very different use of the notion of a holographic
projection using constructive and destructive interference to encode things um so but then
you're absolutely right my my my question was really searching you know um to distinguish are we
talking about um a wave function um in the thalamus are we talking about um application
of the holographic principle to um the classical information on the surface
of some bulk that was the thalamus and you could then argue if you if you wanted to that
the bulk which can never be observed from the outside unless you are the thalamus
you never know what's happening on the inside um you could only observe what's what's on the surface
you know that would be a different application a different notion of of the of a wave theory
that would certainly be consistent with quantum information theory and also consistent with
chris fields in a screen hypothesis that could be spatialized and endowed with
um a in virtue of the fact that the um on the holographic screen itself on the on the surface
there can only be classical information and that information can now be um cast in terms of classical
basing inference um but it also um relates to repeat chris fields in a screen hypothesis
which is um you know if you like taking quantum information theoretic principles
and trying to apply them to uh to consciousness that eludes the problem of um the of applying
quantum mechanics that is only relevant at the very small scale or for very precise or low
temperature systems uh you could you know if you want to apply that kind of maths to um
macroscopic phenomena then you have to apply it in a scale invariant context and I think
quantum information theory would certainly would certainly do that so then yes I was exactly sort
of trying to probe are we is the is pw read um the the the um bozeinstein condense condensate variant
of or alternative version of the projective wave is that committed to quantum mechanics
or is it really um an an expression of condensate like dynamics in the context of quantum information
theory uh and if it is does it live on a holographic screen or does it live in the bulk and if it
lives in the bulk what what are these wave functions over so these are the sort of practical
questions I was I was trying to get a very interesting questions and and it's all to play
forward and I I have an open mind about them but um my feeling is that the bc is a way of
getting past this decoherence argument from tick mark others that you know neurons have
to be classical because of and the bc it it does work very well as a memory that's that's the
practical point of it and working memory I think is what you need for space
awesome um perhaps each can give a last round of thought like where where do they feel this
takes them or what are they looking forward to and uh can then deviate and then carl and then
robert I yeah I don't have anything new dad just that the I find this really interesting and
I remember um reading uh Karen Smith's book kind of arguing that Bose and Bose-Einstein
condensates might be might be important for understanding consciousness and thinking that
among the quantum mechanical hypotheses I like that one the best so
but well as I said earlier I just sort of have this kind of bias but I'm totally willing to be
talked out of it um and uh yeah the the reason I mean I don't want to go into the details but
it kind I think Karen Smith's concern was about the unity of consciousness primarily
and um also kind of made the case that yeah as you were suggesting that maybe um maybe
as you put it nature is clever than we are and there's some way to realize that Bose-Einstein
condense it in the brain without it you know the decoherence issue but anyway I'm just to say this
is all very um very fascinating to me and I'm happy to continue the discussion next week right
isn't it next week yeah thank you Ken and from my part yes also looking forward to continuations
of the discussion yeah my um my direction of questioning will be um something on the lines
I think both Karen and David alluded to which is the um the link between spatial waves in the brain
and the projective geometry that they speak to and the information geometry that underwrites
belief updating and the basic mechanics that that inherit from from the free energy principle
being it classical mechanics the classical information processing or um you know looking at
using quantum information theory to you know to read um read belief updating I'm not sure I'm
going to get any answers but that's what I'm interested in hearing more about and the process
so if you haven't talked about mortal computation yet so we need to talk about mortal computation
oh yes David any last thoughts well the sort of a of an of a man who is a 15 hour and feels that
the more he learns the less he knows so it was predicted in all the books I had read in my years
and so I'm whole open to that complex universe I certainly believe that nature is clever than
I am for sure and I find that fascinating I like the rationale it's not like you know
there is a lot of stuff about quantum mechanics and the brain and consciousness that to me has
always sounded wishy washy if not completely wacko but I came back a bit from that I had a lot of
like Ken priors negative priors about it I remember once in Tucson Arizona at the famous
conference about the science of consciousness there were this bunch of guys who call themselves
they were German the quantum consciousness academy and they were all dressed in black and they are
all you know headset and microphone like that and they were like speaking nonsense as like a cult
but I found that very fascinated because I used to like very fascinating so I used to like this
conference back in the day when it was very psychedelic but that was kind of you know and I
come back to that because my ignorance I'm becoming aware more and more of my own ignorance
I say well why not and definitely I think that maybe Karl can try to do that if we could get
Chris Field in the next core role he would certainly be among us the most competent I tried
to get Grégoire Sergeant Pertruy to the call but he was not viable he's a very bright mathematician
and he master quantum mechanics like like if it was you know I don't know it's nothing for him
or Daniel Benka would be the best also is Grégoire but I'm afraid I won't be able to have them here
but I think it would be very useful to have some people like that who definitely know more than me
about those things and Chris might be interested to join I don't know Karl but looking forward to the
next to the next discussion one correction they were Swiss David they were they weren't David they
weren't they weren't what they were Swiss they were Swiss black I think yes they kind of look
like people from the matrix like oh they were Swiss they were not German they were Swiss
and they had a they had a leader they were always in contact with super hot
wow okay yeah please Robert and and and we'll contact Chris
thank you for all your contribution that that's been really fascinating I think the virtue of
this theory is that it is falsifiable in other words if there's no way in the brain forget it
this theory is wrong and that's exactly the question we're going to be looking at next week
I look forward to having your contributions awesome thank you all see you at 16 UTC on July 29th
okay thank you thank you bye
you
