Hello and welcome everyone. This is active inference guest stream 77.1. We're here with
Gareth Stubbs going to be discussing the police hunch. So Gareth, thank you very much for
joining. Looking forward to your presentation and the discussion we'll have.
Thank you so much for having me Daniel and it's an absolute pleasure to be on the stream.
One that I've watched many times and it's privileged to be able to talk through the
paper. I'm hoping to give you a little bit of background as to why I wrote the paper,
where I've come from, a little bit of history, talk through the paper itself and then hopefully
take some interesting questions. If there's anybody watching or from Daniel himself who's
always got some very insightful questions to ask. So if you're all right Daniel, am I
okay to start and get going? Yeah, okay. So a little bit of background. So I'm a relatively
new academic. I was a police officer for 18 years in the UK. I was in a Northern English
force and during my career I did a wide range of stuff from like frontline emergency response,
blue lights, to community policing, which is building relationships with the community,
gathering intelligence and then working on long term problem solving. Through to working
in national strategy, I worked for the College of Policing and more latterly the Home Office,
the Inspectorate. And the Inspectorate was an organisation where we would inspect police
officers and make sure that the standards of policing and how they recorded and monitored
and all that was up to a particular level. And for the last five years of my policing
career, I was studying a part-time PhD on the side and you would think with me having
written this paper it would be a police decision making or similar and it wasn't. I actually
studied using two theories which were representative bureaucracy and social embeddedness and it
was actually about how new police recruits navigated the police recruitment process via
the use of their social networks. It sounds complicated and convoluted and it was, I essentially
spent a lot of time trying to figure out how people gained advantage or disadvantage through
their current social networks whilst trying to get into the police with the hope of figuring
out why our recruitment process was so discriminatory. And I've been working on publishing from that
PhD, I've only just finished actually, over the last maybe two, three years whereupon
I went out to the Middle East to teach police officers now. There's two people that I want
to discuss during this stream, the first being two different groups of people, the first
one being Professor Friston who was just amazing when I contacted him and the other being two
very well known criminologists called Ken Pease and Jason Roche and this entire lane or path
of study came out of a discussion with them because I was talking about very strange decision
making that you make while in service so you make decisions that other people look at and
say that's a very strange decision, why did that police officer make that decision? But
when you speak to the officer they're often able to relate quite a complicated series
of past experiences that have led to the decision that they've made. And it was Ken Pease
who's again a very well known criminologist who said to me, look, you need to read about
the Bayesian brain. What you're describing is how the Bayesian brain works. So he sent
me on this kind of down the rabbit hole journey if you like and did a lot of reading of the
foundational papers around the Bayesian brain which I found very complicated because I didn't
have a background in mathematics or neuroscience or cognitive science. So it was kind of like
jumping in the deep end. But he recommended a really good book called Super Forecasters
by Tetlock and some of you may have heard of it, some of you may not have heard about
it. But it's essentially the human art of prediction like how intuition is made in the
Bayesian brain. And I found the book revelatory because when I look back at my police experience
I could see the development of my Bayesian brain as time went on and how my decision
making changed. And this was like kind of mixed because we all have our backgrounds
and our history. But when I was at the home office in London and we were looking at the
way that police forces were organized and governed and all that sort of thing, we could see that
there was a general tendency towards this kind of promotion of the generalist. So a lot of you
senior managers seem to have been able to like bounce around the organization. They've done lots
of different things. Some have been detectives, some have been uniform, some have been in
corporate, some have been firearms. You had all these different like kind of disciplines if you
like. And you ended up with a lot of senior leaders who were jack of all trades and essentially
masters of none. And this was in direct contrast to a lot of the research that looked at teams of
specialists, people with specialist knowledge that are built up very, very solid, what you could
call like Bayesian building blocks when it comes to specialist decision making. And then when you
put them together, the matching of all these specialisms then resulted in higher performance
of external private companies. So we were trying to think about how this might look in policing.
And it was only when I read Super Forecast in solid blocks of prediction that I started to
understand how the brain may work. Now, of course, if you at any point are going to YouTube and you
type in the Bayesian brain, you're going to get Professor Friston in some way. So that was my
first introduction. And this was probably about two years ago. And I absolutely devoured all of his
podcasts. I mean, everything that I could find. And that kind of linked in a lot with the LLM
development. Obviously, we have the side by side active inference seem to be like picking up steam,
like crazy. And then we have the LLMs and the AI research picking up steam. And then you could
see how the two were starting to like twist and merge. And there were some really good podcasts
from Machine Learning Street Talk and Curt Jammungle's podcast, Theory of Everything. Well,
we're talking really long form like two and a half, three hour discussions on this stuff. And I
was just absolutely immersed. And I started to think about how this has never been used in
practice, like in policing, you know, like, a lot of the time we go to these training sessions,
you'd have some experienced practitioners talking to you about how they made decisions. We'd have
decision making models. And me with my relatively new academic brain was immediately going straight
to Google scholar and saying, okay, what's the empirical basis for these decision making models?
I know everyone's using them. But do we know if they work? Do we know if they speed up our
decision making? Are they better with those who've got better Bayesian building blocks? Are they not
better? So when you start to look at these questions, you realize that there's almost no
research to support police decision making models. And the best stuff that I found on that is in
Andy Clark book, and the experience machine as a full chapter on looking at police decision making.
And anyway, I'm getting slightly distracted. How did I actually come to the paper? So there was one
experience in my service. And I'm going to tell the story because it's in the paper, if that's
all right, Daniel, is that okay? Okay. And so I was a newly promoted sergeant. And that's like a
first line supervisor in the police. I had a team of about 15 police officers. And I was probably
about 27, 28 years old. And I was out with one of those police officers who was new. And he was
trying to build his confidence. So I said to him, look, Jamie, I said, we're going to go to all the
bad stuff tonight. So when the when the nasty incidents come in, we're going to go and I'm
going to see if I can work with you on building your confidence in these sort of, like, you know,
these, these high risk situations. And he was all up for it. And then domestic violence incident
came in. And the male offender was still inside the house. And we knew that they've been violent
use because the person who rang it was a neighbor. And the neighbor had said that she was
severely injured and bleeding. So because there was a chance that it could get rough, and we
might need to make an arrest straightaway, I thought this would be good for Jamie to go to. And
he was a taser officer. And I don't know how how like experienced you guys are. So I'll just let
you know, but what police officers in England, we don't carry guns like, and there's probably about
five or 6% of police officers that carry guns at the most. And a lot of them are only sent to
incidents that may involve firearms. So the vast majority of incidents we go to, we have a
baton, she's like a stick, and a spray. And they're the, they're the two bits that we've got to deal
with it. Now Jamie had just got his taser. And he was trying to build his confidence. And so we
turned up, there was a very injured lady on the sidewalk, she was pulling clumps out of her
hair, she'd been clearly punched a great deal of faces and absolutely mess. And she told us that
he was still inside the male offender. And obviously, he would be violent towards us as
police officers. Now that if you read the paper, this may come across as if it was a, like a kind
of a one off incident. It wasn't, you go to things like this all the time on a busy Friday or
Saturday night, I could go to the two or three of these maybe. And so this was very, very normal,
nothing out of the ordinary. And I said to Jamie, okay, well, let's go on. We'll wait for some
backup because he might be violent, this guy and, you know, we'll go in and we'll, we'll see what
we can do. He's obviously going to need to be arrested because of the damage that he'd done to
the lady. And she said, no, I've got my one year old upstairs and he's in bed. And the minute that
she said that, like, we can't wait for backup, we have to go in because there's a chance that the
child could be injured. So obviously that changed our decision making. And as we're working up the
front door up to the front door, the door opens and this big muscley guy comes to the front door.
And the thing that got me at that time, and again, I just have to stress like I got these with the
very, very normal incidents, like we'd go to these all the time. There's something about this
incident where I felt like my heart hit my stomach, big adrenaline dump, all of the prickles on my
arm stood up, my hair stood up, power erection, and up the back of my neck. And I remember looking
at Jamie, Jamie didn't feel this. And I spoke to him afterwards. It was really strange because there
was two of us presented with the same incoming sensory stimuli. I had a very different bodily
reaction. And we talked about it afterwards. I mean, at the time, I would like to say I was eight or
nine years of experience, Jamie was like coming up to two. So there was a big buildup of abasing
priors in me for some reason. Anyway, let's cut a long story short. We ended up fighting with the
male. He was very violent towards us, really, really bad incident. And, and when we finally got him
in handcuffs, as we got to the front door, we noticed that he dropped a knife and he'd had a
knife when I pulled him out of the doorway. Now, this is like one of those moments that you have
in a policing career where you're like your mortality punches you in the face, you know,
because had we gone inside or had we engaged him in a very different way, there's a chance that
both of us would not have come away from the incident. And the, the sometimes that like hits
you and it hit us both then. And, and Jamie got very upset. I remember it very distinctly. We
walked into the kitchen, we had to go and check that the young lad was okay. And he was. And
obviously, we got the injured party back into the house. But I remember doing like an immediate
reflection afterwards and saying to Jamie like, I have never had this severity of body, bodily
reaction like that. That came on so quickly. And I've used the word salience to describe it in
the paper. But there was something that was distinctly different. And I don't know what it
was. But obviously, whatever signals I was receiving, be it from the lady on the curb or
from the male's behaviors, we approached door. There was something in me that told me
intraceptively. So it was an internal feeling that then triggered my cognitive processes to
approach the incident differently. Anyway, that incident, obviously he went to court, he was, he
went to jail, actually. And so the incident itself, we managed to safeguard the lady in the sun,
which is always a good outcome. But for me, it really stuck with me for a couple of reasons.
The first was that the bodily reaction that was so different was something that Jamie didn't
receive at all. So there was no difference in him. He saw nothing of the evidence that I saw.
And when I say saw, this is obviously, and again, I'm covering the paper, there's so much
information that you take in these incidents. And it's in such a temporal window that such a
tight temporal window that your ability to be able to affect the environment that you're in is
very, very highly constrained. Because you're only going to be at that incident, maybe for
minutes, if you're lucky, an hour or over, depending on how busy the radio is. So you can't
do what you would call any longitudinal niche, niche construction, your ability to mold or
shape your environment, when you turn up as a police officer is limited solely to the time
that you're there. And because you don't know any of the people there, there's something going on
in a police officer's brain. And again, this is discussed in the paper that is very different
to a normal work environment. So this is, I'm just going to try my best to give you an
example. So if you work on a till in customer services, you have a very predictable way of
living your day out. And of course, unpredictability comes from the customers. But there's
often a set of like procedures or protocols that you follow that enable you to deal with those
people in a particular way. And that allows you to predict your work and hopefully comfortably
do that. Now, when you're a police officer, you have the law. And this was interesting,
actually, Daniel, because when we first had a chat about this, I think you put me in touch
with somebody who was talking about the law as an agent of active inference, which is proper
interesting stuff. And if we get time, like later on, it might be worth a discussion. But the
officers are working within the law. So you've got bounds, if you like, you have boundaries that
you work within. And there's particular actions you can take. But everything is so highly
unpredictable. I'm not working with a till and working directly with people. It's often in a
very, very emotionally charged environment, because that's why police get called in the first
place. You don't know any of the people that you're dealing with. And they're not coming to you
asking for the same service. So it's not like you're going up to a shop and saying, I want to buy
this again, and again, and again, which is the same thing that you'd get as a cashier. When we
turn up a lot of the time, people don't even want police there. So you come in as like a kind
of alien, if you like, and there's often something that again, it's like high emotions,
everything's going a little bit crazy. The decision making of those people is normally totally out
of the norm. You're trying to bring everything back within norm. So if you like that the officer is
like an agent of our status, we're trying to bring back home your status to the environment and
get there. But it's so messy and so difficult that you often end up making decisions that other
people may look at and say, Oh, why have they done that? Such a strange decision. But if you've
been, and I suppose in the paper when I go through it, if you've been in that particular
situation a number of times before, and you have a good set of Bayesian building blocks that allow
you to make improved decision making as a result of that experience, you may end up with improved
outcomes. And I'm not going to say that you will, but you may. And it's a solid theory to back up
good experience led decision making. And there's lots of things that you can look at. And hopefully
the paper towards the end might be able to just talk about some of those and I can take the viewers
through them. So that's the kind of background. The salience of this particular incident is the
one that the paper is based on. It was so different to me during my police career that I needed
something that explained it. This theory explains it in a lovely way. It's so nice. And obviously,
the kind of absorption of Carl Friston's work over time. And the reading of the books, I mean,
Active Inference Book by Thomas Pye, I know that you're doing a series on it, a reading group on
it. It's brilliant. I would say it's a little bit hard going. Don't pick it up as your first book,
do some listening to the podcast first, try and get your head around how it all works, and then
pick up the book and go through it. It gets a little bit heavy towards the end. The experience
machines are really good introduction. That's another good one. Andy Clark talks about Active
Inference Book. It's not an Active Inference Book. It gives you a much wider view on the cognitive
neuroscience and how the Active Inference stuff is brought in. But I really enjoyed that. And then,
obviously, when I'd had this idea and I'd written most of the paper, I think I was at maybe, you
know, six and a half, seven thousand words. I took the leap and I emailed Mr. Friston. And I just
emailed Professor Friston with a massive chunk of humble pie and said, Professor, lovely to meet
you. I feel like I know you because I've watched you a million times. This is what I've written,
what do you think? And then, to my surprise, he sent me back another 800 words or so with a very
heavy endorsement. I was a little bit in shock. It's one of those moments where I was looking at
my computer and I was like, is that an email from? Oh my goodness. And then I opened the manuscript
and I was like, wow, okay, this is amazing. And then, obviously, a little bit more dialogue,
and we chose to submit. But needless to say, and I mentioned this earlier in the podcast,
because I don't have a background in maths or neuroscience. I'm fairly sure that those
holes were evident in that first draft. And Mr. Friston did an absolutely amazing job of plugging
them. So I guess that's the story behind the research, Daniel. Did that make sense?
Yes? You good with that? Yeah, thank you. Okay. Have you got any questions so far,
or do you want me to just work through the paper quickly? Yeah, let's look through the paper.
Okay, cool. Right, I'll just go to share screen then. Okay.
Okay, is that? Yep, looks there. Okay, perfect. So I don't want to read the paper only because
I think everybody will dive boredom, but I will skip through the sections and explain to you my
thinking. And so I go very gently into setting the scene, talk a little bit about how police
officers are often flung into what you would call vital high state situations. And this is
elaborated on a little bit further, but it's that temporal nature of the decision making,
which I think causes very specific grooves in the police officer's brain. And I'm using the word
groove because I think it's a really good analogy that kind of like explains the brain. It's not
that we can't step out of the groove, but they help us make decisions. And I suppose that's
in line with heuristics. It's actually in line with like hemispheric theory, like all sorts of
like, and I talk about this later, like system one system two thinking, this is all quite
well established, good psychological research, it all like kind of melds together and gives you a
good little background. So I talk about a little bit of the history with regards to the hunch
and what the hunch is. It's been described using a number of different terms. So we've got suspicion
in here. This was done on research that was conducted when it comes to things like stopping
search and stopping search is such a contentious area of policing. So high impact when it comes
to things like community tension, community confidence, trust, safety, legitimacy, a lot
of it is linked with the use or the abuse of stopping search. So there's been quite a lot
of study that's looked at the decision to stop and the decision to search, how those decisions
are created and often through ethnographies where academics have gone out with police officers
and watched officers conduct their stops and their searches and how they've
then asked after that's been done, how did you make that decision? How have you come to that
decision to stop and search that person? What was going on inside your brain? And I've then
introduced the domestic violence incident which I've already discussed so I'm not going to go
through that. But I've just talked about this bit here where it says this scenario creates
a fundamental question. How does an officer's body generate these hunches, these internal alarm
bells and what role do they play in navigating the experience of being a police officer?
Now they're not restricted to police officers and I talk about this here especially when it
comes to things like medicine and public service-based professions, armed forces,
firefighting, etc. There's an excellent article and if I could remember it I would share it but
it was about a group of firefighters that went in there in the midst of fighting this crazy big
fire and all of a sudden the supervisor just says right get out, get out, get out and he grabs
all his team and he pulls them out and literally within seconds the floor collapses. Now obviously
there's going to be no super particular salient detail that's made him do that. It's going to be
a gathering of details which are going on often unconsciously in the midst of the fire. Even him
I imagine, car process in a way that's rational and deterministic. He can't say this led to this
and then this led to this and then this led to this. It just this overwhelming feeling came to him
as a firefighter and he said no get come out, come out quick and as they came out the floor
collapsed. Now that's an example of the hunch but the hunch within a firefighting circumstance.
It's the same thing it's like a kind of overpowering feeling of intuition. So I talk a little bit
about this here and we talk about it being a little bit wider than stopping a vehicle and
there is a discussion here of almost like the spectrum of what a hunch can be like. How does
intuition present itself? There is some research coming very shortly from somebody called Emily
Quinn at Cambridge. She's just done a PhD in something called the copper's nose which again
is the police hunch and I didn't know about this until after I'd written it but I know that she's
done a data collection. I know that she's much more hot on the terminology and the neuroscience
and the cognitive science behind this and I know that her research is about to land so just for
the listeners it's definitely coming that's going to be a treat when it lands. But a hunch or a
copper's nose when you're trying to find vehicles that may be up to no good for instance I'd been
in cars with people who are very experienced police officers and say something like I want to stop that
car I don't like the look of it. Now I'm trying to learn and my immediate question would be like
well what do you mean you don't like the look of it? What is it about that car that's promoting this
feeling of unease and even the most experienced police officers they can't answer that question.
They'll say something like oh well it maybe it's the manner of driving you know but if it was the
manner of driving and I might have picked up on it there's something else there's something that's
triggering and I imagine they're heuristics and they're heuristics that have built up over time
again it'll be Bayesian there'll be tiny signs tiny input sensory inputs about a particular vehicle
and the way that it is behaving that over time have led to the building up of this this intuition.
Now that is a very very small slice of what is intuition a very very big slice of what is
intuition might come in the detective world so if you're working on a murder case it could be
that you have a very particular feeling about one of the suspects and that feeling may build up over
time. Now again very very difficult to explain why do you why do you have a feeling that that
suspect did or did not do it why why is it coming and again those detectives and I know I've worked
with them they can't explain it there's there's something that's that's building up for them
and they can feel the hunch the hunch isn't something that's visceral it doesn't come into the
pillow erection kind of like you know like response to threat or response to stimulus that's severe
it's very very slow creeping and it leads to like this it's almost like intrusive thoughts you know
like they're they're very very slow they come in without they're unbidden there's no like kind of
I'm not very very I'm not happy with this you know this is not good you know it's uninvited
so the hunch can manifest itself in lots of different ways from the kind of I want to stop
that car I don't like look of it to something that generates over weeks or months and again
is very difficult to discern like where does that sailings come from we don't know
we don't know and that's one of the things that I think that should be looked at and I discussed
this at the end when we talk about where the research could go so again I take them through
the incident which I've just discussed and we talk a little bit about the background of
intuition research and then we talk about rational decision-making and intuition there's
a meta study there from Wang Wang et al in 2017 he's talking about constructs and I think they
are separate they run upon the dual cognitive system system one system two again emotional
thinking what you're called emotional thinking and rational thinking if you were being a philistine
like me and so yes and then I very very tentatively and I have specifically used that word I'll just
highlight there tentatively with this prior discussion in mind the author posits a definition
of a hunch with the for the following discussion which is an often unbidden salient intuition
experienced by a police officer that subsequently influences their actions now when I say influences
their actions I don't mean that it specifically sends them in a particular direction that direction
can be anywhere but it's the fact that it causes some sort of change in direction or causes you to
consider a change in direction that then so in other words it's instrumental it's not something
that just pops up and it can be dismissed it does something now there was a some pushback
a little bit on the definition so words were added as we went in and through from the reviewers
who were amazing on the article they were so cool gave lots of different editions or possible
editions and talked about this and we ended up with this this inclusion of the word salience to
kind of generate to describe a hunch you know like what well it's the salience of the hunch
it's not like a normal hypothesis our brain is constantly generating hypotheses all the time
but there's something about this particular hypothesis when it pops up
wham it hits you okay well what does that hit feel like where where does it come from and why
is it different to your normal train of thought what is it that's that's made it pop out
and that then leads to the maths now some of the narrative probably half ish that this is mine
some of its cars and Professor Friston went into a lot more detail than me and the equation that I
put forward for surprise was tripled in length and so he went into a lot more and this was the
Bayesian brain bits we introduced the Bayesian brain that if you like the older research and
and then we bring in the newer research data in for instance free energy principle
and then Professor Friston added the detail in the equations here and also the figures
which have come in which are the the background if you like for these equations how do these
equations work and what do they say but what's the gist so if I was to describe this
surprising bounds or the level of surprise that somebody operates within
a police officer is going to be very very sensitive
to boundaries of surprise this is the hypothesis essentially because and I talk about this in
the next section which is about cultural niche construction because they have very little control
over their environments and they have very little knowledge of the people within them
and I think that their brain will generate hunches in a much more sensitive fashion
within those constraints okay so essentially through the gathering of experience very
temporarily informed if you like work environment if I go to a domestic
and I walk into a domestic incident and the male and female are shouting and throwing things at
each other I have I have no discretion I have to take action immediately because there's there's
harm that can take place at any point to either of the parties okay so I have to take what is a
very active role in that environment immediately and therefore I'm constantly training my brain I
think personally as a police officer this is what I think goes on to take action and to take
action decisively in order to reach desired outcomes now in most people's daily business they
have lots of time to make these decisions and as a police officer you just don't and that that
generates grooves I think it generates grooves in the police officer's brain and it leads to
something which has come out in the ethnographic literature around policing called pragmatism
now it's described as a tendency to do over a tendency to think so a police officer will often
tend I think towards jumping into some sort of very active role in the environment sometimes too
quickly way too quickly you know but I think that that too quickly and I'm going to use air quotes
there is Bayesian I think that your brain is trained to intervene quickly in many many cases
and it sets up grooves and those grooves are very easy to fall into and that presents risk you know
so I'll give you an example if I'm going to be controversial here but this is where I think the
research will be really cool if for instance there is a drug problem within a particular
neighborhood and that neighborhood is high in ethnic minority and it could be ethnic minority from
anywhere okay so it could be so in the UK Albanian for instance okay or it could be black in London
or it could be Afro-Caribbean there's lots of different ethnicities but if there is a community
which is heavy in a particular ethnicity and as a police officer you are constantly interacting
in what will be highly temporal niche situations normally violence related with that community
that's going to influence the way that that officer thinks and reacts in other maybe less
temporally influenced situations so I'll give you a physical example if I am going to
gang related violence a lot okay and I'm dealing with victims that have been injured as a result
of gang related violence if I do a stop and search in that same area and I have been to all these
previous incidents there's going to be a building up of influence and experience in me which is then
going to change the way that I behave when I stop that car so and you will see this in the
research this comes out in a lot of the way that police officers are perceived when they're dealing
with ethnic minorities the way that police officers act they're not the same okay when it comes to
majority population interactions okay but I do think and again I'm pushing this theory way out
from beyond my paper here I do think that there were we can probably find some evidence of why
that may be the case and maybe prove empirically that the more incidents that you go to that could
be highly temporally influenced that may involve particular ethnic minorities could then change
the way that you as a police officer operate on a much more wider scale with members of that ethnicity
now I don't think a lot of that's conscious and I know because I've worked with police officers
I mean I met one racist police officer in my entire service of 18 years so I know people say
other police officers police police are racist you know I don't think it's as simple as that I
think it's way more complicated I think that we have to really understand why police officers
make the decisions they do over time for us to properly unpick this problem I don't think it's
something that we can turn the page on and it's it's going to be years of good research some of
which is alluded to in Andy Clark's book and so anyway I'm getting a little bit wide here but
all of this influences that conversation that I've just had I'm not going to go into the detail
but that's that's the bit that that is there and we have this wonderful edition from him
which gives you the background to the theory from Professor Friston now this is the section that
if I had the choice I would have put a lot more words into and this is the hunches and
niche construction stuff and you'll probably be able to tell that from how I've been talking about
it today but low surprise longitudinal relationships probably make up the vast
amount of our interpersonal relationships that we all experience on a day-to-day basis all of us
in general in the world unless you're in somewhere that's very very volatile
mostly they're going to be low surprise longitudinal relationships so you're going to have
more opportunity to mold the environment over time okay so that's the and that's the active bit
of the influence okay so you've got this like kind of ability to interact with the environment the
environment then interacts with you and you end up with this like kind of constantly like forward
and back in between you and the environment the problem is of course again with police officers
the ability to longitudinally for change or influence an environment is just not there
you have I have an hour at most of the incident and then I'm getting sent to another
and that may then cause I think this pragmatic leaning to do
rather than think so that's the kind of like the what I'm getting to in this last this last part
here before moving into the discussion so there's a couple questions that I've come up here I've
mentioned the pragmatism here from Loftus this is from the cultural literature so what cognitive
signals were generated by initial attendance that contributed to the hunch generation when the
Bayesian brain processes these signals what is produced empirically during the process of active
inference what was the officer's qualia so how does the hunch present into consciousness massively
complicated and I've even put it in the paper we don't want to get into the the consciousness
debate because it's absolutely fascinating but it's just incredibly complicated so there are
some things here that make that person aware and this refers to that salience which is in the
definition how are those qualia interpreted so when the hairs on my arm stood up how did I see
the hairs on my arm standing up so obviously you're going to receive the signal but how do you
interpret and then turn that signal into action these are questions that haven't really been
answered yet in this particular area and then this last one which I think I mean it's it looks
like an afterthought because it's one sentence but it's not one sentence it's actually really important
how did the officer justify this hunch in later court proceedings and I have written
hundreds probably thousands of police statements over the years and I know that reading back those
statements they will read very rationally they would read super rationally so my ability to
rationalize my decision-making post decision-making is way better than my ability to interpret a
hunch rationally and there's a big disconnect there so you end up with a lot of obviously
hindsight bias if you stopped a car and you found some heroin well you stopped the car because you
think that there was drugs on the car but as mentioned earlier in the article sometimes
that hunch is nonspecific it's raised through experience that's that's very very different
different really different and I don't think that officers have got the skills to interpret the
hunches well enough to make well-reasoned decisions I think that they rely upon
intuition much more than they say they do and I'm not well I know because I've been one and I've
been around them I know how these things work so I just don't think that it's been researched well
and then as we get towards the end we move into the again the the theory
support from that figure and we posit a series of areas for future research
so we've got here longitudinal study on hunch development so this is tracking the development
of hunches in the police officers as their career develops I think this is super interesting
because when I talked about going up to that door in the domestic and Jamie not feeling anything
and me having the most salient feeling I've ever had there's something going on there you know like
so when does that start to happen like when do when do police intuitions become so noticeable
and powerful that people can see them and be able to act upon them or be able to notice them and
suppress them because even that is an interesting area so if you are getting a hunch and you think
that hunch may be informed through past discriminations then surely you need to be able to suppress it
you know you shouldn't be acting upon it so if you think for instance that there's an element of
discrimination in stopping a vehicle you need to be able to notice that and stop that before it
happens you know and it could be unbidden and again this is in the definition so you haven't
invited the hunch it just comes but you may know that there's not enough there for you to make that
stop there's not enough evidence so something's going on and you need to be able to see that and
stop that happening comparative analysis with a little profession so this is looking at the
generation of hunches for instance in the medical environment neurobiological correlates so this was
to look at neurobiological processes associated with hunch formation the use of brain and body
imaging techniques this is probably way above my pay grade but it would be super useful and there is
some precedent for it in very very primitive studies in the 70s and 80s that look at things like
heart rate and blood pressure over the tour of duty of a police officer you know
but it'd be brilliant to see that advance much more advanced wearables even looking at good
scanning equipment how are these hunches generated it might even be one for the future but we thought
we'd discuss it and the impact of training on hunch accuracy this is something that came from
professor chem peas he was talking about training scars and have you heard of training scars
daniel or that you know so training scars are where you constantly train in a particular way
your grooves become very very pronounced in the way that you approach similar incidents because
you train so much and then when an incident presents itself your brain kicks you into those
grooves even though the grooves may be inappropriate so they can lead to um so for instance taking a
shot because that's a shot you would have taken in training despite the fact that that shot was
non-justified or another one where there's not enough threat in the training scenarios so because
of that you act in a much more uh uh slow and considered way when you need to act much more
quickly both of those will be considered training scars and again um uh so overtraining may suppress
good hunch intuition or development that's the an idea i'm not saying it's there it's just an idea
uh so diversity and we'll discuss this quite a bit today um inciting to potentially gendered
hunches i mean i'm super interested in that i might look this plays out when you look at the
stats of things like stopping vehicles it is different it's different from a gender basis
there's something going on no one's looking at it i think this look this needs looking at
um operation operationalization of hunches in policing so um when and i'm currently planning
a study that looks at this now so using both qualitative and quantitative methods investigating
the factors that contribute to the activation and follow-through of hunches but to do that you
have to be aware that a hunch is happening and that's a that's the one of the things that we're
trying to get our heads around like how do we how do we make officers aware enough that intuition
is kicking in and then when that intuition is kicking in how do we help them describe it and
also help describe their discussion making off the back of it because i think again if we go back
to that pragmatism side i think the hunch kicks in the police officer makes the decision but there's
very little rational consideration of the connection between the hunch and the action
so that's something that i think we can look at um comparative analysis of policing models and i'll
give you a really quick and dirty example of this so in the u.s obviously um it's a coercive
policing model in the uk it's a consensual policing model both of those will change the way that
hunches are generated they will um so have you heard of the touching the tail light on on police
vehicles so in the u.s when a cop touches uh stops a car as the police officer walks towards the car
to speak to the driver they touch the tail light now there's lots of reasons for this the first is
that you leave your fingerprint and dna on the tail light okay but if you think about what that's
doing in that officer's brain the immediate consideration when he gets out of that car is i
could die and i need to leave evidence on this vehicle in front of me now i have stopped thousands
of vehicles in my police career and i have never once thought that and because i've never once thought
it i can hypothesize that the generation of hunches will be way different in terms of sensitivity
to an american police officer's generation of hunches not least because the threat is so
mitigated in the uk the chances of me coming up against the firearm is almost nil i have never
seen a gun i've never fired one so about six months ago so like 18 years of service and i've never
carried and i've never seen a gun in a real life police environment that's going to change the way
that i police and i do think that there'll be a different operationalization of hunches as a result
and that's something that will be a fascinating study and then um this one here this impact of
technological support how does the use of technology and change hunch development so for
instance and this is going to sound really weird but let's just say a police officer is trained
to record when a hunch is received and it could be as simple as a tap on the wrist for a wearable
or something similar and that could then help us correlate the types of incidents that police
officers are at when they receive hunches they don't have to explain them it's just like what
where are you most likely to get them where does your intuition manifest you know
and then we could look backwards at how it manifested and what it did and then the last one
which is the public perception and trust um possible to investigate how public perception
and trust in law enforcement are influenced by officers reliance on hunches so i'll give you
a quick example of this if you rely on hunches to do stop searches and that means that you do
more stop searches that may affect community trust within that uh that particular community where you
conduct in the stop searches that then becomes reciprocal so you rely on intuition to do stop
searches rather than rational thought that leads to a rise in stop searches leads to a rise in arrests
and also probably a rise in much more like um uh friction based interactions with members of the
public long term that's going to lead to a breakdown in in relationships and possibly
um issues with legitimacy so how the public perceive um the legitimacy of police actions
so that's just a an example of where we could go on the big scale this last one's a very macro
like kind of level study and some of these up here are much more personally based
and Daniel i think that's about it
thank you thanks for overviewing it
i have some questions and there's some great questions in the live chat so okay that sounds good
wow many places to jump in there's the fundamental tension with the
possibly arbitrary or hard to explain yet intuitive and honed nature of the hunch
and about how the hunch has such a rich before during and after there's kind of there must
be something like hearing the code called on the radio yeah and that setting a stage like
i'm going to a comedy i'm going to a horror movie or it's this code and that's all that is being
passed through the blanket is just what code it is and that's equivalent to like saying what is your
prior what do you prepare yourself for given that it's just this number or that number and what are
the costs and the sensitivities to like false positives and false negatives there's a lot of
stages to investigate like looking forward to the hunch and then looking back on it
where certain kinds of rhetoric or certain kinds of thinking are privileged or supported by
legal proceedings and saying something like well i just didn't think it was that way in the moment
could be the most honest statement yet it might be seen as like almost malpractice
okay awesome questions yes the live chat exactly right okay all right here we go i'll just read
them um basically in the order they okay all right so susan asks does hunch lead to epistemic
foraging or pragmatic foraging so let's just unpack that in the expected free energy decision
making functional different policies are evaluated in terms of their epistemic value
like expected information gain and pragmatic value which is aligning observations with your
preferences so how does that raising of the hunch then get pushed one way or another into seeking
more information epistemically or directly moving to take pragmatic action so i think that was a very
nice way of summing up a lot of the discussion that where i talked about the lean towards pragmatism
the desire for control for a police officer when they first get there is like it's almost primal
and i know that's a big word to use um but they will i think tend to lean incredibly strongly
into the pragmatic and then move into the epistemic so and if you think about this this
mirrors the court process like if i if i turn up to an incident and there's threat within the
incident the first thing that i want to do is and i know the word is awful because of the
connotations it brings but uh neutralized the threat i want the threat gone because while the
threat is there my intuition is going nuts i mean it overrides everything if i'm if i'm so i'll
give you a very quick practical example if i'm in an incident where i believe that the male party
in domestic violence is going to assault me or assault the victim while i'm there right
that my brain does not want to allow any epistemic foraging
no there's a safety override and the safety override is essentially make sure that this
male is not going to assault you or assault the other person before we start asking questions
and that safety override is often the thing that people will look at and say
and this is what i meant when i talked about the difference between jurisdictions
so i would say that the safety override in the US is much more powerful than it is in the UK
because of the threat that's there because of the availability of firearms so you're probably
going to find where there's more firearms the link towards pragmatic origin is way higher
way way higher and then once that's done neutralized whatever word you want to use then that's when
the longer phone questions and the much more like calm information gathering takes place
so really good question there's definitely a lean towards pragmatic over epistemic
but epistemic will happen and it just may come after the pragmatic so there could be a like kind of
hierarchy a hierarchy if you like affordances because of the situation that presents does
that make sense yeah like to give a kind of a non-policing example it's like you dropped an
object on the floor if it was very surely just a soft carpet you might feel around blindly and
epistemic foraging would have like a low risk but if you strongly believed that there was like
other sharp objects on the floor you would be way more skeptical with just kind of reaching
into hundreds locations that Daniel can you answer my questions because that was way better than I
just did okay next one we'll each give a shot we'll each give a shot um Susan asks how are police
trained to avoid groupthink i.e not just follow the ones with improper force over more motivations
so you're talking about individual cognition in that moment but yet in that dyad encounter
there was like a collective intelligence component and a difference in hunches so
how does the group training and operating come into play
yeah this is really interesting because there's nothing about the way that your brain behaves
under pressure in any of the police training nothing so and I suppose and this is a massive
criticism and I and I used to talk about this a lot because I was involved in the design of what's
called the PQF in the UK which is the education qualification framework and it was a very very
controversial project for me to be involved in but it was about raising the initial level of
education to a degree level bachelor's level for police officers and one of the major drives
is obviously to blunt to some extent the lean towards pragmatism and offer some priors for the
making of police decisions that are better than those based just in practice but this is a move
away from what you would call like a kind of master apprentice model which is the uh and it's
experience based epistemic model now of police learning into something that's much more a priori
which is your more traditional educative professionalised model so are they taught to
ignore group thing I'd probably say well there was no discussion of group things during my training
but I have to think back I mean my training was 23 24 years ago and I'm sure that things have progressed
will it be good informed solidly evidence stuff probably not and I think in some cases I think
there may be some really good academics who will be out there working with particular forces and
they will be giving this sort of training but I think is a more general approach I don't think
it's there and I think it's a massive gap so really good question all right
yeah very interesting it's um it's a team sport team art slash science and so it has to be at
least considered how do officers share their hunches they just raise their hand and say I have a
hunch but that might be throwing a wrench into things in the moment um so how do the right
communication surface and then you have the the radio and you have the local communication you
have these different avenues of message passing but not all messages lead to resolution of the
situation so Daniel it's a really good comment and we've just submitted a paper which is on
the use of decision-making models in detective world and we were talking about this like I was
only on a murder inquiry for a year of my service so um but I saw the way that the murder inquiries
worked and it is way more rational and they invite hunches so like you're seeing your
investigating officers will say look have any of you got any feelings about this please try and
explain them you know how but or the or the other one where you just run an interview with one of
the suspects and one of the first questions that would come out isn't what did the suspect say
it's what do you think how did it make you feel you know so there's a a real space within the
detective world for the discussion and sharing of hunches now if I pick that same um uh instance
up and you drop it into uniform because it's so temporarily enforced that you won't get
chance a lot of the time to share your hunches like so if I have a bad feeling about somebody
at an incident and this is that lean towards pragmatism again I will want to make sure that
I'm safe before I go anywhere I won't share with the officer next to me I have a bad feeling about
that person I want to take pragmatic action to go and try and deal with that bad feeling
so again this leans back into that other question that we've just discussed I would say that so the
sharing of hunches and the passing of messages is probably much more available within the
long the long decision-making processes within detective work I'm very poor within the incredibly
short temporarily influenced decision-making of uniform does that make sense yeah it also makes
me think about active inference and statistics are providing like a science of uncertainty and
decision-making amidst uncertainty and yet in many different domains ranging from policing to law
science there's kind of bespoke ways of dealing with uncertainties and different settings even
within the given field like different cases are going to have different treatments of of uncertainties
and so there's now this dance or fusion to bring together those different treatments of uncertainty
I'm really curious how you see active inference and extended cognition in light of
even though I'm not very familiar with the details the growth of policing technologies
and surveillance technologies and the different paths that a given officer or department might
have in front of them in terms of how they incorporate technology into their whole apparatus
so there's definitely going to be a really really big shift here and so when I left
just two or three years ago there were discussions three years ago about things like the integration
of active heads up displays okay so when I'm at an incident if I've got facial recognition
and it's running in the background and it's passing me information that I don't have and didn't have
how will that affect my decision-making and that is and I'm going to be really honest
really scary because really scary and really beneficial so I'll give you a quick example
I turned up at an incident again I'm going to keep using the domestic incident because it's
simple and we as police officers go to them all the time okay so it's a and I keep calling myself
a police officer I'm not a police officer anymore I'm full-time academic but you know long time so
anyway if I turn up at an incident and I have a set of glasses and my body cam on my body cams
running at all times so I know that there's some element of surveillance of my behavior and I know
that whenever you look back at this incident my decision-making is going to be scrutinized okay
so when it goes into the court system my behavior will definitely be on show and I know that as a
result obviously and I have to behave within the rules and the bounds and all that sort of thing
now there's a propensity and I'm sure you know this so police officers to do what's called
informal working practices where they essentially step outside the strict rules and laws and they
try and take pragmatic decisions so an example might be if I stop somebody speeding I might want to
give them a warning I might not want to give them a ticket but speeding is technically a strict
liability offense so I should have to give them a ticket and instead I operate and I use discretion
I decide not to do it I give words of advice and that person drives off okay with things like
your heads up display if I'm walking towards that car and I'm wearing glasses that is giving me
full history full driving history including infraction speeding tickets etc just by looking at
the number plate and then when I get up to that driver's side window and the window comes down
and my facial recognition tells me that this person has got previous for x y and z the soul etc
is that going to change my decision making 100% because what what has the police officer got to
deal with now they they have what's in front of them and then they do that epistemic foraging
the extended cognition that would come from lifetime information during decision making
is crazy and I'll tell you right now we'll be doing it before we understand whether it is a good
thing to do or not because that's what that's what police do they will jump in probably in fact
I'd be surprised if people weren't testing this stuff now and the other thing I think
I mean I'm just going I went straight to wearable stuff there but there's other stuff that might
help so if I'm thinking from an interceptive perspective there's a really good study
called emotional survival for law enforcement officers and it was a psych it was a police
psychologist that wrote it and he put heart rate monitors on police officers and he showed that
when you go into what's called a cold one incident in the UK which is an emergency incident the
blue lights are on you know like you were talking about the cold the pattern of the information
and the bodily reactions to it if I'm going to an emergency incident when I first start
you're incredibly aware interceptively of what's going on so you can feel your heart your your
breath quickens your periphery narrows all of the normal stress
reactions kick in okay because you know that when you land there there's probably going to be
conflict of some sort and you're going to have to deal with it now what the study showed was that
very very experienced police officers so we're talking like 15 years 20 years plus when they
were going to the emergency incidents they would say that those bodily reactions were not happening
but the monitors would say that they were and this is super interesting
because it may mean you know you could say that the police officer has got more control over
their interception or you could say the exact opposite so they have dulled their interception
over time through exposure continued exposure and we don't know about the effects on hunches or the
effects on general decision making in those different lengths of service if you like now
if we go back to the extended stuff imagine having a wearable that tells you this lifetime
that would be super interesting like it I mean again I'm like you know maybe five years in the
future here but we're not a million miles away there are well-being wearables that are ongoing
now I don't think they're being used for this purpose could they change decision making definitely
will they and in good and bad ways hey I know this just needs a lot more research this bit
this bit that you're discussing loads more research it just needs some proper proper
good looking at because it could be immensely beneficial I can just see a million ways where
it could also be quite damaging wow yeah the the awareness of the hunch and then there's one setting
where the hunch is not aroused which may be like a burnout situation yeah exactly and then yet also
on the other side of let's just say like a stage performer they still might get the physiological
arousal but they actually expect it and so they don't attend to it because this is nice thing
with activists we're not paying attention to what we expect yes and so they have a deeper
experience layer that contextualized the hunch and yet that might obscure that hunch from being
communicated like to a younger colleague yeah and yet communicated where and how the experienced
professor or lawyer or officer feels in a situation is that ineffable experience transfer
and then I I totally see these different paths with the wearables one path where the boots on
the ground are just reduced to an actuator in a decision-making system that they're not even a
part of yes because it tells them here's what you want to do to this car don't epistemically
forage just fulfill what the order is exactly and then there's the epistemic engagement mode
and we can imagine like the family doctor asking somebody questions rather than like looking at
their digital health record and there's kind of um there's a charming and an open-endedness
to that and yet in high reliability situations people are going to be put
into which lane are we going to take this doctor's office are we going to use digital health records
or are we going to have slower potentially noisier encounters just because people
self-report that they like that more than the other way yes yeah and just as you got me thinking
that there's some really good studies that look at things like um uh cancer diagnosis and so
you know somebody comes in with a bad ankle an adopter says yeah you need to go for this
test and this test and this test and they're unable to rationalize that it's the same thing but
there's a much more so if you look at a doctor's purpose they're still going to be pragmatically
based they're going to be trying to solve whatever problem is is facing them um but their
relevance realisation has got so skilled over the years and this is some of the stuff that you
were just talking about there where there's lots of signals coming in that are just very very
efficiently dealt with subconsciously and it may be about making that person aware of what
that subconscious is doing in order to properly understand it and this is what I was talking
about with the hunch generation stuff because police officers don't often they don't interrogate
the journey that led them to make the decision they make the decision and then they rationalize
it backwards I think there's so much we could do here like there's so much potential because
and again this is for improved decision making this isn't like um so we're looking at improved
outcomes here we want to make policing better how do we make it better well I would say that
increasing self-awareness about decision making is absolutely fundamental you can't go anywhere
this is just like perfect you know and the whole like the whole framework of active inference and
and the Bayesian brain it just lends itself to this so well way better than the other theories
that I that I'd explored and some of which are in the article like you know like the schema the
script etc but I love Bramsted's work on niche construction and it that's something I think
that I would like to look at a little bit more I think is as time goes on sorry my brain just
went there towards the end I don't know why yeah I mean is there anything else on your
question wise I forgot some more yeah yeah okay let's keep going with the questions um Jeff asks
what overlap exists with military psychology Zweeblesen identifies active inference without
directly referencing it in his recent book Beyond the Pale published by air university press
I don't know the book but what do you think of the general question I don't but I have um so
I work in a security and defense academy so I'm surrounded by military scholars that's a really
good question and I will go and ask it for Jeff cool okay Dave asks how do hunches align with
hallucinations in deep learning
oh
oh that's a really good question and I have to be honest I mean I've read some stuff on
hallucinations and I've listened to podcasts from machine learning street talk as well as
some good good discussions around it I mean they're anomalies aren't they but
and I suppose you're going to have a set of rules within the LLM that still allows them to be
displayed in the same way that you're going to have a set of rules within the body that allows the
hunches to come to the fore I don't know is the answer to that and I know that we don't properly
understand hallucinations yet but I would I mean obviously we've got no consciousness in in in the
the deep learning machines point of contention but most people would say there's no consciousness
there whereas the hunch the hunch's ability to rise through the consciousness so the qualia of the
hunch is the bit that makes it salient and I think that that salience will be lacking in
in any element of LLM deep learning based work if that makes sense does that make sense Daniel
yeah I I think uh another complimentary way that I thought of that question is the hallucinations
let's just say in image output you say represents this and it makes a full resolution image that
is non factually based and so people sometimes refer to it as a hallucination so whereas the
outputs of that are in terms of observations that are just factually ungrounded the hunch it's not
like it's a it's not a visual phenomena it's not like there's a visual a new visual overlay
or a sensory prediction it's something slower that is kind of like an upwelling of something
that is salient because as you pointed to it's slower it's inter-eceptive it's affective
it's not modifying like what we see smell here in the way where when people talk about hallucinations
as outputs of machine learning models that sounds really weird but I think it may to some extent
do that so and and I'm just thinking about how that might be the case so if I'm at an incident
I'll give I'll give you another very quick example so we went to conduct a mandatory section in which
is a horrible incident and I hate them but it's essentially taking somebody into full-time mental
health care he was a serious schizophrenic with who was a danger to others and and we went to
basically take him into custody so that he could go to the hospital
because he wasn't he wasn't refusing to take his medication or short for his
appointments and it was carrying the community etc and he had to attack somebody
and I was in that room for probably one minute
and I was telling the doctors to get out because I knew what was coming and if somebody had
and this is what you say where it changes the way that you see well it does because it changes
your relevance realisation is that as the intuition kicks in and becomes stronger
then your focus changes visually so you're going to be filtering out much more of the
side if you like and focusing in on what be what be considered the threat whatever the threat may be
and in this case I mean he was holding a knife down the side of a sofa and he was about to attack
us and for some reason something about that incident again highly salient feeling it then
changed the way that I saw it changed the way that I interacted communicated changed the way that I
dealt with my externals and and I suppose you go call them variable so I wanted the other people
out of the way because that would then give me greater that would give me less to think about
when the conflict actually happened so I would probably say there's a little there's a parallel
there I think that it can affect the senses and I imagine that no I quite like it it's an
interesting thing to think about that's what I saw in the paper you cited the the quantum
reference frames and Chris Fields's work so that just makes me think walking down a street
one reference frame is just like oh there's people milling about and then another reference frame
whether this is paranoid or not is like their information to circle me yes somebody is shaking
a little bit in their hand and it's like oh maybe they have essential tremor maybe they're nervous
maybe they're about to do this and so that doesn't change the the photons hitting the retina
that's right it changes our framing and that is what is actionable and a more cognitively informed
law and legal system could have a more agreed yes you're right of this yes you're exactly right
yeah yes very good I've told you you're way better at this than your life you wrap up my words
and it just comes out in a in a much simpler way very good let's work we're cruising together
um well where are you gonna go in your continuing directions here
like what are you gonna do with this now that you have the frontier's paper
okay so um there's a couple of things that I want to do I want to
test whether current decision-making models in policing that are used widely in many different
countries um are useful for the processing and uh understanding of police hunches
because I think that they are accountability models and not decision-making models so that's
something that I want to look at but I suppose the more relevant study will be research in the
uh qualia of the hunch so um within different settings especially within uniform I'm very
interested in it because of its its contact with legitimacy as a whole like how police
are perceived I want to know how uniformed officers receive understand process and then act upon
hunches and the study that I have in mind is this is going to sound really weird
I want to do like a kind of personalized dictaphone like a narrative account so essentially
when a police officer in any corner of the world makes a decision on the basis of a hunch
that is then narrated into this kind of like repository and we use that repository as a
qualitative evidence base to research how the hunch is processed and then acted upon
that's what I'm thinking so um I'm currently in the process of getting funding and I'm hoping
that I can secure it and if I can I'd like to run it as a this is going to sound really strange
but a voluntary worldwide study so I don't care where you're a police officer and I I want you to
take part and we look at how you are receiving on a um a daily basis your minor hunches from
I want to stop that car through to those like kind of heart hitting your stomach
pile erection high threat hunches that totally change the way that you see the incident in front
of you so that's the that's the next step I think that makes me think of aeroid which is a repository
of alternate states of consciousness mostly based upon substances so it's yeah yeah that's
another yeah yeah but it's a it's a voluntary self-report and that sounds very cool and voluntary
I'm hoping I'm hoping that's the plan but um I'm hoping that once I get the funding
that that will be a green light and obviously in the meantime I mean it's been so cool talking
to you Daniel and I know that the community is quite tight in and around the active um
infants institute so if anybody has been listening or if anybody listens to this in the meantime if
you've got any cool ideas or you want to ask me any questions look just email me I I love to talk
about this stuff in general and the discussion I know that we mentioned it right at the beginning
but even the discussion where we talked about the law I've got I've got a theory that I've
spoken to a professor about I'll just throw this out there just to finish off I think that people
may call the police when the surprising bounds are breached and they want the police to be an agent
of return so essentially the police become an agent of our stasis to return to home your stasis
for that person now what that gives us and it's something that we don't have is a general theory
of police contact and it allows us to see how different communities may call the police based
on their different surprising bounds so for instance in high chaos communities their sensitivity
to surprise is going to be much higher than those that are in um sorry much lower than those that are
in um very very structured gated communities for instance um and this this could lead us to some
really interesting research but it's something that is very much in the background of my brain
and something that I'm I'm thinking about a lot reading about a lot and hoping that maybe over time
I can start to develop it awesome thank you Gareth for um connecting these critical areas
and bringing active in and it's just exciting to hear where it's going oh thank you Daniel thank
you for your time and thank you to everyone who's actually managed to listen to me for to drone
along for this long miss it's been a pleasure to have you oh there's great comments in the live chat
so thank you talk to you next time okay thank you very much bye
you
