The Rabbit R1 is a tech product that has raised tens of millions in venture capital,
promised the world, and delivered on almost none of it. Worse though, it's built on a scam
that the founder is now trying to distance himself from. But hey, where are my manners?
I'm trying to be more positive in 2024. So let's let this company introduce themselves,
at least, before we say anything negative about them.
Hi, everyone. My name is Jesse, and I'm the founder and CEO of Rabbit. This is the Rabbit R1.
I can speak or type with R1. I can also use R1 to call a ride. I can also use R1 to order food.
I can also make R1 to a set of more complex actions. For example, if I want to plan a trip
to London, I can just describe what I wish in full to R1. You can order the R1 now at rabbit.ac.
And we are shipping Easter 2024. Well, there you go. That's not so bad. You got yourself a
standard tech guy in a black shirt, promising the world. Apple keynote background. What could go wrong?
Oh, and I guess it's past Easter 2024, so the product should have shipped.
So before we talk about the scam angle, let's briefly check in with Tech YouTube for how this
A.I. assistant is assisting. The thing that you get at the beginning is like borderline
non-functional. Book an Uber to LTT Labs. The ride share status is currently unavailable.
Get me a ride. Apologies. The Uber ride request couldn't be processed. What is this?
You're holding a taco. Oh, that's not good. I could give them a few lessons on positivity.
Turns out, basically, everyone in the tech sector tagged team this product for being
non-functional or playing wrong about things that Rabbit said the R1 could handle. Things just
weren't working. What if I told you that wasn't the biggest scam, that this company is built on
something much worse? And now that I've been so cheery and positive, let's go down the rabbit
hole and see what's under the hood. Yes, it's a bunch of rabbit jokes. So the first thing we need
to do is go to their web page. The R1 is created by something called Rabbit Incorporated. But this
company has a strange history. It was originally registered under a different name, Cyber Manufacturer
Co. In fact, they changed their name two months before their official announcement. And it turns
out that name changes pretty significant because Cyber Manufacturer Co. wasn't just like a shell
company or the same company under a different name. They had separately raised venture capital
for a completely different project, not AI. It was for NFTs. Now, before you laugh, remember,
this is 2021 when people took NFTs very seriously. According to a press release, the project was
called Gamma. And it was at the intersection of gaming, community ownership, and Web 3 buzzwords.
What does that have to do with AI? Well, not really much. Conversely, Rabbit today also
sort of wants nothing to do with crypto. Their founder, Jesse, announces for Rabbit,
let me be clear, quote, we will never touch crypto. Never. Okay, well, that's pretty strong. But given
their whole past is built on crypto NFTs, it's a little strange. Now, when Gamma is brought up,
Jesse doesn't really deny that he ran the project. He sort of makes it sound like it was no big deal,
just kind of a thing of the past. Quote, Gamma was a fun little project I was involved with
during early COVID time. My main work is to build a Unreal Engine 5 space station themed game that
I later open sourced. Yes, Gamma released NFTs and I bought a bunch myself just for fun. Never
trade, never released any token or crypto coins. And I left that project once the game was open
sourced. Well, there you go. Haters. Case closed. It was a fun little multimillion-dollar project
he did. He just built it on Unreal Engine. He may have sold a few NFTs, but he bought a few NFTs,
so it's not a scam. Please don't look into this. Please do not look into this. This is not a scam.
Oh, some people may have looked into it. First, Emily Shepard, and then the writer and
podcaster Ed Zitron jumped in the fray with a great article. Now, I spoke to Ed and he told me a very
different story than Jesse about this Gamma project. It's so weird and it's the same company.
And in 2021, they raised this 6 million and then Jesse Liu across several hours of Clubhouse
I subjected myself to promised the world and more. Now, I have to say, promise the world
and more is slightly inconsistent with fun little COVID project. So I decided I needed to listen to
these recordings of Jesse talking about Gamma myself back in the day and find out who was really
telling the truth. Jesse or Jesse? I don't want to make Gamma or none of us want to make Gamma
as a hype and dump program. This is a legit team with millions of dollars of funding behind.
Basically, we're dumping millions of money into it just to make sure that it will be a next-level
experiences. Okay, I have to admit, it definitely sounds like Ed is right. This is sort of whatever
the opposite of a quick NFT hype and dump project is. And this is where things get much weirder.
So NFT is only just the beginning, the very beginning of this. We probably think that the
NFT part will only take, you know, no more than 20% of the entire weight of this entire Gamma project.
So after NFT, we have this huge groundbreaking ideas about Gammaverse. Then after that, we have
this again, huge groundbreaking ideas about the clean energy versus Gamma coin. And that, you
know, the chances that Gamma coin become the first not only carbon neutral, but actually carbon
negative crypto 2.0 Bitcoin 2.0. I think that's complete the entire Gamma story. Hopefully now
you're starting to see why I think it's strange for Jesse to claim that Gamma was a fun little project
where he never released these tokens or crypto coins when that's sort of what he promised.
He told people he was going to release a carbon negative Bitcoin 2.0. And look, I know it sounds
stupid now, but again, 2021 was a different time. And remember, Jesse had millions in backing. It's
not hard to see how people took him seriously. He said it didn't matter how the NFTs did,
he was going to execute. But where are those millions, you know, the money raised from customers
when the company changed to rabbit? Where did it go? Did it go to develop rabbit? A completely
different project? I don't know. I'd love to sit down with Jesse and find out. What I do know,
though, is that so many of the promises of Gamma didn't happen. And this is relevant to the R1,
not just because this project is built on the skeleton of that scam project. It's also because
the R1 was overhyped in a similar way as a do it all device. But this same company isn't some
history list company. They have a history of abandoning investors like they did with Gamma
NFTs. I mean, Jesse even told people who were worried about the NFTs. Don't pay attention to
that. You know, it's all going to work out. You just got to be a true supporter. I would suggest
for our true supporters, do not pay too much detail about the current NFT mechanisms,
because that doesn't matter. You know, like I can safely say that even if the entire NFT project
completely failed, which I don't think that's the case, we're going to still push the Gammaverse
and we'll still push the clean energy and Gamma coin happen using our funds.
I cannot emphasize enough that was a lie that never happened. The clean energy Gamma coin never
got published or built or launched. Even though Jesse said they were going to do it, they had the
money. By the way, we all know it's vaporware, but I think it's important to really hear him sell it
because this is the same guy who wants you to take him seriously when he sells you the future
of AI. Take a listen to the whole vision really laid out. Gamma coin, which is basically Bitcoin
2.0, that is 100% generated by clean energy. And we did the math, we did the calculations to where
if you own over 1800 milliwatts of clean energy generation, that means you will have
extra generated electricity that you can donate back to CitiGrid. So the general concept is,
let's say if you own a Gamma NFT, that means you own the equal portion,
evaluation of your NFTs at that moment of that clean energy grid that we started building in the
real world. That means you own that power, that portion of the clean energy solar panels that
generates that power. And that means you own that power. And that also means that you own that portion
of that power. And that power will be used to generate Gamma coins. That means you can earn
your Gamma coins out of this entire clean energy cycle.
All right, let's try to suspend our disbelief for a second here and figure this out. Basically,
he's saying buying NFTs somehow would build a clean energy grid, which you would sort of co-own,
which would make clean tokens sort of a thing. And look, I know that sounds a little insane,
but the funny thing is it's sort of the most sensible part of this project, because as I learned,
that wasn't even close to the end of it. They were saying there was going to be a storefront on,
I think, Fairfax Avenue across from Supreme in LA. They were going to do a comic book. They claimed,
there's a Discord thing. A comic book. Yeah, they said a comic book, a TV show, an MMORPG,
and at one point, yes. And then Jesse Liu at one point said that the future of this thing,
you would control using your brain logic. It is insane. Am I the only one who doesn't know what
brain logic control is? Look, when I first heard this, I thought, this cannot be right.
This project is already crypto plus NFTs plus clean energy plus comic books.
Surely they aren't going to wrap in AI as well, right?
The ultimate goal is that each NPC will be powered by AI algorithms, and then you will be
interacting directly with them using your natural language and your brain logic. I think that would
be the ultimate goal. And when I say ultimate goal, I don't think that's like a 10 years plan.
I think, you know, in the next couple of years, we might just have a very good chance to achieve it.
Oh. Oh, he did. He promised it in two years. Okay. Well, why not toss in AI to the buzzword
salad? In fact, I guess it maybe relates more to rabbit. Maybe we do have the connection, right?
The brain logic interface is the connection. I mean, why not just make it the matrix while you're
at it? I mean, it surely is a matrix to my, to my extent, and to the original concept of the matrix
that, you know, you will be reborn with your outer identity in this metaverse,
and whatever you do in the real world matches the exact consequences in the digital world.
Okay. Did this man just do the, if you die in the game, you die in real life,
unironically, while selling NFTs? The answer is yes. And my only follow up question is,
if you get scammed in the metaverse, do you get scammed in real life in this world too?
Look, I'm not here to stump for the big wig venture capitalists who lost their faces on this.
At the end of the day, these are both consumer-facing businesses. They got real people to invest real
money into both the $200, RabbitR1, and into this Gamma NFT project. Both are overhyped,
one just already didn't deliver what they promised, while the other is working on fixing it. So,
what can be done here? Well, for one, the minimum is that the Gamma NFT holders
should be refunded the money they spent. I mean, this isn't even my crazy wacky suggestion,
Jesse suggested it himself in those clubhouse calls.
And I better pay my money to collect your NFT back if you think this is just an NFT
hype and dump project. I have to say that. So, the communities will have my words. Anyone that is
not envisioning the Gamma to the stage two or three, just want to make a couple of ease out of
stage one, reach out to me. I will buy your NFTs. Okay, I will buy your Gammas and get a f*** out.
All right. All right, we'll take you up on that. Yes, I got a haircut. So, I reached out again to
Jesse about these refunds, but he didn't respond again. The Rabbit team did though. They told me
Jesse would not refund investors. The quote was out of context. The project was never abandoned.
It was actually open sourced. What does that mean? Well, Rabbit claims the Gamma team delivered
everything they promised in three stages. The one problem is the three stages they gave me
aren't the three stages they promised. The metaverse, by the way, they said they created two
is not a metaverse. It's an Unreal Engine project file that I downloaded to play.
It's based on a starter game called Lyra. You can see the starter assets here. And the things Gamma
did do made the game so buggy that it crashed every minute. But it gets worse. The Rabbit team
denied Gamma ever promised the carbon negative coin, which they repeatedly promised. They said,
the coin you referred to never materialized nor was it ever promised or delivered.
Obviously, I thought I had a stroke. Here it was listening to Jesse promise it.
But also, he even put it in a video saying, explaining Gamma with our roadmap.
Ultimately, our efforts will lead to the Gamma token, the first ever carbon negative cryptocurrency
powered by our side. Together, we will create a sustainable future for all life and the planet
we call home. Join the discord today and meet your fellow crew members. Gamma.
I don't know how they could have been more clear. I think it's amazing to have them say now. We never
promised that. Only to find a roadmap video with you promising in big letters carbon negative
cryptocurrency. It's just gas lighting at this point to pretend otherwise. What is funny is that
Rabbit also mentions clean energy initiatives. They say they did like reducing gas fees. But again,
that's not what they promised. They promised a clean energy grid. Jesse also promised it on
discord. His post was in Chinese, but he's clearly talking about open sea transactions being used to
buy land to build the clean energy grid, which is going to help mine Gamma coins, which is exactly
what he said on clubhouse. I mean, these people are contradicting themselves in multiple languages.
So I'll let you decide at the end of the day if the rabbit team is being honest here. Towards
the end, they even tried to tell me that Gamma in our opinion and as stated in the fact sheet
has no connection with rabbit. But the fact sheet they're talking about, they sent me in a document
called Gamma project fact sheet. You can't just declare your own facts when it's the same company
who made both things, the rabbit and the gamma project. How can you say there's no connection?
But after realizing no accountability would be taken and no refunds would be given by this
project, I began to feel bad for Gamma investors. It made me wonder, what else is this team hiding?
Well, I decided to find out.
