Saraj, Saraj, Saraj, Saraj, Saraj, Saraj, Saraj, Saraj, Saraj, Saraj, Saraj, Raj Raval.
Guys, this kind of sucks. I don't want to make this video. I'm actually serious. I like Saraj Raval
and I've liked his videos. I've enjoyed some of his videos in the past if you don't know he's a
machine learning guy. Hello world, it's Saraj. And it's not just a couple of industries that
machine learning is affecting. It's every single industry. But he stepped into the fake guru house
when he made a $200 course that misled people, which we will get into in a second. So unfortunately,
I cannot just because I like somebody not do a video on him when I'm trying to educate consumers
about future choices. So unfortunately, I have to do this video. Let me say first that as someone
in the educational space who's made an oopsie before, I get it. Okay. And kind of have a first
hand understanding of people making mistakes, you know, learning from it, growing from it.
But there have been some people alleging that in Saraj's case, this is not a one off problem. This
is not a one time oopsie. This is sort of a pattern of behavior. I've made a severe and continuous
lapse in my judgment that I will leave up to you guys. I am just going to cover the facts of the
case. And we're going to talk about some of the larger problems that people have brought up. This
is with the intent of educating you because this is not Saraj's first course. So I cannot
just let this go because there's probably going to be a course in the future. And when there is,
and when there's another Saraj Revol course, I want you to be educated. Without further ado,
let's jump into it. Here's the course that Saraj Revol pitched. So I've decided to make the highest
value course I possibly could call make money with machine learning. Now, there's a lot here
that's sort of a problem. But the biggest thing is he says that he was going to limit his course
to 500 students in order to give them personalized instruction. And I'm only accepting 500 students
so that I can give each of them personalized education and guidance. And everything was going
fine until people started to notice there were messages going on. There were workspace invites
that didn't make sense. So people did a little digging around and they found out and by the way,
this is a registrar article which kind of sums up the whole situation in better detail than I will.
They found out that there were two separate workspaces that Saraj had set up. One of them had
770 students. One of them had 500 students. And essentially Saraj had been duplicitous about
his stopping the course at 500 students because he was going to keep it all personal and whatever
and give them personalized instruction. And I'm only accepting 500 students. And he got a little
got a little greedy and decided to keep letting people in the course. And when he did,
he tried to basically lie about it and keep it from everyone from knowing by creating two
separate slack groups that didn't have any idea of their the other person's existence.
Long story short, everyone finds out everyone gets pretty upset and they start realizing that
Saraj is not giving the personalized experience that a lot of them are wanting. So at this point,
people are pretty pissed off. And they start to look around and maybe say, okay, well, we kind of
need a refund. And this is kind of where it goes south. Okay, so the first thing that happens is
everyone gets moved to discord because allegedly Saraj didn't want to pay for the slack, like fee
of setting up a professional slack. So once it got to the message limit, he moved everyone over to
discord and when he did, people started mentioning the word refund for a lot of reasons, because a
lot of them said, you know, the course wasn't up to expectation, etc, etc. When that started
happening, people who were mentioning refund in the comments started to get their message deleted
automatically. And some of them were saying they were getting banned. Again, this is all in this
registrar report. And finally, the cries for refunds got to like a fever pitch. And so Saraj
couldn't ignore them anymore. And so at this point, Saraj actually mentions that in fact,
there was a refund policy that no one had heard about. He ignored us until it blew up last weekend.
One student said in the midst of all this, he snuck up a refund policy saying the refund had
to be asked within 14 days of registration and pretended that it was all there all along,
which is ludicrous because there was no refund policy initially. And the policy was posted
four weeks after the registration start date. So what does that mean? That means that he puts
he puts the start of registration four weeks ago. And then at four weeks later, he goes, oh, well,
you guys should have taken advantage of the 14 day refund policy. And everyone goes, wait,
there was no refund policy. He added it after the fact, according to like the page history of
where he put the refund policy. And I don't know if he intentionally made it in a time frame where
people were literally couldn't get refunds at that point. But it seems like he did. And at one
point, Saraj sent an email to somebody who says, Hey, since we're more than halfway through the
course, the refund policy is now ended. However, I'd like to give you a special discount code
up to 100% off my next three courses, as if that's going to make people happy. That's ridiculous.
So eventually, everyone's getting even more pissed off because they're like, wait, you didn't give us
a refund policy and wait, you know, this is this is all made up. And in fact, if you do not provide
a refund policy at the time of someone buying your thing, there's an automatic 30 day refund policy.
So when finally, Saraj gets called out to the point where he can absolutely no longer ignore it.
And after he's tried to basically get people to accept no refund and only accept like,
you know, future courses, which is kind of a lame thing. If you just spent $200 on a course,
you hate, why would you want more of Saraj's courses? So finally, he makes this statement on
Twitter and he goes, I saw some, they're unsatisfied. I'd like to apologize. I'm going to send refunds
to the students who asked with it one within 30 days of purchase. And a lot of people just saw
this as a very last minute sort of cop out because he had done everything he could up to that point
to not let people get refunds. So that's where a lot of this stopped. And for me, that was like,
okay, maybe that's maybe it was somebody who just did not have an experience with a course.
And maybe, you know, this is just a one off kind of thing. But then bigger, I mean,
in my opinion, bigger allegations started coming out about Saraj, specifically with Udacity.
So apparently, I didn't, I didn't know this. So Raj had a course with Udacity. And at the meeting,
they had to have an intervention with him because he was basically stealing people's code for for
his sessions. So one of the things that the registrar accuses him of is basically stealing
people's GitHub code, which is kind of a big deal and something that Saraj very strongly says that
he doesn't do. Saraj says that he actually credited the author every time in the associated GitHub
read me show me a counter example, which is at this point, I mean, this is just what a what a show.
The guys from Udacity come in, and they basically slam dunk him, they go, Oh, no, not with working
with us, we literally had an intervention meeting involving multiple directors, including myself,
to explain to you how non attribution was bad. Even the director of video production was involved.
It was so blatant that non tech had to point it out. So this, so this is pretty serious stuff.
Because this is another course that he's getting accused of this with. And it's anyway, it's just
really unfortunate. It sucks. It really does suck. But I started to do some digging. And
it does not seem to be an isolated case. It doesn't seem to be just with Udacity. It doesn't just
seem to be with this course where shady stuff is going on. Saraj's claim that he credits authors
is misleading at best. So I want to demonstrate one of those cases for you right now of how Saraj
just not properly credit people who he takes code from. And he's done he does this a lot. I mean,
basically all nearly all of his videos are in some way, basically, most of the code is taken from
other people with very minimal changes. So I'm just going to show you an example of that.
So this is Saraj's video. Watch me build a training bot. Okay. So let's just start this video. First
of all, watch me build a trading bot. What does that imply? It implies, okay, I built this thing.
I mean, very clearly I watch as I build, you would think based on everything here that he's
building this thing. It's Saraj and I built an automated trading bot. I built an automated
trading bot, right? I built, I did it. It was me. I built the automated trading bot, right?
In this video, I'm going to show you how I built it, how I built it, how I bet, you know, I built
it. Okay, here's the thing. When you actually go to code for this video, first of all, it takes you
to his GitHub page, right? This is his GitHub page. It's kind of a long story, but the normal way
you're supposed to do it is you're supposed to fork and not just clone to an your own rep repo
with no git history. But anyway, that's a long story. If you go to his starter code and then
scroll all the way to the bottom, this is Saraj's idea of credit. Credits. Credits go to ask Mike
for the starter code. I have no idea how much credit actually Mike did because this says starter
code, right? Saraj built it. How I built it. Maybe he just built a little bit off of Mike's starter
code. Okay, let's go check that out. So what a friend of mine who's way smarter than me did was
he helped me do this like merge thing where we got the original GitHub code, Ask Mike's GitHub
code, and then we got Saraj's GitHub code, which Saraj does not fork or fork from Ask Mike. So
Ask Mike probably has no idea that this guy has basically taken his code. That's kind of a long
story. I'll let someone who's like more computer science, he explained why that's kind of bad.
Basically, he's taking credit without real attribution, except in like name only. But basically,
this is the difference between the two GitHub pages, right? And here's the headline. Okay,
every time there's this arrow like this, this is something that actually gets taken out. And
anytime there's an arrow like this, it gets put into the code. These are the only differences.
This is out, this is in, put back into the code. So basically, he just changes the readme. That's
all he did. He changes the readme, he deletes the guys readme, he takes all the guys code,
the starter code is all the code. And he takes the guys readme, deletes all the guys readme,
and puts in his own thing. And then he goes, Oh, yeah, this is the code for this video by Saraj
called Watch me build a training bot. And then he deletes all the other guys stuff. And at the
very bottom makes this tiny thing and goes, Oh, yeah, the guy gave me starter code. No, he gave
you all the code. He gave you all the code. This is not this is not attribution saying saying somebody
gave me a starter script. And it's the whole script is not attribution saying someone gave
starter code, not forking cloning your own repo deleting to get history so no one can see what's
going on the lead the original author can't see that you link them can't see that you took their
code and then just crediting with starter code at the bottom of a second footnoted page from
your original video that you call Watch me build a training bot how I built it
genuinely genuinely I like the guy or I like the guy style of teaching I think he's a good
educator but this is kind of behaviors just like it's anyway it's pretty bad it's pretty bad but
I'm not trying to like dunk on the guy here but I but I am trying to
to as an as like a consumer alert thing just be aware of this kind of thing
and it's just a consistent pattern of behavior I mean Siraj you know he might be excused if
he could reasonably claim that he doesn't know how to use github because his github practices are
kind of frowned upon but he literally makes a video called how to use github where he explains
what github in where he explains how to fork how to fork things how to fork things but he
doesn't do it and eventually we maybe find the reason why github is a social network and you
can follow other developers to keep up to date with their latest code the more developers that
follow you the more likely developers will contribute to your open source project currently
Linus Torvoltz is the most followed developer out of 28 million on github and right now I'm
number 15 so watch out Linus I think I think I don't know this is a little bit speculation
I think that's maybe why Siraj uses github the way he does I think maybe he's chasing
I don't know cloud is I don't know if cloud's the right word but by not crediting developers
properly he's able to basically gather a following on github who thinks who reasonably
thinks unless they really do their due diligence Siraj is the one who made this thing you would
think Siraj made I mean after all that's starter code starter code equals changing the read me
so yeah anyway there there's a lot more evidence on here I'll link some stuff below honestly this
is like a very shallow dive into all this stuff there's this huge reddit thread about documenting
a lot of these problems and if you just look at r slash machine learning you find a lot of people
who are disgruntled because Siraj used their code in a video never credits them properly and you
know there's anyway there's all these problems so I think a lot of his problems would be solved
if he credited people properly and if he didn't try to mislead people about return policies
and how many students were going to be in his course like all of this seems to be of Siraj's
own making when in reality he has a great platform he's a good educator yeah I feel like I don't know
I don't know why he's doing this so that's the video sorry guys sorry it's not so fun and exciting
day I'm a little bit I'm a little bummed out but at the same time I wanted to let you guys know
what's going on in the community and obviously Siraj walked into the fake guru house and unfortunately
you can't walk in without getting a coffeezilla video made about you that's just the way it is
uh yeah so that's it
uh
