Welcome back to FateGuru, today we have another,
we have a follow up on Seraj Ravall,
a very serious follow up.
Guys, I'm just gonna be honest with you from the outset,
this is gonna be a lot less of the kitty gloves thing
I was doing last time.
Look, if you don't know,
I already made a video about Seraj Ravall,
in which I admitted that I liked the guy
and I've liked his videos.
I've enjoyed some of his videos in the past,
if you don't know, he's a machine learning guy.
Try not to be too critical.
I was trying to say, look, this guy needs to change.
He's a great educator,
but he's got some serious ethical shortcomings
when it comes to citing people.
Saying somebody gave me a starter script
and it's the whole script is not attribution.
And then just crediting with starter code
at the bottom of a second footnoted page
from your original video that you call,
watch me build a training bot.
He wasn't citing people.
He ran a course where he didn't have a refund policy.
He was banning people from the group.
There were all these really pretty big glaring red flags,
but I felt like, okay,
let's maybe give him the benefit of the doubt one more time.
My kind of closing words where this sucks,
this guy definitely falls into the fake guru category.
However, I hope that he changes.
But new developments guys just came out that,
it gets so much worse.
It gets so much worse.
Because last time, if just to remind you,
the plagiarism was really he would take people's code,
call it starter code, obfuscate,
that he was taking people's code.
He'd hide it into his GitHub repo.
He would clone his GitHub repo in such a way
that the original author did not get credit.
It was all this shady stuff,
but there was nothing outright.
I mean, it was like plagiarism in name only,
maybe not like true plagiarism.
But now guys, he actually just flat out plagiarized
an academic paper.
So here it is, here's the paper right here.
This was found by Andrew Webb on Twitter,
where he compared Suraj's paper,
which is over here, to this paper right here.
And this paper right here,
it was written by a whole team of machine learning experts.
It's called Continuous Variable Quantum Neural Networks.
It was written by six people.
Now, Suraj's paper was written by exactly one person.
And it was called the Neural Cubit
Biologically Inspired Quantum Deep Learning.
Now, it turns out this paper, which he said he wrote
because I recently published a paper called a Neural Cubit.
He's saying, I wrote this paper.
These are my original ideas.
He says, this is something I wrote alone.
And basically it's just a big plagiarism fest.
So here's one of the pages that he plagiarized.
Everything on the page was plagiarized.
Now, it's important to note guys,
this is not a matter of he even just took just the page
and just plopped it on his paper,
which would be bad enough.
He did that thing, which people would do in high school.
They would take the spark notes
and they would change like every other word
to try to get it to pass as like their own work.
That's what he did.
So it's not even like, you know, kind of honest plagiarism.
It's like the kind that you're trying to hide something.
So a great example is right here.
It says X problems and non-communitive observables.
And in Sirajah's paper,
he calls it X problems of human cognition.
So he just changes stuff.
So for example, right here it says,
in the end of his now famous 1960 article in Sirajah's,
it says at the end of his now famous 1960 article.
So he just changes one word, right?
Another one, while it has been shown
that real computation can be directly applied to problems
in numerical analysis in scientific community,
it is not clear if it reduces the discrepancy.
Sirajah says, while it has been shown
that real computation can be applied straight
to numerical analysis and scientific computing issues,
it is not evident.
So it's not clear, it's not evident.
That is basically the summation
of Sirajah's contribution to science on this paper.
I mean, it is absolutely breathtaking.
This guy, Andrew M. Webb is the guy who found it
and he ends up writing more about it.
He is constantly showing where Sirajah is plagiarizing.
Here's another example.
Sirajah is basically directly taking even equations.
So like he takes this right here, this whole image
and he puts it over here, I'll show you guys.
He puts it right here.
Boom, boom, same image.
I mean, it's just directly taken.
I mean, it's just totally shameless.
So that's basically throughout the whole thing.
It's pretty pathetic if I'm gonna be honest
because what this actually was passed as
is a scientific contribution of Sirajah.
This is one of Sirajah's scientific contributions
to the community.
My whole shtick is that you don't need to be a PhD
in order to do research in order to contribute to this field.
And I think I live that
because I recently published a paper
called a neural qubit.
I mean, I can't even explain the irony of this
that Sirajah is trying to live out an example.
The only thing he's living out is that maybe
you should be suspicious of people without pedigree
or a background in the field who are purely self-taught
and seem to be coming out of nowhere
with all these papers that sound eerily familiar
to things that our other people are doing.
I mean, this pretty much shatters Sirajah's chance
of being well-respected in the community.
Plagiarism is not finally looked upon by anyone.
And I think with good reason,
but especially in the scientific community,
if you pass something like that off,
and this is what is amazing too.
He livestreamed this moment, this October 11th.
He's saying, look, I'm living out my values
of you don't need an education.
He's saying, look, this is mine.
He's doubling down the neural qubit.
It's my idea.
October 13th.
All of a sudden, the apology comes out.
After getting called out, after getting called out.
I mean, that's the whole thing, right?
He goes, I've seen claims that my neural qubit paper
was partially plagiarized.
Already, I'm pissed off because it's like, no.
What's the point of saying partly plagiarized
when you've changed clear to evident?
I mean, what's the point of that?
This is true, and I apologize.
I made the vid and paper to align
with my two vids a week schedule.
I hope to inspire others to research.
Moving forward, I'll slow down
and be more thoughtful about my output.
Now, here's why that just is kind of angers me.
The whole point of what he's saying is,
look, I was just in a big rush,
and so I just did what we do when we're in a rush.
We try to fit a deadline,
but that's not what people do.
People don't plagiarize to just fit deadlines.
That's not like a normal human behavior
that like, oh, we just all do it, don't we guys, don't we?
I mean, you know what it'd be like?
It'd be like saying, hey,
I really wanted to get my startup off the ground,
so because I was in a rush and I needed some cash flow,
I just robbed a store.
You know, I mean, we get it, guys.
In the future, I'll try to slow down
and be more thoughtful about where I find my money.
It's like, whoa, whoa, whoa, wait.
Wait, you stole money?
That's not like a thing we do.
I mean, that's not just like a, oh, oopsie, you know,
like guys, don't we all just do this?
Don't we all just steal other people's papers
and pass it off as, I mean, and this isn't even,
like this isn't for like a homework assignment.
This is like saying like, oh,
here's what I'm adding to the scientific community.
And it's just frustrating because again,
I mean, even though he says he apologizes,
it feels like he immediately explains it away
as, well, I was under a tight timeframe,
but a tight timeframe doesn't explain this.
This is like an ethical problem.
I mean, this is a problem.
You don't respect other people's work.
That says nothing to do with a timeframe.
I mean, this stuff really infuriates me.
I like, I can't look at it for too long
because I'm gonna get angry,
but like he switches we to I in the paper.
That's what maybe makes me the most angry is he goes,
the team's like, we did this.
And Seraj, who has nothing to do with the research,
says I, I did it.
I Seraj, I Seraj, just like,
it's just like the starter code.
I Seraj, check out the last video
if you don't know what I'm talking about.
I Seraj, I am doing this.
Why is the color glitching?
I'm sorry about the color thing.
I know that's happening.
I can't fix it.
I'm going from green to pink.
No, that's a huge,
I mean, that's a huge problem.
Look at this, look at this.
In the face, face, space, picture,
we treat the conjugate variables.
Seraj, I treat the conjugate variable.
Oh, you can't see that.
I treat the conjugate variables X and P
on an equal footing in the phase space picture.
I don't know.
That ends my sort of defensive Seraj.
I mean, in my last video,
I was like really going about as soft as you can get
just because I was, I liked Seraj.
And I thought that even though
I was seeing a pattern of behavior,
I thought that maybe it wasn't what I thought it was
and it appears to be.
So yeah, really sketchy stuff.
The other thing that really upsets me
is directly after he makes his apology and whatever,
he shouts out the team that he plagiarized from
as if he wants to,
as if he's so happy to give them credit.
He goes, shout out to the Zandu AI team.
He goes, they and the people doing original work in AI
are the real heroes.
Is that you don't need to be a PhD in order to do research.
And I think I live that
because I recently published a paper
called a neural qubit.
My aim has always been to try and make their work
more widely known among the masses
and I'll continue to do so.
No, you're not trying to make their work more widely known.
You're trying to make it known as your work.
That's, that's like so lame.
It's so lame.
Especially when the paper was built around
trying to hide the fact.
I mean, I've already gone through this with you guys.
It wasn't like, oops, I just, you know, took it.
It's like, let me take it and try to hide the fact
by changing words around to make sure
no one catches me plagiarizing.
And then when you get caught,
you apologize and shout out the team
that you plagiarized from.
You lied about who did it.
It's not, oh, oops, I need to give more exposure.
It's, oops, I said it was me.
And actually, it wasn't me who did this thing.
Pretty serious stuff, but that's all for me.
I think this is the last time I'm gonna talk about it.
The only reason I felt it was necessary
is because I felt it was necessary
to correct the record on the last video.
Where the last video, we kind of left an incomplete picture
of the full scope of this problem.
So that completes our Suraj Revolte fake guru series,
I guess.
What do you get when you burn through your plastic stacks?
A mouth full of money while your honey ends up hanging
on your hair.
Rook, lust, never should have trusted long.
I'd lie with a lean on lust.
Fool, fail, suckered by the sail.
Wood for the coffin comes along with names.
