When I was doing all these focus groups last year,
one of the interesting things that came up all the time
was people saying, like, Democrats or swing voters,
not MAGA people would say, yeah, you know what?
We do need a f***ing wall.
We need a wall around California.
Stop all that crazy shit escaping
and washing over the rest of the country.
They see the same videos, right?
If like the homeless people, like,
walking out like zombies with machetes in their hands
and they think, we don't want this everywhere.
Yeah, this is happening then, yeah, yeah, too.
So it can happen again. That's the opportunity.
It can happen. But the thing is that people either stay
and they put down roots and they get woke
or they make a pile of money and they leave.
That's it. Like, no one actually invests in San Francisco.
That's the problem.
In one sense, like, you can't really get PR or a story stronger
than what Hamas did.
And to me, the actual interesting thing there is, right,
that's like pretty much bad as it gets, right?
It's like sort of filming the torture chambers of the NKVD
and the Gestapo in Eastern Europe.
But within like 10 days, it's basically the NPCs in the media
just go back to the script.
Basically, it only knocks them off script for, you know,
like a few news cycles, like maybe 10 days.
It's funny, right before this Dominic I tweeted,
I'm about to talk to Dominic Cummings, what should I ask?
And someone actually chanted some pretty good questions.
So I was just reading those before.
So I've got some great follow-ups
that I think we want your input on.
But yeah, on the right-wing, left-wing thing,
I am a bit of a Fukuyama fanboy.
And I think he's vast, not that I think you are to be clear,
but I think he's vastly misunderstood.
People don't read through the 40 chapters
of reinterpreted Hegel.
They barely even repass the title.
And of course, the best chapter in that book
is actually the last chapter in which he actually,
he predicts a lot of the sort of, you know,
philosophical ennui and malaise
that we currently see in the West, right?
And he actually predicted, in some sense,
the rise of Wokeness or sort of perverted liberalism
that were turning on itself.
You know, Fukuyama's point, just, yeah, good, yeah.
Sort of, he goes into that last chapter,
which I agree with you.
I think it's the preceptor's book.
He goes into some detail into Nietzsche's critique
of modern liberalism.
And that is forgotten.
You're right.
The way that people talk about that book,
they always get the last chapter.
Yeah, and just to summarize there,
I've done a whole piece on it,
defending them actually in my sub-stack.
You know, when he said the end of history,
he didn't mean, obviously,
that things would stop happening in the world.
What he meant is that the arc of political evolution,
however far back you want to draw it
from hunter-gatherer tribes to the agricultural revolution,
you know, middle-aged, theocratic dynasties,
the imperial age, nation, whatever that arc is,
it kind of ends with liberal capitalism, right?
Because the original Marxist idea,
Marx originally predicted that communism
would come after liberal capitalism had triumphed,
in a way, to come up and divide the spoils
and deal with the inevitable inequality that it dealt with.
But the Fukuyama in charge is like, no, no, no, that's it.
A, we're not, we're probably not gonna regress
to a darker age, although we might,
but we're definitely not advancing
into some sort of socialist utopia.
Like, this is as good as it gets.
Liberal capitalism, end of story.
And the Nietzschean angle, like he quotes,
thus begs our sister a lot,
in which again, to summarize very quickly,
what is a complex work,
there were supposed to be these men with hollow chests
who live at the end, who have given up the passions
and the mad joys of tribalism, war, you know, pestilence,
wars of ethno-nationalist identity,
which is funny to say in the context of Israel,
which I want to get to as well.
But in some sense, in that book,
I think he actually explicitly says,
the European Union would be the final retirement home
of the last man.
Like that, the European project in some sense
was the home of the last man.
And in some sense, with the far right you're seeing,
it's unwinding, potentially.
Exactly, and also with the growth of Putin
and the way that the EU, in lots of ways,
I think that's exactly right.
And Brussels has tried to live out that role
in many ways, right, over the last 10 years.
I mean, 15 years ago, when I would say to people,
I used to live in Russia,
I met people like Putin, he is not what you think.
This whole idea that like he's some kind of,
like quite moderate reformer and a technocrat
and Russia is gonna join the EU in a few decades time,
this is all completely insane.
And you're all gonna get a terrible shock by this.
And it was incredibly, at that time,
it was a very, seems like a very extreme view.
Even two or three years ago,
now Britain and Europe were basically pretty happy
with the state of squire,
in which London is the laundry for the Russian mafia,
energy keeps flowing to Germany very cheaply.
And we just kind of like draw a veil
over a lot of the KGB, oligarchal behavior.
People didn't want to face it.
So when Trump came over and pointed out some of these things,
it became a meme with everyone in the EU
literally laughing at Trump
about the Nord Stream pipeline and warning, right?
I mean, of course, now nobody gives Trump
any credit for being correct about it.
But that sort of shows the extent to which I think
that the Brussels just didn't want to face
these kind of issues, and still doesn't.
Okay, I've got a random question,
it's a slight detour, Eric,
but maybe you'll let me go crazy with the agenda.
One conversation, speaking of the House of the Last Men,
by the way, I love the House of the Last Men,
like the post history is actually pretty cozy.
I was in Lisbon recently and I was in Paris recently.
My daughter is actually moving to France,
she's a Franco, she speaks French,
she went to the D.C. here.
I'd love my child to grow up in Paris, right?
And I think, one of the debates that we have in the group
is it's kind of around the spread of wokeness,
this whole business of things going squishy,
a total dedication to equality, a fallen standards,
like a lot of things are just kind of going soft.
What I found interesting, for example,
and again, I'm actually driving at a point here,
in the case of, for example, the Paris riots
that happened this summer that in its contours
kind of felt a little bit like the BLM phenomenon
in the United States, which as you know,
kind of in the COVID tizzy became like a whole thing,
a whole moral panic that kind of sees the West.
You saw it explode in the UK.
I think the Anglo-Saxon English speaking world
is definitely kind of a thing.
And I think the UK, here is the echoes very loudly
of the American political zeitgeist.
I think those echoes are heard much less loudly
on the continent and you saw what happened in Paris,
that the legendaries would show up and the riot police
and they crushed it and that was the end of it,
to that extent from there.
And I told the group, look, this Anglo Protestant software
does not run on Latin Catholic hardware.
It's just not gonna, wokeness is not gonna spread
to the continent in the way that you're expecting.
Like, is that true or am I misreading it?
I mean, I think you've definitely got something of a point.
Like there's definitely a kind of common Anglo-American
set of problems partly connected with the fact
that our universities and our media are much more similar,
right, the media and Oxford and Harvard,
PPC and New York Times, there's just much,
much more crossover than there is between either Britain
and France or America and France.
So I think that extent is definitely true.
On the other hand, of course, there's many layers
of irony in the whole thing, but to a very large extent,
the kind of crazy philosophical origins of the whole,
I don't even like using the word woke
because I think it's a mistake, but that phenomenon,
it is itself a product of continental philosophy, right,
transported over to America's post-war
and growing particularly in the sixties
and then infiltrating humanities departments
and social science departments and everything else.
Though obviously Alan Bloomsburg closing American wind
is partly a kind of trace of this intellectual current.
So in that sense, I think that probably,
like the long-term trajectory,
I think still similar in Europe,
and you can see it in Brussels, you know, it's still following.
We're all basically downstream of the madness of San Francisco.
Like it's different.
But you're everywhere in Europe is downstream
of San Francisco's insanity.
It's just a question of-
Is that still true?
Because I think you're right,
but the joke has always been in the United States
that San Francisco is five years ahead of the US
and then whatever that madness is,
is roughly five years ahead of Europe.
I think the timescales have actually compressed,
it's more like a year,
but you still think it's downstream of the city
I'm speaking to you from.
Plus that, what do you mean exactly?
Yeah.
What do you mean by that?
Well, the timescale is this kind of insane petri dish
of experimentation.
The Berkeley itself was like the kind of radical center
of a lot of the sort of 67, 68 craziness, right?
And that kind of, that impetus never died away.
It's kept pushing.
And these things just have an incredible tendency
to wash east.
Now, if you'd said,
if you'd started to watch some of the,
let's take, for example,
some of the crazy shit on trans, right?
Now, if you'd said a few years ago,
okay, there's like a full stack system in Northern California
whereby kids are brainwashed into this crazy shit.
And then there's actually like,
you can go to Stanford Medical Center
and they'll start giving you surgery
and start talking about taking out ovaries
from 12 year olds.
And that's, in Europe,
then it said that this is completely insane.
That couldn't possibly happen.
And it actually sounds like child abuse.
10 years later, here we all are, right?
We're dealing with the same shit.
So speaking of San Francisco,
one topic I wanted to get to,
I guess we can just jump to it
if we're following this bizarre sort of this tour.
So we were talking recently, Dominic,
or I know some of the people,
so there's like an SF reform movement going on, right?
There's some people that I think that we all know
who by the way are very well respected in tech more broadly,
like people like Gary Tan,
who runs Y Combinator,
which speaking of influential organizations,
hugely I went through it myself,
hugely influential organization.
People like David Sacks,
who was early on a PayPal,
a bunch of companies, huge investor,
are putting real money and time
into trying to change the politics of San Francisco.
I think San Francisco is exactly what you just said,
which is the way I've dealt with it,
having lived here off and on for almost two decades,
is like, it's not really a city.
Don't expect sane city behavior.
It is a Petri dish in which we will say,
oh, psychedelic drugs game on,
or, oh, rule of law, who needs it?
Defund the police.
Oh, let's see what happens.
Or, you know, autonomous vehicles,
you know, what's gonna happen, right?
Yeah.
That said, some people do care about it seriously,
which I support by the way,
and they definitely wanna reform it and change it.
And we were kind of studying the reasons
as to why we think it was broken.
I'll just toss a theory out there
that you're free to disagree on
and riff in another direction.
But I think part of the problem with San Francisco
is two-fold.
One, there's endemic corruption going back decade.
I mean, going back to the gold rush days,
it's always been just a pit of corruption
at the city level, and it's no different now.
It's just masquerading under progressive politics,
in my opinion.
There's a whole homeless industrial SF
has the second highest municipal budget in the United States.
I think over $11 billion at this point.
It's only a city of roughly 700,000 to 800,000 people.
It's not a very big city.
It has the second biggest municipal budget
in the United States after New York.
Where does that money go?
You walk around, it doesn't seem as if
this is a well-funded city.
It looks like a dystopia, frankly.
It's funny, I retweeted a photo recently
someone posted of an autonomous vehicle
in front of a homeless guy stealing electricity
to charge his laptop.
And that's exactly literally what,
like I've described it as autonomous vehicles
navigating around homeless people.
People think it's a joke,
but that's literally what it is when you walk outside.
So it's a combination of corruption.
And I think the other thing is,
and to give a little shade to the tech people,
tech people fundamentally don't deeply care about politics.
I think you have opinions on this.
I think they just, you go to a museum here,
and whoever funds it funds it,
like there's not a Google hospital or like a Facebook,
I mean, Zuck gives a fair amount of money.
You go to New York,
and even the biggest wall speed asshole
has endowed like a wing of Cornell Medical Center
or whatever the latest exhibit is at the Met.
In San Francisco, that's less so.
People take, it's a gold rush town.
People, the miners come in,
they either make a fortune and stick around
or move to Marin or they leave, and that's it.
No one's kind of from here
and no one really invests in a deep way.
Although to be clear, that's changing.
People like Gary, I think are changing that.
Anyway, that's just all framing.
What do you think it would take to fix San Francisco?
And can we maybe convince you to try to help fix it
by coming to San Francisco?
I mean, what you say makes sense to me,
but I guess the obvious question is like the people who are,
so obviously as crime gets worse,
crime is obviously often a very big issue in politics, right?
And logically, I went to San Francisco earlier this year,
like I turned the wrong corner,
I went down the street and then suddenly felt like
I'd walked into some kind of a poor leg,
apocalypse, and literally had to run back down out of the street.
Literally like 90 seconds away,
there was people coming around
as if it's perfectly normal, right?
It's just completely normal.
I then went and spoke to some people
that night, I had dinner in Palo Alto,
and they were like,
fucking hell, you were in San Francisco,
like I haven't been there in like 40 years.
I think, I live in London,
and I think I visit San Francisco
more often than a lot of people in Palo Alto, right?
Which maybe says something about, as you say,
about the disconnection between the tech world and the city.
But of the people who were left,
so here's the question,
why hasn't independence,
obviously Republicans have completely do,
but why haven't independence
campaigning on crime and corruption
been able to make any progress
when it's a global punchline
for like videos of apocalyptic dystopia?
Hey, we'll continue our interview in a moment
after a word from our sponsors.
Real quick, what's the easiest choice you can make?
Taking the window instead of the middle seat,
outsourcing business tasks that you absolutely hate.
What about selling with Shopify?
Shopify is the global commerce platform
that helps you sell at every stage of your business.
Shopify powers 10% of all e-commerce in the US,
and Shopify is the global force behind Allbirds,
Rothy's and Brooklyn and millions of other entrepreneurs
of every size across 175 countries.
Whether you're selling security systems
or marketing memory modules,
Shopify helps you sell everywhere,
from their all-in-one e-commerce platform
to their in-person POS system.
Wherever and whatever you're selling,
Shopify's got you covered.
I've used it in the past at the companies I founded,
and when we launch Merch here at Turpentine,
Shopify will be our go-to.
Shopify helps turn browsers into buyers
with the internet's best converting checkout,
up to 36% better compared to other leading commerce platforms,
and Shopify helps you sell more with less effort
thanks to Shopify magic, your AI-powered all-star.
With Shopify magic, whip up captivating content
that converts from blog posts to product descriptions,
generate instant FAQ answers,
pick the perfect email send time.
Plus, Shopify magic is free for every Shopify seller.
Businesses that grow, grow with Shopify.
Sign up for a $1 per month trial period
at Shopify.com slash Moment of Zen.
Go to Shopify.com slash Moment of Zen now
to grow your business no matter what stage you're in.
Shopify.com slash Moment of Zen.
I think it's, so the first time I ever got dog piled
on Twitter was, I don't know how many years ago it was,
I guess in 2015 or 16, when they passed this thing
called Prop C, that was a tax on gross revenues,
which is nuts, particularly for tech businesses,
to basically give more money
to the homeless industrial complex,
even though it wasn't working.
And I think I calculated how much money you would raise,
divided it by the number of homeless people,
and realized that it was as much money for homeless people
as like the base salary as a Google engineer.
They were literally put applying that much money.
And I'm like, how is this possible?
And I got totally dog piled and ripped apart.
Now, if you go and criticize the homeless industrial complex
or even call it that, you don't get dog piled.
And in fact, there's a whole set of people
who are there with you saying, yeah, we need to fix this.
And so I think the vibe has definitely changed.
There's been something like the recall of Chesa Boudin,
who was literally the son of communist cop killers.
It sounds like I'm making it up,
but that actually, who works for Chavez in Venezuela,
like it sounds like a punchline,
but it's actually his biography.
And he got an elected district, a turret,
like the equivalent of like the prosecutor, right?
And then it was like so outrageous,
he finally got kicked out.
So I think some of that is happening.
And that was a crime issue.
That was literally, there is no law and order,
get rid of this guy.
So yeah, that is, I think that is happening
to a certain degree.
I guess though, so one thing that possibly behind it,
I don't know, you tell me is that I found,
so when I wrote this thing in 2021 saying,
like we're heading towards Biden, Trump too,
like everyone thinks the Trump's finished
and it's not going to come back,
but actually we're heading towards Biden, Trump too.
And let Silicon Valley people decide to intervene
and build alternatives.
I spent some time talking to people there
and the basic problem that I had was people said,
we largely agree with what you're saying,
and we largely agree that if it just ends up
being as Trump, Biden too, that's obviously terrible.
But precisely because politics has got so insane
in the ways that you describe,
is exactly why it's totally impossible for me
and my friends and other people here who've got anything
to actually get involved with it,
because it would just be instantly completely
destructive and my family and my friends
and my investors and my staff would all think
I literally lost my fucking mind if I suddenly said,
we're going to build an alternative to Biden,
we've got to do something different.
So it does seem to be this kind of catchphrase too.
And it's similar to catch-22 in Britain, I think,
that as establishment politics becomes more insane
and the kind of communist mind virus expands
and expands into the mainstream media as well,
and they attack and try and destroy the lives and careers
of anyone who gets involved with politics
that doesn't share the kind of approach.
Then there is this paradox where able people,
entrepreneurs, builders, people who could do it much better
want to more and more,
and they're probably more inclined
to get involved with politics in one sense
than they were 10, 15 years ago,
whether it's like politics, as we know, whatever,
vote Obama and get on with building my trillion dollar
company, they're more inclined to get involved in one sense.
But in another sense, the madness is like,
it's a great room, great barrier.
As I know, does that make sense?
I think that makes sense.
I think, yeah, I think the problem with techies is that
not that they can't be political or be operators,
because they can, they end up having
these large organizations, but I think a couple of things.
One, the whole techie vibe just gives a lot of mainstream
normie voters the ick to use zoomeries,
which is like, it's just a different sort of vibe
what it takes to make, I mean, look at Mark Zuckerberg,
who I worked for, I was at Facebook 10 years ago
on early members, I actually think very highly of him,
and I said as much in my memoir,
but you know, that guy couldn't sell free beer.
I mean, it's just one of those things.
I mean, maybe now, maybe, but he also
pissed off a lot of people, like we raised the question,
like could Elon run for mayor of San Francisco and win?
And I'm not sure he could, actually.
Even among techies, he may not be able to win.
He actually might have a better chance in, like,
Reno, Nevada, which is definitely more red
than San Francisco, than he would in San Francisco.
Yeah, I mean, I think Elon's a great example
of his public right, because he got someone who
was actually a hero to lots of people on the left,
even just three to five years ago,
he was very explicitly and openly saying,
five of the changes have been made to you,
and this is why we're gonna do electric cars,
and this is why we're gonna do space exploration,
and et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.
And, but even someone with the success that he had,
and the kind of backstory of actually being
on the side of the progressive supposive,
like one of the top three biggest causes,
as soon as you basically put a couple of feet
out of line with the establishment view,
they just immediately said, oh, you're a Nazi,
and we've got to start having the DOJ investigate you,
and maybe we should take all your shit
and nationalize all your government.
And that's, I mean, I've had to say to me,
don't, you know, if Elon can go from being,
like, global love figure to global hate figure
in 18 months, then imagine what they could do to me, right?
And you're seeing it now as a side thing,
I mean, relevant, Elon just went to Israel,
and inside of Twitter, i.e. Jewish Twitter,
it's a whole kerfuffle, because a lot of sort of
mainstream bien-pensants liberal American Jews,
just like Elon, one for like replying snarkily
to some vaguely anti-Semitic tweet, maybe,
and also just maintaining a Twitter platform
in which, I mean, to be blunt,
there are kind of open anti-Semites on Twitter now,
and they haven't been banned, right?
But he's definitely not, he's obviously not telling
the party line when it comes to
content moderation on Twitter,
but this is a guy who, by the way,
went to some of the places I went to, actually,
and reported from for Tablet Magazine,
like the actual Kibbutzim, right on the Gaza border,
he was seen wearing body armor in one of them,
because it actually is dangerous down,
like I was down there, it's a war zone.
So the guy actually went there,
X-rays met with hostages, accepted a gift
that I'm not taking it off until you get your hostages back,
basically said, yeah, Hamas has to be destroyed,
this is unacceptable, and he's still,
he's still being pilloried as an anti-Semite
because of his content moderation policies on Twitter,
which are definitely not the sort of policies
that the left would want, it's just, yeah,
he's just shaking my head, SMH to you.
I don't really think it's to do with content moderation, though.
I think it's a much broader thing.
He just, he signaled that he is not with the mainstream,
or, right, in the way that the Ukraine war
kind of coordinated in a pretty unusual way,
like establishment positions,
establishment politicians and media in Washington
and London and across Europe very quickly.
And anyone who stood out against that,
I have the same thing here, like I've been like,
I've been like the one in a thousand
or one in 10,000 anti-Putin for 20 years,
regarded as madly extreme in my anti-Putin-ness, right?
Literally the whole thing just flipped
because I said, I think this war is a fuck up,
I don't think there's an actual strategy,
it's gonna end in tears, we're gonna get bored
and then have to punish it for the news.
Well, you're obviously a paid Putin shell,
you're a fascist apologist, you're an evil person,
the whole thing.
So I think he did, he bought Twitter,
he said, I'm pro-free speech,
and he didn't tell the line on Ukraine all in short order,
and that was enough, seemed to me.
Hey, we'll continue our interview in a moment
after our words from our sponsors.
Compliance doesn't have to be complicated.
In fact, with Vanta, it can be super simple.
Trusted by over 5,000 fast-growing companies,
like Chili Piper, Patch, Gusto, and Juniper,
Vanta automates the pricey time-consuming process
of prepping for SOC2, ISO 2701, HIPAA, and more.
With Vanta, you can save up to 400 hours
and 85% of costs.
Vanta scales with your business,
helping you successfully enter new markets,
land bigger deals, and earn customer loyalty.
And bonus, our moment of Zen listeners
get $1,000 off Vanta.
Just go to vanta.com slash zen.
That's V-A-N-T-A dot com slash Z-E-N.
I wasn't, so Torrenberg here
is actually the son of an Israeli Jew
and I'd convert it, actually,
just so you know the company you're keeping her down with.
I went to Israel recently,
and obviously I'm pretty public about being kind of pro-Israel
and what they're doing in the war.
One thing that people have commented on,
and I tend to agree with it,
Israeli PR is like terrible.
Like they're just not cracking the nut
when it comes to the West.
I have theories as to why,
but before I contaminate the vibe,
I'm curious if you agree with that.
What is your take on Israel?
What is your take on their PR strategy?
Can they even win the PR war?
Well, I think so, a few things, right?
Ironically, like the whole kind of, you know,
Russia was involved with Trump in 2016 story
was obviously complete bullshit.
But there actually was a major KGB operation
from the 1960s to try and shape Western perception
about Israel in a negative way
that was highly successful
and ended up influencing all kinds of publications
in the West, including publications read
by people like Jeremy Corbyn, right?
The guy who took over the lay of party here,
who's like crazy extreme anti-Israel.
So you have like long-
And almost became PM, to be clear.
Yeah, it was within like 12,000 votes.
12,000 votes distributed in different seats,
and he would have been Prime Minister in 2017.
Yeah, exactly.
So there's those like very long-term currents
which have programmed the intelligentsia here
for decades in ways which I think are almost,
like not one in 10,000 people know the history of this
and quite understand how this actually worked.
You also though have, it's clear talking to people there
that the Netanyahu does not have a grip
of the whole Prime Minister's office is chaotic.
Prime Minister's office does not coordinate well
with Mossad and other parts of the deep state in Israel.
So like there is no concerted problem messaging
operating there either.
So I think in a kind of tactical operational sense,
that's important.
But also though, I think there's like a psychological problem
which is that they think that
they think, they make what I think is like a common problem
which is they think it's basically about facts.
They think, oh, we watched this terrible news
from the BBC or whatever,
and these people don't know the truth.
And if we explain the actual facts about Hamas
and we explain blah, blah, blah,
then it'll suddenly change somehow.
And so they keep trying to hammer it
with certain PR strategies of the Western media.
But I think it's just fundamentally flawed
because I don't think it's about facts.
Like the sad truth is that the BBC or all the broadcasters,
they have a long-term moral, simple moral story
about why Israel is an apartheid state and their occupiers.
And everything, all information filters into this simple story
and then filters out, right?
And that's it.
It doesn't work on the basis of facts.
It doesn't work on the basis of reason.
It doesn't work on the basis of logic.
So I think any PR strategy which tries to combat it
with facts and reason and logic is just doomed.
It's a bit like in a way, like in a smaller scale obviously,
but just in terms of what you were saying before
about Zuckerberg.
When the first crazy Carol Cadwalada stories came out
in 2016 about Russia and Facebook
and Cambridge Analytica and all of that,
Facebook sort of thought,
well, this is all such obvious bullshit
and like it doesn't reflect
how digital advertising actually works.
We'll explain some facts
and then everyone will realize what the truth is.
They didn't understand that they were actually caught up
in a moral story, right?
And the whole point was evil tech companies
have helped the evil fascists.
So just explaining to the New York Times,
guys, like your coverage doesn't actually understand
what how digital marketing works.
And if we were explained to you how digital marketing works
and then, you know, this terrible coverage will go away.
Who is Zuckerberg and Facebook?
Like clearly operating like this for like three years.
And then in the end,
why don't we just keep getting fucked?
Like what's going on here?
But that's why, right?
Because they're trying to deal with logic and facts
about something that's sort about logic and facts.
Yeah, and I found out that same trap.
So my book came out in 2016, which is a memoir,
which you know, was a very kind of inside, truthy.
What's that?
I read it, great.
Oh, great.
Oh, thank you, great.
Thanks, yeah.
And I actually met that Carol Calderware figure
once at some festival and yeah.
And it's worth noting that in her career,
career before being a journalist,
I'm using air quotes for those listening to a podcast.
She was a novelist, which I think is probably
where her talent should have remained.
Because given literally everything she wrote
about Facebook was completely fictional.
But I also felt, oh yeah, no, no, no.
I'm gonna explain how digital marketing works
as I've been on the inside.
It got nowhere, it meant nothing.
Everyone still thinks that the Russian influence campaign
or that this Cambridge Analytica thing was real.
And yeah, you're right.
I mean, it was just hopeless at the end.
But getting back to Israel,
like I mean, one slight kind of argument
is that like the videos that first came out
of like the barbaric attacks did have some impact.
Like there was a window of like one week of grace period
in which world opinion seemed to be kind of pro-Israel
as you saw literally the most barbaric
and heinous atrocities being committed,
like literally live streamed
by the people actually committing it.
And I think, you know, I saw the famous 46 minute video
that's even like more gory of what Hamas did
as did Douglas Murray and other journalists.
And they've reacted very strongly to it.
I included it in my piece and tablet
about what's going on there.
So to some degree, I think truth does help,
but getting back to like, you're right.
It doesn't fit into the narrative.
Like this poster business, which has driven me crazy, right?
This business of ripping down.
I've put kidnap posters.
It's just on that point
because I think that's an important thing, right?
In one sense, like you can't really get PR
or a story stronger than what Hamas did.
And to me, the actual interesting thing there is, right?
That's like pretty much bad as it gets, right?
It's like sort of filming the torture to chambers
of the NKVD and the Gestapo in Eastern Europe.
But within like 10 days, it's basically
the NPCs in the media just go back to the script.
So even something as mentally appalling as that
and as powerful as that,
basically only knocks them off script for, you know,
like a few new cycles, like maybe 10 days.
And then they're back to,
oh, Israel's destroyed a hospital in Gaza.
I know, right, it's crazy.
It's like, imagine the Nazis
had like live streamed Auschwitz
and then like two weeks later, people were like,
well, I don't know, were they really shoved in ovens?
Did this expert of life change?
It was impossible.
Right, right, exactly.
I don't know that, you know,
the dead German civilian count is higher
than the British one.
I think we should have a ceasefire.
That's clearly what we should do now.
That was clearly the tenor of the conversation in 1943
at Ten Towning.
Yeah, no, I agree with you.
But yeah, and that, I mean, yeah, yeah.
It came to me like the people in Israel
doing the communications understand this, right?
I feel so sorry for them because watching them,
it looks like it looks increasingly like, come on.
Like does the world sort of knows what Hamas did, right?
But it seems like we can't get traction with this.
So like repeating it or,
and they seem to be like increasingly lost
as they start to realize like global opinion
and the global media is away from them on the story,
but they don't have like a follow-up plan.
No, I think, you know, I've got lots of Israeli friends,
I have Israeli business partners,
I was there for a while, who knows?
I may move there one of these days.
I think the problem with Israel,
and I said this in my pieces, like the Israelis,
Israel is a fascinating country with a fascinating people.
They don't realize how weird they are, right?
Like they're obviously very assimilated
to like global, American, Anglo,
whatever Western business culture.
They've obviously been very successful as an economy,
GDP per capita, matching Germany and the UK's,
which is more than 10x higher than any neighboring country.
Like they're very good at playing the Western game,
but the internal Israeli nation narrative
is completely unlike the West right now.
To the point that like,
one of the questions I got from a friend of mine is like,
how is it that the Western left is lining up
with a theocratic death cult?
Instead of like the Israeli left,
which is actually super commie by the way,
and it's funny, like all these kibbutz
that were attacked by Hamas,
like European press was calling them settlements.
It's like, do you have any idea what you're talking about?
This is literally the lefty tree hugging peaceniks
who live in literal communism,
where they literally split up the income
and live in the only functioning communism
one can find in the West.
That's who got attacked.
That's who you're calling settlers
and painting as the right, but that's the thing.
I think the Israelis, how are they gonna sell the story?
They're a religious ethno-state,
like how does that square with a Western narrative
in which, oh no, it's borderless, it's universalist,
anybody can be Norwegian, right?
Like this business of the, you know, the Irish,
the Algerian or whatever it was immigrant
who like stabbed the kid in Ireland
that they kept on saying, no, no, no, it's an Irishman.
It's like, no it isn't, and the fact he isn't
is some of the material to the story,
but you can't accept the fact that, in fact,
not everybody can become an Irishman or whatever.
And that's the collision.
Like I'm not sure that Israel can be sold.
And at some point, like my advice to them
would like win the war and just,
it doesn't matter what the West is, but.
There's a lot of wisdom in that.
I mean, you can see the kind of madness of the West, right?
I mean, the most perfect example of it,
the way that the most insane,
trans-right activist propaganda people
have kind of joined forces with us, right?
Like the first people who were all getting thrown off
the roof stat of one mobilizing most aggressively
on behalf of Hamas and Hezbollah, right?
Like understand the madness of what's seen.
I mean, to be fair to Israelis,
it is pretty tough to understand that, right?
I mean, it's like, you know,
joke is it's like chickens organizing for KFC.
It's like, do you understand what the nature
of the thing you're talking about is?
Yeah.
So maybe switching topics slightly to one of the questions
and one of the things that came up in our group.
So, you know, Dominic, you know,
I think I even written where things are pretty classic,
so at least as far as I understand,
I actually don't know the UK deeply well.
I've lived in Spain and France,
but I don't know the UK well,
but you have hovered in elite circles
and I've kind of dabbled, I mean, in tech, right?
Well, this is the real core of the question.
What is an elite?
What is the new elitism that's coming?
There's a lot of people that I think we all know
who are from those elite circles
are very financially capable
and endowed and privileged and all that.
And they're not gonna send their kids to university, right?
Like they're just not gonna go the Harvard,
Cambridge route or whatever that is.
But they don't have an alternative.
Like they don't know what's the other thing.
So is there a new elite coming?
Does there need to be a new elite?
Like what's your read on all that?
I mean, you have kids, I assume.
So this is like a real question for you.
I mean, a lot of different questions bound up in that.
I do think that was one of the things you alluded to.
I think it's very interesting about this question.
Like are we gonna send our,
like I've got a seven-year-old kid.
You know, 10 years ago,
I would probably not really have even reflected on it much,
but just would have assumed that obviously,
like I wanted to do certain kind of school
and then ideally get into one of the top universities
in the Western world.
And I wouldn't have probably reflected on it much.
Whereas now, I think I always have the opposite.
Like I think maybe in like 10, 12 years,
like if he really wants to do maths
and he's really good at maths,
then maybe he should still go to Cambridge or Harvard
if he can get into one of those two places.
But barring that, it seems to me like less likely
with every day, that that's something
that I would want him to go and spend his time in.
Quite the opposite.
So I do think that's a big issue.
I hope that some of the rich people do what their forefathers
and actually go out and start new things.
I also hope, it also strikes me that maybe there's an opportunity
to kind of jailbreak the maths and physics departments
because a lot of the credibility of these universities
doesn't anymore come from the history department
and the English department and whatnot,
which have all just been taken over by insane forces.
The credibility that they have left
really comes from what we do in hard sciences.
So maybe one thing I've been talking to some people about
is the idea of could you say, right,
we're going to set up something and offer faculty
from maths, physics, maybe computer science
and say you only have to move like half a mile away for work.
You don't have to move for family,
but you can shift to a new institute,
which we're going to run.
It's going to be running the following ways.
There's going to be actual academic freedom.
All of the crazy communism is going to be completely forbidden.
None of it's going to exist.
And here's the kind of principles on which it will operate.
You'll get more money.
You'll get more freedom.
You'll be able to move much faster.
You know, if you're a professor of physics now at Oxford,
the amount that you can actually do
in any kind of timeframe is like almost zero
because the bureaucracy is so completely insane.
So I think there are possibilities like that maybe
for creating different institutions.
It doesn't strike me as likely that in like 30 years time,
the smartest kids are all going to be keeping going
to these universities and they're going to be, you know,
as mad as they are now politically.
So something's going to change there.
Are they going to break up in fracture
or people are going to create new things
and pull away high status people
and it'll change like that.
And obviously, yeah, so on the university front,
I think that's, but politically though,
the fundamental question is, I think goes back
to what we were talking about before.
We've seen in the Western world this very big shift
in elite talent where, you know, 50 years ago
or 70 years ago, a huge number
of the most able smartest people
that could actually build things,
the general Groves characters
or the people who built Bletchley in Britain, right?
These people have very largely stopped going
into public service.
So if you go to the caliber
of top civil servants now in Britain and Washington,
is drastically lower and more and more
of the most able people are in some combination
of maths, money, DC, hedge funds, startup world,
et cetera, et cetera.
Now, that obviously has all kinds of advantages
from an economic perspective,
but I think it's also disastrous
from a government perspective.
And some of these people are gonna need to have to get,
are gonna move back into politics,
I think, if it's gonna change.
We can't just have all of our great builders
operating as entrepreneurs in private companies,
whilst, you know, the CIA and the NSA
and white haired institutions just keep decaying
and are less and less able to cope with problems.
But then the question becomes,
do you sort of revitalize existing institutions
or do you create new ones at the end of the day?
I mean, I'm very interested in having done both in government.
I very strongly think that the startup model
is the way that to go in government.
Like, if your goal is, so if you're the new president,
you take over January 2025
and by 2030, 2035 you want
a drastically reformed American military.
Do you A, try to do some kind of conventional reform project
in the Pentagon, or B, set up new institutions
that will just tunnel around the bureaucracy,
empowered in different ways,
legally set up in different ways
with completely different freedoms over HR,
over freedom of information, over procurement,
all of the bullshit, which makes it just impossible to do it.
And it's obvious that you do B, right?
You don't say to the US Air Force,
so I'll give you a classic example
that I've actually had experienced within government.
What do you do with future planes?
Well, of course, the existing RAF in Britain
doesn't want to do drones
because the whole institutional structure
and the whole way you get promoted
is by being in charge of pilots.
So the system fights against all,
against actually shifting to modern technology.
So instead of trying to convince this old bureaucracy
to do the new thing,
you just set up the drone force, right?
You don't try and make the old thing do the new thing.
You set up the new thing
and you just shift money and power towards the new thing.
It is possible to reform things,
and I've reformed some things.
I spent a lot of time in the Department of Education
changing things, but it's incredibly hard.
It's incredibly slow.
The forces against you are so massive
and you've got to kind of get everything aligned just right.
It's just much simpler to do startups
in government than it is to...
I'll give you a classic example of that as well.
So we set up a new data science and AI team in number 10.
Because it was new,
it was actually much easier to create.
It seemed much less threatening.
It didn't seem like this terrible challenge
to existing power structures,
the way that telling a lot of existing things
that had to change would have been.
Of course, now it's actually successful
and it's doing all sorts of things.
Of course, parts of the system
are desperately trying to close it and destroy it
because it shows everyone up,
but it's super powerful for the old parts of the system.
But it certainly was much easier to get it out of the hill
than it was to persuade thousands of people to change.
What if you're trying to become president in the first place?
You talk about if you become president,
but if you're trying to win in the first place,
do you try to take over the left?
Do you...
The Democratic Party,
do you try to take over the Republican Party?
Do you start a new party?
How would you think about that?
I know you're interested in America 2024.
Talk a little bit about that.
I mean, I think practically speaking now in the States,
I think the die is cast on the Republican side.
Trump is going to win the nomination now.
This seems like a lot of donors
are going to throw a lot of money down the toilet,
trying to back Hailey.
I think she can...
There's no campaign that she can run that can win.
Possibly Trump can blow himself up,
but she got...
Time to do that, as I said, in 2021, was then,
and they've left all that too late.
I do think it's underrated with Biden
that the kind of assumption seems to be that,
now he wants to do it,
therefore he'll just keep doing it.
I think an underrated scenario is that
he just takes another mental dip
and the polls blip down enough
that it's just clear that Trump
is going to win the Electoral College.
And all the focus group will start
pinging back up through the system
from the five, six key states,
saying, yeah, there's all this thing, though,
to say that Biden doesn't mean Biden.
Biden means either we've seen our Biden,
Gaga Biden, they can't actually be president,
or it's going to be President Kamala.
And we'd rather have Trump than President Kamala.
So fuck it, we're going to go for Trump.
And as those focus group reports come back up,
you can imagine panic at the Democratic Party
and they shove him out.
So I do think it's underrated
that Biden could still get pushed out.
I mean, it turns to setting up a new party.
So I did some focus group
and polling research on this last year in the States.
And we hit a kind of interesting problem,
like figuring out what a new party should say and do
to be very popular was not so hard, right?
Which is generally a lesson of electoral politics.
If you actually just listen
and you want to figure it out, there's usually a way.
The problem that we found was
that people said, yeah, God, we hate the old parties.
It's crazy that they're so shit.
It's crazy that they won't change and listen to us.
Yes, I want a third party,
but I probably wouldn't vote for it.
And you go, but why not?
Like you literally just said all these things
and now we've given you the third party.
Here's our policy, we've designed it.
We've got your theoretical leader that you like.
But they were like, why are you not going to vote for it?
And they go, well, because we're just going to be
a waste of vote and the crazy people
can never get in like the whole from the country.
So they kind of that first pass the post problem,
I think is a real problem.
And I think realistically, it's so therefore like
getting over that it's either a very long process
that you have to resign yourself,
might take 20, 30 years to build.
Or you need a kind of global superstar.
You need an Elon type person or a Kanye type person.
Someone of that level of global fame
that just like instantly punches through all media.
Do you know what I mean?
Yeah, well, let's say it wasn't too late.
It was like a couple of years ago
and someone like Elon had come to you and said,
hey, I want to run, I want to compete.
What is sort of the core issues?
Or what is the platform that would be able to compete?
That would most widely resonate?
I think you talked about this a little bit
in your podcast with Andrew Sullivan.
Why don't you unpack that a little bit?
Well, so what is used really simple, right?
And kind of shows the problem.
If you just do regular focus groups of people
and you chat around what sort of things
that people want, one of the first things
that people will spontaneously say is term limits.
We've got all of these old people.
We've got these like senile people
in both parties everywhere.
It's an embarrassment for us on the world stage.
We've got to have term limits
and drive these old people out and get new talent in.
And also we just, not just old people,
we just don't want the same people there all the time.
And it cuts completely across party support.
You can AOC fans support it.
Trump fans, the most fans support it.
It's like a total home run.
But why to know, but the old parties can't support it, right?
Because the old parties are locked into a system where,
if you say that, that's like calling for everybody
in Congress to be investigated by the IRF or something, right?
It's declaring war on the system.
But if you're going to be a third party,
you didn't care about that.
You prepared to take risks
and you were just openly outlawed with the system anyway.
Then you'd have a bunch of things like term limits,
like much stricter controls on Congress,
all of their dodgy share dealing,
buy stocks and shares and insight trading,
all that kind of crazy shit.
You have a whole set of things like that.
I think you'd be very tough on the border,
very tough on crime.
Like you'd be much closer to Trump on that.
And it's constantly interesting.
The Democrats are just out of touch.
They're out of touch with a lot of their own voters on that.
Like I can't remember now,
when I did all this research, it was last year
and I can't remember the exact numbers,
but no, there's a good chunk of Democrats
who voted Biden in 2020,
who basically agree with Trump on police,
the border, et cetera, et cetera.
I think you'd be crazy to do a lot of what the Republicans
trying to do constantly,
fighting on social security and destroying Obamacare.
Again, everything like that,
trying to have some kind of big argument
about the overall structure of the healthcare system
is just doomed.
I've run a whole bunch of focus groups on that.
There's no way through,
there is no great new universal plan that people go,
oh yeah, okay, this guy's cracked it
and this is what we should do.
But I think definitely you definitely avoid that.
But I think a bit like what we did in 2016 and 2019,
we got attacked by the media constantly
as being completely incoherent.
And it was because our agenda didn't fit neatly
onto the existing party access
and it didn't fit onto a left-right thing.
So we were much tougher on immigration
than the conservatives were,
but we were actually in the same place as the country was,
like we were with the median voter.
We were to the left, so to speak,
of the conservative party on healthcare,
but we were exactly where the median voter was.
Now in Westminster, all the media say,
oh, your policy's in here and no one will pay attention
to that, doesn't make any sense.
But that's not how voters think.
So again, if you're constructing a party in the States
and you just were optimizing for winning, right,
not whether or not the pundits say you're smart
or whether your strategy makes sense,
if you're just optimized for winning,
it's definitely gonna look a bit odd like that.
It won't fit into the conventional party structure,
it won't fit on a left-right axis.
And that's partly because it is sort of crude caricature terms.
If you do focus groups in research on swing voters,
whether it's in California or Pennsylvania or in Britain,
they're kind of nationalist, right?
They are far to the right
of most elected representatives on many issues
and to the left of them on many issues
at the same time, the same person.
And this is constantly, I think, underrated and not...
So the whole political-punitory world works constantly
on this idea of the center ground,
which is regarded as this kind of average of left and right.
Oh, there's balloons coming up, oh, well.
Yeah.
This idea of the center ground where people
are kind of average of left and right.
And it's just, all pundits basically believe it
and there's endless, everyone writes about it in every election,
but it just doesn't actually map to the data
of how real voters...
Yeah, I mean, I agree with you, right?
It's funny, one of the catchphrases you see of San Francisco,
your average San Francisco guy is like,
I'm socially liberal, but fiscally conservative.
And it's like, actually, most Americans
are fiscally liberal and socially conservative.
Actually, as a matter of fact, it's you.
I mean, that is an elite view,
but most Americans are actually not like that.
They're actually socialists of the core.
And the government better not touch my medical care,
but they're actually to the right
on a bunch of other issues.
Exactly.
One thing, I don't know if I'd push back on it
because I suspect that party would actually still win,
but one thing I've noticed, again, the EU-US difference.
In the EU, however, and again,
I mean the continent for the most part,
however broken any political process might be,
it does seem like things kind of converge
if there is a majority view.
And to use one particularly hot button issue,
but it's a good issue because it's very parameterized,
abortion, right?
Abortion is actually not a binary thing.
The real debate is actually at what is the cutoff
at which abortion happens.
And if you look at most polling in the United States,
it's almost exactly where the law dictates
in most European, again, I'm not sure what the law is
in the UK, but in Germany, France, and Spain,
it's basically anywhere between 11 to 13 weeks
is the upper bound for abortion.
That tends to be where people pull at.
Most people don't want a total ban.
Most people don't want an abortion,
literally two seconds before the child is born,
and most people land in that 13 to 15,
and Americans are the same way, by the way.
And yet the narrative in the United States
is either fully banned, no way, like the Catholic party line,
or it's the liberal line,
which is any encroachment to abortion is unthinkable.
Nevermind that like when DeSantis, for example,
I think in his initial platform,
he had a 15 week limit,
which is more permissive than most European countries.
And most American liberals
like didn't even seem to understand
that actually Florida abortion law
would be more to the left than France's would.
But it didn't matter, right?
But in the US thing, and I could cite examples
when it comes to gun laws, to a bunch of other things,
where in fact, most Americans are not crazy,
I need to own a tank gun nuts,
nor total banners are somewhere in the middle.
And yet in Europe, policy tends to converge
to the democratic mean, but in the US, actually it doesn't.
It actually pins to the extremes.
And I don't know if that's because of primarying,
first pass to post, voting, or what,
I was gonna say that because of the primary problem,
because of the primary issue on certain things
like abortion, because as you say,
I mean, so again, I looked at this issue last year,
and you can see how you could craft a policy on abortion,
which would basically be reasonably popular with people,
but it will be attacked
whether you're a Republican or Democrat,
you'd be massively attacked by the people on your own side
for proposal.
If you actually crafted the optimal strategy
on abortion for presidential candidate,
as soon as you said it, you would be attacked
whether you're Republican or Democrat
by your own side as a mass traitor.
But I've got a theory on this,
it's not inconceivable to me
that Trump might actually go into the next,
by like September, October, 2024,
Trump may have a more popular policy on,
be closer to the median voter
and have a more popular policy on abortion than Biden.
Because if you look at his history,
he was never a kind of very far right on this issue.
It's from New York.
So it's possible, certainly if he listens to policy will do,
but it would be a very interesting move
for him suddenly to shift.
And here's an alternative way
of how abortion works.
During the 2020 election campaign,
Biden actually shifted from a more popular policy
on abortion to a less popular policy on abortion.
Why did that shift happen?
It happened because the staff in his own campaign revolted
and basically demanded of him that he changed policy
and he didn't feel strong enough
at that moment in the campaign when he was still weak
to push back against his own staff.
And that shows like another dynamic at this, right?
The Democrats are so taken over by very young,
very elite university educated staff
that they constantly push their own campaigns
to positions which are completely irrational
if you're actually trying to optimize for winning.
Can you see this?
There's all sorts of vapor out on this, right?
In 2016, something like a third of the ads
that Hillary ran actually helped Trump.
And the ads which were most popular
with Democrat activists and donors
and got most clicks with them
were the most helpful towards Trump, right?
This is like a crazy thing
which doesn't fit with the conventional wisdom.
The conventional wisdom is,
okay, politicians may be shitted government
but they are at least trying to win elections.
That is not true.
It's almost never true.
Politicians generally are optimizing
for much shorter term things.
They're optimizing for internal kind of in-group dynamics
in their factions and signaling to the media
over like a 48 hour window.
That's most of what their activity is.
And that's what explains this constant weird stuff
of why politicians not actually adopting the optimal strategy
which is doesn't make ends basic democratic theory.
But is that unique to the US?
Cause like again, in the EU just to cite the European example
things have kind of converged to the public well
in the US they have it.
No, I think it's widespread across democratic politics.
I think America is a bit odd because of the primary thing
but Britain has definitely been the same.
You know, I've watched elections here 20 years.
Certainly since 2010, the only election campaign
that was actually rational was our campaign in 2019.
It's just, apart from that, both sides constantly run
election messages which are just, which clearly don't work.
And another example of it, right, is in the referendum.
Our strategy was hated by all of the MPs
and the most kind of committed activists on our own side
because these people, they don't really want to listen
to the public.
What they want to do is tell the public
what they should believe.
And they constantly think, well,
if you just shout louder at them and tell them more
then the public's finally going to go, all right, okay,
well, I agree with you, okay, right.
Which is not how things usually work
but they hate listening.
People in politics hate listening.
Yeah.
Can I bring up one last thing?
Speaking of alternatives to democracy,
one topic that came up in our group chat this morning,
I believe a venture capitalist we both know, Dominic,
was hanging around with King Charles.
He's king now, right?
Part of my privilege as being an American
is not thinking about royals,
which is what spurred the debate.
He felt that the British monarchy
has a certain gravitas and a certain social function
to play as head of state.
I think it's a ridiculous out ofistic throwback
to a barbaric age that we should be done away with.
I think one of the most ridiculous things
about the Australians and the Canadians
that they still have a foreign monarch on their coin,
unlike us crazy Americans, gun nuts though we are,
we have no foreign monarch on our coins, thank you very much.
And in fact, my right as an American
is not thinking about which royal waste rule
popped out of which royal vagina.
I don't even have to think about this crap.
And I think that in fact, if there is a liberal democrat,
I mean, I think that the role of head of state though
is important.
And one thing that actually the Westminster,
not the Westminster system I guess,
but other parliamentary systems have
is they have a head of state
that's different than the head of government, right?
Like in Israel, for example,
you've got Isaac Herzog who's the head of state
who meets with Douglas Murray and the hostages
and kind of represents the people.
And then you've got the head of government,
whoever one hates of course,
because the head of government who was hated
who actually operationally runs things.
And if there's one thing the American political system
gets wrong is the head of government
and the head of state are basically the same person,
which is why national politics
are basically symbolic religious wars
when really it should be about who's the best CEO.
But in any case, that's a long windup.
But what do you think of the royal's dominant?
Are they worth keeping around?
I mean, obviously the thing is ridiculous in lots of ways,
but I think you're being too rationalist, Antonio.
I think you're thinking that,
well, it's this weird throwback
and it doesn't really make any sense.
And they all have these weird outfits
and how can this possibly be a rational way of looking at it?
But I would say like rationalism in European politics
is often being the path to catastrophe.
The people family makes no logical sense,
but I would actually be in favor of keeping it.
And I think that I've got two basic things.
One is that I think from a practical point of view,
if it was replaced,
it's almost inconceivable that what replaced it
will be an improvement in my eyes.
And secondly, something that I've noticed,
which I think is important, very hard to quantify,
is I think it's a kind of,
it's a last defense against extremism
slash fascism slash communist takeover.
And the reason for that is that the armed forces
don't swear an oath to the government.
They swear an oath to, well,
they did swear an oath to the queen.
Now obviously they swear an oath to the king.
And I think that has an oddly stabilizing effect,
that you can imagine all kinds of political disasters,
or you can imagine the kind of political things
you often see in countries happening.
If you imagine similar things happening in Britain,
because it distributes power in this way,
it will be much harder for some kind of like
extremist fanatic government to take over
and actually take over the entire state
and take over the armed forces
and have some kind of Stalinist coup.
Do you know what I mean?
Because the armed force, other parts of the state,
there's this like residual feeling of,
oh, you're actually basically like some kind of
like foreign inspired coup,
and we're just not gonna do what you say.
Yeah, and that's literally happened.
So in 1981, there was a coup attempt in Spain actually,
in which the Guarde de Seville,
which is like the paramilitary,
like the militarized police literally stormed the parliament.
And there's a photo of Coronel Tejero,
like wavering on a pistol and giving a lecture
in front of the, in the chamber of deputies in Spain.
And what happened?
King Huat Carlos II of Spain basically got on TV
in his uniform with the flag behind him
and said, yeah, we're not going back to fascism.
This is not gonna happen.
And basically called up every general and said,
all right, pick a side, bro, me or jail.
And everyone said, okay, okay, okay, everyone come down.
Like, and then they arrested the coup leaders
and like that was the end of it.
And so in fact, it worked exactly as you said, right?
The spirit of the nation kind of arose and said,
no, we're not doing this crazy shit.
Everyone go back to your room.
Exactly, if someone tried to do that in Britain
and then because of this diffuse authority,
it is sort of slightly weird.
Like, you know, you sit in number 10
and you, the prime minister says, okay,
we're gonna do this or, you know,
sending special forces somewhere
or we're gonna do this with whatever.
The actual, like the actual formal powers in lots of ways
or not his, he is acting on behalf of the queen.
And it does have a weird effect.
And it does mean that these people would not, you know,
if it suddenly went crazy or there was some kind of like,
you know, weird person managed to take,
like a Hitler star situation, right?
Where someone actually wins an election,
becomes head of state in all kinds of
rationalist European constitutions.
Well, the whole system now reports up to that
and we include the armed forces
and the new person is wonderful.
Well, everyone just has to do what they say, sort of thing.
That doesn't happen in the weird,
archaic, irrational British constitution.
But I think the little bit of friction and absurdity in it
is like a good long-term hedge.
Interesting, yeah.
I mean, it's like the second amendment in the United States.
The worst comes to worst.
Everyone's got their rifle.
But yeah, I'm trying to think in the US,
who occupies that role of like sanity check?
It really is the constitution, right?
The US constitution is the symbolic thing
that embodies the nation.
But of course, that's a text subject to interpretation,
which is why Supreme Court almost acts like
a rabbinical court, you know,
interpreting the Torah or something, right?
And so the US is kind of a religious project.
But yeah, in the US, there is no embodying of the nation
outside of the constitution in a way.
That's how you've got.
You know, about going too far in some ways, isn't that?
Like, I always find it interesting how
if you take like quite an extreme situation
in American politics of Roosevelt in the 30s,
after his second win, when he was really,
like, I can't remember exactly what the majority was
that they had in Congress,
but it was extraordinarily massive, right?
And he'd got a massive landslide and he could really,
he could and was ripping out Washington,
closing things down, reopening things,
doing all kinds of stuff.
But he then made a move on the Supreme Court
and he basically had to back off.
It was seen as like just a stepped off.
That's a good example.
He tried packing the court famously,
by which meaning putting his cronies in
and basically interpreting, you know,
like the, my policy professor in high school said,
what is the US constitution?
Whatever nine justices say it is.
And so if you control the justices,
you control the constitution.
And that, in fact, was the step too far.
I mean, that was like,
that would be like imprisoning the queen.
That's it.
You've lost everybody.
Nobody's gonna follow you there, right?
Yeah.
Okay.
We've been talking to you, but go for it, I tell you.
No, I'm just saying, I've harassed Dominic with all my,
okay, ask the smartest Brit, I know questions.
So Dominic, you got them all.
I've got a couple more and then we'll get Dominic out of here.
Okay, go ahead.
Well, one, so some people use the mental model
of thinking about the left in the US as, you know,
college educated people, one third of the country,
plus, you know, certain, you know,
large percentage of certain minority groups
that those college educated people claim to speak
on behalf of and prioritize and give deference to,
against on the right, non-educated,
or non-college educated, working class white people.
And that's a crude, you know, summarization,
but it's a way of kind of describing the differences
and the tensions that emerge where sort of one third
of the country sort of speaks for the rest of the country
in terms of dominating the institutions
that govern the rest of the country.
And thus there's sort of this populist outrage
that has the numbers but doesn't have the power
and thus elect someone like Trump.
How would you edit that characterization in the US?
And I'm curious if that same sort of cleaving
or something similar to that is what's also happening
in other countries where we're seeing sort of similar figures
like Trump or is it all very, very different?
No, I mean, I think so there's definitely something common
across the Western world in terms of what's happening
with educational polarization, right?
You can see in the data in every country,
the story is sort of similar since 1945.
Graduates used to be much more conservative
and that shifted dramatically.
I mean, sorry, it shifted gradually for decades
and then it's really kind of become turbocharged
in the last 10, 20 years.
And that's definitely thrown politics.
It's definitely confused all of the old system, right?
They haven't quite understood it.
It's part of the reason why they didn't see Brexit coming
and didn't see Trump coming.
I mean, just in one interesting way, before Brexit,
most of the polling companies didn't wait by education,
certainly in Britain.
And I think similar problems happened with the polling
in America.
They just didn't, like so our data science team
looked at all of these polls in 2015, 2016
and they said, you know, like the data that we've got
is not reflected in the mainstream polls.
And the fundamental reason is that they don't understand
what's happening with educational polarization.
And very similar thing happened, I think, with Trump.
So there's no doubt that establishment parties
have been caught on the back foot by that.
I'd like to ask one more question,
since getting to this issue of, you know,
education and left versus right.
I mean, I forgot who I read.
It was probably Tyler Cohen or somebody.
And he mentioned how in the 1950s,
if you told somebody you were a Democratic or Republican
or to use a slightly more wonky term,
if it was the input to your logistic regression model
that tried to classify various parts of your lifestyle,
being Republican or Democrat wouldn't have told you
whether you owned a firearm, went hunting,
had a college education.
It wouldn't have told you lots of things, actually.
And while now it's almost dispositive, right?
Literally, it is like a 90-10 split either way
for every question I just said,
whether you're a Republican Democrat,
whether you own a gun, went to college, et cetera.
And so there's just been massive split of just
beyond politics.
I mean, in the US, it really is a red versus blue tribe
sort of issue.
And I'm not even sure why that is.
And I've lived in red states and I'd be a hard nut to crack
if you tried based on politics, you know,
whether I own a gun or not,
or whether I have a college education.
But like broadly speaking, like why is it,
here's a better question.
Why does the right kind of suck in the sense that like,
when it comes to like aesthetics,
when it comes to education, I mean,
I think it was David Redneck who famously called Trump
a short-fingered vulgarian, which he kind of is.
And he said many things that were true, right?
Like his critique of Russia during 2016 was actually correct.
And so not to say that everything Trump said was nonsense,
but there's an air about him.
When he has a rally, it's like the pillow guy
that shows up.
It's like people that you wouldn't want your sister to date
or media or culture that you yourself
wouldn't consume or identify with.
And yet you're kind of stuck, right?
Because on the one hand, like let's face it,
anyone with any level of IQ education,
elite status, income is like shopping at Whole Foods
and living in one of six cities.
And that's their lifestyle.
And yet if you kind of reject Whole Hog,
the far left agenda, well, what do you do?
Are you gonna go live in Nashville?
Like, no.
That said, this is someone who's lived in Reno
and rural Washington.
So I have made that jump,
but probably speaking, most people are not gonna do that.
It feels like the mid-wit meme, right?
Whereas the right, you know, both has sort of the hick,
but also Peter Thiel and sort of the new counter-lead
or sort of the true intellectual.
Yeah, but the Peter Thiel are the minority, right?
At the end of the day, that's not, you know,
if you, when a guy from San Francisco,
even if he had some Trump sympathy,
if they went to a Trump rally, would they look around
and say, oh yeah, I have a deep sympathy with these people?
No, he wouldn't.
He walked right out of there.
And so what do you do with that, right?
If you're not going away,
you're not going with the far left agenda,
and yet you're, you know.
The polarization question is, it seems to me,
and it does seem, I mean, I'm not an expert on this now,
in terms of looking across like lots of different countries.
So I'm not sure how to correct this statement.
Certainly relative to Britain.
So for example, in America, these issues, as you say,
have become more and more polarized
and more and more identified on a party basis.
So even if you go back to like 1980,
you had far more tickets splitting.
You had far more people who would like vote
for Democrat Senator, but then maybe vote for Reagan, right?
And you couldn't be as sure
by the fact that they voted for Reagan
about a whole set of their views,
as you would be now if someone said they voted for Trump.
So it's definitely shifted over the last 40 years.
That kind of process hasn't happened in Britain,
and I think quite a lot of other European countries,
in terms of these things being locked into party identities.
So there has been educational polarization,
that's like a cross-western trend,
but that educational polarization
is not mapped onto party identification across the West
in the same way it has in America.
And I don't know what the answer...
It's a very interesting question as to why that's different.
Again, like, does the primary process play some part of that?
Other structural dynamics in the American voter system
don't know, but that is a difference for sure
between America and Europe.
And also Britain.
On that other question,
I think it comes back to what was touched on a couple of times,
which is just like small people on the right
have gone out of politics.
So if you look at, say...
So everyone hates it.
On the right, people like me, we hate New York Times,
we hate a whole load of that liberal media in quotes, right?
But nobody's tried to create an elite thing
to take on the New York Times in its own terms.
As you say, like a lot of the media
kind of entrepreneurial activity, like banning type stuff,
is basically just like trashy.
It's not trashy.
It's not trying to like beat the New York Times
in its own game, which I don't want to try and do.
But I think a big part of the reason why
is this question of where talent's gone.
And the left still has a whole load of smart people
who are basically on the left going to politics
because they want to control these old institutions
and they want to tell everyone what to do.
Whereas people who are as smart on the right,
so you have like two kids now, age 20,
the one who's left inclined wants to go and work
with Larry Summers in Washington
and then work in the US Treasury
and tell everyone what to do
and then get rich, good work for Goldman Sachs
after some spell in DC, right?
Whereas the person who has read a lot of Mises and Hayek
is probably going to want to come and work with you guys
in California on some tech startup, right?
Then they go and work for Andrew Hill
and combine drones and national security.
But when they look around at the,
and this becomes self-reinforcing,
when you went smart 20 year old,
I mean, I've had this myself in terms of recruiting
and looking at things.
We have like very smart kids, age 20, 23,
and they're looking at options
and they go and look and talk to conservative politicians.
Like, I don't want to work with these fucking clowns.
They just, they're losers.
They're not going to get anything done.
They don't really know what they're there for.
Why do I want to go and work with those people?
So the smart person on the right, the Hayek fan,
those often does different things.
And I think over generations,
this is just compounded and compounded and compounded.
I was fascinating, you know,
when I, just after the election,
I wrote a blog and the blog basically said,
okay, we're going to rip up government
and we're going to do all of this stuff differently.
We're going to break a load of shit
and we're going to build a load of new shit.
And if you want to do this, if you're a weirdo,
if you're a misfit, if you've got technical abilities
that you've like never got involved with politics
because it's such a shit show,
get in touch and come and help.
And I had a comment on the exact number now,
but like 50,000 people applied for a job.
I mean, it was just completely insane.
So you can see there is this untapped.
There are a lot of people who actually do want to get involved
with politics and government,
who are like not people on the left.
But at the moment, they're like largely away
doing their own things and they're not going to drop
those things to go and work for a conventional
conservative thing in Washington or London
that they just think hasn't got an actual plan,
couldn't execute anyway, is not going to win.
By the way, I was going to ask you about that ad
because that was pretty famous and went viral at the time.
Did you actually hire somebody from the 50,000 applicants?
We hired some openly and we hired some covertly
and kind of implanted them in the deep state.
Oh, wow.
I love it.
I want to close by, or I want to end by returning
to where we began, which is on San Francisco.
There was one argument earlier that we said,
hey, tech people don't care about San Francisco.
There's the counter argument that Mark Adresin
has publicly made who came on the show
who's group chat and introduced us.
And he said, hey, actually they do care.
And they're Reed Hoffman, Dustin Moskovitz
and other tech people are some of the biggest donors
to the DNC, to the Biden campaign
and also to San Francisco politics.
We've tech has created the situation
that currently exists and they're relatively happy with it
or they think that's the best that can be done
within the limitations.
And that efforts like Gary Tan and others,
and by the way, Mike Solana is trying to create
a right wing New York Times, our good friend.
He's early in that, hopefully he'll be able to do it.
But yeah, people like Gary Tan, while good intentioned,
Mark's argument that he made on our show
is that it actually doesn't help
because there's no Republican party.
Trying to reform just from within the left
will further incentivize the left to keep going crazy
and take control, whereas the only real solution
is to let things get so bad
that a Republican party can emerge.
And Gary, nobody wants to go right wing.
Even 80% of San Francisco is anti-Elon.
They think he's too right-winger beyond the pale.
And so we're caught in a rock and a hard place,
which is do we just not do anything
and wait till things are so bad
that a Republican party can emerge
or can reform happen from within the left?
And people like Gary and the others kind of take over
despite the sort of structural ratcheting
to the most extreme that Mark mentions happens
in kind of one-party cities or states.
So it strikes me as extremely unlikely
that there's going to be a Republican in any kind
of like short-term way, like in the next 10, 15 years or so,
because of other national dynamics.
I just can't see.
It's a bit like what we're talking about
in terms of Israel and like just moral signals,
but the moral signals of the Republican party
are such that it's hard to imagine a whole bunch
of people going, oh, yeah, you know,
I listened to what they've got to say in San Francisco,
crime's got so bad, maybe we should go Republican.
I don't think that that's going to happen,
however bad things get.
I can sort of understand Mark's argument
about the potential futility
of trying to reform inside the Democrats.
But so my answer to that would be hoping
for Republican revival is doomed certainly
in the next 10 years, so forget that.
It's perfectly plausible that trying to like have any kind
of reform inside the Democrat party isn't going to work,
but why are those unique to alternatives?
Why can't you build an independent force
which doesn't have the branding of either?
That's where I would start.
And so I wouldn't try and spend a lot of my time
like fighting the internal battle to the Democrat party,
because I think a lot of that is a waste of time
and effort and energy and won't work anyway.
If there is a way through, and it may not be, right?
Sometimes places and cities and cultures
are just like they're on secretary
and there's nothing you can do about it.
But if there is a way through, I'm sure that it's
by building something separate to the two parties
in San Francisco and say, right, we are San Francisco people,
we don't like the Republicans for that reason,
we don't like the Democrats for this reason,
but here are the things that we believe in
and here's what we want to build.
And if you put us in power, well, here's how we'll fight
corruption, here's how we'll fight crime,
here's how we'll do this.
And you know, you just, you market test a message
that you know at least it works with the voters
that you need, and then you try and find some people
to sell the message and see what can be built.
That's where I would start.
But the hardest problem I'm sure is going to be people,
like because of this chicken and egg problem.
The worst, the worst, the worst, the better
it ends up working, like when the real,
when the revolution comes.
Until then, it just puts everyone off from getting involved.
And I would say the black pill on SF politics
we saw very recently, which is that in fact,
SF could be easily cleaned up.
So she, I'm literally on second street in Soma
about a block away from a highway that typically
has a homeless encampment under it.
And it currently doesn't because Xi Jinping was here
and they cleaned up all the streets in San Francisco.
And practically overnight, practically overnight,
the city went from the dystopia you saw
to something else.
And I would say to quote one of our great American philosophers
H.L. Menken, democracy is letting the voters choose
and then giving it to them good and hard.
And I would say that maybe the Democrats
actually want things to be this way
because they amplify the problems
which they are the solution, which is oh no,
there's this drug and homelessness problem
and there's this whole thing about it.
Again, they could clean it up,
but they sort of choose not to.
Yeah, I think that makes a lot of sense to me.
A lot of California, California Democrat politics
is intensely mainly corrupt.
And for people like Newsom, the current thing,
the only way the current thing doesn't work for Newsom
is if he actually wants to go and become a national figure.
And I think that's an interesting question, right?
Because when I was doing all these focus groups last year,
one of the interesting things that came up all the time
was people saying like Democrats or swing voters,
not Maga people would say, yeah, you know what?
We do need a fucking wall.
We need a wall around California.
Stop all that crazy shit escaping
and washing over the rest of the country.
And because they see the same videos, right?
If like the homeless people like walking out like zombies
with machetes in their hands and they think,
we don't want this everywhere.
And that's a real problem for Newsom, for sure,
if he wants to become a national figure.
But in terms of the internal California politics,
maybe the Democrat party could just do this
for a long time, right?
You tech people can keep insulating yourselves
like the Roman senators in the Republic.
You can build your walled gardens,
the walls of the walled gardens ever higher
when your fish pond is ever more magnificent
and keep the madness out for another 10 years, maybe.
I mean, I've always suspected my dark theory by way,
SF is a tech hub, is that you need like billion dollar
startups to fix some of the problems the city has.
And it's actually not even a joke, right?
Like the public transport here sucks.
So we had Uber, the housing situation,
hotels completely sucks.
We had Airbnb.
The dating scene, by the way, is terrible.
So we had dating apps.
The social scene is actually not so great either.
So we had all the social media,
like literally every great consumer tech
sort of innovation you've seen
has been kind of a patch to the SF system
from very entrepreneurially minded people.
Company to provide personal security with drones
is the life of this one.
Yeah, private police is next.
Before we go, starting a new party,
I presume is very difficult.
You don't have the infrastructure
that the other parties have.
If that were so obvious, why aren't people doing it?
What are the big bottlenecks to making that happen?
I think overwhelmingly the biggest bottleneck
is this first-past-the-post problem.
That you have to get to some critical mass
before you can break through.
And it's very hard to persuade people
to get involved with something
in a first-past-the-post system
because they think, well,
I don't want to commit 10 years of my life
to building this, which may not get old
where you actually can punch through.
That's the fundamental problem.
And I think that's why it's overwhelmingly likely
that if that's solved,
it'll be because someone super-duper famous,
like a legit globally famous character,
decides to do it.
That's the way you could jumpstart it.
I don't think the lack of infrastructure,
I think actually the lack of infrastructure
in lots of ways is actually a great advantage, right?
I mean, just in our own experience,
because we were a start-up in 2016,
we just did everything better
than the established parties did
because we just used the cloud,
we built all this stuff ourselves,
we actually had a proper tech team.
Whereas as soon as we went in
and we took over the Conservative Party,
we looked around the infrastructure there,
like the whole thing is just completely rotten and broken
and doesn't work.
It's like a bit like central government, actually.
People think this can't possibly be true,
but when I arrived in number 10,
the Prime Minister of Great Britain
has less access to a file-sharing system
than a two-person start-up does.
They can at least use Google Docs
and live edit the same document
in different parts of a building or a hotel
or in different parts of the world.
The British Prime Minister could not do that.
Oh my God.
Antonio, you mentioned at the beginning of this call
how San Francisco has an $11 billion budget
or something like that and 700,000, 800,000 residents.
Do we know how that money is spent?
Is that public?
And if so, where is it spent?
I mean, I assume it's public record.
I think the corruption is not like literally
bags full of cash level of corruption.
It's the sort of todyism of,
there's all these NGOs, right?
That are, NGOs are basically church groups
for people who think they're smarter than religion effectively.
And so you have all these NGOs
and it's literally this gravy train
in which they throw money at people
who make the problems even worse.
And I forget exactly how much aid
you get as a homeless person.
I think it hovers around 800 to $900 a month.
You basically get for free just showing up.
And so, I mean, one of the shocking, not shocking things
that if you actually talk to homeless people,
and there's a few Twitter accounts
in which people go out and chat to homeless people.
Almost none of them are actually from San Francisco.
They come from abroad
because they know they can basically get a free ride here.
And here's a quick job interview question, Dominic.
If the aid for the homeless person is $900,
what is the average fentanyl dose price
in San Francisco per day?
Go straight to the beginning of that, shall I go?
If you're, if you show up,
if you wash up homeless in San Francisco
and you're basically given a $900 a month cash grant,
what's the average cost of a fentanyl dose on the street?
I guess net out, right?
Like, it's basically like...
$20, $30 a day is what that's how much.
Because of course it is.
The market's an equilibrium, right?
Of course it is.
And so, yeah, I mean,
I assume this is all public record, Eric,
but it's like, I don't know.
I mean, the taxes are incredible.
Another thing, by the way, is a shocking thing.
Just another random US-EU observation.
Because I thought when I wrote Cast Monkeys,
I actually moved to Europe,
thinking I'd get canceled for other reasons
for writing like this tell-all book.
And so I like, I spent time in Barcelona,
and Berlin, and Paris,
like checked out the startup scenes.
I didn't go to London, by the way.
But it's like,
Europe does everything right to get startups going.
Like literally they'll take over entire buildings
and give them to startups.
They'll have grants.
There's a lot of talent in Europe.
Like they do everything right,
and then like nothing happens startup-wise.
In the United States, they do literally everything wrong,
top to bottom, and yet they cannot stop producing
tech startups, which is incredible.
But like there's so many taxes here.
Like your restaurant bill is marked up
with some health mandate thing,
which isn't even a hard number.
The restaurant can just randomly mark shit up
by like five or 10%, which is ridiculous.
And yeah, it's just there's so much loss
and ridiculousness in California.
And yet here we are.
I'm in San Francisco.
But to me, Twitter is a good analogy
where Elon could have started a new Twitter
and we have friends who've tried to start a new Twitter
and it's very difficult.
Network effects are very hard.
And it's much easier, although still hard,
to take over existing Twitter.
And similarly, I went to Miami a couple of years ago
thinking that everybody would leave San Francisco
and also follow.
And it turns out no matter how bad it gets,
people aren't leaving.
And so it's probably a lot easier to move more people
to San Francisco than to move people out of San Francisco
into some other city or some other country
where you can get some deal with the government.
Like the whole network state movement is trying to do.
It sounds kind of like totally plausible, right?
Like why?
But so quickly, the obvious question,
like why hasn't this happened before?
Why hasn't this happened already?
People are scared of the situation.
Well, hold on.
So I don't know who you're trying to move here.
I mean, San Francisco, I was here for the first tech boom.
People, shitloads of people moved in.
San Francisco, like it's still kind of dead.
Like it has not recovered fully from COVID.
But like circa 2011,
the place you want it to be in the Western world
was within 10 blocks of where I'm sitting right now,
which is where every consumer internet company
was literally created, right?
Like it was happening socially,
happening business-wise.
Everything was here.
You felt like you were in the center of the world.
That's right.
Yeah, this was happening in AI too.
So it can happen again.
That's the opportunity.
It can happen.
The thing is that people either stay
and they put down roots and they get woke
or they make a pile of money and they leave.
That's it.
Like no one actually invests in San Francisco.
That's the problem.
Yeah.
It might be changing though.
There's a rise in political consciousness
in the last few years.
Like I know entrepreneurs who are now getting into politics
full-time because they see how fucked things have gotten here.
And there's like an ecosystem around it.
There's, it's high status now
in a way that it wasn't a few years ago.
That's true.
Things have changed a little bit, right?
You can get Twitter influenced
by posting about San Francisco politics
in a way that you would never have done 10 years ago.
Yeah.
Max Alana built his whole audience off of that,
his media company off that.
But if there's practical campaigns
that you guys think like,
so-and-so is gonna try and do something
and they're a good guy,
then obviously like hook me up.
I'll be happy to like look at research they're doing
or ideas for messaging, stuff like that.
If I can help in some way.
Cool.
Yeah.
We'll keep you posted.
I don't know of anything at the moment outside of GROSSF,
but you're in that group chat
and I don't think they're serious enough.
But I'd also be interested.
So yeah, we're trying to create that conversation
here in the podcast.
So let's keep the conversation going.
But when the next governor comes up,
maybe we should try and find some like legit celeb
that we can work with,
like the rock or someone to become governor.
Yeah, totally.
It's been done before.
We'll just rearrange it.
Rather mutant virus try out place, right?
So let's get the rock going in California
before we maybe move into the White House.
Yeah, exactly.
Also Dominic, thanks so much for coming on.
Thanks Dominic.
We'll continue the conversation.
I just love you to talk.
