Hi, Ron. How's it going? Hi, Michael. It's going well.
Good to talk to you again. It's been a couple years, but...
Now, are you out of the skeptical business altogether now?
No, certainly not entirely. I have a status as the Senior Research Fellow at the Center
for Inquiry, which is essentially an honorary title. It doesn't involve any compensation or
anything like that. I do write for the magazine from time to time. That is for free inquiry.
I have written a couple of times for Skeptical Inquirer, and actually recently I was again
asked to take on actual legal duties for the Center for Inquiry. Their
General Counsel, Nick Little, resigned somewhat unexpectedly in October.
They had some ongoing litigation, so they asked me to step in on a temporary basis. So I'm doing
that. In addition, in recent years, I've become affiliated as an advisor to Atheists for Liberty
organization. I think you may know Thomas Sheedy as the president.
One reason I did that was because of their emphasis on individual rights, which
obviously I'm very concerned about. Clearly, one of the themes in my book. So, yes, I still have
connections with a secular skeptical movement. Yeah, and even though we're Atheists, we want to
emphasize we believe in the rights of people to believe whatever they want religiously. That
is religious freedom as well. Sure. Obviously, that's a critical thing. And it's obviously,
again, as we'll talk about more this afternoon, one of my concerns. I've always been
a strong opponent of individual rights. That's one reason I've adopted what some people often
call liberal attitudes. You know, I've been in favor of same-sex marriage, reproductive rights,
assisted dying. I do that not out of any ideological commitment, but as out of a
commitment to individual autonomy and individual rights. And I think, unfortunately, nowadays,
those are under threat, not just from the right, which historically has been an opponent in
certain respects of individual rights, but also now from the left. Yeah. Well, that's the subject,
the first part of your book that we'll get into in detail. To our listeners not familiar with this,
there are two big skeptic organizations in the United States, my own, which my listeners will
be used to. But also Center for Inquiry, which has two magazines, the Skeptical Inquire and
Free Inquiry. Free Inquiry is mostly the kind of secular humanism and civil rights and women's
rights and same-sex marriage rights and reproductive choice rights and so on. And Skeptical Inquire
is more like traditional skepticism of debunking nonsense. I gather you agree with
me in that we don't want to restrain our skepticism to just Bigfoot and astrologers and
psychics. There are bigger issues that we've kind of having to be dealing with in the last couple
of decades now. Definitely. Definitely, yes. That means really the same principles, right,
applying reason, rationality, critical thinking to any claim.
Exactly. That is so important. And, you know, unfortunately, I have found out that
critical thinking, you know, is actually, it's interesting you point out, yes, CFI has kind
of two wings, the secular humus wing and then the skeptical wing. After I wrote my book, I got a lot
of pushback from those who identify as secular humanists who tend to be on the left side of the
spectrum and, well, I want to go into detail of all the criticisms. Basically, the gist of it was
that I've sold myself out, I've gone to the dark side, you know, I'm now somehow a conservative
or whatever because I'm questioning some of these left-wing views, which obviously I don't think
is the case. I think it's important for anyone who's a critical thinker to look at each claim,
each view on its own merits and decide whether there's support for it, whatever it may fall on
the political spectrum. Yeah, I've seen this trend happen as well. I think it's maybe a generational
thing, but also a shift from liberalism to what should we call it, progressivism or leftism that
seems, from your an eye perspective, illiberal, but they don't think it is illiberal. They think
it's, you know, pursuing more rights or justice. Probably social justice would be the way to say
is what they're pursuing, right? Exactly. Yeah, social justice, but it's at the cost of individual
rights. It's essentially, again, as we'll get into this more, it's elevating group identity
over individual rights. The individuals no longer the proper unit of moral concern, as far as these
people think, it's rather each group. We have to consider group identity and we have to social
engineer things so that we have this equality in all respects, all areas of life, whether it's wealth,
educational attainment, income, etc., based on group identity. And for various reasons,
I think that's clearly the wrong approach. And so old school liberalism or classical liberalism
or whatever the right term is, is what you just described. So this movement is something different.
Why did that happen? What is your theory for when and how this happened or why?
I think there are several interrelated trends. I think part of it started with,
in the, it grew out of academia in the 80s and 90s. And there were a couple different threads. So one
was this questioning of objective knowledge. There was this viewpoint called standpoint theory.
And essentially it said that all knowledge is socially situated. And you really can't say
there's, everything is true for all people, regardless of the group identity. And in fact,
some people, meaning white people typically, may be cognitively disabled because of their
social status and privileged status. And people who are marginalized or oppressed,
usually meaning blacks or perhaps women or, you know, lesbians, it depends on the context.
These people have special insight that the privileged people do not and cannot have,
they're epistemically disabled. And because of that, one of the progenies of this viewpoint
is the emphasis, increasing emphasis on lived experience. One must defer to the lived experience
of marginalized or oppressed people. Certainly you could never dare to question someone's
claim they've been discriminated against, you know, if they're black or women or gay or what
have you, if you're a white heterosexual male, because you just don't have that insight that
they have, that that's part of it connected to that. And some of this, of course, is part of
critical race theory, some of the tenants that I'm talking about are now part of critical race
theory. Another aspect was that the United States and Western countries in general
have systemic racism embedded into their policies and practices. And in fact, that leads to the
claim that, well, this is why we need the social engineering, why we need equity,
because that's really the only way to eliminate these disparities, which are the result of these
policies and practices. And that's why it's okay to run roughshod over individual rights,
because otherwise we'll never get away from these gross disparities, which again, they attribute
to systemic or structural racism. Right, okay, let's try to steal man some of these arguments.
Is it not true, or is it just anodyne, and obviously true, that I can't know what it's
like to be, I don't know, a gay, trans, or whatever woman of color, and so on. Obviously, I can't.
Sure, yeah. So that's true. So the thing is, they are confused. So when people say you have to
refer it to live experience, if you're talking about feelings, how someone feels, how they've
experienced something, clearly, yes, we can experience that. I mean, the most obvious example
is, men can never be pregnant, right? We won't know what it is to feel like you're pregnant.
Well, I know, we're going to get the trans issues. We'll do that later, but in the event.
But that's different from having a knowledge claim. And in fact, the claim about lived experiences
sometimes backed up is the common saying, oh, you have to walk a mile on my shoes. You really
don't know what it's like unless you walk a mile on shoes. But we also have a common
wisdom thing that says you can be too close to an issue. So in fact, if you've experienced
something, you may have a viewpoint that's skewed by that experience, and you may in fact be more
inclined, for example, to claim discrimination when the objective facts don't actually support
discrimination. So yes, it's true that in terms of feelings, we don't know what it is to be black,
or a woman or gay, what have you, unless you are fall into those categories.
But in terms of objective knowledge claims, is there in fact, systemic racism? Has discrimination
occurred here or not? Those things are open, obviously, to debate, and you have to bring
forth facts to this, you know, to support your claim. So again, I think that's the distinction
has to be drawn out. Unfortunately, that distinction has been overridden and conflated,
and that's really at the heart of this idea that we have to defer to live and experience.
If you just mean how someone feels about something, yes. But if you're talking about their claim to
know something, no, it can and should be disputed. Yeah. I think I would add another layer to that.
First of all, that would be true for anything like what's it like to be a bat? I can't possibly know.
Or what's it like to be you? I don't know what it's like to be. I can't know.
It's not even conceptually coherent to ask the question, as if there's a dualism and my soul
can, you know, transport over into your skull to see if the red looks like the same red that
mine looks like to me or what. I mean, it's just, it's incoherent. But in fact, we can have a sense
of what it's like to be somebody else, as you mentioned, you know, try to walk in a mile in
my shoes or my moccasins and see how that feels. We can do that. We can picture ourselves. I mean,
that's what literature is all about. Uncle Tom's cabin was attempt to shake up Americans to say,
look, this is what it's actually like to be a slave. And people read that one. Oh, God darn.
And of course, that's what, you know, films are all about is to transport you into the
person on the screen. And then you kind of viscerally feel like, oh, right. Or, you know,
like Brokeback Mountain, this is what it's like to be a gay guy. And whatever decade that was
supposed to be taken place, I guess, in the 50s and 60s of America. And you really got a sense,
even though I'm not remotely gay, I got a sense like, yeah, you know, that just sucks. That's not,
that feels really bad. So we are actually capable of having, I would challenge that kind of standpoint
epistemology is that what it's called? The standpoint theory. Yeah, I think it's not even true.
Yeah. Another defect already is this idea that there's some kind of unique
voice of color, for example, that's another claim of critical race theory that
there's a perspective that black people have. And obviously, that's just not true,
because there's a wide range of opinions among black people, among gay people,
et cetera, about a whole range of issues. I mean, clearly, you know, Clarence Thomas
has a different viewpoint than Abram Kendi on a range of issues. The interesting thing about
that is sometimes when you bring that up, the pushback you get is, well, these people are just
white adjacent, or they're such a thing as being a multiracial white. It's ridiculous,
but that's the claim they'll make. Well, yeah, these people are trapped into white supremacists
thinking, yeah, they're black, but for whatever reason, they haven't broken out of this whole
idea of white supremacy that is dominating their thought, which is obviously ridiculous. It's
a way to try to hold on to this dogma in the face of contrary facts.
Yeah, I have to use these examples like Clarence Thomas or Glenn Lowry, the economist Thomas Sowell.
You know, they're black. Okay, so we're supposed to, oh, but they're the wrong black,
or they're conservative black, or they're conservative. Something like that. So it really,
it seems like more of the politics than the identity playing a role there.
Yeah, and again, it's just one of the many weaknesses of this whole idea of the standpoint
theory. I mean, and as I explained in my book, there's so many problems where it's hard to
believe that people buy into it, but they do. I mean, one obvious problem is, so there's claim
that there's no such thing as objective knowledge, everything is socially situated,
well, then the claims of standpoint theory themselves are socially situated, right? It's
it's self-contradictory. Exactly, like the point Pinker makes, you know, are we living in a
post-truth world? You can't, can't be, because if we were, then we wouldn't be, because somebody
just made an argument. So apparently evidence does count and reason does count. So we're not living
in a post-truth world anyway. Yeah, yeah, that's right. So you're old enough to kind of look back,
like I am, of what's changed culturally or socially. This seemed to start happening in the
90s, I guess, with what, lit-crit, post-modernism, and that whole movement, driving it. Is that
where you kind of situate where this starts? Right. It started, I think, as is definitely in
academia, with the post-modernist movement, and it's gone on from there. And I think it has,
unfortunately, influenced many people. And you get that now, one of the things when I was doing
research in the book, I would just went online to look at some recent dissertations by people, and
it's, it's just accepted uncritically. I quote one dissertation in my, in my book by
someone in journalism school, just saying that, well, you know, the idea that journalists can
ever be objective, it's just false, right? And that's been proven by, you know, the standpoint
theory. Well, that's, if that's your approach you're taking, this is, again, someone who's
aspiring to be a journalist. What's that say about what kind of, you know, trust we can have on,
on journalists in the future? They obviously think everyone's slanted, and everyone just has a viewpoint.
It's kind of depressing, really, if you think about that, that would be the end of journalism.
It would just all be opinion editorials, the entire. Exactly, right, right. And did they believe that?
You think these journalists, students believe that? Well, they, they accept it. They certainly
parrot that line. Now, whether they apply that to themselves, because obviously they think they have
insight into things, which is why I guess they're trying to persuade us. But so as again, it's part
of this, this self contradictory nature of standpoint theory. Yeah. Yeah, I was just tweeting
this morning about this meme going around on Twitter of the Johns Hopkins University DEI
statement. Word of the day is privilege. A set of unearned benefits given to people who are in a
specific social group. These include white people, able bodied people, heterosexual, cisgender,
males, Christians, middle or owning class people, middle-aged people, English speaking people.
Well, that's you and I except for the Christians part. But what does that mean that I have a
privilege? Isn't it more correct to say somebody else is being discriminated against? I mean,
what, what difference does skin color make? Well, if you're black and you're discriminated against,
that's the problem. I'm not the problem. It's the discrimination that's the problem if it's, if it's
real. Sure, exactly. Well, again, a tie to the discussion we've had about knowledge. I mean,
one of the claims of people who say they're, you know, whites or males are privileged is
that actually, you know, they're epistemically disabled because of that. They can't understand
the troubles and problems that other people have. And that's how they explain some of the
opposition to, you know, their viewpoints as well. If you're privileged, obviously, you just,
you just don't get it, right? Because you're trapped in this cognitive presence of being
a white person or male person. And again, it's, it's really just a way, it's a convenient way
when you think about it to dismiss opposing claims that you really don't have to engage
with a viewpoint that's contrary to yours, because you say, oh, why that person,
he just speaking from a point of privilege. You know, that's, that's why he's saying that.
It is interesting, you know, one of the things I point out in my book is this, you know, standpoint
theory grew out of Marxist theory. And I say that not to kind of disparage, disparage it,
because actually, to some extent, I thought Marx was a great thinker, mistaken in many ways,
but still a great thinker. And in Marxist theory, the idea was that, well, the, the workers,
they have special insight into matters that the bourgeois can't have because, you know, the,
the bourgeoisie, they're in a privileged position, they're not like a question their status,
whereas the workers who are oppressed can understand their oppression and therefore are
willing to question the social order. And what feminists did, who were the originator standpoint
theory, they took that and said, well, yeah, it applies to the difference between men and women,
too, you know, women are oppressed and dominated, and they can understand, therefore, that situation
better than men who just kind of accept the social order as it is. And then, of course,
that's translate into all these other different categories. So as I said, it's, it's a theory that,
you know, and for various, the same reasons why, you know, Marxism can be refuted. I think some
of those same, you know, arguments would apply to standpoint theory. Right. I guess then make a
distinction between, I guess, descriptions versus normative prescriptions. You know,
discrimination, if it's real, then, okay, document it, let's change the laws or whatever,
versus moralizing about it. And it's easy to moralize about it and denounce it, of course,
who's in favor of discrimination, nobody will, except for maybe some white supremacists.
But that's, maybe there's some conflation there in the theory as well. People like to,
especially on social media, I mean, that's, you know, moralizing drives it, drives it crazy.
Sure. Yeah. I mean, obviously, they think they have the high ground on this, which, you know,
explains some of the rhetoric, right? If you try to bring up arguments against
standpoint theory or against a viewpoint that we have to have equity, you're dismissed as,
you know, at best someone trapped by white privilege and at worst, you're a racist, right?
That's a term now that's tossed about quite easily. In fact, it's used so often now it's kind
of drained of its meaning because, you know, if you oppose any of the left-wing agenda in these
areas, you're at best, as I said, someone trapped by your privilege and, you know, otherwise, you're
just a racist, right? You just don't get things. And again, that's the expansion of the term racism.
It's not just now someone who actually thinks, you know, blacks or Hispanics or whatever inferior,
but it's someone who's opposed to change and policies that would, you know, lift up people,
change things and, you know, eliminate these disparities.
Yeah. Here's your concluding remarks on standpoint theory that I think it's important to read,
because it does put it into context. The suppression of women and their treatment as
inferior, subordinate beings has a long history encompassing virtually all human cultures.
The silencing of women was an integral part of that suppression, as in one Timothy,
first Timothy reminds us, let a woman learn in silence with all submissiveness.
I permit no woman to teach or to have authority over men. She is to keep silent.
Thank you, Bible. Fortunately for all of us, you continue. That situation began to change in
modern times and now at least in Western countries. Only the most pigheaded bigot thinks women are
not as capable as men with respect to scientific or academic endeavors. But the attainment of
full civil and social equality was fairly recent being a matter of decades, not centuries.
So I guess what people on the left are saying is we're not there yet, and we have a long ways to
go. So we need to adjust the scale by, I guess, discriminating the other way or, you know,
something like that. That's what the purpose of these DEI programs are. We have to make it happen
from the top down and we're not even remotely close to being there. Yeah. But the thing is that
we've had tremendous progress, not just with respect to women's rights, but with respect,
obviously, equality for blacks, other groups as well. With respect to sexual orientation,
obviously, we have had huge changes in both social attitudes and the law in the last few decades.
So it's been tremendous progress. And I think that's good. I mean, it's obviously a great thing.
I mean, people should be judged as individuals on their merits regardless of their race, ethnicity,
sex, sexual orientation. It's all in favor of that. And that's kind of one of the ironies now
that we've, you know, I wouldn't say we've achieved equality, but certainly we're approaching the
point where we're increasing the opportunities for people regardless of their race or sex,
what have you. Why now this sudden demand that, oh, we have to socially engineer things. So we
have this, you know, complete equality. Among other things, it assumes that the policies that we
have in place now are the cause of these disparities. And that's one thing I question, of course, in
the second chapter. It's the idea that, in fact, the policies and practices of the United States
are still systemic and racist. And as I say, I don't believe that claim is proven.
I guess at that point, they would say, George Floyd. George Floyd, right.
You know, just anecdotes like, well, how do you, then why is this bad shit still happening?
Right. Well, bad shit still happens. So clearly, and I think we have to distinguish between
individual racist acts, racist acts in the traditional meaning that, you know, someone
has done something because of animosity towards someone due to their being black or Hispanic or
what have you. That still happens, obviously. It happens a lot less than what it did, you know,
when we were both younger, right? In the 50s and 60s, you had a lot more of it.
Things have changed, I think, for the better. But sure, stuff still happens.
But that's different than the claim of systemic racism. Because in fact,
people who argue for systemic racism say, look, we're not dealing with the individual attitudes.
We're dealing with the embedded policies and practices. And that's really the major issue.
You know, the intentional discrimination you get from some people, and this is a metaphor they use,
is just the tip of the iceberg. You know, the major part of the iceberg under the surface
is the continuing policies and practices that are causing these disparities. And that's, you know,
what I questioned in the second chapter of my book, I just don't think that case has been proven.
Especially when it comes, and you know, I've only had a couple reviews on my book.
And one reviewer pointed out a very favorable review, but said that, you know, the book dragged
a bit when he talks about housing discrimination policies in the 40s and 50s, because I spend
like 10 pages on it. But one has to do that to, I think, really come to grips with these claims,
because just too often, what the argument for systemic racism boils down to is they just point
to statistical disparities, right? And you can point to disparities are there. There is a wealth gap
between blacks and whites. There's a gap in educational attainment. There's a gap in
incarceration rates, et cetera. But how do you explain that? What is the cause of that?
And if you look at the wealth gap, for example, one of the claims that's being made is, well,
it goes back in large part to the housing discrimination of the 30s and 40s, because the
federal housing administration actually had a explicit policy of favoring segregated housing
and loans were not given to black families as often as they were to white families.
All that's true. But then when you dig into statistics, that had some effect on
increase in black housing, but not much at all. So in fact, looking at the
point of time where that discriminatory policy was in place, namely between the 40s and early 50s,
the gap between black and white housing changed very little. So there was a gap of something
like 19. And I have the exact numbers in my books, I'm going by memory. In 1940, there was a gap of
like 19.3% between blacks and whites in terms of the percentage of them owning housing that increased
to like 19.7% in 1950. So a minor increase. And that clearly by itself can explain the
continued wealth gap. Now, going into a lot of detail, we can talk more about this, but
essentially the wealth gap, I think, can be attributed to a couple of things. First of all,
there is a legacy effect from slavery. No question about that. Because when you start
from nothing, which is essentially what blacks did after emancipation,
it took a long time to try to catch up and obviously didn't catch up completely
to whites. So that by 1920, so you started out and I cite some studies that talk about this,
the wealth gap between blacks and whites right after the end of slavery was something like 60 to
one, as you might imagine, right? Because obviously most blacks don't have much in the way of accumulated
wealth. By 1920, that had been reduced to 10 to one. Much credit, obviously, to black families
for all the striving they did to try to reduce that gap. Unfortunately, it hasn't really changed
that much from the 1920s. And obviously between 1920 and 1960s, when we started to enact civil
rights laws, you can explain that by saying, well, obviously they were still a lot of discrimination.
Discrimination was still legal, right? That held blacks back in terms of the opportunities they had
in education and employment and what have you. But why hasn't it changed much since the 1960s?
After we passed the Civil Rights Act, the Fair Housing Act, the end to discrimination in credit,
et cetera, et cetera, we've had affirmative action now cut back, obviously, because of
Supreme Court decision, but that was in place for 50 or 60 years. What's the explanation for the
failure for the wealth gap to decrease? One partial explanation which people don't want to
talk about because they think it's kind of a moralizing aspect, especially if it comes from a
white critic, is the fact that in terms of family composition, there are many more black families
that are single parent families than white families. 70% of black children are born or have
just a single parent. That's a staggering statistic when you think about it. And clearly,
it has an effect that you don't have to have a PhD in economics to realize that it's harder to
accumulate wealth if you're a single parent with children than it is if you're married couple.
And that is borne out also by statistics. So, in fact, we talk about the wealth gap.
If you're talking about a married black couple, they actually have more wealth
than a single white parent would have. Now, it is true that even for black married couples,
there is a wealth gap between black married couples and white married couples,
but it's much less than the wealth gap generally. So, the wealth gap generally,
if you just take blacks and whites statistically as groups, is simply like nine to one or seven to
one, something like that currently. That's cut in half if you just look at married couples.
So, the bottom line from all this is that, yes, there probably is some legacy effect
still nowadays from slavery, but you also have to look at factors such as family composition.
If we don't do that, whatever policies we use to try to narrow this gap
are going to be misguided. I mean, we have to look at all these factors here. So,
just to say in general, while there's policies or practices of systemic racism that are embedded
in the United States, if you just take that approach, again, you're not going to wind up with
the proper policies to try to minimize or eliminate this wealth gap.
Certainly, that's Ibram X. Kendi's approach where he defines racism as any discrepancy of any kind
between blacks and whites. That's it. It can only have one explanation and that's racism.
All right. So, we all pretty much reject that as incoherent and unscientific.
What you've described is one aspect. I mean, if we just think about it from a social science
perspective, conservatives will also argue, I think Thomas Sowell and Shelby Steele have
made this argument that the great society in which the government is going to come in and
pull these people up by their bootstraps, so to speak, which would not be their bootstraps, I guess.
And so, essentially, they married the state, say women married the state. Because if you get
married, then the welfare check or whatever dries up. And so, it's a disincentive to be in a married
family dynamic as opposed to single. Something like that is another conservative argument.
Yeah, it is. I mean, there's probably some truth to that, but I'm not sure that's the
entire explanation. Then, we do have to... One thing that I take issue with conservatives sometimes
is they're seeming readiness to cut back on certain social benefits, which I think are
important for families. It's hard to get by on a single parent's income, especially if they're
children than family. So, I think programs like food stamps really are critical. I mean,
we do have to make sure people get nutrition. The idea that there's so much of a disincentive
to get married, and that's why people stay unmarried, there's probably some truth to that,
but I'm not sure that's the entire explanation. In any event, as I said, the important thing is we
need to keep in mind all these different factors. And as I said, family composition clearly plays
an important role. And it plays an important role in some of these other disparities, too,
that people talk about in terms of the education gap, for example. I mean, there are a lot of
studies that indicate that clearly, if you're a single parent, it's harder to spend time with
your children, just reading through your children. I mean, you're busy trying to earn income, support
your family. Educational outcomes tend to be better if there are two parents in the family.
Yeah. For sure. And the other conservative argument that I'll tee up for you, you can
whack at it is religion. You know, if they just followed the Ten Commandments and got married,
they married, raised their kids and so on, with solid Christian moral values, this would be
an uplifting effect. Yeah. Well, the thing is, I just don't think that stable relationships are
necessarily tied to religion. I speak as someone who's been married for almost 50 years. And,
you know, both my wife and our atheists, and we seem to be able to, we've had two children,
we have two grandchildren, so I don't think religion is necessarily tied into the idea of...
Well, they would probably say something like, on average, it's better to be religious than not
religious, because at least you have some foundation in moral objectivity and values.
Yeah. Again, though, I think that's conflating religious beliefs with moral beliefs. And I
think clearly, you know, my experience is that non-religious people can be just as morally
upright as religious people. I mean, that's one thing I think I've reflected on my
70 years on the planet. I've known very good religious people, very good atheists. And likewise,
I've known some despicable atheists, a lot of despicable religious people. So I think
one's metaphysical beliefs really have very little to do with one's moral character.
Right. So leave the supernatural element out of it. Are there objective moral values
that we can say that really is right or that really is wrong? Or this really is good or that
really is bad? So you can say, objectively speaking, even if it's just an economic calculation,
it's better to be married than not if you have kids.
Sure. Yes. Just as if you want prosperity. Now, for some reason,
you know, that concerned about economic prosperity or being able to spend time with your kids and
you know, whatever the factors might go into your calculation, I suppose you could say,
well, yeah, for better me, for me, it's better to be single. But you know,
that you have to recognize that comes at a cost, various costs in terms of not just your income
and wealth, but also the cost in terms of spending time with your children.
Yeah. And I think there's a whole suite of other factors there too, you know,
education, income, you know, and just being in a better neighborhood, like a neighborhood that
has high quality supermarkets rather than living in one of these so-called food deserts where,
you know, the only supermarket within driving distance, you know, just sells the worst crappy
food, high calorie, low nutrient value and so on. The air is not as good. The roads are not as good.
There's more gangs, whatever. I mean, there's probably 100 different things, the difference
between a poor inner city and a, you know, a rich suburb, something like that, that it's,
there's so many factors hard to calculate, which has what influence, but together they add up.
Yeah, definitely, definitely. And also, you know, this relates to another disparity that
is often attributed to systemic racism, and that's, you know, crime and, you know, the
allegation that blacks suffer from a justice system that is stacked against them. And, you know,
of course, there's the one thing they often point to is actually the easiest one to refute so-called,
you know, unjustified killings of police. You know, there's often this rhetoric about there's
a genocide going on against blacks being carried up by the police. And, you know, there are obviously
some very high-profile cases. Most and many of these cases do indicate some unjustified use
of force, the Floyd case being perhaps the most prominent one. But then if you, you know,
look into the actual statistics in terms of the number of people who blacks who are unarmed,
who might be killed by the police, you're talking about maybe a dozen people a year, right? So this
idea there's a genocide. And then if you look at police killings in general, war whites are killed
in blacks. Now, true, there's a, you know, disproportionality. So statistically, you know,
proportionally, more blacks are killed by police than whites. But again, in absolute numbers,
I think the latest figure I looked at was last year with some like 450 whites versus 230 blacks.
So, I mean, it's a strange genocide where the people supposedly carrying out the genocide
are killing more people of their own race than another race. And then, you know, you have to
look at each case individually whether or not it was justified. And so this whole blanket
condemnation that, oh, it's the police are unjust, the racist, what have you,
that doesn't seem to be borne out by, you know, careful studies. And there was actually a very
important study carried out by Roland Fryer, who happens to be a black economist from Harvard.
He looked very closely at the statistics for all shootings by police, not just fatal shootings.
And again, to make a long story short, and I discuss in detail my book,
it simply was no pattern of discrimination against blacks, no indication that police were using,
you know, force, you know, shootings against blacks more often than whites.
Oh, so that argument, I think it doesn't have much foundation.
Didn't he get run out of Harvard for that study or getting canceled culture?
He was criticized, although I think they had something also to do with claims of sexual
harassment in his, yeah, so that may have more to do with that, although there probably was a
sense among some that, hey, we don't like this guy because his claims, so let's, you know,
piggy that onto the sexual harassment issues. And yeah, so that was that got brought up during the
Claudine Gay trauma the last couple months here. You know, why him? I mean, she's black. Well,
he's black. Well, but it's the, you know, the he had this study. Well, yeah, so maybe it's a
little more complicated than that. Anyway, that doesn't matter. Yeah, so Heather McDonald makes
the case, it's more of a statistical artifact. So we'll get back to all the variables. If you live
in a poor neighborhood that has a lot of crime, and you're just walking down the street, you're
more likely just statistically to encounter a policeman who's driving by, or maybe they're
more likely to pull you over or stop you just because statistically speaking, you know, there's
more crime in this neighborhood and there just happens to be more blacks living in that neighborhood,
you're going to have more police on citizen encounters. And even if the rate of
inappropriate searching or treatment of the citizen by the police officer is low, 0.01% or
whatever, if you have 10 times as many encounters, you're just that number, it's just going to go
up statistically without any racial animosity whatsoever at work. Sure, exactly. And likewise,
the claim about incarceration rates, you know, this ties into the whole school,
you know, school to present pipeline argument. It is true that, you know, again, if you look at
statistics, there's a disproportionate number of blacks who are incarcerated, something like 33%
of the prison population in the United States is black, blacks comprised roughly 13% of the
population. But then if you look at the people who are committing violent crimes, the latest violent
crime statistics from the FBI indicate that 36% of violent crimes are committed by blacks. So
essentially, it's equal to the incarceration rate. And then you go into the, well, why are the more
crimes being committed by blacks? Again, that ties into the some extent, the wealth gap issue and,
you know, the whole question of, you know, living circumstances. I mean, again, you don't have to
be a jurisprud or a have a PhD in sociology to know that poverty and crime are often related.
Right. Yeah. People who are in poor circumstances and they see a way to, you know, enrich themselves
outside of other opportunities that they may have been denied such as educational opportunities,
they're more likely to turn to crime. So the, it's not racism that's putting people in jail,
it's the fact that proportionally more of the violent crimes are committed by blacks and then
this understandable given their social circumstances. Yeah. Well, there I can see an activist saying,
yes, I agree with you. It's not, there's not systemic racism in the traditional old school
sense. But this is why we need a UBI, you know, or some kind of government assistance to pull
these people out of those crappy neighborhoods. So they're not having those encounters and running
with bad people that commit crimes. And then that leads them to being arrested and harassed or whatever.
Right. Well, that, you know, that goes into the issue is if there is a wealth gap
and part of it can be attributed at least to the legacy of slavery, what's the right step to go about
closing that wealth gap? Assuming that's something we want to do. And I think it's just in terms of
social harmony. Social harmony is a good thing. If you want to reduce friction between the races,
it might be good to have a more, more income and wealth equality between blacks and whites.
And that goes into the issue of reparations. Is that the right approach?
Well, first of all, you know, why would we be doing reparations? Is it from a moral obligation
or is it, in fact, to reduce the wealth gap? If it's a moral obligation, you wouldn't look
actually the individual circumstances who are getting the reparations, which would mean, you know,
some of these athletes who are making $50 million a year would get, you know, a check for whatever
it is, right, two or $300,000 or something. Which doesn't make any sense. If on the other hand,
we're trying to reduce the wealth gap and do it in a way also that won't result in some
pushback from, you know, poor whites who are concerned about why am I not getting a check
because my circumstances aren't good. One way that's been proposed, and I'm not an economist,
so I can't evaluate with this, you know, whether it's a good idea or not. But the Annie Casey
Foundation has said that childhood savings accounts, if administered on a kind of an income,
you know, so you test by the income, how much someone would get into the childhood savings
account, could reduce the wealth gap over a generation or two. So it's not a quick fix,
but it's a fix that would I think result in less divisiveness on the social and political level.
Again, I'm not necessarily arguing for that. But, you know, if we think the wealth gap is
something that should be closed, there are means to do it. I think that, you know,
wouldn't result in the same social divisiveness that reparations might.
Yeah. Yeah, I like the GI Bill model where, you know, the government is going to give you a break
on a loan, interest-free loan or whatever to go to college because this is one of these
collective action problems. We as the government just think it would be good if our citizens
were educated or married or own homes or had kids, right? So these are examples I always use.
Apparently the government wants me to own a home because I get a tax break on my interest,
on my mortgage, and I get a tax break for being married and I get a tax break for having kids.
I even get a tax break for driving electric cars. So apparently the government wants me to do all
sorts of things because they're incentivizing me to do that. Right. Maybe they could do something
like that, you know, because it's not just income but also education. So maybe something like a GI
Bill, you know, like low interest or interest-free loans for people of color to go to college,
community college or just something, just, you know, finish your high. What is that formula,
you know, to stay out of poverty, finish high school, don't have kids out of wedlock,
get married and stay married and then have kids and get a job and keep your job. I mean,
it's pretty simple. You know, it's not rocket science. No, I agree. Yeah. And again, that ties
into, I think, the importance of treating people as individuals and trying to persuade them as to,
you know, what the, if they have certain goals in mind, what's the proper way to go about that?
And much better than kind of top-down social engineering that's being pushed right now.
And that goes into the, you know, the third chapter on my book was this whole idea of equity,
again, the social engineering that we need to change all these policies or bring about,
you know, absolute equality in all these areas. Number one, I just don't think that's,
you know, again, from a moral standpoint, it's treating the group as the unit of moral concern
rather than individual. More importantly, just, I don't think, you know, in the long term,
this doesn't make any sense because let's assume that at some point you actually,
through your policies, get absolute equality between, you know, the races, between different
ethnic groups, between, you know, the sexes. It's obviously not going to stay stable. It's
going to change over time. And then what do you do? You keep changing the policies to keep,
you know, the equality in place. It just, I mean, we live in a dynamic society. There's always going
to be some sort of, you know, gap between people, whether it's a racial gap or a gap between the
sexes or what have you. And for the idea that the government has to keep intervening all the time
to keep absolute equality, it just, it's a dystopian outlook, really. And I think it would
obviously lead to bad economic consequences. I mean, you know, the one model we have or something
like that is, you know, the Soviet Union, they try to social engineers, there's things to bring
about, you know, the communist utopia. Well, clearly, that was a failure. And I think the
same thing would result, we had a government that was really bent on ensuring this absolute
equality between the races, between the sexes, etc. So here you're making distinction, equality of
opportunity and equality of outcomes. And that's what equity means in the progressive vocabulary.
Yeah, exactly. It means bringing about equal outcomes among the different groups. And
yeah, that's the new meaning of equity. I mean, equity used to be kind of a vague term like
justice, meaning that not just something that's fair, but now it has a very
I think is we should reject this doesn't make any sense. And it's, it's led to, you know,
implications that I think I found really I when I wrote this book, one thing that I found most
surprising. I looked at how equity has gone into the healthcare field. You know, the American
Medical Association, at least again, when I was younger, was often regarded as a conservative
organization, you know, because in part because they were opposed to, you know,
socialized medicine, what have you. Now they become essentially a very radical organization.
And I invite people to just, you know, go online and look at their strategic plan for achieving,
you know, equity. And essentially, it counsels physicians to become social activists. In fact,
you know, they need to fight white supremacy. They need to fight meritocracy, which is
regarded as a poison. Those are words from their, their book. And, you know, that attitude I find
troubling from a lot of different perspectives, including this, I guess, my traditional view
of the physician is someone who's concerned with the patient in front of them and how to
treat the patient in front of them as opposed to greater social justice implications.
So it seems to me that's not something we want physicians to be concerned about,
or at least concerned about in terms of how they treat patients.
Yes, of course, that's what medical doctors do, but not public health officials or researchers.
I mean, their goal is, is the group, you know, on average, African Americans suffered more from
COVID than whites. Why? Why is that? And what can we do about it? That, that is their concern.
The group is the target. Right. Right. I agree. No question from public health
professionals, but again, the way the AMA is structured, this is a obligation of the individual
physician as well to consider social justice implications as they go about treating patients.
And that has led to, you know, certain proposals which I think
just are ill-advised and go against the traditional understanding of physicians. There's this
one study which I highlighted in my book, it was a study carried out by physicians at
Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston. And they found out that on average,
black patients with heart failure were not referred as often to specialized cardiology
services as white patients. Well, that led to a proposal. And, you know, the people who
authored this proposal, you know, made no bones about it. They said this is for corrective justice
purposes, right? We need to have a policy in place against preferential treatment to black
patients from here on out so we can kind of balance things out.
No, I think I find that objectionable in principle, right? Because I think it should
be left up to the physician to decide, you know, which patient goes into kind of general
medical treatment as opposed to specialized treatment. But it turned out, if you look at
the actual study that supposedly justified this preferential treatment, it didn't justify it.
There was no basis for the conclusion that somehow black patients were actually being harmed.
Because it turned out that even though black patients were referred less often to specialized
cardiology services, the mortality rate for black patients after their heart failure was
actually lower than it was for white patients in the study, which indicates there was actually no harm
arising from the fact that they weren't being referred to these specialized services. So
a flawed study leading to a essentially a flawed recommendation.
Maybe this is a good point to address the implicit association test as another one of
these tools that says, if you're a doctor and you go, but I'm not discriminating, I'm not a racist,
well, you are unconsciously. And here's the test to prove it.
Right. I think the problem with that is, and again, there have been a number of critics of this.
It's very hard. But how does actually one either prove there's this implicit unconscious bias,
or how can one refute it if one wants to refute it? Either way, it's something that's very difficult
to measure. And what often happens is that people just make this conclusion that, well,
again, if we have these disparities, there has to be some, you know, just some explanation for it.
So if it's not intentional discrimination, and it's not necessarily policies,
there has to be some implicit bias going on. And I haven't found, maybe you have,
but I haven't found any study that conclusively proves that there's actually this implicit bias.
Again, it could be true. It's hard to refute a claim that there's some unconscious bias going on,
because again, how would you establish that conclusively? But I think that's, I don't know,
I'm not persuaded by that. Obviously, again, it could be true for some people,
whether it's as prevalent as its proponents say, I tend to doubt that.
Yeah. Yeah, we've covered that quite a bit in skeptics. There's several problems with the test,
first the test reliability, you know, from one day to the next or one moment to the next that
the same person takes the test, they don't get the same score. It varies
beyond what is acceptable by psychometricians. But then the deeper one is, is it test validity?
Is it really measuring what it says it's measuring? And the answer appears to be no,
this associating, you know, black and white with, you know, positive words or negative words,
that sort of thing. You know, it may just be measuring your, I guess, your reaction time to
words that you're familiar with or not familiar with and not, you know, some sort of, you know,
racial bigotry that's underneath there. In any case, you know, there's other problems with the test.
And not to not the least of which is it doesn't predict who will actually discriminate at all.
It doesn't, it has zero predictive validity. And so there's not much to do with it. It seems
to be one of these things that when people like you and I say, yeah, but we've made a lot of moral
progress since the civil rights movement. Yeah, but that's only what people overtly say to pollsters
when they answer questions like, would you move out of a neighborhood if a black family moved
into your neighborhood? Almost nobody says that they would now, but they used to say that in huge
numbers. Right. Say in the fifties. But, but unconsciously, they're still, you know, it's
underlying there. I'm troubled by the same, same reason you are, you know, if it's unconscious,
how am I supposed to know? Right. Well, it's how you act, but I'm not acting
anyway. Show me what I'm doing, you know, something like that. Right. And then it comes down to
something like, well, you know, Google doesn't have 13% African American computer engineers.
You know, like that's the, okay. So then the question is, or, you know, 50% female CEOs and
Fortune 500 companies, why is it only whatever it is, like 23% now? Right. Why is it not 50%?
And, and so is it that there's still an old boys club and there's a glass ceiling, or is there
some other, you know, reason? Maybe it's the pipeline problem. There's just not as many women
applying for those jobs. Why are they not applying for those jobs? You know, well, it could be,
goes back to eighth grade, when they're diverted in one path or another, it could be just preferences.
Remember when Jamie DeMore got in trouble at Google for saying, maybe women, he was just
reflecting kind of an evolutionary psych model that, you know, women, girls, females prefer
people and, and males prefer things, you know, and that programming is more of a thing thing.
And, and that's why there's more women in medicine and, you know, and other people oriented jobs.
And there's more men in more of the STEM fields that are more thing related. And, but even to say
that is kind of a taboo subject.
Sir, right, you can't break up. And that's, you know, one of the, it's one of the, actually,
the more troubling aspects of this whole push for equality and it ties into the whole DEI,
diversity, equity and inclusion push that's prevalent now throughout corporations, universities,
whatever, is that there's a taboo on just bringing up certain subjects, right? And it ties into,
it's actually a restriction now on what academics can, can say what they can present at conferences,
what journals are going to allow to be published. One thing I point out in my book is that now
some journals have actually said we're not going to publish articles. I mean, regardless of what
their worthwhileness is as a study is, if in fact they denigrate or insult the dignity of some group.
So in other words, there's, there's a censorship going on. Same thing for, you know, various
conferences have put an emphasis on, well, does your presentation advance racial equity in some way?
If not, well, maybe we don't need to have your presentation at the conference.
It's affected, obviously, recruitment for faculty. Many universities now has been going on for a
couple of years and it was actually, it was an article in New York Times fairly recently about
UCLA because there was a professor there who, very liberal professor, this guy was actually
believed in affirmative action. I forget his name right now, but he was turned down for a position
because his, you know, the now mandatory equity statement which you have to submit with your
application for any faculty position somehow didn't pass a muster, as I think he said something like,
well, he believes in treating all individuals the same. And according to the rubric that
universities use, that's a big no-no. You're not supposed to say something like that because
obviously you need to, you know, accept the fact that people have, you know, different positions
in life when there's white supremacy and et cetera, et cetera. So there's a, you know, very
troubling, essentially a quiet censorship going on in academia and there are certain views that
if you express them, you may not get published. You may not be able to make a presentation at a
conference and you may not get a position that you want at a university. And that's obviously
for someone who believes in a culture-free speech, not just, you know, the government, you know,
preventing free speech. But it used to be, at least the model was that universities especially
where it was an area where you'd have, you know, different viewpoints expressed. You wanted to have
a different viewpoints expressed. You want to have different viewpoints debated. And if in fact
we're kind of, you know, saying certain views or taboo, that's obviously very troubling. And I
think it also is going to lead to there's enough distrust already among many segments of the population
in terms of their mistrust of the, you know, universities, the establishment, the medical
establishment. If they come to, you know, the sense that in fact, well, you know, there's censorship
going on in these journals and conferences or what have you and certain views can't be expressed,
well, then why should we accept, you know, what's coming out of these journals and what's coming
out of these conferences. So it has a lot of negative implications,
aspects of this whole push for equity that's going on right now.
Yeah, this is what's called base rate neglect that is neglecting to ask, well, what's the,
what's the base rate behind whatever statistic you're looking at? Again, how many, you know,
contacts are between citizens and the police in inner cities versus suburbs or whatever.
You have to know what the base rate is to know whether the particular number you're looking at
is unusual or not, you know, and Phil Tetlock calls this base rate taboo to ask like, well,
how many women are applying for programming jobs at Google? You're not even supposed to ask that.
The only thing that should matter is what the outcome is, what's the actual hiring rate. But
from Google's perspective, or say Caltech or MIT, why aren't there more women stem
undergraduates, graduates and professors? Well, what's the rate at which they're applying?
And it turns out it's pretty low. And so, you know, if you're female in STEM, you have a pretty
good chance of getting a good job because there just aren't that many applying compared to the
males. Then the question is, well, why is there this base rate difference? You know, this why is
there a pipeline problem? And does it go back to high school, middle school, grammar school? Is it,
is there some, I don't know, underlying discrimination against girls going into
STEM when they're young? Or is it something else like Jamie D'Amour proposed, reflecting
evolutionary psych models that, you know, things versus people, something like that. But
even asking that is taboo. Right. But there is that obvious difference.
You know, interestingly, so one thing I've done in my semi-retirement, I've been taking
physics courses at George Mason University. You are? Yeah, I am. Yeah. I have a very school
pace. First of all, I had to start off, you know, taking math courses. I had a abysmal high school
education as far as math goes. So I had to actually start with a pre-calculus and the calculus one,
two, three, whatever. Anyway, what I want to make is that there's obvious difference in terms of the,
you know, male-female ratio in physics classes. You know, it's, I don't have the exact numbers,
but in most classes I've been in, it's usually, you know, like 18, 19 guys and maybe three or four
women. Right. And, you know, what's the explanation for that? I assume my university is not unique.
And, you know, that's despite, you know, there's obviously been a push in the recent decades to
try to get women more interested in STEM courses. But you can't force people to do it. If they don't
want to do it, they're not going to do it. So it's clearly not a question of, you know, societal
pressure, you know, to stay away from STEM. I mean, certainly, you know, the universities are
trying to get more male women in STEM. Companies are trying to recruit, you know, more female
engineers, et cetera. So what is the explanation? No, I don't know myself. And I don't know if it is.
Yeah, but I don't know. Well, yeah, I have some thoughts on that. I mean, I suspect it is just
a vocational interest difference between men and women. I think that studies show that that
starts pretty early, like early middle school, you know, when they first give those vocational
interests to, what would you like to be when you grow up? You know, there are male-female
differences that are reflected largely the same ratios of actual graduation rates in those fields
and then job hires in those fields. So that's probably mostly it. I mean, I'm sure there are
still some physicists, mathematicians, old guys at these schools that are, you know, didn't get the
memo about treating women equally, you know, but they're a dying breed now, right? I mean, most of
the professors at Caltech and MIT that I know, they're young liberals. I mean, they're not
discriminated. They're trying to do the best they can to do the right thing, social justice.
You know, so I suspect it's the pipeline thing. And, you know, why force people to do things
just so we can solve the equation of a proper balance of what we want in society.
Right. Exactly. Right. And as you indicate in the last chapter on my book, I also talk about
the right wing identity issue. Well, so, you know, in part, I think
the right wing reaction and in terms of identity, it's a Christian identity. You know,
there's a Christian nationalist movement. Part of it is actually just a reaction, I think,
to the all the cultural changes, the cultural transformations that have taken place in recent
years. I know, for example, in Virginia, we probably have a Republican governor because of all the,
you know, blowback regarding critical race theory, which was being pushed in schools,
despite what some Democrats say. And many people have just this idea that, well, you know,
that's a problem in the United States. We have all these new ideas. We have to go back to the
glorious past when everything was fine. And that glorious past was founded on, you know,
Christianity. We were a Christian nation, and that's what we need to return to.
And there's certainly a very strong, you know, Christian nationalist element behind the whole
Trump movement. In fact, the strongest supporters come from that, from that area.
And, you know, when I say Christian nationalist, these people aren't really,
they identify as Christians, but they're really not concerned about, you know,
theological nuances and just this idea that they have that things were better in the past. And,
you know, US was Christian nation. And that's, we've gone away from that. And, you know,
some of the arguments they make for that are just really based on the misreading of history.
And unfortunately, some misreading of history, that's, you know, widespread, at least among
that segment of the population. You know, this idea that the founders were Christian, and therefore
they must have intended to establish a Christian nation that's part of it. And then, of course,
see, they point to the Declaration of Independence and, you know, they say, well,
their references to, you know, their creator and their rights to drive from a creator,
that shows that we were a Christian nation. So, if you examine these claims, though,
you find really, they're really just a distortion of history.
First of all, in terms of the, you know, the founders and beliefs,
sure, many of them probably were Christian. But, you know, you can infer from the fact that
someone was a Christian that they didn't believe in separation of church to state,
because actually, many of them obviously did. Madison, and his actual viewpoints,
you know, people dispute about how strong a Christian he was, but let's say he was.
He was clearly the strongest proponent of, you know, separation of church to state. He was the
guy who proposed, you know, the First Amendment, you know, the whole Bill of Rights, and someone
throughout his life who talked about the importance of, you know, keeping carbon out of religion.
He even opposed, you know, having the Congressional chaplain's appointed because he thought that was
an infringement of religious liberty. And many of the founders actually were a rash list more than
Christian, their approach to religion. They were today what we call cultural Christians. Yeah,
they may have gone through, you know, the ceremonies that tend to church and what have you, but they
didn't accept revelation as a guide to truth. More importantly, you know, the foundational
document of the United States, the foundational document is the Constitution. That's what
established a government. And, you know, there's not one word in there about deference to God, you
know, no indication that our rights come from a deity, no indication that the authority of
government derives from God, rather it's we the people that establish the government.
And it's an entirely secular document. There's no reference to God in there.
Furthermore, no indication that governments should support religion or rely on religious bodies at
all. And that omission of God, you know, was not something that went unnoticed. There were people
that protested that there were attempts to amend the Constitution throughout the, you know, early
part of the 19th century to put God back in there. You know, they were rejected, fortunately. So
people recognize that this was a secular document. So this whole idea now that we are a Christian
nation and that's the founders established that we've gone away from that is just simply a
falsification of history. But it's the, it's the attempt to give legitimacy to the
Christian nation's viewpoints. You know, they obviously want to have our policies based on
what they perceive as Christian viewpoints. And that means, you know,
an end to an abortion, putting prayer back in schools, getting rid of same sex marriage,
whatever they think of as, you know, the important Christian doctrines.
They recognize, of course, that these are not universally popular viewpoints.
But they say, well, you know, to be true to our nation's heritage, this is what we should do.
So that's why it's important why I emphasize in my argument in my book, you know, the arguments
against this historical viewpoint, because that's what gives us the pattern of legitimacy to their
claims. Where does this begin in the 1980s with the moral majority in Reagan? Yeah, to some extent.
I mean, there's always been a kind of fundamentalist strain in American religion. But the fundamentalist
really used to stay out of politics, you know, there was not something that really interested
that much. But yeah, beginning in the 80s, you had the moral majority with Falwell.
And clearly, it's had a political impact because the Republican Party has seen this as part of
their base. And it's probably true that at least in many, many races where the president showed
congressional races, Republicans could not win without the support of this, you know, this
Christian fundamentalist group. Again, it's certainly been part of a key part of the Trump
political movement. And the whole, you know, Trump's, you know, the key Trump slogan, they
make America great again, it kind of ties into the sense that, oh, we need a restoration of what
America was before we need to return to this, this Christian heritage, and that's what made
America great. So it's, it captures that slogan actually captures nicely, I think the mindset
and ambitions of the Christian nationalists. And Trump is, you know, clearly exploiting that guy
who, by the way, never indicated any real religious tendencies prior to running for president.
And surely they must see through that. Like this guy is not really one of us. But then what are
they thinking? Like, well, whatever, he's going to get us the judges we need to overturn Roe v.
Wade, he's going to do this, he's going to do that. And he's going to stick it to the libtards.
Right. Right. Exactly. I think that's why they do it. And certainly the ones who think about it
do that. Interestingly, though, that based on some polls, some people actually are persuaded
that he's a religious guy that, yeah, maybe he said some things in the past that, you know,
we are questionable, but now he's, he's one of us. That's self delusion, I think, at best.
But yeah. Yeah, I was at a, doing a debate with Dinesh D'Souza at a church, a Christian church,
and I think it was in Wisconsin or maybe Michigan, Michigan, I think. Any case,
just an evangelical, there's like a thousand people there. And this was right after Trump took
office. So I just took the opportunity to ask them, why this guy? I mean, come on. I mean,
you can't possibly think he's in your tribe. And basically the answer was, well, first God works
in mysterious ways. Look at some of the odd characters in the Bible that deliver God's message.
They're flawed. He's flawed. And yeah, but like you said, he's one of us now. And again, he's going
to get us the judges to overturn Roe v. Wade. And he did. He did. Right. He delivered on that.
No question. Yeah. That was an important victory. And they want to, you know, continue with that
path. Obviously, they want to restrict reproductive rights further if they can. Yeah. So like with
identity politics, what's more important, the identity of the politics in this case,
what's more important, your religiosity or your politics? And maybe their, their perception is
that even if he's not religious at all, he's doing things that, that will change the country in the
way we think it should go. Exactly. Regardless of his motives. He could be a narcissistic,
Machiavellian psychopath. What do I care? It's going to end up with a country that I,
I want, a Judeo-Christian, whatever. Right. Exactly. Yeah. I think in,
yeah, clearly that's an important part of his base. And we'll have to see how things turn out in
2024. But given the rise of the nuns, how big a group is, or is Christian nationalism as a
political force? As a political force, it's the important part. Probably, you know, based on the
studies I cite my book, probably about a quarter of the Republican base would be Christian nationalists.
That means in the country as a whole, it's probably no more than 10, 12%. So in terms of
general population, not that strong a group, but they have, you know, disproportionate,
to use a word we've tossed around, disproportionate influence on the political process.
Again, a key part of a Republican base and they tend to be very motivated to vote. So they have a
influence on electoral outcomes. Whereas unfortunately, you know, some younger people
who may tend to be more in the nun group don't vote as often. Yeah. Yeah, that's right. Yeah,
I think that's right. What other features would Christian nationalists like to change in America
that disturb you? What were you? Well, I'm a key supporter of reproductive rights. So clearly,
the abortion issue is very important to me. And I'm dismayed by, you know, the Supreme Court decision.
And of course, even worse now, of course, they're trying to, you know, cut back, you know, access,
you know, reduce it to six weeks or prohibit it entirely, maybe get rid of the morning after pill.
They're trying to restrict that. Obviously, there are cases going on about that right now.
The idea of, again, I believe in autonomy and individual rights, you know,
I think gay people, if they want to, you know, get married, they should have the right to marry.
So I'm troubled by the efforts to, you know, turn back the clock on that.
Trying to put prayer back the schools. Again, I don't think the schools, school should be places
where you learn a critical reasoning, not where you're taught certain dogmas, whether it's, you
know, belief in God or, you know, belief in systemic racism. I don't believe in critical
race theory being, you know, put in schools either. But, yeah, so the Christian efforts along those
lines. Yeah. Do you think the abortion issue is being pushed too hard now and it may backfire on
Republicans? It could. Could very well. I mean, it certainly is, I think, was a motivating factor
for many people in the midterm elections. It could be now going into 2024. A lot, it depends on just
what level of consciousness it's at for their voting public.
You know, the Republicans, I think, I think Trump in this regard is, again, showing how savvy
is. I mean, he criticized the Santas for approving that, you know, six-week limit in Florida. And
he's indicated he doesn't really want to touch that issue. And I think that that's the right
approach. We, you know, just leave it as it is. Don't talk about it. Leave it as the Democrats
have tried to bring it up, which I think they will. So I think it's a little hard to predict
how much of influence it's going to have. I think it will motivate some voters, especially
whether that's going to tip the balance or not. I don't know. I mean, there are a lot of things
going on right now. Biden's clearly is not the most popular president. People have legitimate
concerns, of course, about his, yeah, that's an understatement. The legitimate concerns I think
about his age, of course, Trump is only a couple years younger. So yeah, but he's light years ahead
of Biden cognitively. It's just astonishing given his health and his weight. But you know,
it's genetics, who knows. Yeah, I don't know if you saw that town hall in Iowa the other night
with Trump, where one of these pro-life women got up and she made it pretty clear she thinks
there should be no exceptions for anything, that the mother could be dying and she doesn't care.
And he tiptoed around that pretty carefully. Like, well, if it weren't for me, you wouldn't
even be having this conversation because I got us the judges. She's like, yeah, that's true.
And then he finally said, I got to go with the exceptions. It's just what I got to do.
Yeah, I just think, I think the poll show, if I recall, that, you know, the trimester system
should be legal, rare and safe in the first trimester, not done in the third trimester.
You got to draw the line somewhere, maybe 20 weeks, 22 weeks, whatever it is in the second
trimester. I think most people are on board with that. Yeah, I think most people just kind of
stands to reason. I mean, again, you know, there's a lot of debate about the status of the embryo
and the fetus and what have you, but there's just really, I think, an intuitive sense, which
mentions, I think, the moral reality. And that is, you know, early, early in pregnancy, really,
it's up to the woman inside. She's going to carry this to term or not. It's up to her to make that
decision. Obviously, as you get closer to the end of the pregnancy, however you want to describe it
in terms of the status of the fetus or whatever, it just, you know, you draw the line at a certain
point. I mean, you can't wait until the eighth and a half months to decide, well,
I decided I no longer want to carry the child. I think, you know, people accept that this is not
what we want in a society. Yeah. Well, with your response to the pro-life argument that
even in the first six weeks or 12 weeks or whatever, you are killing a human being.
Maybe it's not a legal person yet, but it's not medical tissue. It's not removing a tumor or
something. It's a human. And you're killing it. Well, genetically, it has a human genome.
But is it, first of all, up to at least a couple of weeks, you can't even say it's an individual,
because there's always the possibility of twinning or fusion, right?
So at least, certainly up to the first couple of weeks, you can't say there's an individual being
there, which if you think, you know, having status as an individual is a key to moral status,
and it doesn't have any moral status at that point. Beyond that, you know, this whole idea of,
you know, is it, you know, potentially a person or not? And that's why we want to, you know,
give it a special status and say you're killing someone. Well, if you look at the rate of miscarriages,
which again, I've seen different studies, but certainly no lower than 30%, sometimes as high
as 50% or 60%, you know, the idea that this, you know, zygote embryo is definitely going to
become a person at some point was just simply not true. There's a huge amount of embryos and
zygotes that never make it. Now, they're disposed of, you know, probably if we get into it, it's
because of the sumgenetic defect that, you know, doesn't allow the woman, you know, to carry the
term. Whatever the explanation is, the idea that there's some inevitability to this, this, you
know, entity becoming a person at some point is simply not true. And the idea that it's just, you
know, you know, something that can grow on its own without the contribution of a mother is also
false, you know, the mother is really a key part of the, of the growth and maturing of this being.
It depends on the mother for nutrition, etc. And so this idea that somehow it's an independent
being and we have to treat it as such, I think it's just mistaken. So that's, that's the argument I
would make. Yeah. Why do you think or when and why did abortion become a Republican issue? It
didn't used to be thinking about the shift of during Reagan, right? Didn't he used to be
a pro choice originally? He was obviously also was a very liberal Democrat at a certain point
in time. So I don't know if those changes occurred at the same time or not.
Yeah, I don't know that much about his personal history. But again, I think it ties into the
recognition that they had the space among conservative Christians. And they recognize
this was an important issue for them. So I think the first, you know, anti abortion plank in the
Republican platform, it was either was 1976 or 1980. Before then, there really wasn't a huge
amount of difference between Republicans, Democrats on how they approach an issue. First of all,
of course, before Roe v Wade, it was illegal in most states in New York and some other states
were had exceptions. But you know, you had, you know, Republicans like Rockefeller, for example,
who on the abortion issue, as far as I know, was, you know, said, yeah, we should have a legal at
least in certain circumstances. So yeah, I'm not sure if Reagan was the first,
you know, presidential candidate among the Republicans to make that an issue might have been
for. But yeah, it came about in the late 70s, early 80s. And again, I think it was part of the
recognition that, well, this is an issue that we can use to our political advantage. And you know,
of course, I'm not doubting the genuine beliefs and seriousness, belief of some Republicans that
yeah, this is something we believe in as a moral issue. But I think a lot of it was due to political
reasoning. Yeah, another aspect that bothers me is, I think in the long term history of humanity,
and maybe even our evolutionary past, controlling female reproduction is something that males like
to do. Oh, no question. Yeah. And that's, that's obviously, I think part of the explanation as
well. I mean, clearly, it's mostly male legislators who are pushing these, you know,
restrictions or outright bans on a portion. And he doesn't say they don't, they're not the ones
most directly affected by it. Yeah. And that would explain even, you know, controlling birth control
access. Like we don't want you to even have a choice at all. You should just be home making babies.
That's your job. Right. Yeah. And again, that ties into the some of the traditional Christian
nationalists with a right-wing Christian viewpoints of very definite and dividing sexual roles,
you know, women are homemakers, you know, they're the help meat for men and you know,
their emphasis should be on raising children, staying at home, taking care of the kids.
Yeah. So but now by your and my standards of the individual autonomy,
why don't these Christian nationalists just say, this is what I want to do and I'm going to do
this with my family and you do whatever you want. That doesn't seem to be enough. It's like, I want
to legislate what you do with your family and the privacy of your bedroom. Why is that? Exactly.
Exactly. Right. And it's, yeah, I mean, because no one is, you know, we're not, you know, China,
no one is forcing someone to have an abortion, right? It's up to the individual woman to decide
whether or not to bear a child. That's the way it should be. It should be up to the individual.
And that is one obviously troubling aspect of this push to end reproductive rights is you're
deciding for other people. Just like they decide, you know, well, you know, if you're gay, you
shouldn't be allowed to marry. Really, what difference does it make? You know, it's,
one reason I believe so strongly in individual rights is unless you can show there's a harm to
other people, why not let people live their lives the way they want to? What is the problem
with that? Right? It's like you want, you have an idea of what a good life is. That's fine. You
follow that path, but why try to impose that on other people unless there's some kind of harm to
which is why the, you know, the issue of which we haven't touched on yet, the whole trans,
you know, transgender issue is kind of interesting because as I, you know, I'm going to vote a few
pages to this in my book. From one perspective, again, because I think people, certainly adults,
should be able to do with their lives as they see fit. So if someone believes that transitioning
from male to female, female to male, that's something that they feel is important to them.
It's part of their essence or what have you. Yeah. I mean, I do have some concern. I don't think, you
know, we have enough science really behind this issue to determine whether or not, you know,
this is really a, you know, a medical condition that requires, you know, hormonal treatment
or surgery or what have you. But again, whether there is enough science behind it or not, if
someone wants, as an adult wants to do this, doesn't really harm me in any way. Generally speaking,
now the thing is that in certain areas it does, you know, like athletics is the most prominent
example. I mean, if you've been a biological male through puberty, you're simply going to have
certain advantages in most athletic competitions that a biological woman would not have. And,
you know, that leaves some problems now because, of course, the transgender ideologues, if I can
use that term, who say, well, you know, if you're a trans woman, you're a woman period, right? So
even if you've been a biological male for, you know, 20 years and then you make the change,
you should be allowed to compete as a woman in female athletics. Well, then we get situations
like Lea Thomas situation where someone who is a, yeah, not a bad swimmer, but in terms of, you
know, his male ranking was something like 400 out of, you know, whatever nationwide, 452, I think,
suddenly turns into a national champion as a female swimmer. And, you know,
the transgender ideologues say, well, who cares? You know, she's a woman now, period,
and she should be allowed to compete as a woman. Well, you know, clearly the science indicates
otherwise. You know, we certainly understand the desire of someone who's spent, you know,
a lot of time in athletics to want to continue to compete, but it's simply not fair to other,
to female athletes, I should say, to allow this person who's a transgender person who's mostly
a male during the old critical period, uh, to compete against females because they clearly
have a person as an advantage. And the failure to recognize that I think is just again,
putting ideological blinders on. Yeah, it's pseudoscience. I'm completely in agreement with you.
I've been pounding on this so often now that my, my own team said, calm down a little bit here.
People are thinking you're a little obsessed with this subject. Well,
but it's in the news a lot. And, you know, these are conflicting rights. You can't have everything,
like an abortion issue. You have the rights of the fetus, the rights of the woman,
you got to choose, can't have everything, you know, and I support trans rights to not be discriminated
against. Yeah, of course, trans rights are human rights. But if you want to, you know, compete
against women and you're an actual biological male, then no, that's not right. I'm sorry,
you don't have the right to do that. You can't, you can't have everything and that's just the
way it goes. So I guess I'm conflicted about this. What should I do? Right? Yeah, I guess my
viewpoint is, again, to me, it's a question of where's the harm? And I, you know, I know the,
you know, Megan Kelly, Helen Joyce argument, other people made that argument. It's kind of a
slippery slope thing. If you concede, you know, the whole pronoun thing or what have you, you know,
you're opening the door to, you know, they're saying, well, we're, we're, you know, we're
women complete. If it's a trans woman or women for all respects, you know, whether it's,
you know, disrobing in a locker room or competing in athletics or what have you,
I don't know. I think people can draw the line, you know, and to me, I don't really care what
pronouns someone uses and it doesn't bother me to refer to a trans woman as she, her or whatever.
I mean, what, to me, what difference does it make? It does not hurt me in any way.
But again, I would draw the line and it's just a question. I think of where
you draw the line and you can say, well, look, the fact that you prefer to be called by female
pronouns, I don't care. I don't really care how you call yourself. Whatever it doesn't make to me.
But that doesn't give you an entitlement suddenly to say, well, in all respects,
you're a woman and be treated as a woman, especially in things like athletics, where
clearly you're biologically speaking, you're different. And the same thing with the other
areas too, where, you know, incarceration, for example, you know, this idea that, well,
a trans woman needs to be housed with female prisoners all the time, even if this person
is committed, you know, sexual crimes. I mean, it doesn't make any sense, right? So
I'm not sure there's a blanket answer either way, because you can also see the circumstances where
someone has transitioned from male to female, and especially if the person maybe is slightly
built and has very feminine characteristics. Do you want that person housed with male prisoners?
Because given the situation with, you know, rape and in prisons, I mean, it's an invitation, maybe
that person being harmed. So I think individualized treatment there may be important, but it's
obviously hard to make judgments in those cases. I don't know. Also, we'll have to see.
I'm hoping more and more liberals speak out, not just conservatives. You know, I don't want
the voice of reason to be Tucker Carlson and Sean Hannity on Fox News. Come on, liberals,
you know, like people like you, defending free speech and individual autonomy and rights,
individual rights. That's where it has to come from.
Yeah, I agree. And I think that's one of the problems right now is that the country is so
divided. I mean, things are so partisan so that, as I said at the beginning of this broadcast,
you know, when I talked about my book, among some secular humanist friends or what have you,
their immediate reaction was, oh, you're, you're giving ammunition to the right.
Why are you doing this? You know, you've gone to the dark side. It's like,
well, look, we need to look at these issues on an issue by issue basis. And you know,
if we think there's something that's ill founded and ill advised, we need to point that out.
I'll say. All right, Ronald Lindsey against the new politics of identity. There it is.
Really a great, important read. By the way, it's a really good, well written,
well researched, just a really thoughtful book. I was really impressed with your scholarship
and very readable as well. So congratulations. Okay. Well, thank you for that. What are you
working on next? I don't know. I haven't decided yet. I haven't decided yet. I'm sure it'll be
something coming out in the future, but I've got to think about. Okay. All right. That sounds good.
That's a good place to end.
