Okay everybody, it's Michael Schirmer and it's time for another reminder to sign up for the Skeptic Society, Skeptic Magazine public event we're having this year, December 1st, 2nd and 3rd, Friday night, all day Saturday, Saturday night fundraising dinner, Sunday with Jared Diamond.
And so I just wanted to say just in kind of reflection, we have not had a public event in many, many years.
The last big conference was at Caltech back in 2015 timeframe and since then, of course, as you know, we had the pandemic that shut everything down.
We moved our offices from Altadena up to Santa Barbara where I now live.
And so we've had kind of a restructuring and I want to share all that with you by showing you the office.
You can just come on in.
We've got thousands of books in my private library here as well as you'll be able to pick up back issues of Skeptic.
They're right there on the wall that with most of which we keep in print copies of my books and other books by people like Richard Dawkins and Jared Diamond and and so forth.
It's going to be an epic weekend.
I'm really looking forward to it.
We really depend on your support.
The Skeptic Society is a 501c3 nonprofit science education organization that depends on donations and fundraising events like this.
So much of this event, much, much of the money for this event goes to the Skeptic Society.
Well, none of it goes to me or anyone personally, but to the Skeptic Society.
That's what that Saturday night fundraising dinner is all about.
And if you support the magazine or work in the media or pod, the podcast and so on and so forth, everything we've been doing for 31 years now.
Then you can show your support by coming.
Just coming.
And why would you not want to come to Santa Barbara in December?
Believe me, it's gorgeous here.
And the hotel where we're holding it at, the Hilton, is right on the beach, right on Cabrillo.
You will be, you know, I don't know, 30 feet from the sand.
It's great.
It's a wonderful facility and I've talked them into some great low prices, like half the price you'd pay to stay there if you just walked in up the street.
So check it out.
Go to Skeptic.com.
Click on the banner for our conference.
Sign up.
Sign up for the event.
Sign up for the Saturday night fundraising dinner.
I'll see you here that Friday night or Sunday afternoon at the office where I'm sitting now and at the events at the Hilton.
It's going to be epic.
All right.
See you soon.
Okay.
Let's start with the basics.
Cancel culture.
What is it?
How do you define it?
Sure.
We define it.
We want to kind of establish it as a historical era, basically the same way people talk about other mass censorship incidents, you know, in history, like the Red Scare or one end too.
We link it.
We basically say it's the uptick after 2014 of attempts of campaigns, sorry, to get people de-platformed, punished, expelled, fired, etc.
For opinions that would be otherwise protected by the First Amendment if it were happening like in a public setting.
And also the climate of fear and conformity that resulted from that.
Right.
Vicki, you want to add anything to that?
Yeah.
I would say in terms of our definition and is a little bit technical, but I would, I mean, at least for me, it was something that I just grew up so steeped in that it was a strange exercise to even really define it in such a specific way.
So 2014 is our cutoff point of where I think it really took on a new tone.
But I mean, I was born in 2000 and so as far as my like contextual chronological awareness, that's pretty much all I've known is this graceless society in which any little misstep or faux pas could cost you a friendship or a college admissions letter.
I mean, it's definitely, it's strange because that cutoff point is very, very much in line with when I came into political awareness myself.
Well, what's funny about this, Vicki, is it makes perfect sense that you were like, well, I live with this my whole life.
And why did we notice a change in 2015 or 2014?
It's because Gen Z started to think college because there was a little blip and cancel culture that's measurable around 2011.
It's kind of like the social media effect, like all over, like that.
So that's kind of like the precursors like Martin Gurrey's whole point.
But it, you grew up with it, but then it started reaching the whole country when Gen Z started hitting campus in large numbers, unfortunately.
Yeah, let me introduce you to what I call the Henny Youngman principle.
Henny Youngman was a 1950s comedian.
He used to joke around one of his lines was when he was asked, how's your wife?
He said, compared to what?
So cancel culture is much worse really compared to what?
How do you know?
We have a lot of data in the book and particularly, you know, I've been working on campuses now for 22 years.
And to be clear, it wasn't great when I started in 2001.
But for example, we compared historical data on the number of professors who've been targeted.
And we talk about more than a thousand examples of professors being targeted since 2014.
You know, two thirds of those have been punished in some way.
And about, you know, a fifth of those, almost 200 of them have been fired.
And that includes like 40 tenured professors.
So it's a big number.
Now to put that in historical perspective, I started it during 9-11.
And there was major threats to academic freedom in the years after 9-11.
And there were about over a dozen professors targeted and three of them lost their jobs.
And that was considered really bad, even though the three professors who lost their jobs, you know,
one was Ward Churchill, who ultimately lost it because of academic misconduct, which was serious.
Another one for taking too much time out of class to talk about, in that case, the Iraq War.
I mean, another one who was fired, Samuel Arian, because of they were like,
okay, he does seem to actually have ties to terrorism.
And that was really like, since the law was established between 1957 and 1973, you know,
there's nothing even close to the number of professors that we see.
We even would compare it back to the Red Scare, even though the law wasn't clear yet.
It's like people in the 50s actually thought you could fire communists because they were too politically doctrinaire and not good teachers.
It was basically the rationale.
And at the time, there was actually a massive study going on of the Red Scare.
And they estimated about 62, 63 professors were fired for communist beliefs,
about 90 professors for beliefs overall during that period, which is usually rounded up to 100.
And we're talking about twice that number, except in a time where there's almost no viewpoint diversity on campus.
There's a million different ways people get canceled without anybody even being able to see it,
because there are literally secret hearings.
And you're still able to find this many heretics to burn is insane.
Right.
Yeah, and I think we were so fortunate that I mean, I think I speak for myself and a lot of other people where
I felt like I had so much anecdote to say, like, oh, I know a ton of people who've been torn down and attacked,
but we were super fortunate to have the fire team behind us and all of these amazing statistics that they were able to distill for us.
And they've had decades of caseloads to demonstrate that there truly is an explosion first, like around the 2016 election.
And then again, all like unprecedented numbers in 2020, which I think really like one thing I keep hearing is people saying like,
Oh, isn't this kind of behind us and in the rearview mirror, but it seems like I'd probably be likely to say that in 2018,
not knowing that the pandemic and this next level of unrest and this next contentious point in history was right around the corner.
And I wouldn't be surprised if the 2024 election doesn't become another cycle of at this point in time.
It seems like if we have a cultural tension point are reflexive responses to just indulge in a liberalism in this in this really frightening way.
Yeah. Yeah. So anecdotal data versus actual data.
And I guess it just depends on what the context is. The story I like to tell is, you know, what the toggling between CNN and Fox News and who was at Hannity or whoever had the campus craziness segment every week.
And, you know, if you watch that, it just think, well, every college campus must be completely nuts.
And before COVID, I was doing maybe a dozen to two dozen public talks at universities and colleges through an agency that would book me.
And you go to these college campuses and you don't say anything. I mean, it's just these kind of quiet, bucolic places where students are mostly just hold up in their dorms or at the Starbucks.
And, you know, you don't see these, you know, kind of campus riots and craziness.
So and a Chapman where I taught for 12 years, you almost never say anything like that.
So is it that even if the actual raw numbers are low, it doesn't take that many incidences to get a spiral of silence going where everybody has to feel like they need to keep their mouth shut?
Well, and to be clear, historically speaking, the numbers aren't low.
And when you actually asked professors whether or not they've been punished or threatened with punishment, we did a big study on this.
Sixteen percent. I thought it would be like two percent, would say, because that would because two percent would be really bad.
So we know that we're like even that the thousand, which is a terrible number and we can't find any comparison in the last 50 years, that that's just a tip of the iceberg.
But it is also really clear.
And I have to explain this very nicely at a presentation I did in Boston with someone being skeptical that, you know, it couldn't possibly be that the elite colleges are really that much worse.
And I'm like, I almost want to be like, oh, no, dear, I'm so sorry. Yes, they are.
They are a lot worse. They're a lot more professors losing their job.
I mean, Harvard was horrified that it finished dead last in our campus free speech ranking.
And they were kind of like this can't be, you know, like basically this must be ridiculous.
And I'm like, no, no, you have to understand, you got a negative 10.69.
The next closest school was University of Pennsylvania, which has been terrible for free speech, also an Ivy League school that got like 11.
And some of the criticisms of our ranking of Harvard, they got so Harvard about it.
Like one of them was kind of like, well, the methodology is not good.
We know the best statisticians in the world are like, well, you should know that Sam Abrams, a Harvard PhD in statistics, who's brilliant is one of the main people who constructed the study.
It's the largest survey of student attitudes ever conducted.
And that we base it on four databases, the biggest one of professor cancellations of student cancellations of deep platforming and of speech codes.
So it's like it's on a bigger scale than ever has been done.
And one of the other arguments that Harvard was making was that some of the professors we were holding against them for firing or otherwise disciplining weren't that prestigious of professors.
And it's like, oh, dude, okay, that's ridiculous.
That's just snobbery talking.
But by the way, even if we took away those professors, which we shouldn't because they matter, you would still be dead last.
Yeah, I remember seeing Pinker posted from Harvard.
We're number one.
Pinker is great.
Pinker has been a real champion on his campus too.
He started up a whole movement to improve the environment there.
Just for just for listeners, the references to your appendix here where you have the data that you actually present here of your college rankings from one to whatever it is.
203 Columbia University at 9.91 University of Chicago at 77.92.
So these are self report data from students and professors of how they're treated on college campuses.
Greg, you're muted.
We do 13 different factors and with the students, we ask a number of questions and we evaluate them.
So if you have a school where all of the liberals think it's great for free speech and none of the conservatives do, that's a bigger penalty because it basically means that there's definitely viewpoint discrimination going on there.
We also factor in things like whether or not they say the faculty will have their back, whether or not they think the environment is good.
So it's been interesting to see, you know, like I live in DC and Howard University actually came out as the best school in DC.
It's still like in the 80s out of 200.
The survey you're talking about was actually last year's because we couldn't.
The new survey was just too new.
There was no way we could actually get it in the new book.
So we wanted people to have some perspective by seeing the previous years.
But they came off at like number four in terms of comfort expressing ideas, which was really interesting to see.
We evaluate the students on all different sorts of things.
The most disturbing stuff, though, is tolerance for violence.
And at Oberlin, for example, only around half of the students said violence is never okay in response to speech.
And we've noticed that a really weirdly high percentage of former women's colleges have populations that actually, you know, think blocking a speaker is okay.
Shouting down a speaker is okay.
Or even violence in response to speech, which is some of the most disturbing stuff I've seen in my career.
Yeah, for sure.
Okay, so I was an undergraduate 72 to 76.
You must have been about 10 years behind me, Greg.
And Ricky, you are what, 2010s for college?
I was.
I just showed up in 2018.
Yeah.
Okay.
1992.
That's when I started to count.
Yeah.
Okay.
1992.
Okay, boy, I'm really old.
All right.
Well, so I do, I do remember the concept of political correctness and some of my more conservative professors complaining about this is what we're going through now, qualitatively different than the political correctness movement, or is it, is it just more of the same?
It's definitely a much more intense version of it.
The I wrote a long piece for reason last year called the second grade age of political correctness.
And I talk about how, you know, you went from the speech code movement of 64 to the anti free speech movement of Herbert Herbert Marcus in 1965.
And even though free speech kind of won the day on campus or so we thought by 1985, major campuses, including Wisconsin, Stanford, University of Michigan started passing speech codes to clamp down on racist sexes speech.
But then of course, you know, many of these schools, the first people to get in trouble were actually minorities themselves.
So, you know, it worked out exactly the way a free speech person would tell you.
And at the time, though, this was kind of off campus, the right and the left thought that PC was ridiculous.
It was worthy of being made fun of speech codes were an abomination and they were all defeated from 89 to 95.
But a big point of my of that article is that I started working around 2001.
And it actually turns out that there were more speech codes on campus in 2001 that there were even in 1995, they just kind of ignored the rulings.
And that even though the students were less enamored with PC and the professors were less enamored with PC, the administration, which kept on growing the administrators were definitely much more hostile to freedom of speech.
And it took a wave of students also being comparatively hostile to freedom of speech showing up around 2013-2014 to create something that is a much bigger, you know, calamity in terms of academic freedom conformity free speech in a university with much lower viewpoint diversity than it had back in the 80s.
And with things like bias related incident programs that didn't exist back then, which have replaced speech codes to a large degree where you can call and report your professors or your friends for offensive speech.
Yeah, give us some examples of yeah, give us some examples for your experience.
Yeah, absolutely.
I this is a story that I tell often because I think it's just the first moment of me on campus that's pretty illustrative of my experience while at NYU.
I showed up I just moved to the city, and they have you go to a like campus police building to get your ID card so that you can get into all the buildings.
And they hand it to you and they say, this gets you into the cafeteria and here and there and then on the back you'll find all the really important phone numbers for for being an NYU student.
And it's of course 911s on the top the campus safety hotline is there in case there's a crime and it's lower Manhattan.
The student health center there was I think there's a phone number for a like psychological help hotline which frankly is very necessary for Jen's ears.
And then after that, there's the bias response hotline on the back of your ID card so I mean it can never stray from your person because just in case you need to report a transgression.
It's there that we had posters all over campus they were on the back of the bathroom stalls oftentimes like in the library and stuff and so it was institutionalized in a way of like I had come from a boarding school where I was used to a lot of the arguments against free speech
and I was aware that there was an issue in terms of self censorship I mean I already had experienced that in high school but then arriving in college and saying like, Oh yeah first day better make sure that you know there's a hotline to to report any transgressors.
I mean I was very, very nervous as a more heterodox thinking person on NYU's campus. And I was hiding. This is embarrassing to say in retrospect but I'm in this dorm with randomly assigned NYU students who I just assume were hostile to my viewpoint or could be and I wanted to have friends
living in the city alone so I had hid my Thomas soul books and my Jordan Peterson books under my bed, which is so embarrassing in retrospect and now they're on wide open display behind me as we speak, but that was the kind of place in a brown paper bag.
Anyone knew that I believe that there were some economic fallacies out there in the world.
You know on that just as a sidebar, you know, identity politics where identity is just everything your race is everything, but Thomas soul is black so apparently that's not enough right there's some.
It's a race trader. We talk about this in the we talk about one thing that I think it's cool about the book is we try to situate cancel culture as a only the most extreme way of winning arguments without winning arguments.
And we take on what we call rhetorical fortresses on the right and the left the left the right one we call the efficient because it's just very simple it's like you don't have those in the liberals experts journalists or people in like Trump.
But on the on the left, it's since it grew up in academia it's like it's like it's just like level after level of ways to not ever have to address someone's argument and step number one that I confess and with with profound embarrassment that when I started Stanford in 97.
You know if you could if you could do the game of claiming that someone some author or thinker was conservative that very quickly did lead to a sort of like well I guess I don't have to take them that seriously.
And so I took me a long time to read Thomas soul for example who I was like oh wow like this this guy's freaking brilliant.
And he does his most controversial thing is he oftentimes will do an international comparison of problem facing the United States with other countries.
And then of course like the funniest one was Camille Paglia.
I had somehow been persuaded that she was some kind of crazy right winger when she's more of a crazy left winger but she's she's a badass and she's a totally interesting thinker.
And it's not just that the 36% of people that are actually concerned to call themselves conservatives can be dismissed.
It's like what Pink Pinkers point about the left poll that a higher education is so uniformly left that everything to them looks like it's to the right.
Is there a right poll for everything to the left looks everything the way it looks left or left.
I think that when it comes to some of the stuff that we point out where the problems are with the liberalism it's been in some of the state legislatures.
But given that there is that when you look at political the breakdown of the country that more densely populated places tend to be more left leaning and more sparsely populated people tend to be the right.
I think that outside of you know some very religious colleges like I'm not sure you could find like a place that would actually be as bad as having like a right poll.
I mean perhaps not like a geographical location but I mean I definitely see as someone like I'm a center right libertarian and I write for more conservative outlets and I'll get comments and feedback calling me woke often and I'm like.
I mean in my context in Lower Manhattan I'm hardly woke but I think that's one of those words that people use to just point out any sort of like if you are in a really purest area of the right wing ideologically that's that's a word that you can just kind of throw at anyone to dismiss them in a similarly dismissive way.
Which I mean I guess on the online sense that is a right poll.
Right.
Since you mentioned Jordan Peterson.
Actually one comment on Thomas soul.
He just has a new book out social justice.
Yes.
Yeah.
And he's 93 right.
I know he's not doing any podcast so I didn't get them.
But he makes like one point of this you know compared to what my young man example.
You know that there's the black white income difference.
Largely disappears if you control for marriage.
And call it you know college education and so on so he makes a kind of snarky remark.
So I guess the races are just targeting single black people and an uneducated black people or something.
In other words you know thinking like a social scientist where you have like a dozen variables at work that may account for some discrepancy.
And your people that you're writing about the cancer culture people they're just looking at the one variable maybe to race and gender.
Yeah race and gender.
And we do take on cancer culture from the right as well.
Yeah.
We have multiple chapters on that and we're concerned about it.
But it has been it has been interesting you know debating this in public.
And when it comes to you know I feel like there are people who want me to say it's all worse on the right.
I'm like that would be lying.
Like looking at what's going on in academia.
So for example even the data I just cited about one third of those cases of professors being targeted.
They actually initially come from the right.
But and then sometimes turning point USA sometimes Fox News and some of those professors really do get punished.
But there is a caveat there.
Almost all of those campuses are still dominated by the left.
So the ultimate person who decided to fire that professor oftentimes is someone who would be considered on the left.
And so I did a debate many years ago.
If the left and I still consider myself left of center liberal that if the left was still as good on free speech as it was in say the 1970s.
None of this stuff would be possible because even if it was a liberal or conservative professor getting in trouble they would just answer.
No we're not punishing this person for further expression or academic freedom.
That's insane.
That's funny.
Yeah Chapman University we it's pretty liberal.
The faculty is pretty liberal.
But we have statues around campus of like Ein Rand and Margaret Thatcher and Martin Luther King and just a variety of people.
And at one point I don't know maybe two years ago there was a demand that these statues be taken down.
I mean Ein Rand.
Oh my gosh Margaret Thatcher.
She's practically a war criminal and so on.
Anyway so but our president handled this just perfectly.
He waited a few days and then issued a statement.
You know I listened to what you said.
I respect your opinions.
But no we're not taking the statues down.
And it was like and then they just went away.
It's like oh so if you just stand up to them then they go off in search of somebody else.
You're so right.
And that's one of the things that we do do try to stress in terms of solutions.
One like if you're a corporation have a policy like you know we don't we have a we have due process in place like as long as you slow the process down the the the social media mob won't last.
And when it comes to campuses a university president who comes out early and says no how quickly that can make a incident dissolve.
And that's one of the things that the good schools actually have in common.
The ones who do well on our campus free speech ranking and including University of Chicago generally has been quite good on it.
UVA is probably are the most like the most elite.
But then a lot of technical colleges make it on the top of the list because they can fall back on.
You know some things are true and some things aren't and it's not always going to be nice.
Hey Ricky let me because I get asked about Jordan Peterson a lot since I know and I've written a little bit about him.
What is the appeal of his message.
Is he so huge.
I mean I he was appealing to me I always hear that he's the king of the incels and all all his followers are young sad pathetic men and I don't feel that that really is a descriptor of myself.
I've always found his 12 rules for life.
I think I read it like late high school.
I would say and it just it it's funny because I remember at one point I recommended it to my mom who's a very common sense thinker and she read it and she was like Ricky like this is pretty like.
I thought that I taught you this stuff like this is pretty basic like pull yourself up by the bootstraps clean your room.
Get your life in order sort of thing but I think for someone in as a member of Gen Z was like it really an antidote to this pervasive message of like you are a victim and if something goes wrong.
Your locus of control is outside of you it's because you're a woman or it's because of whatever a mutable characteristic.
You might be able to clean your being targeted by that the world is working against you and I really felt that that was like the victimhood complex that a lot of Gen Zers grew up steeped in that was so pervasive on places like Tumblr and social media that all my friends and I basically grew up on and
derived our social philosophy from unfortunately in retrospect like just having a that very clear voice of wisdom saying get your get your shit together you know get get your ducks in a row and then take on the world was to me something that I just it wasn't a message that I ever really heard and it was it was funny to me when my mom was like.
I thought that I taught you this I'm like I don't know Tumblr taught me that everything I want is out to get me and if someone doesn't hold the door for me it's got to be because I'm a woman or something like that.
All right maybe there's a good point to introduce Ricky the three great untruths from the previous book Kotlin in the American mind and then your new fourth great untruth that you talk about.
Sure so the great untruths come from actually the way my family tends to give advice that essentially we we recognize that you know we're independent minded the kind of people you know who would end up at the head of a free speech organization.
We like to think for ourselves but so we don't think that people often respond to positive advice saying you should do the following five things all we're trying to do usually is like but don't do the following don't do this dumb thing can we all agree on that.
So we the setup for Kotlin of the American mind the book that actually is why Ricky and I know each other in the first place we had three great untruths which is what doesn't kill you makes you weaker to always trust your feelings.
And life is a battle between good people and evil people and we make the point that if you believe these things your life will not be as happy and goes against modern psychology and ancient wisdom and it's just terrible advice to give to anyone.
The one that sounds the nicest is always trust your feelings but most of like actual you know moral teaching is about no.
Don't always trust your feelings their information not instructions as I can't remember her name but that's one of my favorite quotes on that.
And in this book we added a fourth great untruth which is no bad person has any good opinion that essentially so much of the debate seems to be trying to establish whether or not that someone is morally good or bad.
The conservative part comes in because like really what they're trying to say is like the spirits conservative and therefore immoral because they're all bad and therefore you don't have to listen to them and there's something really childish about this.
Now I always think of like you know Jean-Jacques Rousseau all the biographies of Rousseau show him to be a pretty awful human being that doesn't mean he's wrong about everything and actually I'd say that there's a you know maybe 40% of Rousseau that I actually quite agree with.
You shouldn't actually be evaluating thinkers on whether or not you think they're good people you should be evaluating them on their argument.
But there's also a huge double standard they don't tend to apply this to Rousseau because there's some affection for Rousseau still on the left.
But the great David Hume which I say with you know such great reference because every science person and every first amendment person loves him so.
He has a he had a footnote and I think 1752 that was by modern standards racist.
He also had a footnote in 1752 and there's an attempt to completely dismiss him.
Whereas Douglas Murray points out it's like by the way they don't do this with Marx you know like who was racist like anti-Semitic like all those kind of horrible horrible stuff.
There's a huge double standard with who they apply the you know no bad people can have any good opinion.
What's that that you call that a offense archaeology where you go digging digging around.
To be clear that that's not our term I don't know I don't remember who originally came up with it.
I know I should learn to give credit where it's due.
But my favorite example of offense archaeology was a he was like on the board of directors I think of a major corporation.
And he had written against women being in the military in like 1986 or somewhere around there.
And he got canceled he got kicked off the board because of something he had written in the 80s which by the way he no longer even believed in and he was very clear about that.
So you and that's and that's the thing what we're trying to say is and one of the reasons why I got so frankly depressed and anxious when I was writing this book is as soon as you're a target the thing they're going to get you on isn't necessarily the thing you're saying on the podcast.
It's something that you might have tweeted you know 15 years ago it might be a column you wrote in high school it might the the the ability to try to find something on you is is one of the M. O.'s of council culture.
Yeah.
Ricky you talked about in the book you guys talk about the difference between the First Amendment as legal precedents and then just cultural free speech norms.
What's wrong with well OK let's put it this way I can't just say anything I want walking around the world telling people you're fat and uglier or whatever I mean we all silence ourselves out of politeness or whatever.
Isn't that different from whatever the First Amendment protects us and shouldn't corporations and universities have something like polite speech codes or you know don't be a dick and just say nasty things to people.
What's wrong with that.
Yeah I mean I think obviously there's the First Amendment that protects you in the public sphere and then it's certainly up to private corporations and private universities to create their own contours and I think I mean there is.
I would in my opinion I think there's a great deal of mistrust in people's ability to just filter on their own like I don't think a corporation necessarily needs to say Michael can't call his coworker fat.
I think that most people can kind of do that on their own without their corporation stepping in and doing that.
But one one delineation that we do make is that we don't think that First Amendment law in on its own is adequate and protecting free speech in a culture because you have examples of actually contrasting examples of the French Enlightenment which was able to flourish in a context in which the legal the laws in the books were actually quite hostile to free speech.
And yet that was an enormous moment of intellectual flourishing versus if you go to a country like Turkey or North Korea or Russia.
In a legal sense you actually have a perfectly fine standard of having free expression but that just doesn't actually happen in in in actuality.
And I think that the reason that we delineate between free speech culture and just free speech laws in the books is because it's truly.
You can't have a society where free speech is is thriving and healthy and well and discourses is robust unless it's a principle that is drilled into every citizens head and something that they truly believe in that knowing what other people really believe and have to say is is a something worth.
Worth knowing and I mean I would say even just from my own personal perspective coming from Gen Z being a philosophy major doing I did a two year liberal arts condensed philosophy program at NYU at a great school I was at the top of my class.
And yet it took the pandemic and taking a leap of absence to decide on my own that I wanted to read John Stuart Mills on Liberty.
And I had this like I mean it it's hard for me to even like it's like learning to ride a bicycle like now I can't really think about what the world is like without the realization of what classical liberalism is but at that moment in time it was like whoa like it just like hit me like.
I have been taking for taking for granted all this time what free speech means to a society how I do actually have these these amazing rights that are so historically and chronologically unlikely in the scheme of human history.
But it took actually learning about like why that principle matters and not just taking it for granted and saying like oh maybe like some offensive speech should just be curved because like I don't want to hurt people's feelings like.
You need it you need people to be aware of why we've all bought into this classical liberal ideal and just having a law on the books is certainly not enough to guarantee that.
Yeah and I'd like to chime in because I we actually put some of the more in the weeds arguments back in the appendix partially because since most people kind of know cancel culture is going we didn't want to have the in the weeds arguments break up the flow of the main argument so we put them a little bit in the back.
But I make the point that one of the reasons why we include the First Amendment about the First Amendment standards in the definition of cancel culture is to import a tremendous amount of thoughtfulness and nuance that actually exists in First Amendment law.
And so for example when you talk about the employment setting I tend to think of it as a analog or comparison to public employee status.
Now what that means at least in theory is that yeah you call your your coworker fat you know in the office that's considered you know unprofessional and any employer government or not could probably fire you for that.
They might also be kind of like OK that's rude stop being rude you know but I don't like the fact that the first thing people seem to do is get fired these days but that's a totally different issue.
But if you express your opinion off off the job on a matter of public concern there is some law saying that you that a public employee shouldn't be fired for having an opinion.
And when you're talking about things like free speech culture versus free speech law you're really talking about thumbs on the scale and different levels of balancing.
And at the end we give we point out that there already are like sayings that we all grew up with or at least not so much Ricky but me and you grew up with like to each their own.
Everyone's entitled to their opinion all of these things that kind of put a little bit of a thumb on the scale of OK do I really want to fire this person for for cracking a body joke on Twitter.
You know for example which which really does happen.
Or should I be kind of like well you know if everyone did that if every corporation did that that would be bad for democracy right.
Right.
Yeah Ricky so you grew up in the social media world.
And so I'm curious what a libertarian like you thinks about the regulation of social media companies.
Should they shouldn't they. I mean if you if you're a free mark pro free market.
Shouldn't Twitter be able to do whatever they want.
Operation.
Well they used to have shareholders but I guess not anymore.
But something like that Facebook or whatever that's their prerogative they can ban whoever they want.
Even though maybe normalize you don't think they should but shouldn't they be able to do that.
Yeah absolutely.
I mean I think that they they certainly should be able to.
I think there's some important nuances that have come out of like J.
Auditaria recently having a pretty I think landmark victory in now two court challenges of the Biden administration and several other federal agencies in which he and several other complainants were able to pretty
persuasively demonstrate that that federal agencies were reaching out to companies like social media companies like Twitter and saying you know here's a body of misinformation on on your on your platform and effectively job owning them into censoring on their behalf because
you know these these large social media companies do have some favorable regulations and it's like well really nice company that you have there with all of your favorable policies.
Be ashamed if you didn't get rid of a little bit of this information misinformation for us.
So I think that's a very important nuance of defining the the boundaries between these companies which are increasingly just standing in for the public forum and also allowing for some free market alternatives to flourish which I mean there's been a tremendous
amount of disruption with Elon Musk buying Twitter and all these different offshoots of now threads is an option I don't really think that went anywhere.
But and there was there were a few of them are going to I don't think any of them are going to go anywhere and there's something about the free market that doesn't solve these kinds of problems just because of market momentum.
I mean why aren't there a dozen Twitter there aren't they got there first and that's it they got they captured 99% of the audience and you know you can start you can go to threads but no one's at on threads.
Yeah I'm on threads.
You are?
Okay.
I post a threads sub stack X you know Facebook LinkedIn and Instagram because there's something wrong with me.
But here I'm giving you the argument particularly to Ricky Libertarian you know the free market is not solving this problem so government needs to step in and regulate it.
I mean which problem specifically.
Well I guess censorship I mean people should not be free to say whatever they want.
I mean ISIS should not be free to recruit members on Twitter something like that.
And so so the argument would be I mean I agree with you but I also don't think that there's a large swath of social media companies that have just been like warm hosts to ISIS.
I do think that the free market has done a pretty good job of stepping up and creating the contours and experimenting rather than the government coming in and saying here's what is dangerous speech or here's what's not allowed.
I mean I'd much rather allow for that experimentation and which I think Twitter Twitter did and Elon is trying to tinker with the different nuances there and I mean I do I also would push back a little bit on the idea that the free market has not created some alternatives.
I mean for better or for worse a place like it might not be a place that you and I would want to go to but like gab and truth social and all these other little crevices of the Internet that are very much alive and unfortunately very polarized.
But like there there has been a free market alternative that it might be a little bit more of a niche market but those are pretty dedicated users.
We have a chapter actually on what we think is kind of like primitive thinking on social media and one thing that's really cool is that we have we got to work with NCRI National Contagion Research Institute to point to look at data indicating that people who were kicked off of Twitter in
2016 and 2017 and 2020 tended to go to places like gab where from the you know research they did seem to seem to indicate and unsurprisingly got much more radicalized and what people miss is that there's value in knowing what people really think.
So for example when you give the example of terrorists being kicked off different platforms I get sympathy for it but keep kicking them off but at the same time they all move to WhatsApp.
They all move to things that were much better protected meanwhile it's kind of like you're going to tell us what you're planning great you know like way to create a record way to do this out in the open.
And this is something I have to repeat a lot like it's not you don't defend freedom of speech because you think everything people say is good what you defend freedom of speech because you're saying that everything people say is information that might be valuable.
They might be announcing hey by the way Nazi over here great don't go on a date with me that they might actually otherwise be hiding.
It's funny.
Yeah when there's all those calls to kick Trump off of Twitter it's like why I want to know what he's thinking at one in the morning.
It's important to know what he's thinking.
He's president.
Okay let's look at the big picture censorship.
What is it about human nature.
Do you think that the default seems to be always to censor other people whether it's individuals or corporations or government agency.
It's just the long history of humanity at censorship is the norm.
Why.
Well I mean I call my substack the eternally radical idea because and that's it's a reference to freedom of speech because I think in every generation people rise up and I always expect I'm going to say to defend free speech.
I'm like no no no every generation people rise up to fight freedom of speech and they're usually historically speaking on the on the on the the censors are on the winning side.
It's very like it's a comparative rare window of human history that free speech has been at all protected.
And I think that there's lots of different you know reasons for that.
I think that certainly tribalism is part of it.
I think that we crave certainty.
I think that we crave a more rational world.
I think we crave it like as Karl Popper points out we crave a more permanent and rational world.
But we also like the idea of there being eternal perfect truths that are unchanging which is one of the reasons why I'm such a critic of Plato.
They don't give a whole speech you know get get a little cranky about Plato.
So I think this runs really deep with us.
And I think one of the reasons why freedom of speech is the eternally radical idea is because it goes against some of our intuition to say you know like of course the heavier thing falls faster than the than the lighter thing.
And it actually turns out wait my intuition was wrong.
I bet if you test it that opened up the enlightenment was this incredible period of being like what if we test all this stuff.
What if we actually look at it and go like is this actually true.
And we found time and time again.
Oh wow no no we are totally wrong about a million different things when you actually when you actually test them.
But it's uncomfortable for a lot of people.
I think like temperaments like me me you and Ricky we have a little bit of like we're more comfortable with awe.
We like the idea that there's a massive ocean of stuff that we will never and can never know.
But for other people that's profoundly unsettling.
Yeah Ricky what is your answer that based on like say your fellow students and when you were in college what was it that they were driven to censor people.
Yeah I mean I think that there's definitely been different iterations and one thing that the coddling of the American mind did such a great job of was describing for me something that I felt like I was living through as like a test like study subject maybe
but like couldn't really see the larger zoomed out version.
And so to have Greg and John explain a lot of the safety ism of Gen Z was really clarifying for me because I could see all the symptoms of it but I couldn't quite grasp the cause of it or how it was different from times in the past.
But I would say in the most recent couple of years it's been the tying of like psychological well being and safety to words in a way that I think really appeals to some people's more sympathetic interest in saying like oh my gosh I wouldn't want to harm somebody
or allow them to be hurt or wounded by words and those words could literally be violence and it sounds very hyperbolic but that's discourse that I heard all the time at NYU and feeling as though you need to protect another.
I would say at least from my vantage point I mean I went to a very diverse college but almost every single time I heard that sort of discourse invoked it was by somebody who was saying oh we can't let like this other group like we can't let these words wound this group
and very I can't come up with a single time when someone said like as a person of color or as a woman I'm wounded by those words it's always to protect some other group abstraction.
But I would say at least in terms of the censorship inclination of my generation it was totally just hijacking our genuine sympathy and empathy for people and convincing us that insulating people
or stopping certain ideas from coming out of people's mouths was something that would actually legitimately stop harm for others.
You mean so you're saying it's a mistaken belief that words are the equivalent of violence because if you really believe that then there's kind of a rationality behind silence.
You don't want to let somebody physically pound on somebody else you would intervene.
Yeah I mean quite literally you would hear that like those are violent words or you're harming me or I need a safe space which is an ideological safe space but I almost feel like there's a physical element to that as well obviously in a very literal sense.
But yeah I mean words are tantamount to violence in the minds of a lot of people that I encountered in academia and I think that an outgrowth of that is if you really embrace that mistake in my view then it becomes perfectly acceptable to shout down a speaker
or to threaten somebody who's trying to go to a campus event or to assault somebody who's espousing dangerous words because if words are tantamount to violence then that's a completely acceptable response to them.
Yeah and I always try to point out that this is an ancient idea and I watch you know professors most embarrassingly but sometimes students think of think that almost like pat themselves on the back for thinking of like that well we now know words are
violence it's kind of like no we knew words were violence back in the 13th century kind of like there was not a major distinction made between the two and it was more or less a societal decision to make a bright line decision
a distinction between words and violence you know it's embodied in the First Amendment for example took a took a while to realize you know the full extent of it wasn't really realized in the 20th century.
But the same time like this but and Jonathan Rauch who was a good friend and you know one of my intellectual heroes you know he makes the point that it's underappreciated how much a bright line distinction between speech and violence has been a tool for peace because basically the way that the traditional way that we resolve disputes in human history is violence or the threat of violence or ostracism like really coercive means and to move from not just we're going to
tolerate dissenters but we might actually listen to them engage them and take seriously the possibility they might be right is uncomfortable it is also like a radical idea but it's one of the best inventions the species has ever come up with.
So the canceling of the American mind is something of a sequel to the coddling of the American mind is it that the coddling of parents.
Be people like me of people like Ricky is what made them fragile and that's why they are suffering to have more anxiety depression suicidal ideation cutting all this fear of missing out and fear of being left out and all that stuff is is that thesis held up.
We you know to be clear in coddling we actually identified six different causal threads of why this happened and parenting is definitely a part of it like anxious parenting is part of it.
We actually even added at a seventh that essentially the ability to sort of fall out of the upper classes you know as people and particularly in the upper classes kind of like a perpetual state of sort of mild panic.
But we also talk about how social media sped all the stuff up how the polarization made things much more intense.
So there's a technological influence here that not only sped some of these existing trends like polarization and paranoid parenting up also created some new ones like God forbid Tumblr you know where the social dynamic became very much about earning some amount of prestige by going in deep at the worst aspect.
Of your of your own thought.
So we think that actually this environment is created by a number of factors and but it is weird that the parenting and I think that partially the actual when I mentioned that the you know conservatives tend to live out in the country and liberals tend to live you know more densely packed.
I think a lot of what we're seeing is this divorce between the between sort of traditional thinking and progressive thinking.
Whereas those two work really well if they balance each other out that essentially like someone pointing out you know who really wants to be very very forward thinking how they raise their kids having the grandparent there saying actually some of that seems like a pretty bad idea.
You know from my grandparents told me that's actually a pretty good balance but now that we actually live in in communities that are much more politically isolated and much more homogenous.
We kind of spiral off in our own particular idiosyncratic craziness.
Ricky how come you're not a fragile snowflake.
What happened to you.
And she certainly is not she like I got depressed and anxious while writing the book and she was a rock.
I mean I would say looking back a lot of the Gen Z isms were things that it was it was helpful to have Greg and John kind of identifying some of the cognitive distortions of my generation because I was guilty of a lot of them myself.
I think having that awareness and and having you know intellectual authorities like Greg and John who described that to me in a way that I took very seriously was something that allowed me to actually reflect in on myself and I've met a lot of young people who've read that book.
And had the same experience to their credit which is why I feel so fortunate to be able to play a role in in this next book with Greg.
But I would say another part that was of my upbringing that's very important to me is I've been very fortunate in the combination of parents that I was blessed with with a mother who is of Eastern European background and a lot of sensibility and no nonsense.
And I think that's part of that kind of cultural inheritance and a father who's actually 86 years old so I've got the most unbelievable span of generations in one household.
I mean he's he was 63 when I was born and I think coming home with a lot of the the kind of generational tides of things that impacted me at school and I'd come home and I'd police his speech about whatever word was perfectly acceptable the day before but now I've been told by someone was unacceptable.
He'd be like, I don't give a shit.
Like, I'm sorry.
I don't care.
And I so your dad was six.
Your dad was 63 when he had you.
Yeah, so I was I was a late addition and I think, you know, growing up with someone who could tell me I mean I've always been a history nerd too and growing up with someone who could tell me what it was like to see Nazi POWs with his own eyes being shipped to a camp in upstate New York and who had lived through a lot of social tides.
And a lot of trends and fads that had died out.
I mean just having that I feel so fortunate to have been able to to ground my own conception of the world beyond just like social media or this moment here and now because it was like almost like an anchor against some of the generational tides I would say in retrospect for sure.
I mean I was like the only kid in.
I remember one time in like second grade a teacher had come to my mom and been like what's up with Ricky.
She said son of a gun and I've never heard anyone say that.
Well, and something really my dad's actually was 50 when I was born, which is very unusual for people my age.
And you know, like our family fled the Bolsheviks, you know, like we were originally serfs, you know, like so we have a long, long family history of that.
But particularly if you grew up in a first generation environment with other immigrants or also with other immigrant kids.
Like the rest of the world, particularly when they come here, they have I think they have like a better understanding of some of the aspects of what they make America different and free speech is always right at the top of the list.
And how often Michael I have to tell you like I'll have someone from I went to law school with talk about being concerned about political correctness.
And they'll and they'll mention or cancel culture or just ideology gone wrong.
And even if they're otherwise very lefty, they'll be kind of like oh yeah, my mother was born in Slovakia.
You know, like they have some connection or you know, my parents grew up in China.
Like they have some experience with authoritarianism in their family history or personally that makes them aware of how precious freedom of speech is.
But that's one of the things is so great about working with like a brilliant young woman like like Ricky is that, you know, she but partially by having, you know, a little bit of a lifeline to the more distant past through her dad.
You know, she she definitely maintained tremendous historical perspective on on how bad it could be without freedom of speech.
Yeah. Yeah. Well, Ricky, your dad's got me beat. I had my son at 62. He's now seven.
Yeah. And I had a 31 year old daughter and I had her. I was 37 and that was kind of old. So
I've been a great aunt since I was 10. So it's got to be like some sort of record.
Okay, let's talk about these generational differences. I've been thinking a lot about this.
I just read Jean Twangy's latest book Generations Highly Recommended.
Just that massive data set. So her thesis just to review it for the listeners is that technology has driven a lot of social change, mainly say vaccines, public health measures and so on double the lifespan.
If you lived in a time when you were likely to be half the population would be dead by age 35 on average, you know, and you've got to have 10 kids because half of them are going to die before they get to reproductive age and so on.
So we were more what's called an R selected species. That is, we have lots of offspring and hope to get a few into breeding age like salmon versus elephants that have one or two.
I mean, we're more like elephants on average, but her argument is that when life gets safer and longer, it can slow down.
You don't have to have as many kids. You don't have to have them as early. Her startling statistic was that women of my age on average got pregnant the first time at age 19.
Now it's 29 for your generation, Ricky. That's 10 years and they don't have four or five kids. They have one, 1.5 or whatever.
And so her argument is the coddling part. Coddling is not the right word. They're more risk averse because you're only going to have one.
This is it. I'm putting all my resources into this one and that translates into things like play dates that we do.
You know, like, okay, I got a call set up the time. We're going to drop them off. We're going to make sure everything is safe and protected and everything is good.
You know, whereas my generation, you know, you have four or five kids just come home by the time of dinner and that's it.
So the safetyism she argues comes from this kind of over protecting and risk aversion because you have all your resources into just the one or maybe two.
I don't know. What are your thoughts on that?
I mean, I think that that makes sense even in the in the ways that I do think I was coddled. It was by my mom and being an only child because she, you know, I was the kid that they poured all the resources into.
And I would go to all the right tutors and, you know, she she'll admit herself to have been to have been a helicopter parent a little bit.
And I think, you know, my dad's first family, he had four boys and it was like, I don't know which one's which at a certain point they were four and four years.
So it was definitely a difference in that sense.
And I would also say, like, I think that the Internet plays a role in that too, because of all this, like, I mean, such a wealth of a constant stream of information on like all these different theories about parenting and how you should be
parenting and all these different methods and and there's this like constant stream of telling you what you what you're doing wrong with your kid or what you should be doing.
I mean, I think that that also put so much pressure on on parents to be giving their kids the best foot forward.
And that often does mean helicoptering over them or coddling them or or doing things that are historically just negligible to the well being of a child going forward.
So I think that that probably makes sense because if you have less kids and and more time and a much louder bullhorn in your ear telling you how you're doing everything wrong as a parent, then certainly that would make you coddle your kids.
Yeah.
And in freedom from speech, at first I called this problems of comfort, which unfortunately I realized would be the initials would be POC and I realized I might have canceled for that.
So in coddling the American mind, we changed it to problems of progress that essentially and so I was trying to sort of split the difference about trying to explain why I agree, you know, with pinker on things getting better in a lot of ways, but also that I expect things to get worse for freedom of speech.
And particularly if you have environments where you're more isolated from people disagree with you and a more therapeutic culture, and that has fewer larger problems and can actually has a higher expectation of comfort, frankly, that you're going to get less and less comfortable with free speech over time,
not despite other things getting better, but actually precisely because other things are getting better. So I think that the decay of freedom of speech is a side effect of what would be what should be considered progress.
I do think that if things turn awful, like if we end up in a nuclear war or something like that, the some of that will go away.
Because it tends to give people like a sense of perspective, but I would rather have the problem problems of progress than not have them.
Yeah, I've often wondered if a lot of these big protests over small things are just the result of that's what's left to protest that you know the big things have been to Vietnam War and civil rights, women's rights, gay rights, these are all done largely.
And so what's next in the next generation will I want to get out there and do something to help human progress. What's left of the trans rights or whatever, and our BLM movement and, you know, and then also, you know, when you watch something like the George Floyd video, I mean, it's really hard to watch and not just
Yeah. And then you think, well, what can I do, you know, I'm not a mayor, I'm not a politician, I'm not a police chief, you know, what can I do? Well, I can go down there and protest. Yes, tomorrow afternoon, we're going down to City Hall and we're going to have our signs.
Or you go on Twitter and complain because at least you feel like you're doing something.
And I would also add to that, like, in my generation, having been at a boarding school like our school would, I think we were activated quite young politically and we, you know, they would have buses to certain protests and rallies if you wanted to go down to DC for whatever the most
reason, like a climate protest or something like that. And I also think you combine that with the fact that teenagers are not doing any of the normal teenager things that they have done for the entire span of human history.
Like they're not socializing, they're not getting outside, they're staying on their phones, they're not getting licenses, they're not dating, they're not getting summer jobs anymore.
And so they have a bunch of kids that are on their phones and on their devices with a 24 hour news cycle who are kind of taking on the weight of the world on their shoulders from day one as soon as they plug in online and they don't actually have healthy outlets to use their time.
So of course they're going to want to put that energy and that activism and that passion that they have somewhere. And oftentimes I think it just ends up going into the political white noise.
Well and let's be clear here and this is something that I do, there's a tendency particularly for those of us who are more left leaning to never want to blame anybody.
You know, like never want to say like anything was really anyone's fault, it's impersonal factors taking over and that's the cause of everything, it's just you're a victim of circumstance.
But we do try to be pretty clear in the book that there really was, for example, an anti free speech movement. You know, there really were thinkers including Richard Delgado and Herbert Marcuse and actually what gets labeled now as CRT that really the first thing they did was try to pass speech codes and restrict freedom of speech.
And it's the same thing that comes to, like the theory of cobbling the American mind is that we're teaching young people to think in cognitive distortions, exaggerated mental habits that will make them anxious and depressed if they have them.
But to be clear, like some of that comes from, you know, just parents being extra anxious as there's less to worry about some of it comes from a very intentional, you know, movement among K through 12 teachers, parents believing that if if you're absolutely terrified and depressed about global warming
it will somehow make you more of an activist about it. And that was again to go back to Pinker Pinker points out no that actually is likely to make you hopeless or come up with solutions that can't possibly work.
What you need to actually fix things like George Floyd absolutely horrifying and immediately, you know, there were like eight different reforms that would have made common sense to pass it would make an event like this less less likely.
Instead it became sort of a national consciousness raising thing and it really, you know, went after professors and students who tweeted things that were mildly, you know, insensitive, even some cases like that are just utterly ridiculous.
So I think that we shouldn't underestimate how much the mental health harm that we're doing to young people comes from a faulty belief that if we make them sufficiently miserable, it will somehow produce positive social change.
Yeah, sometimes you guys all hear pushback like you're just perpetuating a moral panic over much to do about nothing. This isn't a big deal. I mean I heard since you mentioned the critical race theory I heard Chomsky on a podcast the other day saying, Oh, this is just this tiny little legal theory in law schools,
you know grammar school teachers middle school they don't have any idea what this they're not teaching this to kids.
I have respect for Chomsky. He should know better. The thing is, it's not like they're not literally teaching, you know, they're not handing out Derek Bell's books. But I mean, there's some of the books that have been in controversial.
One I think it's literally called intersectional baby like anti racist baby, you know, like is absolutely that that's CRT. A lot of these a lot of these ideas, there's so much in the culture that that people don't recognize that they're originally where they came from our Kimberly Crenshaw.
And Crenshaw has been critical of how they've turned out to her credit. But yeah, it's omnipresent in our society. It's so taken for granted people forget where it initially came from.
Interesting books on different sides, even though Chris Ruffo isn't a big fan of ours, because we posed rightfully the stop will act in Florida because it was laughably unconstitutional.
He actually wrote a pretty good book about, you know, the origins of CRT that points out that, you know, things that people should know like Markoos actually still in the 70s thought Mao was terrific, you know, which is worth knowing.
And but also Yasha Monk on the other side wrote a book called The Identity Trap pointing out a lot a lot of this stuff and how much it actually has filtered filtered in everywhere and it is, you know, it includes aspects of everything from postmodernism to CRT.
And it's, yeah, it's everywhere now.
On this topic of identity, Ricky, maybe you know some people your fellow students.
This kind of sudden spike in trans by gender identity fluidity and so on. What is going on with that? Do you think?
Yeah, I mean, this is definitely a contentious issue, but I mean, it's one that I have I have no problem talking about because I've seen it like, I mean, I think.
I think I draw a line between like I truly don't care.
I have a ton of bisexual friends.
I think that there is a crazy uptick in people that identify as non straight.
It's not something that I'm really worried about pontificating about because, you know, they're not hurting anybody there.
If they want to experiment or end up one way or another, sure, fine, whatever, like I'm very libertarian in my disposition on that front.
I do draw a line on on feeling as though I'm much more comfortable having a conversation about like when it comes to medicalization and permanent decisions that are being made,
especially when someone is not yet 18 when you can't get a tattoo or even have a beer yet.
And I think at least from my vantage point, the people that I know who have who have gone down a gender non conforming route or who have decided to or have ended up deciding that their trans
have consistently been people who have been very online and especially in crevices like Tumblr.
And I think, you know, there's a huge swath of historical data to demonstrate that young women are especially susceptible to social contagion.
And I think that that that that's a large portion of it for sure.
And I think, you know, it's just incubated in in.
It's like a ready made community that on a place like Tumblr, if you're a kid who's kind of a drift in your social world.
It's you're welcomed with open arms.
I've interviewed a lot of detransitioners and that's something that I consistently hear is that they felt when they were in middle school that they were kind of on the outskirts and then all of a sudden here's this this warm welcoming community with a solution to all their problems.
And that tells them that this is kind of the panacea to everything and and you get built in friends to and and a whole world that embraces you.
And then all of a sudden all your friends in school in real life are celebrating you because you've done something so brave or you're having assemblies in school and suddenly you're the kid that was in the back corner and you're you're really at the center of everything.
And so I think that there's a lot of complex social things going on on that front.
But I would definitely say that the the social contagion aspect like I I saw in just from afar in my age cohort that there were I was definitely a propensity of friend groups like coming to that conclusion at the same time together.
And I don't think that that is a coincidence.
Yeah.
Yeah, I mean, and I want to break us back to cancel culture and how it relates to this.
So let's take Carol Hoeven, you know, absolutely brilliant.
You know, wrote a wonderful like a really top notch book called testosterone called tea and you know the dangerous time to be writing about it.
She's an evolutionary biologist and she's over been essentially forced out of Harvard because she won on Fox News and explained very compassionately very sweetly that we should be respectful towards trans people.
We should use their pronouns, all of the stuff, but biological sex is real and that it's important and we can't lose sight of the importance of biological sex.
And immediately a DEI administrator, you know, started, you know, complaining about it very publicly and people students got together and petitions, you know, together fired the or otherwise punished.
And they wouldn't work in her class, they wouldn't be TAs and she got really depressed and she she dropped out came back again to work for Steve Pinker's lab.
And given that she dropped out, we actually count that as a cancellation attempt in our database, but we don't actually count that as a successful cancellation, which because she did it, you know, of her own accord.
But this happens all the time and it's hard to, you know, know what it doesn't happen as a school is high profile as Harvard.
But here's how this relates to the trans discussion. People aren't stupid.
And when they see that someone got absolutely, you know, pulled over raked over the coals for just saying biological sex is real.
When the next expert comes out and says, actually, biological sex is on a spectrum, it's not really real is blah, blah, blah.
They're just going to say, Why should I trust you? Because if you said anything else, your life would be totally messed up.
You might be fired. You might actually lose your entire career and all your friends.
And so that's one of the reasons why one of the subtler themes of the book is how cancel culture destroys trust and expertise.
Yeah. Yeah, just a final point on that because I had a trans student a few years ago, a Chapman who, 18, these are first year students and she decided in the midstream, I'm now I want to be a boy or man or whatever.
But it was obvious in a few weeks, she didn't want to change sex or whatever. She wanted to be trans. The trans was the identity, not the other thing.
And that's my sense of what might be going on there.
I think there's definitely also, I mean, there's so much pressure. It's, it was really bizarre. I was in humanities classes at NYU and there was so much pressure to attach your personal immutable characteristics to any point that you make as a preface in,
in especially philosophical conversations where you'd hear all the time, like, as a queer person, blah, blah, blah. And it would be like talking about some philosopher from the 17th century.
And it's like, what is your, your identity have to do with that? Or as a woman or as a person of color, because it was almost like, if you felt like you might be saying something a little bit controversial or your idea might be pushed back on a little bit,
then you had to, you had to attach it to some sort of group that would shield you from it, which is almost the inverse of the perfect rhetorical fortress of what Greg and I discussed with cancel culture.
It's like protecting yourself by saying, I actually am part of this class. And so, you know, if you can, if you can adopt one of those classes too, then, then there might be social benefit to that in a world where people get torn down for not being the right identity and having a certain idea.
I remember talking to an Uber liberal mother whose daughter I think just turned 15 and she was bragging how she's bi, bisexual. I said, well, how do you know? I mean, if she had sex with boys and had sex with girls and she said, I like them both equally.
And she said, no, she hasn't had sex with anybody. It's like, then how do you know? I mean, so it's the identity itself. The word has captured this meaning.
It's interesting when you look at the data, how many women say that they're bisexual, but when you actually ask them, do they, who they have sex with, a large percentage of them only have sex with men. And it's kind of like, okay, so what exactly does that mean?
Well, that does flip pretty considerably with Gen Z women. Jean Twenge has some data on that in her book where actually a lot of the self-identified bisexual young women are engaging in sexual activity with both genders.
Interesting. Okay, before we run out of time, let's make sure we cover the conservative cancel culture. What's wrong with Ron DeSantis wanting to protect Floridian children and protect children going to Disney because they're going to be exposed to all this crazy woke stuff?
Oh, don't get me started on this. The laws coming out of Florida have just completely derailed some of the discussion, some of the very legitimate discussion about higher education reform, which, you know, badly needs to happen.
We need a lot of work to protect academic freedom and viewpoint diversity. And that overwhelmingly got derailed by the Stop Woke Act, which, you know, literally, when they're arguing in court, I believe they said it's kind of like, well, you could have someone being anti-affirmative action in class, but they can't be pro-affirmative action.
It's like, no, that's laughably unconstitutional. And we warned them about this. And now, because that was a, and Fire bought it in court, by the way, and we won, that there's now a version of it, part two, that they're, I think is just as unconstitutional, and I think we'll be able to defeat it again.
But it was bad because it's unconstitutional. You can't engage in viewpoint discrimination in higher ed. And it very much said you can't, you know, talk about these topics, you know, whether race, sex, gender, but also really, you can't have these points of view.
It seemed to be very, it was baked into the law. And meanwhile, this has turned into, oh, it's the new McCarthyism, there's all of these laws across the country, threatening academic freedom, and I'm concerned about the bad laws coming out of a lot of these legislatures, but there really was, as best we can tell, one law that came out, and that's the Stop Woke Act, and we defeated it in court.
But the other bad things coming out of Florida, you know, like the going after Disney for having a political position is just silly theater, and but also, you know, abuse of power.
The one that I think people should be more worried about is the attempt to go after New York Times and be Sullivan, which is the case that really strongly makes it very hard to defame public figures and well-known people.
And it's funny because there's a little bit on the right that kind of like, oh, we'd be so much better officers, there's no New York Times v. Sullivan. I'm like, guys, think this through.
Who do you think would be the most likely to get in trouble without New York Times v. Sullivan? Like conservatives are crazy to think that that somehow protects them more than anybody else.
Just explain that log in that.
So New York Times v. Sullivan is a seminal First Amendment case from the 1960s in which there was a ad run in the New York Times where that talked about a some of the racial justice protests going on and it was and it had a couple of factual minor factual mistakes in it.
And there was a lawsuit to against the people who bought the ad and claiming that it was defamatory.
And in that case, the Supreme Court came up with a standard called actual malice that essentially you have to if you publish something that that you know was false or you showed reckless disregard for the truth, you have to meet that high level in order to defame a public official.
And this has been very good at protecting us, protecting the U.S. from the very real problem of people in power using defamation law to silence their critics.
So this is like when making Kelly head around to Sanctuary push back against this that this is not good for conservatives because once you set that precedent that it's okay for the government to go after corporations attitudes politically.
Well, that's just going to turn around and bite liberals.
Yeah, and I think it's something that unfortunately is it appeals to like the baser instincts of people who may have been in the camp that I was in before I really sat down with the classical liberal text and theory where like you see liberalism on the left and people fighting in a really
mighty way to try to squash out dissent and then it seems perfectly logical if you're not really steeped in in the philosophy of free speech and pluralism and classical liberalism to say, well, we should be stamping it out too because we're fighting might with might and they're
they're bringing their fists and we should fight back and I think it's a it's a really unfortunate reality that that's something that has allowed someone like DeSantis to get so much attention and so much popular support because it actually feels like he's fighting
liberals and and there's not enough at least in my opinion in my view as someone more on the right there's not enough truly principled people with solutions that are genuinely pluralistic and generally genuinely foster a diverse democracy that are coming up and saying like
actually if the left is going to abdicate freedom of speech as a fundamental principle. Why don't we just take that up and think that would actually be appealing to quite a lot of people but unfortunately it's not quite as sexy as stopping woke so
yeah well right stopping woke I mean there was a viral tweet last week of a page photograph of a page from a children's but maybe middle school is hard to tell about anal sex rimming you know how to stimulate somebody make sure you
use open water got to be careful of this and that and this was just being passed around like this is what the left is trying to do. Yeah let's talk about it yeah yeah what's the back story there. The back story there is it's a book that you know I don't think is appropriate for kids but by a long
shot and this is something that is frustrating where fire is coming out with a frequently asked question on you know book banning and I put that in quotes because a lot of what's called book banning is not book banning but there is actual book banning
we took some heat in the Wall Street Journal for talking about book banning in the book but book banning is when you completely remove a book from a library not reclassify it as for adults you just completely take it out.
Book banning is when someone gets arrested for forgiving you know for suggesting the book what is it this book is gay you know which has some racy stuff in it but the same time it's not a crime to distribute it and a lot of the
way the media has been covering this is is people are arguing that something is age inappropriate and if you're if you're saying if you have a process and they decide that you know this book is not age appropriate that's always what K through 12 libraries and public libraries have done
and so there is a problem of book banning but the way it's actually being handled currently in the media is really deceptive the one that bothers me the most frankly is when you have these laws saying you know we will not teach the following books in our curriculum
well and that get called book ban and like you can think these are stupid and some of them I think are stupid but the same time do you live in a world where decisions on curriculum were at some point in human history not political they've always been political and what scares me the most
with some of the stuff is that there's a movement among some nonprofits that are essentially like just like the governor the former Democratic governor of Virginia just right before he lost was was really kind of saying that we should leave
all decisions related to K through 12 education just to graduates of education schools and it's like no there are there I have you know five and seven year old there are kids we pay the taxes on it and this is a mandatory institution and therefore there needs to be Democratic
oversight so so when it comes to curricular stuff that's always been politically decided and should have some Democratic oversight so I think there's been some even though we we object to the problem of book banning I also think the debate has been held at a very low and sometimes frankly deceptive
level
right so you distinguish between public schools and private schools
of course yeah yeah can do what they want something like that yeah
okay before we run out of time here because I know you guys got interviews lined up solutions what should we what should the average person listening to this do what can I do
well third of the whole third of the book is about solution but well Ricky go first
yeah I was gonna say one thing that we do emphasize is on parenting I think that this we need to be very mindful to raise anti-cancelers and that's something that sounds very
like hopeful and wishful thinking but actually the vast majority of Gen Z actually has a negative view of cancel culture more so than any generation it's
a small number of very loud and very vicious people who are tearing down fellow young people and a whole lot of young people that are sitting on their hands and are afraid to speak up for their friends and to put themselves out there
and so I think that that parenting the next generation to be mindful of the fact that like everyone is going to screw up and everyone needs some grace at a certain point of time is certainly something that
gives me hope that there are more parents being aware of instilling those values and a lot of young people who have come up like raise raise their hands when I started speaking out in NYU and said like actually I agree with you
just don't tell anyone right tell anyone right so this is called pluralistic ignorance or the spiral of silence where everybody thinks everybody else thinks something in fact they don't
with collective illusion yeah yeah and when it comes to I mean for me I think we need to be thinking about big bold other ways for the hardest working smartest students out there to show that
because I think that's how kind of pessimistic I am about some aspects particularly of elite higher ed now first I think people should hire less often from elite higher ed because a lot of these problems are much more intense in elite higher ed
and I but I also think that we need avenues you know that someone can show that they're because right now take Harvard and I will pick on Harvard all day 45% of students I believe of white students are either kids of professors kids of
legacies or sports people and the average average GPA at Harvard is 3.8 so you might have someone who just kind of waltz in there because they're a legacy that they don't have to work hard they'll get they'll get
they're making a 3.6 and I know this from Stanford as well like it you know it's hard to be the top of your class of course but it's all the most impossible to fail out you can you can get away with doing very little in elite higher
so right now we have this product that's supposed to give us the hardest working best and brightest and it's not and it's also giving employer employers and often cases people who show up and want to cancel anyone they disagree with and have you know forums about you know someone said something
conservative you know in my organization let's let's let's have a giant meeting I think that if we had some other alternate avenues and I'm talking about University of Texas at Austin for example but even way beyond that we need to have other ways of showing that completely
go around elite higher education because that's how serious I think some of these ideological problems are you need to find other avenues.
Yeah I mean to Greg to Greg's credit he changed fires hiring requirements to hire me because I ended up just being so like disgusted with the state of my education and the nerve of my school to charge full tuition for zoom.
And so now fire will hire non grads he's walking the walk.
And I think I think definitely challenging the the grip that elite higher ed which is inculcated all these ideas has on on our society and our institutions of leadership is definitely a really important thing to chip away at.
By the way I think those kind of pressures will actually help encourage elite higher ed to reform itself because you know let's face it Harvard has it.
I crunched the numbers the other night one trillion dollars.
They're going to be they're going to be around for a while.
So you also have to put pressure on elite higher ed to reform itself but I would but I would love to start seeing you know people figuring out ways that people can show you know how many books they've read on a particular topic because those are the kind of people that at fire
more basically when we're hiring people we're trying to figure out would you defend freedom of speech even if it wasn't your job and do you live and breathe this stuff because then you're one of us.
Yeah yeah so Ricky is it enough to say I disagree with cancel culture.
Maybe just saying it other people go hey me too and then all of a sudden you get a cascade of of of shifting of opinions.
I certainly believe the courage is contagious and yeah it's just a matter of of I think you know an example that I think is really gives me a ton of hope is in Harvard their free speech council had 100 professors on it who all at the same time
step forward and said yes this is a problem and I think the safety in numbers is a really important thing because they've not been castigated in a way that I think if it was just one of them they almost definitely would have been.
And so you know the more people can actually put together that there are those around them that think the same way which was my experience at NYU having professors and genes and students that I knew in classmates that I never would have known agreed with me that free speech was an issue on campus
and I think that's a really helpful way to reach out to me privately makes me realize yeah we could all get together and say this is a problem and we and and we're all going to back each other and and be courageous and I think that that's a really hopeful path forward
I'll say goodbye and just make a few more comments with with Greg. Thank you Ricky. Thank you so much. Congratulations on getting a major book deal with a major publisher at such a young age. You're just getting started. You're rolling.
Ricky is the best. I feel very lucky to get to work with her.
Thank you both so much. It's been a pleasure.
Bye Ricky. I'll just a few more comments with you Greg. I'm glad you guys took on the bachelor and Chris Harrison.
Oh yeah.
My wife and I have you know we have a little junk TV we like to watch which used to be the bachelor and the bachelor.
Yeah and I always thought that was a stupidest show until I started watching it then you get attached to the characters and you know like oh she shouldn't have she should have picked him or whatever.
But then that last season where the white woman picks the black guy is the man she wants to marry and then they do some offense archaeology and they find when she was in high school she drew what she went to like an antebellum like a
Scarlett O'Hara dance.
Yeah Scarlett O'Hara yeah something like that and they oh my god and and and that those final episodes were just painful to watch and they're like you know why did you pick him it's like well because I'm in love with him.
Oh no that's not it you know and it's like you got to do the work they kept telling her she has to do the work do the work and that's the first time I had heard that phrase like what does that mean do the work.
It means I'm superior to you and there's some knowledge that I have that you have and when Chris Harrison what he came out and said we do in that was let's have some grace.
The people are being absolutely awful like it was something that was perfectly reasonable to say and he got forced out after what was it.
Don't remember exactly 18 years.
Yeah 19 years.
Yeah.
And he comes off as the nicest guy probably Uber liberal just everyone along and and tolerate differences and so on I mean deals with all that and to be run out of town like that it was just shameful.
Yeah.
And then they brought in that new host a black guy out Ocho I think a C H O or something like that Emmanuel Ocho he was a professional I think football player and and you know sort of making trying to make the transition into television.
I read his book which was it's basically it's a little bit like the anti racism type theme to it where everybody is a racist and I think the title was you know difficult conversations with white people something like that.
Yeah.
That usually means lectures to.
Yes.
Yeah.
So I said all right I'm a I'm a white guy.
I have difficult conversations on my show with lots of people so let's get them on in the publisher.
My publisher is a big melon and they're like nah he doesn't want to do it.
So yeah it was just like yeah I'll lecture to you Sharma but I don't want to talk to you about this because there's no conversation to be had.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Well and that's one thing that we do in the book we talk about you know we talk about things cancellations rated covid we talk about journalism publishing we talk about corporations because to make the point that this is really you know escape the lab
And fire the foundation for individual rights and expression where I'm CEO we change from being the foundation for individual rights in education focused overwhelmingly on higher ed to the to do expression in just last year because the situation has gotten so bad off campus as well.
Yeah.
Can people who work in a corporation or at a university stand up and say I'm not doing the D.I. training.
That's pretty risky to lose their job right.
If you're in a private corporation it's especially risky because they probably can you know fire you for that.
However if you're in a university setting and you say that I'm not attending this that there's a very particularly given the way some of these are formed that there's a very strong compelled speech argument because a lot of times what they don't just want you to come to this thing
They want you to confess your evil or your oppression which brings up serious issues of conscience and compelled speech.
So for one thing that fire is challenging right now and I love this about fire.
We fought and defeated the stop woke act.
We're also suing in California going after this absolutely outrageous D.I. policy that they have that requires professors no matter what they teach to work in ideas like intersection.
Anti-racism all the approved D.I. type stuff into their classes.
And it's like I watch some people kind of explode on threads for example where I am you know someone yell in a responses read a book looking out off and I'm like I have friends.
But but but the and I had to point out listen if you understood why it was a threat in the stop woke act this is actually even worse.
This is telling professors what they must to say and it makes it basically categorically eliminates the possibility that you that you come out and say oh by the way I actually think some of this is BS.
Like it's actually required you to have a point of view on some of these topics.
So we're suing it in court.
The constitutional legal precedence on that goes back to the saying of the Pledge of Allegiance for some Jehovah Witnesses right.
Yes 1943.
Very good.
Yeah.
The Barnett case which is which is probably my all time favorite Supreme Court decision.
You can't make people say things.
You can't make people say things.
And it's something that I say this is bad as it is to tell people what they can't say it's even worse to tell them what they must say and downright totalitarian to tell them what they have to.
And that it would apply to public schools.
I mean if I go to a Christian school and I want a Christian education and I'm supposed to believe in Jesus you know they have a right to not hire me Michael Schirmer the atheist right.
It depends on what they promise you know like we definitely do recognize that like particularly like a public like a like a private Christian college if it wants to not promise freedom of speech or academic freedom.
They have the right to do that.
We will list them as a school.
We call them warning schools.
But what we mean by that is like well if you want freedom of speech it's not actually promised by these schools.
So just be just just be warned.
That doesn't necessarily mean the environment there is terrible for free speech.
But it could be and they can do that.
But what's interesting is a lot of these nominally religious schools have profoundly you know strong commitments to freedom of speech in their policies like Georgetown.
And I almost wonder if Georgetown should just eliminate them because they were third from last in our most recent free speech rankings because they and it's not like they're firing people for for being contradicting a Catholic teaching.
Although that they are punishing students for that to some degree.
In a lot of cases you know like going after Ilya Shapiro is because he made the left mad because he he talked about how he was critical of Joe Biden's decision to say that he's going to hire a black woman to be the next Supreme Court.
And something like 59 percent or some percentage of the American public was like yeah that wasn't appropriate.
The person's always going to be like it makes it seem like whoever gets the job got it didn't get it on the basis of Marin.
Well there you can just apply a Rawlsian original position where you don't know what the person's skin color gender is.
And therefore you wouldn't want a rule that says I can hire a Supreme Court justice or nominated Supreme Court justice who is X race and Y gender.
Because everybody will know that in principle that can't be right.
Yeah.
I agree.
But if you fill it in with the correct race and gender correct for the wrongs of the past.
I guess that's what's really going on.
But I do apologize because I actually.
You gotta go too.
Okay.
All right.
Great.
Yeah.
No worries.
I know you guys are busy.
Thanks so much.
Always a pleasure Michael.
And everyone should know that Michael also appears in the book talking about some of the stuff that's been going on with Scientific American which breaks my heart as well as a former subscriber.
All right.
Take care.
Bye bye.
