Oh, when the fall comes along and the leaves come tumbling down, the eyes of the nation
turn to Detroit town, that's where the cars are, brand new cars, and that's where we're
going to go on this Chevy show. Come on, we're going, we're going your way with the 61
Chevy's by Chevrolet. The greatest show onward, we'll show you why we say the 61 Chevy is
going your way. This is the 61 Impala convertible, a little shorter and not quite so wide on the
outside for easier handling, but with all that big Chevrolet room and wide comfort high seats
inside. Take a look at this one, what a low price you pay for a 61 Chevy that's going your way. This is
the 61 Chevy Biscayne, the lowest priced, full sized Chevrolet. Here's big car comfort at small car
prices. Back we go to show you with a rear view display that the 61 Chevy is going your way.
Hey, shout hooray, call there's big news today is the beautiful station wagon going your way.
The Corvair Lakewood, America's very first station wagon with the engine in the rear.
Lots of cargo space in the back. So common thrill to the greatest show onward that your Chevy dealers
come see why we say that the 61 Chevy is going your way, your way.
Harriet, David and Ricky, the Nelson family. Any place, any time is a good time for Cola.
Only Coca Cola gives you that refreshing new feeling, refreshing new feeling, refreshing new feeling.
Coca Cola's bright and lively, Coca Cola has more zest, Coca's a lot more soothing, loving, refreshing zest.
Only Coca Cola gives you that refreshing new feeling, refreshing new feeling, refreshing new feeling.
Only Coca Cola gives you that refreshing new feeling, refreshing new feeling.
And now the Coca Cola Company invites you to enjoy.
Most of us, they enjoy good times over again in pictures. And now here's Harriet.
If your family is like ours, you'll have as much fun together indoors as you do out.
And now there's a new camera by Kodak that's just the nicest one I know to have around the house.
It's the new brownie starlight camera, the most compact indoor and outdoor camera in Kodak history.
See, it's so small that it's right in the palm of your hand.
The starlight camera was built with fun in mind. So handy, so easy to use because the flash is built in.
Always there when you want it. These new flash bulbs are extra small too, so they're easy to have handy when you want them.
Now when you see something you'd like a picture of, just pop in one of those tiny flash bulbs and shoot.
You'll get wonderful pictures in black and white, or color, or even gorgeous color slides.
See the brownie starlight camera by Kodak. It costs less than $12.
And start now to enjoy your good times over again in pictures.
And now Kodak invites you to enjoy the adventures of Ozzie and Harriet.
It's Tupperware's 10th birthday and you're getting the present. This is it.
If you go to a Tupperware party between now and May 6th, as one of the first 12 guests, you'll receive a lovely costume pin by Velupte.
Or as a hostess, a beautiful Velupte compact. Plus the regular hostess gift.
Call your Tupperware dealer or find Tupperware on the yellow pages under housewares or plastics.
Or write Tupperware or Lando Florida so you can help celebrate our birthday by accepting a lovely gift.
