Trigger warnings, safe spaces, microaggressions, unconscious bias and lived experience.
The language of therapy is now used widely and indiscriminately.
We live in a time where stoicism and rationality are seen as antiquated, harmful even.
And we are encouraged to normalise eccentricities and perversions while endlessly focusing on
our needs, our emotions, self-care and our inner child.
And yet more and more of us are looking out at our culture and society and feel like we
are observing a psychiatric ward.
Male rapists in women's prisons, racial segregation in schools, the censorship of books and the
rewriting of history.
The world's gone mad, many of us cry.
But do we even know what madness is anymore?
Have our mental health professionals got our best interests at heart?
Is sanity still the goal?
Or, instead, has the psychiatric profession become a battleground for warring versions
of reality with the patients sacrificed and made a casualty of the cause?
As a mental health nurse, I've worked closely with patients suffering from a wide range
of mental health conditions.
And while I have experience working with a range of treatments, my real interest is in
talking therapies.
However, like many, I'm concerned about the radical, harmful and authoritarian ideologies
that are destroying this profession.
While training to become a psychotherapist at the Tavistock and Portman NHS Trust, I
soon became aware that critical race theory was being used to encourage unequal treatments,
judgments and generalisations about people based on the colour of their skin.
When I spoke up about this and advocated for the colour-blind approach of treating people
of all races equally as individuals and without prejudice, I was told that this was discredited
and outdated.
By disagreeing with the view that all white people are racist, I was told that I had created
a traumatising environment.
Not content with threatening to bar me from the profession of psychotherapy, one lecturer
attempted to have me struck off as a nurse, claiming that I had caused raced-based harm
and was unfit to work with diverse patients.
The course lead would later give a pre-written speech, declaring that I had made the learning
environment unsafe due to my oppressive hate speech.
I was subsequently prevented from finishing my clinical work and told not to be present
in the clinic's reception area because the sight of my face could cause trauma.
Without the generosity of those donating to my legal crowdfund, I would have been left
with no way of fighting back and protecting my career.
I spoke to Dr Valerie Thomas about the effects that woke ideology, also known as critical
social justice, is having on psychotherapy.
Once critical social justice is introduced into any arena, it has a totalising and an
authoritarian agenda and its agenda is to dismantle and disrupt all the pre-existing
approaches to that particular arena.
In the case of counselling and psychotherapy, once you introduce CSJ into the territory,
it wants to decolonise the field.
It wants to remove any different view of the human condition.
It wants to completely obliterate that.
A really good example would be different approaches to contentious areas of race.
It won't allow any other view than its own anti-racist perspective.
Ideas such as colour blindness won't be allowed to exist separately.
It will go out of its way to demolish and deconstruct.
All the other approaches that have those different views.
So the end result of CSJ coming into counselling and psychotherapy will be homogeneity.
Providing a perfect example of what psychotherapists describe as reaction formation, or describing
the opposite of what you are doing, the Tavistock racism was presented as fervent anti-racism
as it declared itself to be an anti-racist organisation.
There's a range of third party organisations that have been brought in by universities
who are trying to achieve the top ranking as an anti-racist university, an inclusive
open university on the question of racism.
They have lots of overseas students, they have lots of students from ethnic minorities,
they don't want to be seen as racist.
They bring in organisations who put forward a critical race theory approach to racism
and we know that with that comes all manner of problems, an inbuilt sense of grievance,
an assertion of white supremacy and of white privilege, a guilt to be associated with your
skin colour if you're white, an introduction of a victim mentality if you're non-white
and these things and power relations critiqued in a particular way.
In an academic university setting it's perfectly reasonable to be familiar with those theories,
in fact I would advocate that young people would be familiar with them because they're
very popular, but they should be familiar with them as a set of theories, not as fact,
not as the only policy that counts and that in fact if you challenge those theories you
can actually be called out as a bigot discipline and so on and so forth.
So that's the problem with them, if they were introduced as part of an academic package
of you know we should be familiar as I say with critical theory is a major intellectual
movement I would expect that lots of students particularly in the humanities would be familiar
with it, but to then say you have to live by that and for a university to think that
its status as an anti-racist or inclusive organisation needs to go along with this I
think is very problematic, very dangerous for a free speech, a real assault on academic
freedom.
Unfortunately my experience at the Tavistock is not an exception, in 2022 a report conducted
by Dr Carol Sherwood and Dr Kirsty Miller showed that clinical psychology training courses
across the UK are encouraging trainees to decolonise traditional evidence based treatments
by removing anything that could be considered white and Eurocentric, increasingly mental
health professionals are being bullied or denied their careers for disagreeing with
woke dogma.
You know I hear from trainees who have kind of paused their studies pending the outcome
of cases such as ours because they just want to see what the lay of the land is before
they continue.
Hey are there trainees who literally and it's causing them a lot of pain inside because
they feel that they just cannot speak out but they desperately need a qualification
and so they're just going to keep their head down and they feel that they're not being
true to themselves which I think can eat someone up inside but the alternative is to speak
out to get kicked off and then to lose their livelihood so some people feel that they don't
have an option in that respect but yes we have new members joining us all the time looking
for something else.
On the flip side as I've said earlier there's a lot of therapists out there who have kind
of taken on board this ideology and now fully embrace it and you know it's quite worrying
to see.
I mean I was invited last year to a conference by a group called the Society for Extential
Analysis to give a general talk about what had happened to me and gender identity theory
more generally you know it's a group of therapists so one would hope they would be able to handle
difficult conversations and hear things they don't necessarily agree with you know this
is part and parcel of what it is to be a therapist but I was told that there were boycotts of
the event, people didn't show up, after my session finished there was what they called
an emergency safe space that needed to be held because some therapists were so traumatised
by the sight of my face in the building that they couldn't you know kind of bear to go
on without having a safe space to debrief in.
This worries me.
It sounds very similar to what's happened to me it's almost cut and pasted I've been
told that I'm unsafe I'm traumatising how this language is weaponised yeah I mean it's
hysteria isn't it it's you know it's an extreme form of catastrophising and emotionality
it's not healthy response regardless of the politics or what your beliefs are about anything
reacting you know I wouldn't react like that to someone who had a different opinion to
me on anything really like it's extraordinary that mental health professionals are behaving
like this because they are the group that you would expect to be able to think and you
know manage their own emotions.
These are the bloody therapists I mean what hope do clients have if their therapist crumbles
under the slightest bit of pressure or something that they don't agree with I mean it's a fundamental
principle of being an ethical counsellor therapist of bracketing your own personal views and
beliefs because you're going to encounter clients who think and view the world very differently
to you.
The origins of psychiatry as we know it today can be traced back to 18th century France a
group of doctors began focusing more on understanding and caring for the mentally unwell rather
than just incarcerating them.
A century later neurologist Jean-Martin Chaco considered the founder of modern neurology
began diagnosing and treating hysteria or excessive emotionality Chaco put on displays
of his patients during his teaching sessions in Paris one observer of this was the Austrian
neurologist Sigmund Freud.
Freud was particularly interested in the link Chaco made between mental illness trauma and
conflicted sexuality Freud theorized that an impeded or disrupted sexual development
was the underlying cause of many psychological issues.
He outlined a triangular edipal configuration whereby the child has to navigate his or her
position desire and attachment in relation to the parental couple.
Freud repressed fears and fantasies with a key to understanding human behavior making
the unconscious conscious through talking therapy would lead the patient to greater self-awareness
and a reduction of symptoms and so the 20th century saw a flourishing of various forms
of talking therapies.
As Roy's practice of psychoanalysis developed those that followed on from him all differed
in their own theories and practices but they formed a broader tradition of focusing on
the interplay between the patient's own inner psychic reality and the reality of the external
world the aim being to identify and understand patterns of thinking and behaving which were
hindering or harming the patient.
Being able to accept and manage life's harsh disappointments and limitations was a key
part of this and being able to separate subjective feelings from objective facts was vital to
healthy functioning and what Freud termed reality testing.
However alongside the development of psychoanalysis another theoretical framework also began to
emerge one with a very different agenda.
Originating in the 1930s the Frankfurt School were a group of radical far-left academics
who sought to merge Freud's psychoanalytic theory with Marxism.
This merger would become to be known as critical theory and it would seek to dismantle and
upterm prevailing power structures as defined from a purely communist perspective and so
psychoanalysis and psychological concepts and terms more broadly became co-opted by a
narrow and extreme political agenda.
The most influential among the critical theorists was Herbert Marcuse.
Building on Freud's emphasis on repression Marcuse proposed that a tolerant liberal society
should be fought as exhibiting a form of societal repression, a notion he termed repressive
tolerance.
A truly liberated and unrepressed society could only be realised through communism.
And to achieve this would require an intolerance and even violence towards anyone who opposed
communism.
Alongside this anxiety and alienation signalled being in contact with the reality of your own
oppression whereas happiness, belonging and positivity were a sign that you had developed
a false consciousness and internalised your own oppression.
And what was the cure for your false consciousness?
To awaken a critical consciousness, to become woke, to become just as resentful and cynical
as the critical theorists themselves.
So real tolerance is being intolerant, negative thinking is positive and happiness is oppression.
If this all sounds insane, it's because it is.
As we know, critical social justice has a genius for rhetorical strategies.
And a rhetorical strategy that was used in our field was the positioning of critical
social justice as an evolved form of previous social justice.
And anybody who wasn't on board with that was out of date, potentially reactionary.
So therapists and councillors generally were sold this and they bought it.
And something that myself and my colleagues have really struggled with is that none of
our, or hardly any of the leaders in our field stood up against this.
So there has been no public critique, I mean, for a radically different approach to counselling
and psychotherapy.
I'm just going to say it again, no public critique and I find that absolutely astonishing.
The critical theorists began to notice a problem preventing their communist utopia.
Living conditions had improved so dramatically for the working classes, they lacked a desire
for full-scale revolution.
In response to this, a shift began to happen.
Oppression in economic terms began to be replaced by oppression in relation to identity, namely
gender, sexuality and race.
In the 1950s, the French-Algerian psychiatrist and psychoanalyst, Franz Fanon, joined the
Algerian National Liberation Front.
In his writings, Fanon praised the Nazis for resolving Germany's border issues by force
and he urged a similar violent revolution in Algeria to achieve the same cultural purification.
During this time, Fanon was making his own contributions to critical theory, specifically
on the subject of race, paving the way for the decolonisation movement.
In keeping with the Marxist separation of people into either oppressors or oppressed,
Fanon saw people not as individuals, but as colonisers or colonised.
Fanon took the Nazi prejudices applied to Jews that they were all rich, all powerful
and to blame for all the evil in the world and he applied this to white Europeans.
A denial that it's a good thing to treat people as individuals and to take people as
we find them according to what they say and how they act.
And instead, we see people as ciphers or proxies of a collective identity based on race.
And that's really harmful, it's harmful because it's dehumanising and when you start dehumanising
groups of people, it then becomes very much easier to politically and in reality treat
people in ways that are unequal and cruel and can be very, very dangerous.
For Fanon, revolutionary murder is a necessity.
Political violence is presented as being therapeutic and the mass killing of Europeans
a kind of psychiatric treatment.
He describes how the native cures himself of colonial neurosis by thrusting the settler
out through force of arms.
And what exactly did so-called decolonisation look like for Fanon?
A complete destruction of political and economic systems brought about through violent genocide.
In Fanon's words, decolonisation is quite simply the replacing of a certain species
of men by another species of men.
With contemporary cause to decolonise school curriculums, museums and literature, psychotherapy
has not unsurprisingly escaped the decolonisation movement.
They're conflating the processes of knowledge accumulation with the processes of imperialism
and colonialism in the past.
Just like the British appropriated cotton from India and brought it back to Britain,
remade it and sold it again, etc., they've done that with knowledge and culture.
That's the really fatal flaw.
That's why if you accept that, then what you are accepting, that knowledge and ideas
and imagination have no reality of their own, which is why I would call it an anti-realist
position regarding knowledge and culture, because they're conflating it with political
and historical processes.
I think there is an analytical distinction to be made, and I think we need to observe
that distinction to allow us the freedom to engage in critique.
I also think they're wrong historically in their characterisation of knowledge, because
the idea that science or mathematics or philosophy, questions about existence, questions about
nationhood have all kind of been, since the Westphalian agreement in whatever century
that was, have all been entirely white Europeans, is patently untrue.
You only have to look at the readings of the nationalist leaders in Africa, the writings
of Tagore in India, people in Latin America to see that these ideas were contributed to
and engaged with by a wide variety of people across the world.
To say that they're white or Western is to me to give up far too much, far too easily,
to quite a kind of limited, quite racist argument really.
Yeah.
I mean, when I was at the Taverstock, I was told, one of the lecturers said that psychoanalytic
theories are white theories, and I asked how can a theory be white, while the person who
came up with the theory might be white, the theory in itself, if it's accepted and it
has a consensus around it, it becomes universal and it's for everyone.
And I was told that that was an attack and I'd harmed people for just questioning.
It's very concerning how race is being attached to ideas and knowledge, where it's almost
very, as you say, kind of possessive, that people need to, we can't share ideas, that
this is, a white person came up with this idea, so that means that only white people
can view it or listen to it or whatever.
It's a real stay in your lane message, isn't it?
And it actually flies in the face of reality today, because if you actually look at what
is happening, the kind of cultural hybridity that is around at the moment, the intellectual
excitement that is there to be had from exchanges across continents, across countries, is phenomenal.
The merger of Marxism and psychoanalysis marked a change of course with regards to the purpose
and use of psychotherapy. The original focus of examining the individuals in a life was
now making way for a psychology that was focused on telling people to change the world, rather
than change anything about themselves.
One of the things that will be automatically happening through this approach is like a weakening
of the individual who comes for treatment. So the client will not be encouraged to develop
any agency. Everything has been done to them. Thoughts and ideas of victimhood and resentment
will be encouraged, so they won't be interrogated in any way. And in fact anything that the
client presents is going to be supported or endorsed without question. So instead of
this very strong drive in traditional therapy, which is all about developing insight, insight
into the self, insight into others, what happens with a CSJ driven agenda is that the insight
is given to you.
Psychiatry largely determines diagnosis based on individuals' relationship with reality.
But how exactly is reality being defined? It seems there is an increasingly narrow concept
of reality, which is less about what is objectively true and is more concerned with diagnosing
those who have dissenting views. There is a historical precedent for this. In the Soviet
Union, those who disagreed with the regime were incarcerated in psychiatric facilities
and those protesting for reform were diagnosed as having delusions of reformism. And while
we are quite facing this level of corruption within the mental health profession, there
is a growing concern in the way psychology is being used to push a political agenda,
wield power and pathologize disagreement.
It's a very, very strange moment in time that we have now where the idea of that kind
of pursuit of truthful knowledge is seen as dangerous and dangerous in a particular way.
It has been seen as dangerous in the past politically because it can unsettle truths
that people in power have used and have needed to maintain their position. But today, as
you point out, it's seen as psychologically damaging, the very idea of questioning an
orthodox belief. It's seen as somehow equivalent to damaging the person, holding that belief.
So it's now understood that it is acceptable for therapists, therapists, psychiatrists,
to use manipulative tactics in order to bring the client around to their agenda. And when
I looked at the guidelines that were issued by the American Psychological Association
in 2017, and these are the guidelines for multicultural practices, they are completely
explicit that it's crucially important that the therapist helps their client start to
engage with identity talk. So no matter what the client is bringing, the therapist believes
it's important to get the client to examine the role that their identity plays in the
difficulties that they're bringing. And it suggests that you can use therapeutic skills
to overcome the client's resistance, to shifting the focus of the conversation away from their
own issues to issues of identity. I mean, this is a complete reversal of the ethics
of psychotherapy and counselling, where it's always a client's agenda that takes precedent.
In 2019, the American Psychological Association issued guidelines to supposedly improve men's
mental health by declaring traditional masculinity to be psychologically harmful. They specified
achievement, adventure, risk taking and anti femininity to be part of this harmful constellation.
Similarly, recently published APA guidelines to clinicians outlined that children should
lead the way in carving out their own self descriptions and assignments of gender. These
categorizations include gender fluid children, gender smoothies, gender by season children
and gender by location children. It may be worth noting at this point that there has been
a significant demographic shift amongst psychologists since the early days of Freud and Jung. Around
70 to 80 percent of psychologists and psychotherapists are now female.
Look, man, Freud was no dummy when he pointed to the fact that the devouring mother was
one of the major impediments to proper human development. He knew that, looking deep into
the darkest families and seeing this proclivity of the overprotective mother to destroy the
developing integrity of the child, to keep the child infantile, to cling to that relationship
instead of developing life for herself and letting the child go flourish. That's Hansel and Gretel.
I mean, I guess it's interesting, isn't it, to think from a psychological perspective as
to why so many people are drawn to woke ideology. I often see that a lot of these activists
seem to be very unhappy and in a lot of pain. And it seems as though woke ideology gives them
an outlet for their anger and their resentment. And I guess certainly at the Tavistog, as some
of the people that were bullying me, it seemed to me that they were very damaged. And of course,
if you have experienced some kind of trauma, you would feel anger and resentment. But I guess
what I notice is that woke ideology or critical social justice, it doesn't bring about healing.
It keeps you in that state of anger or upset. What are your thoughts on that?
Well, just to pick up on your last statement, it isn't a healing practice. It's a political practice.
And certainly from my perspective, it's actually a toxic practice. So it's the exact opposite,
anti-therapeutic.
And I had a client when I was still practicing who had seen other therapists before. And generally
the message he was being given, he said, was that he didn't really have much to complain about
because he was in the privileged position of being a straight white man. And actually he had
plenty to complain about. He had a lot of crap going on in his life that he needed to unpack.
But the message from society is he was privileged and he should step aside and actually let
someone speak who's got real problems. And I think that can only be encouraging like mental
turmoil in people.
The 1950s saw the discovery of antidepressant and antipsychotic medications. Alongside this,
diagnosis became more specific and formalized. The American Psychiatric Association published
the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders. And to this day, it remains the
leading authority for psychiatric diagnosis. The original DSM contained 106 distinct psychiatric
diagnosis. Five editions later, this has since increased to 298.
In 1980, gender identity disorder was introduced as a diagnosis. And the Tavistock's Gender
Identity Service, GIDS, was set up 10 years later. In 2013, gender identity disorder was
replaced with the term gender dysphoria. This change occurred in response to political
pressures claiming that the term disorder was stigmatizing. From as early as 2005, staff
at the Tavistock GIDS Clinic were expressing concerns about the use of experimental medical
treatments being used on children experiencing dissatisfaction with their biological sex.
Internal reports outlining the lack of research around prescription of puberty blockers and
cross-sex hormones were ignored. Safeguarding whistleblowers were bullied and put through
disciplinary procedures. Similarly, those in the public eye who were the first to speak out were
turned on by the media and ostracized by their peers.
But I just kind of thought, well, once people find out that children are being told that
they will become, you know, boys are being told they will become girls if they cut off
their penises and girls are being told they will become real boys if they cut off their
breasts, once they find out that the medical complications that come with taking cross-sex
hormones like testosterone for girls, you know, the side effects include osteoporosis,
early menopause, everyone who's on testosterone, all these women who are on testosterone will
go into early menopause, 30 years too early in some cases. Multiple sclerosis is associated
with men taking cross-sex hormones. So I thought, well, all you have to do is tell people about
all this and it will, you know, it will gather momentum and people will try and stop it.
But that was six years ago, nearly, and no one did. No one seems to care.
Proper scrutiny of the tabistock only came when a former patient, Kira Bell, brought a legal
case against the clinic. Kira was prescribed puberty blockers when she was 16 and went on
to have her breasts surgically removed. She later regretted going through these irreversible
procedures. Like many, she came to understand her mental distress as being the result of
a range of issues rather than being born in the wrong body.
Kira Bell's judicial review led to the 2020 High Court ruling that under 16s were unlikely
to be able to consent to puberty blockers. Subsequently, the UK government instructed
esteemed pediatrician, Dr. Hillary Cass, to take an objective look at the tabistock's
gender services. The findings of the Cass review aligned with many of the concerns raised
by whistleblowers. Then evidence based from an affirmation only model was severely lacking
and that the use of puberty blockers came with many risks. Following this outcome, the tabistock
GIDS clinic was closed, leaving many wondering why it took the government so long to act.
But on the tabistock, they then think it's an NHS clinic full of experts. You trust them.
You would think, wouldn't you? And they are told by whistleblowers as a problem, but it's
an area that they feel difficulty in intervening in. Now, if that's what the Conservatives feel
like, then the Labour Party, who are much more prone to embrace a lot of the diversity
orthodoxies with even less thought, I hardly need to mention the Lib Dems and the Greens.
And that's kind of your political class, right? And, you know, I don't really count. I'm just
like a non-affiliated, relatively new peer in the House of Lords that, let's be honest,
a bit of a maverick. So there aren't enough mavericks in a way and also political parties
in general have become stuffed with technocrats, careerists, all sorts of, you know, there's
a real collapse of a political class of people with great integrity, open-minded, independent
thinkers that used to exist within parties and now that doesn't really feature. And so consequently
you do get people just nodding along to things. But I think it's been a great, again, a great
indictment of the political parties and the political leadership of this country that allowed
the Tuberstock issue to continue. Just one quick final point is, I think when they started
to hear about it, they then thought, oh my God, now we're going to get blamed. You know,
can you imagine a situation where it's your worst nightmare, right? Your worst nightmare.
You think you're doing the good thing and everyone will love you for it. And then some people
start to imply that you have set up a medical facility that is actually institutionally offering
abusive, medically abhorrent practices on children that will cause enormous psychological
if indeed not physical damage. You don't want to accept responsibility. So you think that
can't be true. It can't be true. But because you have trusted the medics, because I think
that you would, you just want to look the other way. And I think that they just look the other
way until they were absolutely forced to stare it in the eyes and stare it in the face.
The CAS review interim report found that to date there's a profound lack of evidence
on the best approach to treat gender dysphoria in children. Does my right hon. Friend share
my concern that in spite of this, the NHS insists on making a child's expressed gender identity
the start point for treatment? And also my surprise that the NHS has chosen so far not
to track patient outcomes, particularly for under 18s.
I do share my hon. Friend's concerns and that is why the NHS commissioned this review
for one of our top pediatricians. It is already clear to me from her interim findings and
for the other evidence that I've seen that the NHS services in this area are too narrow,
they are overly affirmative and in fact they're boring on ideological.
That was the big gender surgery performing institute in the UK.
How was that closed down? What happened?
Government closed it down. Because they knew that they figured out in the UK that the rates
of transgender transformation requests were skyrocketing and even the people at the clinic
knew that they were Russian people along the transformation pipeline way faster than they
should have without proper clinical evaluation. There's a thousand lawsuits out against the
Taffas talk in the UK now. A thousand.
But like if you tell a child that it's even possible they were born in the wrong body,
that is grooming. Because it's not true and you're planting a dangerous idea in a child's head.
So I think grooming has always been the perfect word for what's going on.
We're all being groomed into accepting things that we shouldn't be accepting.
Another example is children's books written by so-called queer creators.
They keep slipping in drawings of young people with double mastectomies.
Just the little stitches on the chest and this is portrayed as the most wonderful inclusion.
And what it's actually doing is normalizing the idea that you can find your true self
through mutilation.
One of the most shocking details of the Tava stock goods service was that around 80% of the
children placed on a medicalised pathway were gay.
Reportedly there was a dark joke at the Tava stock that soon there will be no gay people left.
And yet such regressive and harmful ideas were being pushed by people claiming to want to
promote inclusivity, care and compassion.
The staff at the Tava stock seemed to be unable to question and sterned up to ideologically
driven external organisations such as transgender charity Mermaids.
Reportedly due to the fear of being labelled as bigoted.
I met a young lady called Kirabelle. She was a lesbian who told me the horrific experience
that she had in the Tava stock clinic.
It was an eye-opening experience.
I know that the member for Kokodi and Cowdenbeath talked about transing away the gay in his speech
in Westminster Hall debate.
We are seeing, I would say, almost an epidemic of young gay children, young gay children
being told that they are trans and being put on a medical pathway for irreversible decisions
and they are regretting it.
That's what I'm doing for young LGBT children.
I am making sure that young people do not find themselves sterilised because they are being
exploited by people who do not understand what these issues are.
It seems to me as though organisations like the Race Equalities Charter and Stonewall,
they're almost acting like a sort of protection racket in that institutions don't want damage
to their reputation.
They pay money for these organisations to come in so that they can say that they're progressive
and they're anti-racist.
Then these organisations essentially set about bullying staff and students into confessing
their white fragility and all sorts.
I guess I'm curious as to how a movement which seems to be about money-making but also
oppressing workers and students and infringing their rights when they don't have the power
to fight back, how that can consider itself to be progressive or left-wing?
It seems to be the opposite.
It does seem the opposite and I'm from a left-wing background.
I think probably the word progressive, I think I probably would have always considered myself
to be progressive but now it's such a tainted term.
The term left-wing is tainted as well.
Increasingly, people across the political spectrum are realising the tyrannical nature of critical
social justice.
It is not only preventing good psychological treatments but it is often contributing to
a worsening of mental health.
It is unclear at this point whether the profession can survive and return to sanity.
Often held up as a genius of the 20th century, Sigmund Freud's statue sits here outside the
Tavistock.
One can only imagine what he would make of all the harm, malpractice and lawsuits going
on behind him that have left his practice of psychoanalysis hanging in the balance.
In terms of the fight, I think in the UK we've kind of won already.
We've kind of, we've reversed, you know, the fact that mermaids are under statutory investigation
is fantastic.
The fact that Tavistock closing is fantastic.
There's more, there's more scrutiny on how we get got here and so as a result the kind
of completely incoherent set of beliefs that these people have is being exposed.
There's something that remains constant for me and the constant thing is that the drive
for healing is a universal drive and it seems to operate across all societies and as far
as we know, you know, all historical periods and there's a vocation to offer, suckers,
psychological help to people who are suffering.
So, no matter what happens to our professions, that drive to heal will still exist, it will
take new forms.
Thank you.
