All right, I think we're rolling then.
Well, hey, well, thank you so much for this invitation.
It's really nice to be here, sort of.
But let me go ahead and share my screen.
And we'll go ahead and start the process here.
So what I'll be sharing with you today
is my vision for combined integrated unified
toward a more coherent clinical psychology
in the 21st century.
I'm honored to be part of this conference.
I've enjoyed my conversations with Mark over many years
and Sue and Caroline.
I'm really glad that we got a chance to chat.
So I love the idea of the conference
in terms of buying, join, and be united as one.
I think that's beautiful.
And it certainly speaks to my heart
and it speaks to my passions over the course of my career
and its exploration.
I'm looking out over at least a picture of Christchurch.
I will say at least the commute hasn't been bad.
So that's a positive.
And I appreciate that you guys are having a conference there.
That's what it's like to look like a lot of people in one room.
I haven't seen that in a while.
But I am happy to be at a beautiful place myself.
This is James Madison University at Dusk.
And so many of us are very fortunate to be in the places
that we are.
So thank you so much.
It's very, very enjoyable to have this opportunity
to share with you some of my thoughts.
So I'd like to just start by getting clear about why
I titled my talk, What I Did, Combined, Integrated, Unified.
And we'll start with combined.
What does that mean?
Combined in our language means combined
across the practice areas of psychology.
And the practice areas of psychology in the United States
are a clinical counseling and school.
And so when I say toward a coherent clinical psychology
in the 21st century, I actually should be clear.
I mean that with a little C, not a capital C.
Because actually what we're exploring
in James Madison University's combined integrated doctoral
program is a combined integrated approach.
And that trains at the heart of the practice areas
and what we really are affording is a coherent integrated
identity of a psychological doctor.
And while there may absolutely be specialty differences,
for example, between somebody who's a child, family,
school individual, or somebody who works with adults,
and then many specializations may break off after there,
we believe there's a coherent practice identity
of a health service psychologist that
carries the identity of a psychological doctor.
And that's what combined means for us.
There's also integrated, and I should say integrated
and pluralistic, across both the paradigms
and systematic levels of analysis.
So all of us are, if we're clinical psychologists,
we know that it's sort of a jungle of different approaches
out there.
There's cognitive and psychodynamic and humanistic
and emotion-focused and behavioral and family systems,
not to mention a whole host of other possible perspectives.
Our view is that each of these have value.
And at the same time, their organization
is, well, a bit chaotic, shall we say.
So one of our concerns are ways in which we might bring
some order and integration across levels of analysis
and the paradigms.
One example of that is what I call character adaptation
systems theory.
Character adaptation systems theory
is a way to think about the individual through the lenses
of three different contexts.
The context of one's biophysiological genetic
development, that's the lower left arrow,
the psychological learning and developmental,
and the sociocultural ecological frame
that somebody might be involved in.
Now, this is something that's very common
across a wide variety of different trainings.
We see, of course, the biopsychosocial model,
and at least the United States, is a required aspect.
But what we also see in this diagram
is a way to organize the modes of character adaptation,
the systems of adaptation, the systems by which individuals
adjust.
And my theoretical lens allows me
to see the human mind in terms of different systems
of adaptation, such as a habit and procedural system,
a felt experiential system, a relationship system,
a defensive system, and a justification system.
And what you can note in relationship
to this particular diagram is that actually each
of these systems of adaptation correspond
to some of the key emphases and insights associated
with the major paradigms, most notably the habit
and the behavioral system, the humanistic experiential system
with the emotion experiential system,
psychodynamic focus on our core relational attachments
and our defenses, and cognitive and perhaps narrative
therapies focused more on the system of justification.
So this is just an example about the ways in which
our program and our shared sense of understanding
appreciates the various viewpoints,
recognizes the need for pluralism,
and at the same time is looking for ways
to integrate across paradigms, across systems,
and various levels of analysis.
And finally, in relationship to unified,
unified is in particular at James Madison
in terms of because it's heavily influenced by my work,
I was program director for there for 12 years.
And for us, unified is a focus on how to define the science
and practice of psychology at what is known as
the metaphysical and meta-theoretical levels of analysis.
These are the very big broad views that we can take.
Here is a depiction of what I call
the metaphysical empirical continuum.
And I've come to see science as absolutely needing attention
to all aspects of this particular continuum.
You see the right hand side, you see empirical,
which is data gathered by research methods.
And those are nested in normal science paradigms,
nested in hypothesis and descriptive data techniques.
And then there's theory and that's grounded
in a particular paradigm.
And that's mostly where our systems operate.
The meta-theoretical lens focuses on the relationship
between the paradigms and how they might be related.
And then finally, the metaphysical lens
really emphasizes our concepts and categories.
Like what are the fundamental concepts that we use
and how do they interrelate to one another
to create what's called a descriptive metaphysical system?
That's basically your worldview,
your sense of what's real and how you know about it.
Now, in my work, I developed a unified theory,
what I call the unified theory of psychology,
I published this in 2011,
and this really was a meta-theoretical analysis
in the sense that what it looked at is
it examined the various paradigms
and then introduced some key ideas
that I argued that if we were to begin,
enter the field through these ideas,
we could then take the key insights
of the major paradigms and coherently arrange them.
I'm currently in the process of developing a book
which will hopefully be done by the summer
called The Problem of Psychology and its solution.
And that's a metaphysical analysis of the field
that gets at the fundamental roots
of what our subject matter is concerned with,
what is a proper ontology for psychology?
So to summarize, we have the combined
across the practice areas that give us an identity
of psychological doctors,
an attitude of integrated pluralism
that cuts across the various paradigms
in relationship to the theories and levels of analysis
and how to coherently arrange them in a particular way
that affords us as practitioners
and then fundamentally an attention to the field
and relationship to its core concepts
and the ways in which the theoretical paradigms
relate to each other
and the seeking of a coherence amongst those ideas.
So what I'd like to share with you
in the next 40 minutes or so
is some of the narrative associated with this.
I'll allude to some of my training
and my training in American clinical psychology.
I wanna emphasize American clinical here
because our concepts and categories,
one of the things that I tend a lot to
is how they exist in systems of justification.
They get their meaning in this context
and it's very important for us.
And I hope our global consciousness is very much aware
of how problematic it can be to transpose a set of concepts
that exist in one system of understanding onto another.
And I'm very sensitive to that in relationship
to what we mean by psychology.
What do we mean by the science of psychology?
How does that interact with say indigenous perspectives?
How does it interact with psychological perspectives
from other cultures?
It is crucial to contextualize the meaning of our terms
and I'll be sharing with you an articulation of my experience
in the context of American clinical psychology.
And I think it's crucial
because actually in terms of influence,
American psychology is some of the most sort of influential
and it's spreading out into the world.
And I feel both good and anxious about that, quite frankly.
And I think we need to be both aware of what it is
and what its potentials are
and also what of its possible problems.
And one of the problems that I encountered in my training,
which I'm sure all of you encountered in some ways
that I'll speak to as the problem of psychotherapy
and how that turned into the problem of psychology.
And one of my goals of this talk is to really solidify for you
what the problem of psychology is.
And then I'll offer one aspect of my work
in relationship to the problem of psychology
and a framework called the Tree of Knowledge System
that I developed now over 20 years ago.
And how does it set the stage for a new way
for us to think about our discipline subject matter
and to situate it in a more coherent naturalistic view
of the world that does justice to our souls and spirits
in a much more effective way than traditional,
at least in my opinion,
traditional empirical psychology does.
Part of that sets the stage for getting
at a core understanding of what our core concepts of
in American psychology,
psychology is defined as the science of behavior
and mental process.
I wanna help you at least get a glimpse
of some of my work in relationship
to understanding these very, very complicated
and ill-defined constructs
and how the Tree of Knowledge sets the stage for us
to approach these concepts in a new
and I believe more effective way.
I'll then offer some thoughts, shift gears
into this sort of abstract theoretical,
metaphysical stuff and talk about the training
that I engage in.
So I want everybody to know,
although some of my ideas and work does get
into pretty high abstract.
I'm definitely a theoretical psychologist at heart.
I'm also a clinician at heart.
My journey started in the clinic room.
I'm deeply concerned with human suffering.
My work is in training individuals
to become effective, reflective psychological doctors
who go into the world with appropriate levels
of self-reflection and social responsibility in relation.
And I'll talk briefly then ultimately
about a unified approach to psychotherapy,
how this sets the stage for a particular identity
and the identity of a unified health service psychologist.
So now some people will see the word unified
and be like, oh, there's one way of doing it.
And the answer is no, not at all.
In the sense that unified simply means to pay attention
to some of the core confusions in the field
and there are ways to resolve those confusions
and afford a lot more coherence
in our understanding than is present.
Once we have coherence, the diversity
and integrated pluralism that is fundamentally
the attitude that we're cultivating,
because of course, diversity and richness of ideas
is actually present in virtually every science.
I certainly would want it present
in both the science of psychology and its practice.
And I would embrace it as a fundamental principle
of human existence in relationship
to our reaching, our potential is found
in both the dialectic of unity and diversity.
So in terms of my own life,
I start with an approach that embraces
empirical mainstream psychology.
I am impressed by people like Albert Bandura.
I'm a social and cognitive psychologist.
I say, oh, you know, cognitive behavior therapy.
Oh, that's empirically supported.
I'm really a big fan of that.
I also am actually impacted quite a bit
by sociology and feminism.
I become woke and I don't know what it means these days,
but back in 1989, I know what it meant
in relationship to the frame of reference
about issues of justice and concern
about some historical issues.
I was really fortunate to be educated
by Rich Tedeschi and Lawrence Calhoun
at the University of North Carolina
in community and clinical psychology.
I mentioned these folks because they are pioneers
in post-traumatic growth research.
Over the last 10 years,
this actually caught some fire.
You may have heard of post-traumatic growth.
I heard that there may be some interest
in the power threat meaning framework
that the Brits are exploring in relation.
Actually, some of the post-traumatic growth stuff
really offers a very interesting angle on psychopathology.
It offers a different angle about what is trauma
and how do we think about both suffering
and the deepening of human experience.
And so I feel very fortunate
that I got exposed to that kind of thinking
early in my master's degree.
Rich Tedeschi was my professor
for my integrative psychotherapy class,
and this is what sparked in me an awareness
of what I would call the problem of psychotherapy.
So I'm thinking about science.
I want to do sort of the best analytic work.
And then of course, what happens to all of us
is you actually get in the clinic room
and there's a person in front of you
and they're suffering.
And you're wondering,
what the heck am I doing in relationship to this?
And how do I intersect my frame of reference
for who they are and who I am
in this real unique relationship relative to theories?
So I'm in the process then of doing psychotherapy.
And I realized basically what I realized is,
you know, it is my theoretical understanding
that I was actually gonna make a bridge
to whatever empirical research people are doing
to my actual work in the therapy room.
And I see what happens in the therapy room really is
there are all sorts of different interesting perspectives.
I think they all have some value.
And what I also noticed,
really the best of the best seem to do the best work.
That's not surprising.
But what it noted to me is,
no, it's not just like CBT is some big winner here.
And that's my strong opinion.
It's really sort of the best of the best
is what the winner is in relationship
to what we should be cultivating.
And so I went to the University of Vermont
for getting my doctorate in clinical psychology.
And it's in 1996 that I sort of have
what I think turns out to be a very interesting,
somewhat common sense idea.
And that is as I went,
as I saw the work of the different paradigms
in the psychotherapy room,
I returned to psychology.
And I had this idea that actually,
why don't we organize the psychotherapy paradigms
based on the science of human psychology?
Just like if we look at Western medicine,
generally Western medicine is organized
on the science of human biology.
And although there's all these different specialties,
of course there's a lot of opinion
and a diverse practice in medicine,
but there's also organized
around the science of human biology.
So should we then be organizing our psychotherapies
in relationship to the human psychology?
And then when I returned to human psychology
through this particular lens,
then I realized just how problematic
the structure of empirical psychology is
and what I became the problem of psychology.
So what I'm trying to do here
is I'm trying to say, hey,
actually it's our knowledge as psychologists,
which actually will become sexual and explanatory
that will then cause us to draw from empirical research
and then put it into the therapy room.
However, to the extent that all of the paradigms
are disorganized and different people
use different frames of reference,
the bridge between research and practice
is unbelievably chaotic
and it threatens the entire coherence of the system.
So fundamentally what we're talking about then
is what is psychology?
And ultimately what you get is psychology
as anyone in the field knows
it's a multiplicity of different meanings.
It overlaps some with philosophy and folk experience.
In terms of my terminology,
I'm referring to modern psychology
as a particular enterprise
that falls under the scientific
sort of language and epistemological system
that emerges in from Galileo to Newton
and then becomes part of what psychological science
emerges as in the 19th century.
Now, if you know the history of the science of psychology,
it starts off as psychophysics.
That is, you change a stimulus out here
and somebody reports notes a just noticeable difference
or has an experience on the inside.
Wilhelm Von, the great German psychologist,
finds psychology really studying inner experience
based on people's report.
William James says, no, that's not what psychology is.
Actually it's the functional relationships of mental life,
both on the inside and in relationship
to how both animals and humans adapt and adjust.
It then bleeds over into philosophical considerations
and this becomes the father of American psychology.
Then we get a strong empirical assertion
and John Watson asserting basically
we need to follow the experimental natural sciences
and he adopts an epistemology and an ontology
of the physical sciences that says,
no, we need to look at behavior.
Then of course we get Mr. Sigmund Freud
coming along and basically giving us a whole nother view,
also a deterministic view,
but nonetheless one that focuses
on a very different ontology about both the mind
and of course the primary focus on the sub
or unconscious mind in relationship
to the self-conscious mind
and its implications for suffering.
So what you see here is a wide variety of different phenomena.
I could also add a number of perspectives
anywhere for Herbie Neving-Hoss
and experimental cognitive
to the Gestalt psychology perspective.
What actually happens is that even by 1927,
Lev Gaikatsky, one of the most brilliant psychologists
in the field identifies this as a crisis.
There is no coherent ontology.
There is no coherent description
of what our subject matter is.
And fundamentally, this is the problem of psychology.
Now, what did modern empirical,
mostly American psychology do?
Well, basically it said, don't worry about it.
It's like, we're gonna be a science, okay?
And as long as we're a science,
we will add to our knowledge
through the empirical enterprise.
And yes, there will be a pluralistic of investigation.
Now, a thoughtful student will come on and say,
hey, how can it be a science
if it can't define its terms?
And basically what modern science said, well, it's okay.
And this is what I'm gonna critique about the field.
It's not okay.
And I'm gonna argue that essentially what is happening
is what I call the sandcastle problem.
The sandcastle problem is I believe
that there are a multitude of different research programs.
And I think they're brilliant and they're beautiful,
but at the same time,
they're defined in a particular operationalized way.
And while you can build sandcastles,
what will happen is the tide of the next researchers
will come in and that will wash those sandcastles out
and then a new group will grow, but what will not happen.
And Paul Mill noted this,
what will not happen is a cumulative knowledge structure.
And so what I believe is a foundation
it can be seen in terms of our problems
is to start with our basic definitions
and take a look at those.
So let's see how the field is defined.
So some individuals five to 10% in American psychology,
at least say that psychology is the science of behavior.
There's still a very respectable textbooks
that make this claim.
And the reason that psychology is the science of behavior
is because that behavior is what's studied by science.
And therefore that's what psychological scientist
should be interested in.
And then we get other people that say,
no, psychology is not about the science of behavior.
It's about the science of mind, okay?
So notice right off the bat,
we have a fundamentally different ontological
or descriptive claim
about what our subject matter is to this day.
Of course, it's worth noting that you also have now
the emergence of cognitive science.
What is the relationship between cognitive science
and psychology?
That's an interesting question.
But if we're gonna be a scientist,
we still have the problem of why the behaviorists
made the claim they do.
And many cognitive psychologists will say, well, yes,
I am interested in the mind,
but I study the mind via the behavior.
In fact, every psychological scientist,
this is a quote from George Mandler
that basically says, well, we're all behaviors
in the sense that we study behavior,
but with this, we interpret it as a mind
unlike the behaviorists.
So what do we do?
Most of the field basically then decides to,
well, we'll go with mind and behavior.
That sounds reasonable.
And so the many, in fact, about 80%
of the dominant textbooks define psychology
as the science of both mind and behavior.
David Myers has a common textbooks
with behavior and mental process.
That's actually probably the most common definition.
And I thought I'd share a definition by Rosie Spellman
in a psychological book.
Word psychology is coined at a time when concepts
like soul and mind were not clearly distinguished.
Okay, well, that's a whole nother problem, right?
We got soul, and that's ultimately the root of psyche.
But then we're really interested in mind,
but here's the key element.
Since science studies only observable phenomena
and the mind is not directly observable,
we expand this definition to the scientific study
of mind and behavior.
And this actually, she actually nails
what modern empirical psychology does,
but it really highlights, I believe for us,
what we have done then just for clarity
is we've used the epistemology of science,
meaning the way in which science knows
to dictate how we define our subject matter.
And so psychologists split behavior
and mental processes off from each other
where behavior gets defined by what we can assess
directly in science.
And then mental processes are what we can infer
as a function of the epistemological constrictions
that science places on us.
Now, this actually is a very, very problematic approach
to defining one subject matter to go ahead
and define it by the method, okay?
So I wanna say that we've been grappling
with this issue for almost 100 years, if not more, really.
And we have to ask, why is this so hard?
Why is this such a complicated thing?
And actually, as I got more and more interested
in theory and then philosophy,
I think I found basically,
we can actually look outside and understand modernity
and understand the way modernity makes sense out of it
and see why this is so hard.
And this is, I generated the term called the enlightenment gap
to explain why actually it makes perfect sense
that psychology would have such difficulty
in defining what its terms is.
What is the enlightenment gap?
Well, the enlightenment gap refers
to two fundamental philosophical problems.
In other words, two problems
that we really don't know how to address.
One of the problems is understanding,
having a basic ontological or explanatory frame
for what is mind relative to matter.
We don't have a good framework for that.
And secondarily, we don't have a good framework
really for understanding what social knowledge is
and how is it relative,
but also different from scientific knowledge
or the reverse, what is scientific knowledge?
How did it emerge out of
and how is it different than social knowledge?
How do we know that these are problems?
Actually, you can just look out at the landscape.
For example, what we see is the mind-body problem.
It's everywhere in philosophy.
We can, in the West, we can trace it to Renee Descartes
who gives us a mind-body dualism.
Virtually every philosopher agrees
that mind-body dualism is really problematic.
Yet we still don't have a good language or grammar
to put mind-body together.
So one obvious factor is we don't have the right field
of understanding to define our terms.
So that's, and that's the mind-matter problem.
What about the science and social knowledge?
Well, those of you that have any conversations
about modernism versus postmodernism will know.
Here's a Michael Foucault, Michelle Foucault notion.
Power is everywhere.
It's diffused and embodied in discourse.
And this gets to the authority of knowledge,
the nature of truth claims that's embedded
in imminent context or is transcendent
and speaks to reality in a particular way.
So here's an idea.
If we can't define what scientific knowledge is
relative to social knowledge,
and we can't define what mind is relative to matter,
no doubt that we're gonna have serious problems
in relationship to defining our field.
And so what I would then posit is if we take a step back,
why is the problem of psychology so difficult?
Well, actually, it's even a part of a larger problem
where the problem of psychology is actually
in the shadow of the enlightenment gap.
And so it's fundamental to our basic sense-making structures.
And so that's one of the points
that I would then really like say is that modernity
never really figured out a way to talk about matter in mind
and to understand what scientific knowledge is
in relationship to social knowledge.
And if that's the case,
how could we possibly have a science of mind and behavior?
Because both of those things will conflate
and bounce up against one another
and different people are then going to have
different frames of reference.
So we have a core fundamental metaphysical
or epistemological ontological problems.
What is it?
I'll be clear about these terms.
So the epistemology refers to how do we know?
And psychology is trying to get an understanding
of the psyche, which could be whatever that might mean,
but one thing it certainly probably means us
to do with consciousness.
However, consciousness is not available
through an exterior epistemology, but behavior is,
consciousness is available from the inside.
So this creates an epistemological problem.
So whereby the inside is dependent upon,
the inner consciousness is dependent upon
an interior epistemological view,
but science is dependent upon an exterior view.
There also is an ontological problem.
What is the ontological problem?
Well, there are two aspects of the ontological problem.
One is called the hard problem.
Philosophers discuss this a lot.
You may have heard, what's the hard problem
of consciousness?
Well, that's the difficulty in explaining
subjective conscious experience
based in mathematical terms.
I'm not gonna talk about that,
but one thing that they don't talk about
in relationship to the problem of psychology
is the ontological problem is that we psychologists
have then gone ahead and developed many different paradigms
to define mental and behavioral processes
in many different ways.
I've already reviewed some of these.
So we have mind as behavior,
because that's what's available through science,
then we can build models of behavior.
Mind as information processing,
there's a whole really neurocognitive functionalism
is arguably the most basic understanding of psychology.
There's mind as your conscious experience of being.
There's mind as self-conscious reflection,
and there's some people that argue
that mind should only be
for human self-conscious reflection.
That would go back to Renee Descartes' conception of mind.
And we also have serious questions
about whether or not we're talking
at the level of the animal or at the level of the human.
And what does this mean?
Basically, what we're talking about here
is these are very different reference points in reality.
So to this day, we do not have a zoomed out view
that allows us to correspond
these very different reference points.
And if we have radically different ontological reference points
for what we're talking about,
we will ultimately kind of create mush in our understanding.
Or at least there's a tremendous vulnerability
to what my friend John Verbeke calls equivocation
across explanatory frames.
And this is one of the things that has driven my own passion
is this notion that there's no agreement.
I wish that the problem of psychology
was widely known and discussed.
There's a problem of quantum gravity in physics.
Everyone knows about it.
But I'm trying to get people to raise their awareness
that there is a foundational problem here.
And we should wonder about what it actually means
and if there are viable solutions.
And this takes me back then to my own timeline.
And in my doctoral training,
I sort of had a transition into viewing the world
that then ultimately set the stage
so that I built what I argued to then be
a naturalist scientific ontology
that's actually up to the task
of defining behavior and mental process.
One key idea was the justification system idea.
I actually started that in 1996.
What that does, and I'm not gonna get into any details there,
is it really separates out our culture person part
of our mind from our primate part of our mind.
And those are very, very different.
And one of the argument that I will make
is that there's a primate part meaning of our mind
and a person part of our mind.
And it's crucial to understand why
and what is the relationship between those two domains.
And that relates then to what would ultimately
become the overall map,
what I call the Tree of Knowledge System.
That occurred in a flash of insight back in 1997.
It was really interesting to me a year later,
Edward Wilson's Consilience came out
and really my basic frame of reference
is that the Tree of Knowledge affords us a path
into Consilience.
Indeed, I characterized my overarching system
as a unified theory of knowledge
in relationship that would be very much akin
to Wilson's hypothesis about Consilience.
I argue Wilson fails at Consilience
because he doesn't even address the problem of psychology
and there would be no way to achieve Consilience.
If you don't understand and deconstruct
and resolve the problem of psychology.
So in 2003, I did publish the Tree of Knowledge System
in the Theoretical Unification of Psychology.
It's also important or worth noting that my day job
during this time is at the University of Pennsylvania
and I worked with Dr. Aaron Beck
and we were running a randomized control clinical trial.
And this also had a tremendous impact on me
and how I understood how the paradigms would frame
what the experience was on the ground.
And while we certainly did some really interesting work,
it's also the case, I'll tell you Franann
as the project director,
that the complexity of the cases
and the ways in which we worked
from far exceeded cognitive therapies capacity
really to frame it, yet because that was the paradigm
that we were operating under,
then virtually all the results were then framed
and interpreted even in the Journal
of American Medical Association,
the high level scientific journal.
In fact, I would argue that it was not the full picture
to say the absolute, to say the least in relationship.
So this was one of my concerns in relationship
to how do we actually do research
and have conceptual categories that are up to the task.
So what is this Tree of Knowledge System?
Like I said, it's a naturalistic scientific ontology
that I believe can define behavior and mental processes.
This is a part of the work
that I'm currently doing in my book.
If you're familiar at all with the system,
if you know big history at all, which if you don't,
I really encourage big history is the idea
that we can really pull together
a big naturalistic view of the world.
If we go back on the scale of time
and down on the scale of complexity
and then we can then come back
and that means we start our universe origin story
at the Big Bang as a state of energy information.
And then out of that emerges the dimension,
the material dimension of complexity,
the base of that material dimension
is the quantum mechanical base and then across scale
and to explain the sort of shape of the universe
and its relationship, the space-time relationship
to gravity and mass is afforded by general relativity.
And then we can go up scales of complexification
from particles into atoms into complex chemical molecules
and then across scale like up into planets
and asteroids and stars and ultimately galaxies
along those lines.
So that's the first dimension or plane of existence.
The Tree of Knowledge then says there's a second plane
of existence that emerges about 3.8 billion years ago,
at least that we're aware of on planet Earth.
And then over the course of a 3 billion year period
we see the emergence of the Tree of Life.
This happens as a function of natural selection
operating on genetic combinations
that give rise to cells and cells then evolve,
connect with each other, create multicellular creatures
and we see the emergence of the Tree of Life.
And then the Tree of Knowledge makes an interesting claim
that says we see another dimension of complexity
emerging around what's called the Cambrian explosion.
This is when we get complex active animals,
a complex active animal's got a complex body with segments,
it has a brain and something like an insect
would be a complex active body.
And then we see the evolution,
about 550 million years from the Cambrian explosion
up then into invertebrates like insects and crabs
and then up into vertebrates like fish and then birds
and then ultimately primates.
And this we can also model through an emergent variation
selection and retention model
and neuro information processing
that vary akin to genetics.
Now, importantly, I'm introducing a word
to our vocabulary here called Mind with a capital M.
It's now akin to life and it refers to the dimension
of animal mental behavior.
This is one of the, it's not a neologism
in the sense that I'm not completely making up a word,
I can show references that people use
but it is a particular meaning of mind
that then when you actually capture it,
it then affords us a new way to think about
the relationship between inside, outside activity
and the nervous system as a whole
that's gonna get us out of defining things
based in terms of scientific methodology.
But it's important to note
that the first dimension that we're talking about in mind
is the animal mental dimension.
And then the Tree of Knowledge says
there's a fourth dimension that emerges
between 200,000 and 50,000 years ago.
What happens is our symbolic language systems really take off
and we start talking in propositional language.
Propositional language changes the game
and it changes the game
because it creates the problem of justification.
What is legitimately is and ought to be the case
both in an analytic sense and a social and personal sense.
And then all of a sudden we get into dialogue,
question and answer dialogue
and then we build systems of justification.
And we see the evolution both of our knowledge systems
and then especially in the last 10,000 years
are technological systems
as we gain greater and greater control.
This is another emergent evolutionary process
with the fundamental unit being then symbols
that are then organized into propositional statements
that give rise to these networks of justification.
It's also important to note here
that it's culture with a capital C.
I very much believe other animals have little C culture
but capital C culture refers to culture
where people are coordinated,
self-conscious people coordinated by systems of justification.
And although other animals are very advanced
they do not have this very unique capacity
which makes us a very different kind of primate.
So we get the Tree of Knowledge system
and it affords us a new and I think better map of big history.
It defines the natural universe,
the ontic natural universe
through matter, life, mind and culture.
And then it starts the process of potentially organizing
our scientific knowledge and corresponding to that.
One of the things about it
is that it then has these joint points.
Unfortunately, time limitations means
that I won't be able to tell you exactly
about the meta theoretical structures.
I've written a lot about them
but they do afford then a way to then pull paradigms,
models of understanding these domains together
to create a big picture of coherence.
So fundamentally, so how does the system work?
I'm gonna share then the basic vision logic of the system
is that you have physics mapping the matter dimension,
you have biology mapping the life dimension.
Then the current knowledge system is basically chaotic.
As you get more and more higher
on the scales of complexification
that's somewhere in there psychology is about,
in American psychology can really see the most influential
but also basically polar opposite figures
in radical behaviorism and via Skinner
and Sigmund Freud's psychoanalysis.
I chose those figures early on
to show that I can assimilate and integrate them
with each other and mainstream psychology.
And then we can move from this confused set of ideas
to a system that has a lot more coherence in relation.
Ultimately arguing that through behavioral investment theory
I can bring Skinner in accordance
with emergent evolutionary theory
and then I can connect Freud to the shift
from primate to persons and then create a physical,
biological, psychological, social picture of the whole.
This is crucial.
One of the things that it speaks to
in relationship to what is psychology
is that when we talk about mental processes and behavior
that a logic and architecture of the Tree of Knowledge
says we should define the science of psychology
in very different ways
whether we're talking about basic psychology.
Basic psychology is brain, mind, animal behavior studies.
And then there's human psychology
which would be a totally different sub-discipline
precisely because humans are both primates
and they're persons that are socialized in particular ways
that fundamentally change the behavior
and mental processes, which is why,
humans have conferences and other animals do not seem to.
So that is sort of a taste to suggest
that we could be in a position to use the Tree of Knowledge
to define our terms.
And that's what I would like to argue for
in the next brief period of this talk.
And one of the things that I'd like to suggest
is that the Tree of Knowledge highlights something
very important about the concept of behavior.
It says, actually, the behaviors were sort of right
and they were very wrong in some ways.
They were sort of right in that science, yes,
is about behavior.
They were very wrong to then say psychology
was about behavior.
Because if science is about behavior,
then that's gonna have to mean
that psychology has to be a particular kind of behavior.
And that's a very, very different argument to make.
So one of the things that I wanna suggest then
is that science in general does frame the universe
in terms of in behavioral terms.
There's an observer, there's an object field change
that the observer measures.
That is a scientific epistemological stance
about all positions.
In other words, behavior then becomes the goggles
through an exterior epistemology
where it defines the observer looking through
a change in object field.
And that is important because when we now go
to the Tree of Knowledge, we say,
oh, actually behavior can be organized
in relationship to the different dimensions of complexity.
And actually I'll take that a step further
with this periodic table of behavior.
But the periodic table of behavior suggests
is that we're gonna organize different dimensions
of behavior, matter, life, mind, and culture.
That gives us general object field relations.
And then there are these primary levels of analysis.
And actually when you look at nature this way
and you look at the sciences, you get to see
that the sciences actually are organized
around these different dimensions
and these different levels of analysis.
So there's energy that then goes into particle physics
and then that goes into atomic physics
like the periodic table.
And then that gets into chemistry
and then that goes into scale, like I mentioned,
like Earth science, then you jump over
and you get some molecular biology and genetics.
Then you get into cytology, the science of cells
and multi-organism science like botany.
And then you go across scale there
and you get into ecology.
And then it gets confusing in terms of our terms
but I wanna say we then get into neuroscience
and then we get into animal behavioral science,
which I wanna call comparative psychology
or basic psychology.
In America it's called ethology,
which is this weird blend between biology and psychology.
And then you have the social behavioral ecology of groups.
And then finally that jumps over
and we get the emergence of propositional language
and self-conscious justification
and then we get into family.
So why is this model important?
Well, it shows the stratification of nature
that's available when we look through our behavioral glasses.
But what it means is that fundamentally
there are these different classes of behavior.
And that sets up the stage for a very interesting argument
that says, huh, well physics is about the material behaviors
and biology is about the living behaviors.
Now psychology becomes basic psychology
becomes about mental behaviors
and then human psychology becomes about
well human mental behaviors that are embedded
in a cultural context.
So now what we have is what is behavior?
Behavior now is takes on a completely different meaning
whereas before behaviors gets defined
by the epistemological requirements of science.
Here we have a broad ontological view
about what behavior is and then we classify it
and what pops in relationship to this
is that there are certain kinds of behaviors
that psychologists are interested in.
So with behaviors defined as such
this brings us to an opportunity to then say,
well, what do we mean by mental process?
If I had more time I would elaborate
what are the various different meanings and references
but I will simply say that some people mean mind
as the neuro information processing.
Other people mean it in terms of this subject
of conscious experience of being
and a subset of individuals mean it
in terms of our self-conscious reflective dialogic
dialogical discussion and talk
like in terms of human reasoning.
What these three different domains of mind
can be mapped onto are different reference now
with this map that have different epistemological views.
So there's mind sub one that's the neuro cognitive analysis
mind sub two that is the subject of conscious phenomenology
and then mind three.
And what's interesting about this table
is that it suggests that actually yes
these are different domains of mental process
on the one hand and they're available
through different epistemological frames.
One is the classic behavioral epistemological frame.
The second is a subjective phenomenological frame.
The third is actually an inter subjective frame
because it's dependent upon the capacity to you
for one to observe one speaking a verbal behavior
if you wanna use the old behavior term
but of course that requires then an observer
that actually speaks the language
and comprehends the systems of justification
that are being advocated for.
What does this mean?
It ultimately sets the stage then for us to address
psychology's fundamental problem where we have consciousness
and that is historically defined
by the interior epistemology of science versus behavior.
And now we can say actually there's mind one
which is functional awareness and response mind two
which is phenomenology and mind three.
And these then have different frames of reference
and relationship to exterior epistemology
which is anchored in behavior but includes overt reactions
and somewhat neurocognitive process
and public verbal talk, self-report.
And then there's interior epistemology
which is centered in subjective experience
and also involves a private narrator.
Why is this fundamentally useful?
Well, ultimately it gives rise
to what I call the map of mind one, two, three.
The map of mind one, two, three enables us to define
exterior and interior epistemology.
First, the neurocognitive functionalism mediated
by the nervous system.
And then we have mind in terms of overt behavior,
what the animal is doing.
We have the subject of conscious experience.
There's a theory, behavioral investment theory
that unites these various domains
and shows how they engage in informational interface.
And then finally, private and public justification.
So now what this does is it then says,
oh, what do we mean by behavior on the one hand writ large?
And then what do we mean by the domains of mental process
and how are they interconnected?
This allows us then to define mind as behavior,
that's mind one B, mind as cognition, mind one A,
mind as phenomenology, mind two,
and ultimately mind as self-conscious,
both private and public.
So now what we have is we don't have to be defined
by the methods of science
but we actually can be defined by a naturalistic ontology
and see what other referent point people have.
And ultimately it gives rise to a unified ontology.
Now my argument is that that is a game changer
when it comes to thinking about the science of psychology.
And if we go back to where I began
in relationship to my work in the clinic room,
all of this very, very kind of crazy abstract reflection
in relationship to what are these deep concepts
starts with the concern in the clinic room.
And ultimately I'd like to then bring us back to
my work in the combined integrated program
and share a little bit about what that fundamentally is about.
And then what I'm trying to leave you with is this idea
that there are these different domains of fragmentation
and some of the work we're doing does seem to be able
to put these very disparate domains together
in a way that affords coherence.
So the combined integrated doctoral training program
at James Madison, fundamentally what we call the Madison model
is about training doctoral level health service psychologists
or psychological doctors.
The program is designed as an integrative applied
professional psychology that seeks to train leaders
and mental health.
In fact, what we're trying to invite individuals
to come into our program is to look out at the landscape
and ask, well, what do we mean by mental illness?
How are we treating?
What are the cultural implications?
What are the biological?
What are the developmental implications?
How do we understand systems and how do we do it
with philosophical reflection and scientific clarity
and good responsible practice in the new systems
that we might enter?
The mission is to produce leading professional psychologists
that broadly train in the science and practice of psychology.
We cultivate an active level of self-reflection
because I certainly believe that clinicians
have to understand where their beliefs come from.
We have to be reflective in relationship
to what is our ideology, our worldview,
our value structure, what is our particular triggers
and how those intersect with the different rich
and complicated and often dysfunctional
psychological systems that we enter.
We then wanna cultivate individuals
who are optimally prepared to work in a wide variety
of settings with diverse kind tell.
And we want, we believe that this is a professional,
fundamental ethical responsibility
and when we cultivate personal, social and global awareness
and a sense of contributing to the greater good
and fundamentally then reflectiveness
about what that actually means
and how it becomes embodied in our lives.
The program was sparked before I got there
by the recognition of the increasing complexity
of human psychological needs,
require a comprehensive and integrative approach
to fostering psychological wellbeing.
And as I mentioned at the beginning,
it offers this unique view of small C clinical
and also small C counseling and small C school
and cultivates a particular in the center
of the heart of a psychological doctor.
The vision of the AP, of the program actually
was recently adopted in 2017
by the American Psychological Association.
In fact, if you encounter the term health service psychology,
health service psychology is defined by the intersecting
and central overlap of clinical school and counseling.
And by the way, that actually came
from the leadership of our program back in 2003
when we hosted some conferences and set the stage
for delineating this aspect of professional practice.
The rationale is that we can integrate synergistically
across and we don't need to break.
I mean, what does it mean to be a counseling psychologist
versus a clinical psychologist in the 21st century?
I appreciate in and deeply the counseling tradition,
but I also will argue that in terms of the identity
of what it means in relationship to the field,
it behooves us enormously
to have a consolidated professional identity
around a generalist orientation.
And I believe that in a global and international context
that makes good sense.
Although each system, as I say,
depends enormously on the institutional cultural dynamics.
Very briefly, because I'm aware of time here,
the system then that I offer
does allow us to share a picture
of the institution of American psychology.
And what you see here is that you have basic psychology,
the three great branches, animal, mind, brain behavior.
You then have individual into social
and cultural psychology.
These are the scientific disciplines
and that's organized into professional practice.
Now there's applied psychological bridges
and the fundamental domains of competence
and ethical commitments that define the field.
So I believe that the system that I afford
sets the stage at least in the context
of American psychology to take the 50 plus divisions
and actually place them in coherent relation.
The program has a number of goals
and fundamentally basically what we wanna do
is we wanna create a sensibility
of a unified professional psychologist
who understands both the coherence of the science
and its enormous plurality,
appreciate the research and appreciate the craft
of entering into consultation, assessment
and intervention systems.
I'm not gonna read these particular professional goals.
They speak to all of the issues that I mentioned.
This goal four speaks to our appreciation
and richness of human diversity
and diverse contexts in which people operate.
And goal five focuses on the program
leveraging its privilege in relationship
to making a difference for the better
in other systems and do so with humility
and honor the integrity and dignity of other systems.
The last section that I would like to just briefly speak
about is embedded in this is this idea
that there is a unified or integrative approach
to psychotherapy and a subset of integrative.
I'm actually president-elect of the society
for the exploration of psychotherapy integration.
The society for exploration of psychotherapy integration
is an established professional frame
for thinking deeply about integrative approaches.
I would argue that when we look broadly,
there are seven major approaches
that we should be thinking about,
the biopsychiatric, biomedical evolutionary,
then there are these major individual approaches.
And then fundamentally there's social family systems,
feminist, critical theory kinds of perspectives
that need to be considered
as we reflect on the work that we do.
As you know, and as I began with,
it gives us the choice in relationships to what do we do?
Do we go to one of the paradigms
and just hang out on a particular mountain?
The psychotherapy integration people argue,
no, there are these different paths,
common factors, technical eclecticism,
as a theoretical integration.
They have different focuses,
common factors emphasizes the relationship
and says it really doesn't matter what you call it,
it's all about the process.
You can then go technical eclecticism
that focuses on the particular domains of intervention
and says, hey, what works empirically?
You get then a similar integration that says,
hey, you can have a home,
but look and utilize the perspectives of others.
And then there's theoretical integration,
which says, hey, we can pull key insights,
say from learning theory and psychodynamic theory
and blend them together to make a better model.
All of these have value, I've studied them all deeply,
I teach psychotherapy integration.
I am a particular fan of a fifth pathway
and that's this unification pathway.
And what it does is there are ways,
I believe, to build metamodels.
I should introduce you to one
that afford us the opportunity to see the mountain range
and then organize the key insights in relation
and suggest that each of the paradigms
is playing a particular instrument.
If we try to listen at all at once with no frame,
we get a lot of noise.
However, if we step back at the right place
and see the mountain range,
we can then pull each instrument and see them in relation
and then we can elucidate a much more musical sense,
a musically coherent sense
of what the field is speaking to us.
And then there are, as I mentioned when I opened,
and again, I would have spent a day
on exploring character adaptation systems theory
and what does it mean for how do you conceptualize
and then how do you intervene in real situations
in relationship to the therapy.
But what I would like to do is end today
in relationship to the cultivation of what we talk about
in terms of a unified whole service psychologist.
I practice as a psychological doctor
who's trained broadly in the science of human psychology,
especially personality, relationships, development,
psychopathology and human change processes
in the context of therapy to foster psychological adjustment
and more optimal psychological functioning
for individuals in need of care.
To do this, I engage in a comprehensive assessment
that examines key domains of function,
habits, lifestyles, emotions, emotional functioning,
relationships and interpersonal styles,
defenses, coping and identity, and psychosocial wellbeing,
both in terms of psychiatric diagnoses
and maladaptive processes and problems associated
with living, problems in living distress.
These elements are placed in a biological learning
developmental and sociocultural context
to delineate a clear case conceptualization
and problem formulation.
The results in a treatment plan,
which is developed in collaboration with the client
from a menu of bona fide interventions
that might be appropriate,
taking into considerations their values,
level of functioning in stage of change,
through a strong working alliance
and a process of awareness, acceptance and active change,
skill development efforts,
the therapy is oriented toward meeting appropriate goals
which are set relative to prognosis
based on the conceptualization and problem formulation,
progress towards those goals
and the quality of the relationship is monitored.
And if successful, we turn to maintenance
and ultimately when appropriate termination.
So fundamentally, this is,
and I hope this speaks to a wide variety of you
in the type of work that you do.
And that's what I wanted to extend
as I bring this to a close,
is the idea that there is an opportunity
for a rich, textured, skilled craft of a psychological doctor,
but one that actually is informed
by a particular frame of reference
that has more coherence.
So fundamentally combined across the practice areas,
integrate across the systems and paradigms,
unified the field
and then cultivate a unified identity as psychological doctor.
That's combined, integrated, unified.
Thank you so much for the time
and the attention and the opportunity
to share these ideas with you.
So.
