I got another big idea. Let's get AMC to put a theater in Decentraland.
What if they not only got into online in a big way, but still kept the spirit of physically
going to the theaters and hanging out with friends? They can sell tickets that you can
buy using mana. Users would be able to walk to a pizza kiosk and order a pizza,
and then go to theater and hang out with their friends and watch a movie together
all without leaving their house and the game. Edit. It's happening. Someone built a theater,
yo AMC, where are you at? You don't want to miss this opportunity.
Man, when I walked in it blew my mind. Something was playing. I watched it for at least five
minutes. Sound and video was clear as fuck. Checked it out and it blew me away. This is
absolutely sick. Who owns it? This will be awesome once VR is integrated and you can do
screen sharing with a group of friends so it'll be like watching the movie together.
I could even see Decentraland movie gift cards being sold at the supermarket in the area where
all those gift cards are located. That'd be so cool. I wish could take all my bitcoin and live inside
this world. Do best. Clap, clap, clap, clap, clap, thumbs up, okay, high five, one hundred, one hundred.
What you're looking at is Decentraland. Conceived by Argentine developers as to
Banner Dano and Ari Mellak as a virtual reality world for unconstrained markets and presently
advertising itself as a decentralized metaverse owned by its users. In the pitch version,
Decentraland is a true virtual space. A whole new parallel world that you access via virtual
reality. A world where you can shop, buy things, invest, purchase goods, and go to stores
unconstrained by the laws that govern the place where your physical body eats and sleeps.
A product so promising that it commands a valuation in the billions of dollars.
In practice, it's just a bad video game made up of smaller, worse video games wrapped in a real
estate scheme cosplaying as the Matrix. Most of what Decentraland does and what it fails to do
are things that would be considered forgivable or quaint in a Kickstarter MMO that had clearly
bitten off more than the creators could ever chew, but given that this is a project founded on
cryptocurrency, all of those foibles are laced with the language of finance and landlordism.
Strolling down Decentraland's spacious boulevards at five frames per second rewards the user with
a seemingly endless parade of virtual billboards brightly proclaiming that the space you see is
all available to rent. This is because of a pretty basic chain of incentives that are laid bare by
Decentraland's history. While the nominally playable game launched in February 2020,
the actual launch was in 2017 broken into two parts. First, an initial coin offering in August
where their mana token sales raised approximately 24 million dollars denominated in crypto coins,
and second, with the terraforming event where parcels of land denominated in land tokens
were auctioned off for an additional 28 million in crypto, predominantly bought by guys like this.
This being crypto, the obsession with scarcity is so pervasive that it's almost a waste of time
to even mention it, but the land tokens were limited to 90,000, which of course,
centered a lot of the discussion of Decentraland around the hypothetical value of the virtual
plots of land in the event that Decentraland won the future and became the Manhattan of the metaverse,
the go-to destination for virtual life. The initial buyer's plans for the land overwhelmingly veered
towards pitching cryptocurrency or financial services or just sitting on the land with the
intent of renting it out later. This is all baked in. Decentraland's initial pitch hinges on it.
What if you could own the virtual world?
Create, develop, and trade without limits. Make genuine connections and earn real money.
Decentraland, a fully immersive platform powered by the blockchain.
Buy land, design your experience, and transform the way people see the world.
Purchase the first ever virtual real estate. Get started today.
Now there is a lot of ground that needs to be covered and a not insubstantial amount of theory
that I would like to get out there, but I suspect the main thing you might be here for is failure.
So just to wet your appetite, here is a list of things you can expect to see as we talk about
Decentraland, what it is, and what it isn't. Decentraland Records presents the only collection
of failure you'll ever need. Bad graphics, more performance, dead malvies, missing geometry,
weed leads, loading boxes, and so much more. But before we can get into that, we've got to talk
about the metaverse.
In the past two years you have likely been inundated with attempts to explain and define the metaverse,
and yet despite the numerous attempts, you probably feel no closer to having an actual
workable definition in your head, one that maps to something you can visualize actually integrating
with your life. There are a lot of definitions out there, most of them are incredibly flimsy,
many of them are outright insane, very few agree on anything other than the broad strokes,
and almost all of them fall back on gesturing towards Ready Player One and going, you know,
that thing, it'll be like that. In the mainstream the metaverse has been somewhat hijacked by the
crypto and web3 crowd. An interesting element to that is that while they are extremely aggressively
pushing the word metaverse out into the public consciousness, they are late arriving parasites.
They will typically nod their heads at any metaverse vision before throwing it back at you
with their crypto junk grafted onto it. They don't care about the form or content of the metaverse,
but both crypto and the metaverse require spontaneous mass adoption to make sense,
so the two are somewhat simpatico in that regard. In sharp contrast we have the writing of Ryan
Bolger. A theologian Bolger's vision of the metaverse is that of a reified space that sits on
top of the real world, a one-to-one digital clone. You can leave a digital letter for someone on a
park bench and they need to go to that same bench to find it. A clone so accurate that self-driving
cars will navigate not via sensors that monitor the world around them, but by referencing
the current position of things in the metaverse, the most jacked version of google maps you can
imagine. For Bolger, traditional websites and apps are just a stopgap to the ultimate aim,
which should be to astrally project via VR into a McDonald's where a cashier will then see you
through AR glasses and take your order as if you were in the space. The goal of this degree of
ratification was to create a space so real and legitimate that it could be said that the metaverse
could be capable of containing divinity. A church in the metaverse can be sacred
independent of the context of human interaction because it's not just software, it's a place.
Digital fashion and other FIDGETAL industries also want to break down the barrier between
physical and digital, but for very different reasons. They look at the market for cosmetics
in live service video games and crave translating that business model to reality. Rather than building
a reified virtual world, digital fashion is much more interested in the augmented reality side of
things. They want AR glasses that are so universal and so seamless that we all dress in mocap suits
and composite the new Gucci over it using an advanced spin on TikTok's hat filter. In this
definition, the metaverse isn't another place, conceptual or otherwise, it's just a name for
the digital skin that gets laid over the world when viewed through compatible devices. We strongly
believe that the amount of clothing produced today is way greater than humanity needs, but don't
shop less, shop digital fashion, don't shop less, don't shop less, don't, don't you, don't you dare,
don't you f***ing dare shop less, don't you. There are numerous problems here which boil down to
the fact that all of these have equal claim to the word metaverse. If you comb through dozens and
dozens of definitions of the metaverse, you can assemble a web of broad attributes where some
are generally agreed upon while others border on being mutually exclusive. It's a vague,
largely incoherent cloud of ideas that's malleable enough that basically anything can be called part
of the metaverse, a proto metaverse, or a semi metaverse. The central land is the metaverse,
the sandbox is the metaverse, horizon worlds is the metaverse, roadblocks is the metaverse,
Fortnite is the metaverse, Minecraft is the metaverse, the lint experience is the metaverse.
I look at my 14-year-old and she has spent the last year and a half living in a metaverse.
She doesn't even know that word, right, but her school is on Zoom, she hangs out with her friends
online in one form or another, actually in a whole bunch of different forms, right, in Instagram,
in TikTok, in iMessage, in Fortnite, in Animal Crossing, in all of these different metaverses,
right? Some leaders within the virtual world space such as Tim Sweeney believe that eventually
every company will need to operate their own virtual worlds, both as standalone planets and as
part of leading virtual world platforms such as Fortnite and Minecraft. As Sweeney has put it,
just as every company a few decades ago created a web page and then at some point every company
created a Facebook page. Of course, this flexibility that allows for anything good and
popular to be part of a natural, inevitable precursor to the true metaverse simultaneously
provides the flexibility to dismiss any failure as a failing of that pure vision rather than a
failure of the underlying ideas themselves. The metaverse cannot fail, you can only fail
to make the metaverse. There's no consensus definition because the metaverse isn't real,
it's not an actual thing that anyone's really building, it's a rhetorical device that allows
the writer to gesture at the future and pontificate on what ought to be. Definitions of the metaverse
are thusly principally rooted in the writer's present political and social values. When you
understand that the metaverse isn't a distinct invention or construct but merely a rhetorical
proxy for the future of technology, then all of this becomes a lot easier to deal with. The reason
it's also messy is because of the aforementioned gesturing towards fiction and because a lot of
the people writing effluent prose about how the future is here today in the form of blockchain-based
social spaces are, for the most part, salesmen. That's not to say that they don't believe the
metaverse could or should exist, just that most have not considered if it would actually be
any good. That part they take as a given, because it's always super cool in stories,
so why even bother considering that the end result might be boring, inconvenient, and disappointing?
Now, science fiction and actual science have a long and storied history. It's fun to point to all
the devices that exist today that were first sketched out by a fiction writer decades earlier,
but there's also a massive survivorship bias there. Sure, some speculations become real,
either because the author rooted their speculation in cutting-edge science or because fans of the
work tried extremely hard to make it a reality, but even more get discarded as silly, useless,
impractical, deadly, or physically impossible. This might come as a shock, but when a writer
sits down to compose fiction, the thing that they write doesn't need to actually work.
They're not real inventions, they're narrative devices, and at a certain point
no amount of cool factor can make up for the limitations of physical space.
Star Trek's holodeck is an insanely cool idea, and dear god, do I wish it were real?
But it can't exist not, as depicted, because it's not an invention, it's a collection of
camera tricks and special effects. At the end of the day, the holodeck's limitations and lack
of their of are dictated by narrative necessity. So when Neil Stevenson writes about the metaverse
in Snow Crash in 1992, it is an invention composed of a mix of speculation about the future of existing
hardware, trends in how people interact via virtual spaces, and an overwhelmingly cartoonish
dose of rule of cool. Stevenson's metaverse is a massive three-dimensional contiguous space
because it's evocative and interesting. It provides a colorful backdrop for the story's
gonzo plot about a high-stakes pizza delivery sword master employed by the mafia and a computer
virus that can cause brain damage. Snow Crash is prescient in degrees about some of the ways in
which we would engage with technology, but overwhelmingly that prescience applies to the
internet as it currently exists. We have virtual live events, virtual sports, virtual town squares,
virtual clubhouses, and even virtual strip clubs where you can hang out in chat with 500 strangers
and watch someone just absolutely
really the only things that are missing are either aesthetic like the giant contiguous
three-dimensional representation of the internet where you can walk from one webpage to the next,
or maybe not even physically possible at all like the Snow Crash virus itself.
So this then creates a bit of a trap for a lot of the salesmen writing about the
inevitability of the metaverse where they have to cling to those aesthetic details as
non-negotiable because otherwise they're just talking about the internet. As Matthew Ball writes
in his 2022 book, The Metaverse and How It Will Change Everything. Although virtual worlds come in
many dimensions, 3D is a critical specification for the metaverse. Without 3D, we might as well be
describing the current internet. Message boards, chat services, website builders, image platforms,
and interconnected networks of content have been around and popular for decades after all.
Which brings us to virtual reality. VR is pretty cool tech, I really like it. It's also pretty
limited, or more specifically the tech runs up against a pretty big barrier which is the human
body. The inner ear really doesn't like moving without actually moving, which means that every
VR application is a series of compromises between the immersive potential of VR and what the body
will tolerate. Because Stevenson's metaverse is a plot device, effectively an alternate dimension,
the characters are able to navigate the space however Stevenson wants them to. And because
it's narratively interesting, when the characters want to get from one part of the metaverse to
another, they need to traverse the distance between those two points. Ball, for his part, concedes
that users of the inevitable metaverse would likely find this to be too inconvenient and prefer to
teleport from location to location. The reality is even more restrictive. The compromise is that
overwhelmingly virtual reality experiences are largely static experiences, with free form movement
around a small footprint with the user teleporting from spot to spot even within the same virtual
room. It's a compromise that VR enthusiasts are willing to accept because the alternative is a one
way trip to the floor as your cochlea decides that being upright is no longer an option.
The end result, the actuality of virtual reality, is that it's an incredibly potent tool for an
unfortunately limited number of applications. This creates a very sharp contrast between the
metaverse that's talked about by pundits and the reality of VR that developers and enthusiasts
have been mapping for over a decade, with pundits continuing to insist that a vast,
contiguous space representing the internet is not only a desirable way to interact with those
functionalities, but indeed a preferential way. How this manifests is a metaverse that exists
overwhelmingly in the form of blog posts about the inevitability of its existence, with anything
tangentially related to virtual reality being encircled as part of the metaverse, along with a
whole lot of stuff hardly related at all. Of particular fascination is the way that this is
all talk and no product. Lint USA, manufacturers of terrible chocolate truffles, launched their
metaverse store in November 2022 and just have a look at the language used to describe it.
Lint USA launches its first ever 3D virtual store with Beyond XR and makes shopping for premium
chocolate a truly innovative experience. In a beautifully decorated, fully 3D and highly
photorealistic environment, the store welcomes visitors with an engaging introduction by one
of Lint's famous master chocolatiers, Han Shaja. Best of all, the immersive store is totally
comprehensible. We at Lint USA are thrilled to offer customers this state-of-the-art experience
just in time for the holidays. While there is no experience like walking into one of our beautiful
Lint stores in person, our online store is no different. We're excited to show it off.
This is all pretty routine corporate fluff, though the surprising and telling thing is that
it's just words. There's few, if any, images included, and there's a reason why.
The whole of it is elevated to transcendental when you see the actual thing that they're describing.
A laggy, hideous, cheap, faux 3D website that would probably be a camp hit if it were pitched
instead as a throwback to FMV video games from the 90s. The vast majority of these so-called
metaverse offerings are virtual spaces only insofar as they are painted to resemble a store.
We already tried this 25 years ago and discarded it because it turns out the human brain can shop
from a list of items or a grid of photos far better than it can from an image map photo of
a display case. Examples like this betray not only the ignorance of history on the part of the
part of pushing it, but also a profound incompetence on the part of the people building it. Rather
than being a cutting-edge virtual shopping experience, the Lint store is so bad, so embarrassing,
that it would be more respectable to learn that Beyond XR is an outright scam, shaking down
gullible corporations afraid of being out of touch with the future or missing the boat on the
next big thing, rather than true believers trying their hardest. The fact that Patrick Diggleman,
vice president of sales and e-commerce for Lint USA, looked at this final product and in an
immediately scrap it, bury it, and demand the company's money back is just a nice tight
encapsulation of how much metaverse participation is being driven by irrational, uninformed FOMO.
And this brings us back to Decentraland. All these definitions are pretty bad for Decentraland.
It clearly wants to be the metaverse, it calls itself that, but because they, like Lint, have
made the mistake of actually trying to make something, it's possible to evaluate whether
or not they've succeeded. They have activated the trap card of falsifiability. VR was dropped from
Decentraland's core feature set somewhere in 2018 or 2019, and has all but officially been
relegated to a community-produced mod, which just means that it's difficult to get working in the
first place, and when you do, nothing is optimized for VR, either in terms of technical performance
or user experience. The results are dizzying, even without a headset on.
Okay, so the app's just straight up broken now. Cool.
For many definitions of the metaverse like ball, this already makes DCL a non-starter.
Virtual reality, or at the very least augmented reality, is a non-negotiable feature. This,
however, in my evaluation is just a case of no true metaverse. Decentraland is embarrassing,
which makes it inconvenient, which means there's a lot of incentive to discredit it as a claim to
the idea of the metaverse, to insist that its failures are meaningless, that there's nothing
to learn from them about the viability of the underlying ideas. But the knife that says all
these definitions are the metaverse cuts both ways. If the concept is so broad as to be little
more than a vague gesture at the future, if successful and popular things like Minecraft,
and Roblox, and Fortnite get to be the nascent metaverse, then this does too. And if this is the
future, then the future is a dead mall. It is difficult to fully encapsulate the sheer contradiction
between Decentraland as it exists in the minds of its supporters and the actual product that you
can interact with, but in this endeavor we shall strive. Maybe we spent our best shot early by
opening with Redditors praising a theater with non-functional doors and a photo of a
real concession stand in place of any actual modeling, but it's probably best to let you know
what you're in for. That post we ran earlier by the by is the most popular post of all time on the
Decentraland subreddit. The fact that it's a crossover event with Reddit's memestock fanatics,
right down to being disproportionately laden with Reddit awards as they tend to do,
has a poetry to it that I couldn't script. Name a more iconic duo than bad products and
cereal bag holders. You can't do it. The pizza kiosk they rave about where you could in theory
order dominoes via the metaverse and pay in eth or mana is long gone. All that remains is an empty
plot devoid of even the world's procedurally generated shrubbery. The details are thin,
but from what's available it's apparent that dominoes wasn't officially involved in any capacity,
which would indicate that the builder had really just created a middleman between you
and dominoes, where he would take your crypto and then pass the order along with payment in dollars
to dominoes on your behalf. The event calls back to one of the foundational myths of crypto,
the 10,000 bitcoin pizza, the first purchase ever made with cryptocurrency. 22nd of May 2010
is the date when someone first purchased an item with bitcoin, in this case a pizza.
The reality of that is very similar to the Decentraland pizza kiosk. No vendor accepted bitcoin
in exchange for pizza. Floridian Laszlo Hanyats offered 10,000 bitcoin on a forum to anyone who
would bring him two large pizzas. Fellow Floridian Jeremy Sturdevant took him up on the offer,
bought two large pizzas from a pizzeria with his own money, and then traded them to Laszlo in
exchange for the bitcoin. Other groups have tried to recreate amusement rides in Decentraland,
such as those found in District X. Originally slated to be Decentraland's red light district,
before the project organizer stole all the donated land, District X is now home to an
excellent showcase of the reality of Decentraland's ability to deliver interactive experiences,
laggy, glitchy, and profoundly sad. Oh yes, I can feel the thrills coursing through my veins.
In the Decentraland experience there's a persistent tension between the different
vectors of incompetence. Most of the people building this stuff don't have good ideas,
so the stuff is generally bad from first principles, but then on top of that the tools for building
things in Decentraland are also bad, so good ideas are knee capped by being extremely hard to implement,
but then on top of that Decentraland just runs and performs poorly, the controls are particularly
heinous, and sometimes the camera gets possessed by a thousand angry ghosts, so no matter what
experience you build it'll be tainted by that mandatory membrane of interaction.
Some of what you'll stumble across is almost quaint, like this modern style suburban single
family home populated entirely by official Nintendo art. It's almost adorably incompetent,
like the Decentraland version of a Geocity shrine to Xander from Buffy the Vampire Slayer.
At least until you notice the for sale sign out front and the several dozen identical Mario
houses scattered around the world all owned by the same guy named Dan. They're everywhere,
I've completely lost track of how many unique instances of this house I've stumbled across.
This is in part because navigating Decentraland is a nightmare, the extremely short draw distance
and attendant lack of landmarks makes it very easy to get lost, so it's hard to tell if any
given modern Mario house is a fresh one you've never been to before or one that you've looped back on.
Decentraland faces a fascinating problem inherent to its basic construction.
The language of interaction with the world of Decentraland is the language of games.
You navigate the world via an avatar, your avatar runs, jumps, and clicks on things.
This makes games the most obvious implementation as an experience, since the ludology is already
there. The problem is that Decentraland is just bad for games. Decentrally is an abysmal little
experience barely qualifying as the kart racer that it nominally resembles. Of course we can't
judge it too harshly as it's just a proof of concept, though given that everything in Decentraland
seems to fall under that umbrella, it's enough to make one suspicious. Like maybe it's still in beta,
or it's just a proof of concept, or just a rhetorical shield against criticism.
Either which way the developer's other project, Infinity Engine, is also awful and it's being
featured on Decentraland's front page for well over a year. The fantasy of the metaverse is one
where it subsumes much of our present reality, where in the words of Matthew Ball, entire generations
will eventually move to and live inside it. Which, as a statement, more or less demands poetic
interpretation. That Ball is referring to interactions and activity taking place via
the membrane of the software, because otherwise it's, you know, stupid. Because your body won't fit
inside the wires. But regardless, this idea of place requires the simulacrum of place,
and the simulacrum of place must encompass both the fantastic and the mundane. Because if it doesn't
encompass both Skyrim and your office and the grocery store, then there's too much discontinuity.
The metaverse ceases to be a world, a true place, and becomes little more than a digital interface.
And to that end, the existence of the metaverse demands the existence of issue law, a professional
corporation. Welcome to the Metaverse Law Office of James Issue, a personal injury lawyer based
in Los Angeles. James isn't in right now, no one is, and he never will be because the idea of staffing
this place with actual people is patently absurd. Well, it was unfortunate that you tripped and
dropped the urn containing your grandmother's ashes because you tripped over a rake that your
roommate left out. Unfortunately, when you attacked him with that rake, it was a crime. And so I'm
afraid I'm going to have to refer you to a criminal defense lawyer. This is, this is outside kind of
the purview of what I, what I do. I'm more of a personal injury lawyer. So unfortunately, you're
going to, you are going to need a criminal defense representation. And I do have some people that
I can, I can refer you to. I'm, I'm deeply sorry for the loss of your grandmother and, and the,
the death of your roommate. But I can't assist you any further in, in this matter.
This is not meaningfully useful in any way to businesses. When confronted with the actual
product, the actual series of things that would need to be engaged with to make the fictional
vision of the metaverse real, the product and the comparison to the next generation of the internet
is comical. Ball quotes Tim Sweeney talking about a future where every company is expected to operate
a virtual world, just as every company a few decades ago created a webpage and then at some
point every company created a Facebook page. But here's the thing. We already know from those
examples that most companies don't need much more to a website than some cursory fluff and their
contact information. A website to most companies is just a replacement for a yellow pages entry.
It's an ad whose number one job is to carry a phone number, address and business hours.
A Facebook page became appealing because it offloaded the work of designing the page and its
functionality as a whole in a way that office workers could easily manage. Facebook handles
running Facebook. You just put in your stuff making it a useful tool for high density up-to-date
communication like promotions or changes in operating hours. The entire process there is a
move towards efficiency. The construction and maintenance of a virtual world is ludicrous in
comparison. The effort to build and update is orders of magnitude beyond even a basic webpage
and the information density goes down. Like this is really important. Most business communication
is going to be in the form of text forever because text is really really really useful.
But the metaverse is a uniquely terrible medium for the delivery of text because that text cannot
be presented in an optimized format. It must be bent to the metaphor of a real space. That's why
the only actual meaningful things in issue law, a professional corporation, are links to conventional
flat text and image-based websites because they're just more efficient ways to present and access
information. So the virtual workspace, the idea that this plot in Decentraland would
ever become actually functional as a space with the receptionist navigating up the virtual stairs
to tell James via in-world voice chat that someone is waiting to see him, is comical.
But without that promise, without that story, what's even left? An NFT gallery and hard-to-use
widgets that just open Instagram and another tab to remind you that you're not in the metaverse,
you're just browsing a website? I guess at least you can stand on the balcony and admire the modern
Mario house across the street. Even official production, stuff created by the developers
themselves or people they've subcontracted, trend heavily towards embarrassing. The festival stage
for the first annual metaverse music festival featuring DJ Paris Hilton lacked collision on
the stairs and balcony, meaning you could take a terrible elevator to a second floor that you
would immediately fall through. New Year's Eve 2022 was staged in a Duke Nukemesque recreation
of Times Square and featured a devastatingly terrible jumping puzzle, just indescribably bad
in its fundamental construction, riddled with all manner of collision problems and very much
coming off as a half-hearted idea that was implemented improvisationally and never actually
tested, let alone revised, with the reward being a broken scavenger token, z-fighting textures,
and a bad view of the party.
After a long day's virtual lawyering, it's only natural that you'll want to take a load off,
and we would recommend none other than NFT World's NFT World Cities Comedy Club.
It's always bugged me when I go into a comedy club and I'm not immediately met with comedy,
it's false advertising, but with the power of the metaverse and a $120,000 grant from the
Decentral and Dow, the NFT World Cities Comedy Club obtained an infinite source of comedy.
It's not all comedy and incompetence and insincerity, though. Occasionally you'll stumble
across a single plot that's just a simple shrine to a loved one, taken away from this world too
and, oh hey, it's another modern Mario house.
One of the most consistently popular locations in Decentral and popular enough to warrant a
functionally permanent spot on the Genesis Plaza hot locations board is the Wonder Mine
meteor mining and crafting game. Now, something to stress here is that this is, within the context
of Decentral and a success story, there are people who interface with Decentral and solely as the
medium by which they access Wonder Mine. Even just looking at the map, it is one of the few
consistently occupied places where you can find other players in any reasonable number,
and it is an idle clicking game that is so sluggish in its pace that it barely qualifies as a
Skinner Box. Meteors fall, and you click on them, and then you wait. The sole value prospect is that
at the end of the process you might be able to craft an NFT wearable that you can then sell to
someone else. So, like I was saying, if you want to see what this is worth, we can go over to the
marketplace in search steam punk hat, and as you can see it's worth $249 mana. The value of mana
today is over a dollar. So, with such big money on the line, of course the game is bought into
hell and back with idlers and auto clickers. Decentral and doesn't log users out after a set time
spent idle, and the meteors fall in predictable locations, so it's pretty easy to automate.
But even barring that level of complexity, it's trivial to just leave a tab idle and collect the
periodic rewards. Wonder Mine is also immediately adjacent to one of the oldest games in Decentral
and Dragon Rush, which is featured prominently in Genesis Plaza. Immediately we can spot a problem
with the real estate model of the internet. This relatively modest game has an absolutely massive
footprint and necessitates a towering retaining wall to back its terrain. From a standpoint of
architecture, it's an immensely hostile block, a massive impassable barrier to both sightlines
and traffic. It turns out that having every individual app and website take up scarce space
in an adversarial relationship is... bad. Alright, so walk onto the dragon's back,
press F to flap wings and fly, go through the gates and land on the landing pad to finish the race.
Now, maybe this is just unfair. After all, I did say that Dragon Rush is one of the oldest games
in Decentral and let's do some due diligence and find something more mature, more refined,
something with a budget behind it.
Well, okay, that's quite a pitch. And, you know what, let's treat this seriously. Like, let's
treat this like it were a kickstarter or steam early access pitch. $240,000 is modest but realistic,
and watching the trailer, it's all very achievable, especially since the buildings are just lifted from
World of Warcraft. But, like, the features are very straightforward and the trailer even evokes
Decentraland's style. This is eminently realizable, low rent, sure, devoid of original ideas,
also true, doable, absolutely. This is it, right? This is the moment Decentraland has been waiting
for. This is the realization of all their promises. This isn't just a thing in Decentraland, it's
Decentraland as a platform, as the infrastructure invisible beneath an otherwise independent game
experience. They even bother to include the coordinates in the trailer like they actually
want you to go there.
It's just, it's the same story over and over again, everywhere you go in Decentraland,
it's all the same stuff. No amount of remixing can overcome the underlying flaws of the base layer.
Decentraland wants to be the invisible tech behind the scenes, but it can't because it also wants to
be a real virtual world, and the one goal imposes endless creative and technical decisions onto the
other. You can't really get anything better out of the system.
The Metagamma Mall is a construction of special note because its existence was made possible
by a grant of 220,000 US dollars from the Decentraland DAO, the organization that operates
in theory as the government of the Decentraland world. The pitch was a gamified mall and I will
let their own pitch package speak for itself on some key details.
The actual product is a track that you walk along to collect coins that can be traded for wearables
while a bad techno DJ repeats the instructions on an endless loop. Because space is so tight,
even for large plots like this, the track consists mostly of really obnoxious spirals,
and the place is infested with bots that idle on the exact same spot until the timer resets and
they can collect more coins. It would seem that while 220,000 dollars can get you a lot of stuff,
it can't get you an experience worth doing with your own human hands.
The actual rules of super dogerio are oblique and the DJ's instructions don't actually help.
Guess it's called metamine now? As for the mall component, I don't even know what to say.
The space is so cluttered with the extreme cyberspace aesthetic that it's barely even legible as a
mall, and the whole notion is keel-hulled by the fact that this is a miserable interface for
actually buying things, which is the actual purpose of a mall. The result, an empty shopping
experience plagued with bots, isn't just a dead mall, it's an undead mall, stuttering along in a
parody of life. Now, they did seek a new grant in late 2022 asking for an additional 60,000 USD to
expand and revitalize the mall. Unfortunately, the proposal was rejected 3 million to 9 million
with 7.8 million of the no votes coming from two people. Sorry, Metagamma Mall, better luck next time.
The Decentraland Report is one of the most fascinating elements of Decentraland and it
breaks my heart that we can't give it the time it truly deserves. They style themselves as the
first ever decentralized news network reporting on the latest breaking news of the metaverse.
Between grants and private funding, it has received over 250,000 USD, a quarter million
dollars of investment. It is an organization operated by Kevin Clark, better known by his
handle KevinOnEarth999, will let him explain what it means. Decentralized news networks give the
public the power to control event coverage, reporters, and how the network will evolve over
time. Tokens are distributed to the public based on participation, and can be used to purchase
event coverage, add space, and vote on key decisions such as the addition or removal of
actual news reporters. Just to stress this, to highlight it and make sure that you are aware,
this is not us catastrophizing or editorializing. The ability for the crowd to fire reporters
is an explicit feature. Imagine if you could use a token to vote off a reporter from the news.
You can buy the ability to fire a reporter, and that's deliberate because it gives the token
resale value, which incentivizes participation. The editorial agenda of the Decentralized Report
is not just nominally available for purchase, it is proudly available for purchase.
The Decentralized Report is a news outlet that hates journalism. It takes the very messy subject
of journalistic independence, the way that journalism often functions as willing collaborators
with systemic power, and the reasons why we should be legitimately skeptical, alert, and
literate in how we intake media, and uses that to advocate for a radical populism
masquerading as neutrality. The logic is that institutions are inherently biased, therefore
less institution means less bias, and no institution means no bias. Their trust model is explicitly
rooted in their incompetence. Kevin's rhetoric is part and parcel with the conspiratorial thinking
that leads people to trust misinformation they found on Facebook, specifically because
they found it on a page that gets flagged by Facebook as misinformation. It shares a table
with the belief that reporters exist to deceive the public, and so the only journalism you can trust
comes from those who hate journalism. With this decentralized approach to news,
the public can take control of global narratives, focus on fact-based reporting,
versus buy-space reporting, which is focused more on getting views than telling the truth.
Kevin's vision for the news is downright dystopian. It's a killer writing prompt if you're in need of
ideas. So what's the product? You want to see some journalism so unprofessional that it would
make even the writers at the defiant cringe? Any giveaways? Yeah, for sure, man. If you hang around,
I'll definitely do a giveaway, man. So we'll just hop on in right here to Dice Masters.
I'll encourage you guys, come on through. I just want to show some support to Dice Masters, you
know. And then we'll kind of move it into the auction phase with, you know, hopping from gallery
to gallery. That sounds like a great time. As recommended by Shawnee upon the passing of this
grant, we agree to pay back 10% of our monthly revenue to the Dow in perpetuity into the grant
amount is paid back to the Dow. That's amazing. That to me is epic. It's just Twitch streams.
No fucking way. Do you fucking hear that, motherfuckers? That's what the fucking metaverse was missing.
Meadow! That is very true, holy shit. That is very freaking true. Wow.
That was Big Dave. Says Big Dave is talking. Listen the fuck up. Wow. That was wow.
Wow. That was soundcheck. You gotta be kidding me.
That was freaking soundcheck. You gotta be kidding me. I know, I know, right? It's pretty
disappointing that after all that talk about the philosophy of journalism, this ship runs
aground over the fact that nothing remotely worth reporting happens in Decentraland in the first
place. So the risk of journalistic malpractice is functionally zero. Despite the lofty ambitions
of the network, these guys are ultimately harmless. They're just small streamers cosplaying as
reporters while hanging out with their handful of regulars talking about the video game they like
That said, there's still a story here. They still raised a quarter million dollars, right?
Did that at least pay someone? Well, no. Reporters aren't paid as such. They get paid
in the report token and they get a cut of the organization's monthly revenue on Expand,
a crypto meets Twitter meets Patreon platform. At the time of writing, that's around 120 bucks
total. Expand takes a 10% cut, there's another 10% cut for their grant repayment,
a phrase that shouldn't exist, and then the remainder is split 9 ways. There's the possibility
of one-time donations on top of that, which get cut the same way, but on average the individual
reporters are looking at about 10 bucks a month. This isn't a great deal, especially since the
streamers, sorry, reporters, need to provide their own equipment. So it's no surprise that Kevin has
failed to draw in any Pulitzer Prize winners. Who he's ended up with is an ensemble of Decentraland
users who just want to grow their stream by associating with an org. They're all broadcasting
from their personal Twitch streams. What they get from the org is the DCLR branding, which, you know,
it doesn't draw in the crowds. Every single stream we caught had extremely low viewership,
almost always fewer than 10 viewers, often under 5. Kevin's personal and DCLR branded
YouTube channels don't fare any better. A video is a success if it breaks 100 views.
The Decentraland Report is the perfect showcase of Web3's ability to cause money to just evaporate.
The build is called the Metaflower, which is a reference to an NFT of a super yacht from other
Metaverse candidate at the Sandbox that sold, you know what, doesn't matter. Using allegedly
very expensive tech, the flower is intended to develop in bloom as the number of subscribers
on the expand page grows. Of course, we need to take Kevin's word on that because the count
is currently 22 followers towards the goal of 10,000, so the building has remained in its initial
form. What we're left with is this. We've got walls laced with Kevin's prized NFTs, two platforms
that I'm assured are the studios where presenters are intended to stand, the decision room where the
DCLR DAO members will meet once the DAO gets some, and then we have the Butthole tunnel that takes
us to an alien in a rice paddy hat who tells us that we need to save the Decentraland Report
by gathering news juice. And it turns out that news juice means, please follow Kevin and pals on
Twitter. Wait, Kevin's in here twice. Strangely, there's no news in the DCLR HQ. What they do
give you is a link to an entirely different 3D web application called Oncyber. So you're sitting
there, computer frying from running Decentraland, and if you want to see some news at the Metaverse
News building, Kevin wants you to open up another 3D site that loads up two dozen YouTube videos at
once and then crashes Firefox entirely. It's absurd. Needless to say, the Decentraland
build contributes extremely little to the utility of running a news network. We don't know precisely
how much this whole thing cost, beyond about $35,000 for the land, but given that the $127,000
in grants are reasonably well accounted for, it would seem that, after the boring stuff like
building the website and Twitch assets, this as a whole represents Kevin's $126,000.
So let's focus on those grants. Kevin received four grants from the Decentraland Dow. Two were to
hire an editor for DCLR. Both paid the editor $50 per edit in mana. Then there was a $5,000 grant
in September of 2021 to create unique in-game jackets for reporters as a milestone reward for
six months work. And then there was the big one, a $120,000 US grant in stablecoins to build the
back end for DCLR's rewards system. Since Decentralized News is all about rewarding participation,
including viewership, you need to build that system. Pretty much the same tech that handles
Twitch drops to service a community of like 30 people. The Decentralized Philosophy of the
project demands this type of massive, inefficient system exist as a starting point. You can't
expand into these solutions naturally. So Kevin spent $35,000 on land, potentially $91,000 on the
studio build, $5,000 on jackets, and $120,000 on this reward system, and then went back to the grant
program looking for another $240,000, $32,000 of which was allotted to reporter equipment and
included salaries for a marketing director, content manager, graphic designer, and so on.
In what would seem to have been the only lucid moment in the fever dream of the grant scheme,
Kevin was told no. Two more reduced proposals have also been rejected.
You know what we haven't talked about in a while? Chocolate. I mean, sure, lint has their
metaverse, but surely chocolate giant Hershey wouldn't be left behind? Well, if you've got a
craving, you're in luck. Just a hop skip and a jump from the Sugar Club, you can experience
Hersheyverse, the official metaverse holiday home of Hershey chocolates of India and the Philippines.
Sure, this plot may look microscopic, but boy howdy is there a lot to do. For one, you can talk to
the shopkeepers inside and they'll send you a link to Amazon. But there's also gamification.
There's a quest. It's time for a treasure hunt. Just hop up here and bounce over here and click
on this and ride the elevator and click on the camera and you can get your very own official
Hersheyverse wearable. An NFT on the frequently exploited polygon blockchain, it would appear
that this hat has been claimed generously about 500 times. But once you claim your extremely ugly
hat, you get one last quest to extend your time in the Hersheyverse. You see, the treasure chest
needs opening and the keys won't find themselves, so you just talk to the shopkeepers and pick up
the keys off the ground and click the thing and you gain the ability to fly. And by fly,
I mean that if you double jump, an invisible platform spawns under you and lifts you up
to a predetermined height where you can jump to one of the clouds and take control of the
chocolate cannon, which may or may not work. Brands love the metaverse, or at least that's
the story. Samsung, Nissan, VitaPhone, Snapple, Citibank, Pedigree, Hershey, Mountain Dew, Trident,
Sour Patch Kids, Atari, Miller Lite, JP Morgan, everyone's getting in on the metaverse. Now what
that means is, um, extremely flexible. We've already dipped into Hersheyverse, but what else is out
there? It's just, it's weird, man. Atari has probably the best looking location of any of these,
but it still principally consists of a large faux social space full of furniture that you can't
interact with. Wait, have I even mentioned that yet? Yeah, you can't sit on chairs in Decentraland.
The whole goddamn world is built of nothing but hangout spots, and you can't even roleplay
sitting around a table unless you buy the user-created sit emote from the marketplace.
Otherwise, in the Atari Stronghold, you have a slate of links that I'll take you
out of Decentraland and a couple wearables that are no longer available. The only thing to actually
do here is play one of the four variants of Breakout and feel the gnawing cold reality seep
into you as you realize that Decentraland is such a monumental failure as a platform for
socialization, for commerce, and for gaming that it can't even handle properly emulating Breakout,
a game from 1976 that you can play on goddamn Google images. Steve Wozniak built Breakout
50 years ago to run on 44 TTL chips and a ham sandwich and that still, somehow,
too demanding a gaming experience for Decentraland. The Onyx Lounge by JP Morgan Chase built in March
2022 and described by Fortune as a bet on a metaverse future that could be worth trillions
was originally staffed only by a wandering tiger but has since been replaced with a cramped reading
lounge. The DCL branch of HSBC is a unique kind of awful with this deeply unsettling robot receptionist
and stares with no collision with the only problem being that it's not clear if this is an official
HSBC project or not since impersonation is trivial and even the official builds are glitchy and weird
because it's Decentraland, everything is glitchy and weird. Particularly though as you go through
a lot of these you start to notice a few trends. First is a subject that we'll talk about at
length later which is that discussion of these ventures rarely feature anything meaningful.
They don't tend to tell you how to actually find the location and tend to downplay the product
itself, typically limiting visuals to a wide screenshot of an exterior if anything at all.
Fortune didn't even bother to mention the tiger, it's really more about the headline than the
actual space. Second is a trend of dispersion. It's not Hershey's that's in the metaverse,
it's Hershey's Indian Philippines, it's Nissan Italy, it's Vodafone Turkey. Third is a trend
towards the temporary. While the Atari metaverse headquarters is still standing and the Onyx
Lounge by JP Morgan Chase still sort of technically exists, most of these aren't actually brands moving
to the metaverse, they're just promotional campaigns. The Snapple Stronghold, Millerlite,
Metalite Bar, and Hersheyverse are already gone. The metaversity of Stacum came and went in about
two months. The Trident Vibe X Sour Patch Kids Chew the Vibes dance party has been replaced by an
office for Moses Worldwide, the ad agency that built it. While a few corporations jumped in
early and actually bought land, that ship has seemingly already sailed, and now the impetus for
this isn't originating with the brands, but with the digital ad agencies that they hire,
who then toss in a decentralized activation as part of the package, a way to recoup some value
from the land that the ad agency bought. Fourth is that they just overwhelmingly suck and need to
constantly direct users out of Decentraland in order to accomplish anything. The Nissan Experience
will let you book a test drive in Italy if you click a link to open their existing website.
The Atari Store opens Atari's actual store. The pedigree fosterverse lets landholders create
a metaverse duplicate of a real dog in a partnered shelter in need of a forever home. The metaverse
dog serves as a digital billboard leading to the dog's adopt-a-pet page. Of the three dogs,
the platform lists at the time of writing, all three have long since been adopted out,
but their listings remain because the incentive for landholders to participate is to get a pedigree
branded dog on their parcel so the metaverse dogs are doomed to beg for adoption for all eternity.
So what does that all mean? Well, the obvious but speculative narrative is that ad agencies
that have a stake in the success of the metaverse are approaching brands in smaller markets and
pitching them on a version of the future and dazzling them with some cooked numbers. They
point to articles in real outlets like Fortune with titles referencing a trillion dollar future,
and like, in the face of that, can you even afford the possibility of being wrong? It's the lamest
version of Pascal's wager. Back on the Genesis Plaza spawn platform, we've got these pillars
that I've shown but not really talked about yet. These are decentralized solutions to discoverability
in their metaverse, or, well, at least one of their attempted solutions. As already mentioned,
the classics pillar includes Dragonrush in the coveted bottom spot where you can actually
interact without needing to crank the camera or use the awkward skeuomorphic buttons. On the right
hand side, though, is the crowds pillar, and for the last year, one location has dominated that
bottom slot. Ice poker the stronghold, which routinely boasts over 100 attendees, often pushing 200.
Now, that number is middling in isolation, but by the standards of Decentraland, where 12 qualifies
as a crowd, it's pretty meaningful. Of course, a ton of those attendees are idle at the default
spawn location, but let's not ruin the fun. As for the legality of this, well, the opinion of
Decentra Games Singapore-based lawyers is that it's not gambling under relevant statutes, thus
they don't need a gaming license to operate. The important thing here is that the only thing in
Decentraland that seems to be actually successful is outright just a casino, and regardless of the
sentiments of Jock Law LLC, the community seems to be taking it for what it clearly is.
So, as you can see, I've earned $2.98 from playing, and honestly, I've only been gambling,
playing the casino for a couple of days. The odd thing is that it's seemingly only the poker
tables at that. Like really, it's just this one specific casino. There's a whole bunch of different
casinos around the gambling zone, basically all of them owned by Decentra Games under the ice brand,
but the stronghold is the only one anyone's ever in.
Turns out, that's because they already ran into legal problems. You used to be able to gamble on
the slots at Tomanoya with your cryptocurrency directly, but between glitchy behavior that
would eat transactions, high service fees, long wait times to resolve bets, and, most critically,
some pointed letters from various regulatory bodies, the stronghold is the only location that
supports the current brown bag policy, and it only has poker. All the others have been converted to
free play. You can still go over to the aquarium and play Blackjack, but you will do so alone.
These people are not here to play, they are here to gamble.
When discussing Decentraland, it's hard to overlook the subject of its abysmal user base.
Indeed, the biggest story to come out of Decentraland in 2022 was drama over DCL's metrics.
In October 2022, Crypto Outlet Coin Desk reported on Dapp Radar's data that claimed Decentraland
had as few as 38 daily active users. Decentraland fired back in a blog post scrutinizing the data,
calling it misinformation, and pushing their own value of 8,000. This back and forth continued
with Coin Desk releasing the final word on the subject in January 2023, with their research
suggesting an active daily user base of 810. Now, it's tempting to fall into this whirlpool as
apparently Coin Desk did for 3 months and litigate the definition of a user, but let's head this
off at the pass. Whether Decentraland has daily activity of 40 users, 800 users, or 8,000 users
is irrelevant. In their business, these are all the same number. Emotionally,
it feels like a significant difference, but let's give some context to these numbers.
At 810 users, it's competing with Lord of the Rings online, and it has a fraction of the users
of Fishing Planet, which like it's Fishing Planet. The most generous numbers for Decentraland
put it in competition with Star Wars of the Old Republic. All of these values are just steam users.
It doesn't include the users who access the games directly through their dedicated launchers
or on other platforms, so these numbers are inherently conservative.
Now, despite having these varying player counts, these games all have fundamentally the same
business model. They are operating a micro-MMO. If you ever wonder how dead MMOs survive,
it's by running tight ships. These teams, often small, inherit a product that was hugely
expensive to produce 5, 10, 15 years ago, and they are tasked with maintaining it
in order to support a small but loyal user base. It is possible for Runes of Magic to be profitable
off the back of a single digit number of whales, people who just really like Runes of Magic,
the same as true for Fiesta Online or Lotro. So it doesn't matter what Decentraland's
true daily user count looks like, because any number they've ever pushed falls into the
same band of long, long dead MMO. The fact that Decentraland has a similar user base to DC Universe
Online is the red flag that most people notice first. Daybreak a Game Company is a game developer
that currently owns and maintains numerous old MMOs, including EverQuest, DC Universe Online,
and Lord of the Rings Online. This is a tough business, and in December of 2020, Daybreak
was acquired by Enad Global 7 in an agreement valued at $300 million. So this company that
owns and maintains all these MMOs that are all individually comparable to Decentraland's user
base is meant to be worth a fraction of Decentraland? It's been said numerous times before,
but it shouldn't be left unsaid here. Decentraland's purported value,
based on the market cap of its cryptocurrency, is completely disconnected from reality.
Decentraland's product is clearly trash. As a video game, it struggles to set itself apart
from Inferna, an MMO that advertises itself as an underdog off of the back of its three-man
dev team. So Decentraland goes all in on the speculation, on narrative. Its value has nothing
to do with what Decentraland is today, but what it will be, and what it did do when you weren't watching.
Because the metaverse in its more mature form will be a lot more advanced than this,
and be a lot more sophisticated than this, but this really is how it starts. This is the beginning
of it, and this is going to be the shape of things for the next 20, 30 years. I genuinely believe that.
The way that crypto users talk about Decentraland is so dissociated from what you yourself witness,
that it seems like they're talking about an entirely different thing. Like, is this it?
Is this the billion dollar virtual world? Surely, I must be missing something.
Like so much of Web3, Decentraland has weaponized its speculative element,
since they are the future. The product as it exists now borders on irrelevant. The proposed
inevitability of the metaverse is their greatest asset, because they don't even need to try.
This is the everything proof shield that Decentraland users have created to guard from criticism.
Decentraland and all its contents is forever a prototype, always just an indication of what
the future will bring. Being bad is not a flaw in the crypto space. Just look at the red ape family,
they're visibly incompetent, and they still made it to three episodes, even if the creator is too
much of a coward to post the third publicly. Every successful crypto project is bad, but with
enough legitimacy, you can mask that fact. This generates extremely funny scenarios,
like crypto shill robin from the defiant stumbling through Decentraland's barren wasteland,
while trying to invent reasons why what he's looking at isn't plainly obviously ass.
And I often say that the metaverse is, it's a world that rotates around you. And this is what
I mean, the world literally does rotate around you. This is a universe where you are always at the
center. That is the whole kind of mindset change that you have to get when you talk about the
metaverse. Decentraland users understand this need for legitimacy intuitively, and so it becomes
what they crave above all else. This is why they value brand activation so highly,
no matter the circumstances. Being able to put Vodafone on their world map, or pedigree in their
events tab, spins the narrative that real companies are here in Decentraland. Even embarrassing brand
activations are defended because they're just dipping their toes in. This is just the beginning.
Decentraland users seek to encourage brand activations and events through pathetic pandering.
They'll smile through gritted teeth as they insist that the Hershey experience really is
interesting and successful. By performatively engaging with events and brand activations,
users seek to create the illusion that these events are successful in the hopes of drawing in the
next sucker. What's cooking good looking people? We're in Decentraland. We're in Hersheyverse.
Can you believe that? Hershey's, bro. Hershey. However you say a Hershey, I'm pretty sure it was
Hershey. Is the fuck Mandela? Bro, who would have thought Hershey was going to make a little plot
on Decentraland? You know, before you know it, you're going to see other candy companies. You
know, there's already beverage companies, there's already alcohol companies, there's fucking Yahoo,
Amazon is already in here, and Hershey is the next big one to get into this shit.
This principle scales up from the pedigree fosterverse all the way up to the marquee events of
the platform. The Metaverse Music Festival, which in its most recent outing was tossed around as
having featured performances from Bjork, Ozzy Osbourne, and Motorhead, consisted almost entirely
of pre-recorded messages from the musicians, followed by just playing a couple music videos.
It's awesome to be in the Metaverse with you, and it feels great to be here in Decentraland.
I hope you're all having an amazing time today. My name is Dave from Astage, and maybe after today
I'll be playing a few of my favorite tracks. Let me know what you think about this one.
I criticized Fortnite for being overly poetic with its definition of a live Marshmallow concert,
and this is just so much worse. The Metaverse Fashion Week, as the name implies, was a week-long
fashion event held in Decentraland in March of 2022, scheduled to run just after the Milan
Fashion Week. The event was organized by the Decentraland Foundation, the developers of Decentraland.
It was the involvement of the Foundation that saw the Metaverse Fashion Week get some real
attention in media coverage. A number of lifestyle, fashion, and tech journalists were sent in to
cover the event, for whom many were experiencing the Metaverse for the first time. The event was
billed as an opportunity to see the next major innovation in the fashion industry, a new way
for fashion to be designed, bought, and sold. It would be the melding of fashion and art.
Finally, art and fashion, together at last. The word phygital got thrown around a lot to refer
to the simultaneous purchasing of a digital and physical good, like you buy a digital hat in
Decentraland and a real hat turns up in the mail. Not to get distracted, but World of Warcraft did
this exact promotion in 2010. This plush windrider cub came with an in-game pet. It's not a new thing.
But of course, they don't frame it that way. Instead, you're buying a single hat with two
simultaneous planes of existence. It's not a bundle of two products. It's the same hat in two
different forms. There are dozens of tech startups eager to composite clothing over photo or video
and label it as the future of self-expression. This so-called screen wear is, at best, an
artful Photoshop job, and at worst, essentially just a TikTok or Zoom filter.
Well, there are different avenues. The first thing is you could wear it on your real self
through an AR filter. So that's number one. And that's the part where technology is still,
you know, work in progress. It's going to get better and better. We know it. So I think as we
regular people start transitioning more and more into the virtual world, spending more time in
virtual environments, and that barrier between physical and digital starts blurring more and
more. And we will start consuming, you know, digital fashion, digital sneakers, digital makeup,
digital jewelry. This was the rhetoric that defined the Metaverse Fashion Week.
So our ragtag ensemble of journalists and creators were sent in to report on the future
of reality and fashion. How did it go? Do you really need to be told at this point?
What the fuck did I just watch?
After a pre-show trial session spent exploring Decentraland's luxury fashion district,
maybe it was too early, but the only fashion space I teleported to was an empty DKNY store.
While there were plenty of fashion shows, very few were successful because the overall
experience fell flat. Perhaps, expectably, many weren't able to capture the magic of a physical
show where attendees are fully immersed and emotionally invested in the brand's collection.
The gamified aesthetic in Decentraland took away from the fantasy and craftsmanship of
luxury fashion, and simply put, the Avatar models weren't as inspiring.
And there was just very little documenting of the event in general. This is due to a combination
of disinterest, but also a deliberate effort not to showcase the embarrassing product.
Even the brands involved in the show downplayed the Decentraland part of their Decentraland show.
The shows didn't look the way the brands expected they would, as publications on the
social networks made clear. This is because brands posted the best photos from the show,
and not the reality of pixelated avatars and simple looks.
Likewise, musicians who performed at the music festival didn't exactly rush to show off the
event either, so footage of any of these theoretically big events is shockingly sparse.
This isn't some grand conspiracy, it's just dozens of individuals independently reaching
the same conclusion. The product sucks, and it'd be a bad idea to show it. This is true
for both DCL users, but also the journalists covering it. Decentraland looks so unprofessional
that coverage of Decentraland looks unprofessional by extension.
And this actually looks, it looks sort of like me. I like it so much,
I'm going to dance for you. This is my happy dance.
We do have a whiskey distillery. You've been holding out. Oh, this is cool.
Here we can walk around and actually see the distillery from inside.
I enjoy your virtual distillery, not so much your virtual bourbon, so cheers, Gigi.
Cheers to that.
I mean, so here's the thing. Is it for us? I don't know, but there are hundreds of thousands
of people who already live in the metaverse, do exist in the metaverse, who are buying things,
who are hanging out. This creates an environment where the metaverse fashion week was a thing
talked about in The Abstract. It was a thing that did happen, but the reality is slowly eroded away.
Most people who learned about the event didn't see the product, they only heard the narrative,
and that narrative went a little something like this.
The wearables were supposed to be available immediately after the runway event at a nearby
pop-up shop, and for free, a rarity considering fashions rushed to capitalize on crypto clothing.
For some reason, a couple of hours after it ended, they weren't displayed yet inside the
paisley patterned store. A good reason to come back.
This journalist witnessed a broken feature they experienced a bug. Rather than reporting
critically on the failure of a key feature of the event, the article pulls its punch in the last
line through the language of puff journalism. Out of context, it reads almost like satire,
but if you read enough coverage of Decentraland, this becomes a very real trend.
Last of all, I can definitely see this event evolving into something much more engaging.
There are communities of people who are replicating in various metaverse outposts,
behaviors that people, or people dressed as elves, have long cultivated in reality,
and fashion is one of those behaviors, so we're all just going to need a better graphics card.
However, MVFW did provide a glimpse into possibilities for how brands can build their
narratives in the metaverse, offering immersive experiences and innovative ways to expand offerings
beyond the physical. Once VR glasses are integrated, the experience is going to be on a whole other level.
And in the absence of any voices to the contrary, that becomes the narrative of the metaverse fashion
week. It had some technical issues, reviews were mixed, but it was a proof of concept that left
journalists feeling certain that the concept has a future. And through that lens, that allows those
involved to say with a straight face that the event was a success. Yeah, it was a fantastic four days.
As a proof point of what is to come, this is the early evolution of decentralized commerce.
On the whole, journalists are seemingly overwhelmed by the tempest of claims and
ideas surrounding the metaverse. We can appreciate why this is the case. A lot of this is vague,
either on purpose or on accident. It is not the job of the writers at women's wear daily to
crack crypto wide open. It's all too big, too out of scope. They're convinced that they just
don't get it. So they defer to the explanations and narratives given to them by people trying to
sell something. I mean, so here's the thing. Eric Ravenscraft has discussed this phenomenon
with a specific eye towards journalists in outlets like the New York Times, uncritically
parroting the vocabulary of real estate for the digital groundbreaking of metaverse headquarters
that in many cases don't even actually exist. This goes all the way back to the first major
coverage given to Decentraland, a BBC story in 2018 in response to the initial land auction.
In Decentraland, users can build whatever they can imagine on plots of virtual land,
but the creators are giving BBC trending a sneak peek of what the city will look like when it launches.
What's important to remember here is that the Decentraland we're seeing wouldn't exist for
another two years. The actual product in 2018 looked like this. So by its very nature, there is
nothing really to show, and it means we get these lovely little artifacts from the past.
The spine of this story is built not on what Decentraland
did or was doing, but what it will do. All of the features that will be implemented and
benchmarks it will hit. Journalists and vloggers who very understandably don't know the deep lore
of Decentraland's development still mention VR as a thing that just hasn't been implemented yet,
despite the feature being scrapped. Once VR glasses are integrated, the experience is going to be on
a whole other level. Decentraland craves legitimacy, but it can subsist on crumbs. It is a speculative
real estate scheme which is rapidly approaching the Nigerian prince level of self-selection.
That means that for its purposes, all it needs is for people to discuss it and for the conversation
to feature the defenses we've been discussing. It's just a prototype, it will improve, the metaverse
is inevitable. Because this reporting loads the basis for investment advice like this to sound
believable. Land is hitting all time highs for value and people are asking like, you know,
can people really afford to buy these plots for a lot? Yes, because there's going to be a large
commercial and business entities that can make a lot more than what they're going to pay for this
land. They know it has long-term ramifications in the industry, so it's a great investment.
If you took Kevin's advice at the time, you'd be in the red less than two weeks later, have lost
half your investment two months later, and be down 80 to 90 percent today. That is the danger
posed by nonchalant coverage of Decentraland, boosting the narrative that major brands and
mass adoption are right around the corner. There's no such thing as bad publicity for Decentraland.
It continues to persist through performative hype and deception, but Decentraland needs to be
recognized for what it is, and we can't give it the easy way out. Decentraland is not and has never
been a VR experience. You cannot order a pizza in Decentraland. Decentraland is not the future.
It has never and will never be worth a billion dollars.
So at this point, I think it's plain to see that the product of Decentraland is at best
bad. But Decentraland users are battle-hardened on this point. They've had years of defending
against this claim. Many DCL users will concede that sure, the product itself is janky, but
obviously it's just a prototype. The real appeal of Decentraland, what sets it apart from its
competition, is its system of governance. Decentraland was built and is maintained by
the Foundation, the actual developers behind the product. Melec and Ordano always intended for the
Foundation to go hands-off, simply becoming the underlying machinery of the world akin to the
invisibility of a web host. As part of this invisibility, they wanted users to handle as
many elements of development and maintenance as possible. This is characterized through the
language of ownership. Decentraland is owned by its users, so naturally the users have direct
control over the product. This is further obfuscated through the language of Decentraland as a
reified space, which is to say Decentraland users present themselves as akin to the government of
a virtual world, enacting policies in a democratic fashion. They do this through the Decentraland
DAO. Because the Decentraland DAO dresses itself in the language of governance and law,
it's tempting to engage with them on that level and take the DAO seriously. We tried to give them
a fair go, but we found ourselves repeating the mistakes of the journalists we just criticized.
To contrast them against real governments implies that the comparison is warranted,
and humors the notion that these are adults attempting to revolutionize the concept of
governance. So let's adjust expectations and lead with the soul of the DAO. Upon revisiting the
DAO's governance site for this project, the first thing that caught our eye was this. A proposal
to fire a committee member for abuse of power and bias. And let me tell you, the contents of this
would be right at home on something awful circa 2008. A guy got banned on Discord and got so upset
that he wrote a thousand word essay on a sock puppet about why the moderator should be fired for
abusing their authority. Because when asked, the moderator kind of said he was a pluralist and
pluralists hate the individual. And on, and on it goes. The proposal was rejected, but it was rejected
as an invalid question. Because the team manager of the DAO facilitation squad does not count as a
member of the DAO committee, and thus a complaint would need to be made to the grant support squad
who would then need to recommend a proposal to revoke the grant funding the DAO facilitation
squad, thus firing Matimeo indirectly. Then there's Kevin's failed grant proposal where
multiple people rejected the proposal, at least in part because Kevin blocked them on Twitter.
When you block someone on Twitter, this is where they end up. This is a group of people that sees
the Sugar Club, the empty bar next to Hershey's, requesting 60,000 US dollars to fund its operating
costs, and they're like, yeah, yeah, that seems reasonable. When they hold elections,
candidates are asked questions like, what are each candidate's stance on bringing physical
world ideologies into our decentralized world? You know, government structures, democracy,
communism, whatever. In that example, the candidates universally accepted the idea that
DCL was apolitical, and they would support politics being patched into Decentraland,
but only if it achieved majority support in an official vote. This is like a grand experiment.
However, there's a lot at stake. So I think any ideology that we're considering bringing in,
it would be best handled on a side project. My dudes, the ideology is coming from inside the house.
Their philosophy of governance minimizes individual authority and decision making,
but they pass full legislation that gives committee members absolute discretion with
no appeals process. The Decentraland Dow is no less of a failure than the Hershey's experience,
or Decentrally. We're just changing gears from bad video games to bureaucratic incompetence.
And you can't really understand the Dow until you wrap your head around just how inequitable
the voting situation is. Dows often make use of weighted voting schemes. The main purpose of
this is to acknowledge a user's stake in the project, the logic being that those with the
most invested have the most at stake in the Dow. Though the details can vary between Dows,
Decentraland's scheme is refreshingly straightforward. Votes are weighted based on the
sum of Decentraland tokens in the attached wallet. One mana is worth one point of vote power. It's
just wealth. The more money you have, the more your vote counts, one to one.
Naturally, this leads to those with wealth shutting down any proposal that bothers them.
For instance, let's look at this proposal. Should we address voting power distribution in the Dow?
In the proposal, a Dow committee member pointed out the obvious issues of the system,
and the results turned out like this. 163 votes for, 45 against. That is 78% support in terms of
real votes, though we'll get to that, but once voting power was accounted for,
the margin inverted to 73% against. And then, even within that, of the 5.18 million VP against the
proposal, 4 million came from a single wallet. Four wallets make up almost all of the votes
against the proposal, 99.7% of the VP in the 73% majority. The next step would naturally
be to play with these figures versus the real votes. 2% of voters accounted for 73% of the VP,
but the issue there is that even though this weighted system allegedly exists to combat bots,
users still use bots for the optics. When you actually look at the votes, 128 of the 209 votes
were from accounts with zero VP. These were accounts with literally no influence on the vote.
80% of those dummy votes were for yes. 19 of these accounts only had a single VP,
and then a bunch had two, both equally capable of being sock puppets. But whether
guessed 60FD is a real user or not is irrelevant, because one wallet lapped the competition.
One wallet told the Dow to go just f**k itself, just really just...
And the Dow politely complied. These whales are often burner accounts who are not available
for negotiation. Their decrees are silent, yet drown out all their voices. But there is still
an urge to pretend like negotiation is a possibility.
But we still got it denied, although we met the threshold of approval. In the final hours,
we did get three votes which came in to deny, and sort of made us step back and say we need
to re-evaluate how we're bringing this forward, because ultimately even reaching the VP threshold
of approval by the community, it seems like the whales still felt like something else needed to
be addressed outside of the other feedback we had. Kevin is clearly upset by this, and despite all
his talk about addressing the concerns of the whales, he understands that he's talking crap.
He wants the Dow to give him money, the anonymous whales in question, do not want him to receive
money. There is no negotiating or compromising, just pharaohs you can pray to. So that leads us
naturally onto the subject of the Dow's management. The Dow has been speedrunning bureaucratic
paralysis. In 2020, they attempted to automate governance by running an on-chain system, but
it didn't work. No one wanted to pay transaction costs to vote on every name,
ban, and point of interest, so they moved the system back off-chain six months later. Problem
is that without automation, you need humans to push the buttons. Decentraland is quite proud of
the Dow's grant scheme, but it's been a massive headache for them recently. For the first year,
they gave away $3.5 million in grants to develop projects that would aid adoption,
but the grant application had no standard process, and grants had no oversight and no
accountability, because no one existed with the authority to do it. The initial proposal alluded
to the idea of revoking grants, but included no framework to implement it. So the Dow committee
put forward a proposal to set up a squad whose job would be to help grantees deliver their product,
and in extreme cases where a project had collapsed or was too far off course,
the squad could recommend that the committee revoke the grant. But the committee is administrative.
They can't revoke the grant, and the squad are essentially independent contractors. They can't
revoke the grant either, so we need a new committee with express permission to revoke grants.
Enter the grant revocation committee. We could go crazy with dissecting this,
but the short version is that these committees are meant to have minimal discretion. The authors
of the policy seem to think that discretion only exists if you acknowledge it, so rather than
limiting the scope of consideration, like any other discretionary position in government,
they limit the committee to only considering cases that are actively handed to them,
but put no restraints on the committee members actual decision making,
effectively giving them absolute power to revoke any grant for any reason. And as the cherry on top,
there's no appeals process, because to appeal the verdict would require a different group with
the authority to overturn the decision of the revocation committee. The committee intended to
have minimal discretion is completely unrestrained with zero accountability. Oh, and these guys are
paid commission for every verdict, so the DAO is about to learn real fast why we don't do that in
the real world. Then we have the facilitation squad, the governance squad, the protocol squad,
the security advisory board, the newly proposed working groups. They're expanding the DAO committee
from three to five members, but only after an election to replace one of the original three.
In trying to minimize human involvement, they have instead ballooned it, and like,
look at the participation numbers. Generously, there's a few hundred people actively involved in
the DAO in any capacity at all, and at this rate, every single one of them is going to be in at least
one squad or work group. More realistically, the couple dozen people with the inclination to spend
their free time role playing bureaucrats are going to be sitting on the accountability squad that has
oversight over the oversight work group that advises the spending council on how much the
accountability squad should be paid. Oh, and these bureaucrats are paid in MANA, which as we've seen
is a direct source of political power. Like, do you remember that time YAML agreed with YAML that
YAML should be paid $150 an hour in MANA? Would you be shocked to learn that YAML, who agreed with
YAML about paying YAML $150 an hour, is friends with Mellik and Ordano from back in the days when
they all spent their time at a tech bro flop house they called Casavoltare? And through all this
bureaucratic garbage, it's easy to lose sight of the truth. The DAO has no actual authority.
Decentraland isn't owned by its users, it's owned by its owners, the Foundation.
While the Foundation cedes the copyright on material submitted by users, the terms of use
make it very clear that the Foundation holds the copyright on the Decentraland part of Decentraland.
As Catalina Gaonta points out, this conflicts with the rhetoric that Decentraland is
owned by its users when the most significant legal right in this area is unambiguously owned by the
Foundation. Even looking past that, can it really be said that Decentraland is owned by its users
when the DAO is currently being held hostage by a dozen whales whose proportional voting rights
dwarf their peers? Now, being a digital landlord doesn't require much engagement at all. I would
hazard that whoever owns 50 identical Decentraland homes plastered with for sale advertisements
isn't really a Decentraland user above the most literal threshold.
I, on the other hand, am demonstrably a user of Decentraland. Given how dead engagement is,
I feel pretty confident in estimating that I spend far more hours per year actively looking
around and doing stuff in the world than the median landowner. But I am not an owner of Decentraland
by virtue of that time spent in the world. There is no mechanism that correlates the two that gives
ownership to those who use it, and strips ownership from those who idly hoard. The mechanism
of ownership is not usage, it's ownership of land and mana. The arc of Decentraland's development
is dictated by the foundation. They may occasionally ask the DAO what features they'd like to see or
act on simple proposals for technical changes, but the DAO is not Decentraland's board of directors.
Well, first, I think that Decentraland is always working with the community because we are a DAO,
right? As a decentralized platform, we are mostly governed by the DAO. So we are not a
corporation, so our roadmap also operates differently because we always try to look into what the
community is aiming. Notice how she doesn't say we're bound by the decisions of the DAO because
there are bosses. Instead, the foundation is working with the community and trying to look
into where the community is aiming. When discussing Decentraland's perspective value to actual business,
the foundation can't say with a straight face that representatives from target
need to get in touch with the DAO facilitation squad to outline the contents of a proposal.
At a certain point, all the talk of decentralized ownership and political revolution
needs to get put aside, so Dolce and Gabbana will actually respond to the emails.
In line goes up, we all had a good laugh at DAO's whose central product was undefined.
Are we a comic book or a bimonthly curated box of snacks? But to their credit, that is in keeping
with the philosophy of a DAO. In the case of Decentraland, the foundation came first and knows
what it is and what it wants to be. If the DAO were to vote for the project to become a 2D
Metroidvania set in a hypothetical 4th Punic War in the visual style of NHL 94, sorry, that isn't
happening. The foundation acts autonomously whenever it wants. When the foundation implemented
the first ATM in the metaverse, they didn't consult the DAO before starting development.
And can you blame them? Can you imagine if, as a business, they were bound by the whims of these
losers? Despite the rhetoric, the foundation isn't dependent on the DAO. In truth, it's the opposite.
The DAO can't function without the foundation. Not just in the obvious ways, but from top to bottom.
The 2021 proposal to go off-chain came from the Executive Director of Decentraland. In the
proposal, he nominated three individuals to serve as the administrative committee members,
all of whom were working at the foundation at the time. Point is, the Decentraland DAO simply
lacks the means to function autonomously. Through lack of tools, unimaginable inequality,
general incompetence, and the lack of authority, the DAO is impotent. So, is it any wonder that
their grant scheme can turn $240,000 into the metagamma mall? I mean, what else could this system
possibly produce?
One of the most telling moments in the Decentraland timeline is the June 2019 blog post announcing
the switch from the Babylon engine to Unity. Not because of the engine change in and of itself,
but because of this note. Jumping added. Jumping puzzles, it's important to note,
are functionally the single ludic interaction inherent to Decentraland's mechanics. The only
games that you see in the world with any consistency, games that actually involve interacting with the
space and not with a two-dimensional UI element, are scavenger hunts and jumping puzzles. Unless
you're headed to the gambling halls, jumping on things is functionally the only thing to consistently
do in Decentraland, and it was, this is important, an afterthought. 2019, that's four years of
development before jumping was added as basic functionality. Ari Mellik and Esteban Ordano
are Argentine developers who met in a hacker house known as Casa Voltaire. Most of what we
know about Casa Voltaire comes from two online articles, one from 2017 and another from 2020.
Casa Voltaire hit the sweet spot of anonymity. There's not really any contemporary information
about what was going on there because it was just a flop house for tech pros, but it left
just enough of a footprint to become mythologized. The community at the Voltaire Castle became a
worldwide legend, a crazy hacker haven for cryptocurrency projects. As Ryan Vanzo describes
it, the house was a communal workspace where small startups would operate in the house and share
resources and expertise. This was combined with a heady blend of smart boy philosophy.
Both of the previously mentioned articles paint a picture of genius, citing the deep
conversations that would take place within the group. But you know, here's the deep
moral dilemmas Vanzo cites in his story. How should autonomous cars act in a situation that would
save the driver but kill a pedestrian? Who is liable if a bot malfunctions and causes harm?
What kind of neuro-security should we develop to protect users of brain-to-brain interfaces?
So, like, a high school introduction to ethics. One of those is literally the trolley problem.
In this environment and within the context of Argentina's political volatility,
Ordano and Mellick conceived of Decentraland as a bunch of things, principally a fulfillment of
the fantasy of snow crash, the matrix, and of course, ready player one.
The idea was basically whether we could do a virtual world that was based on
open standards and the blockchain and whether we could encode the physics into a blockchain.
Of course, influenced by videos and movies like Matrix, ready player one, and snow crash.
But inside of that was an inkling of the political, the notion that this could be a test bed for
political movements, for new economies, and ideally, liberation movements.
Writing for Rest of the World, Leo Schwartz and Lucia Cholecki and Herrera describe it
skeptically as a petri dish for the ideals of democracy and decentralization they championed,
built on the premise that a virtual world controlled by its own citizens
could more effectively govern itself and offer more stable investment opportunities
than a real one governed by elites.
Of course, in actuality Decentraland is steered exclusively by its own elites,
people who bought in hard and early and have the voting power to dismiss any challenge to their power,
or literal project insiders who have the social capital
and access to the code base to simply end run the will of the whales.
Because Decentraland is not a petri dish, sterilized and sealed off from our reality.
In 2003, writers rushed to Harold's Second Life as the vanguard of the future.
Not just a video game, but a new place that couldn't have existed before.
Two years prior, Edward Castronova had argued that EverQuest and virtual worlds like it
were important because the objects in them were worth money.
In response to Second Life, Castronova predicted that in the future,
humanity would pick the virtual world over the real.
The exodus of people from the real world, from our normal daily life of living rooms,
cubicles and shopping malls, will create a change in social climate
that makes global warming look like a tempest in a teacup.
Philip Rosdale, a developer on Second Life, went even further.
The real world will become like a museum very soon.
So it'll be fantastically cool to go to New York,
but in the same way that it's cool to go see the Mayan ruins.
Because the big buildings will still be there, but they'll be covered in dust.
Because no one will bother too much with them anymore.
There's just one tiny, almost inconsequential problem here.
Just a little thing.
We'll talk about it in a moment here,
but maybe just keep in your mind that there's a small little issue.
Johann Huizinga is known for his landmark anthropological work
Homo Ludens, published in 1938.
Huizinga was concerned with the interaction between play and culture,
and a key element of that was trying to define play.
What is the difference between a fight and a play fight?
How is it that chalk on grass can produce a boundary
that people take seriously during a game of soccer?
Huizinga proposed the concept of the Magic Circle,
which aims to describe how play space is delineated from the ordinary world.
In a game of Dungeons & Dragons, the rules and instructions alone
aren't enough to represent the entire game world.
It is the compound relationship of formal, social, dramatic, and aesthetic elements.
Essentially, when you buy into the game,
everything comes together to create a kind of pocket dimension.
A psychological bubble where board pieces, dice rolls, and social interactions
can take on unique meanings distinct from reality.
In a game of soccer, the players all agree to obey the rules of the game
and a social contract forms.
Suddenly, the ball, chalk, and their own limbs take on properties prescribed to them
in the player's mind, boundaries become respectable,
and in respecting them, they become real.
If, however, someone then karate chops the opposing goalie in the throat,
the bubble bursts, the contract has been broken,
the circle has been pierced, and the lines on the ground stop mattering real fast.
In an honest engagement where the fiction is unavoidably present,
but elided for the sake of immersion,
we would call the circle Suspension of Disbelief, or K-Fob.
Tom Belstorf and Edward Castronova both sought to push Second Life as a real place,
separate from the real world where genuine research could be done.
Belstorf argued that Second Life was a fixed site of culture like a Pacific Island.
Edward Castronova made a career out of arguing that Second Life was a site of
genuine economic activity.
They, not in their words, but in criticism,
present Second Life as existing within an impermeable magic circle,
as, like, the Matrix, somewhere you travel to.
A place.
Okay, but there's just that one tiny minuscule problem,
and that's that people who live in Second Life don't actually live in Second Life.
You can eat an infinite amount of digital food in virtual reality,
and you will still starve.
But the metaverse both presumes and requires that legitimacy of place and the real.
Either the outright reification of Ryan Bolger,
or digital fashion being pushed as a genuine property.
It needs to be real in order to be meaningful.
So the authors of Decentraland, its creators and its users,
paint a magic circle around it with a narrative of inevitability,
a narrative of the metaverse, a narrative of a true,
separate, new world that you will eventually move your life into.
Because if your neighbors aren't going to eventually be compelled to be here tomorrow,
why would you ever want this today?
Decentraland is, at every level, a collective fairy tale,
just people playing pretend.
The feeling of these shows was that we all performed a fashion week,
rather than participating in it.
Whether it be the pedigree fosterverse scraping data from adoptapet,
users playing lawyer in their corporate offices,
or purporting to be the future of news,
Decentraland's value to businesses is patently absurd.
And as we've seen, even its decentralized premise is a fantasy.
The Dow has no authority and is comically hapless,
content to play politics all the while pretending that they have a stake
in a billion dollar product.
And it's not enough to convince themselves.
They need to convince you.
So that is what they do by any means necessary.
They will pander, mislead, outright lie,
whatever it takes for you to buy into their narrative.
Because this only makes sense from inside the circle.
What if you could own the virtual world?
Create, develop, and trade without limits.
Make genuine connections, and earn real money.
Decentraland is a farce and a tragedy.
It is painted into a corner by a combination of ineptitude
and inherently bad ideas, and it cannot escape its fundamental being.
Whatever other ideals are spit out,
whatever rhetoric about liberation or political experimentation is employed,
the simple fact that it was materially born as a pre-sale
of lots of land based on a fiction of people moving in
sets off a chain of decisions and incentives about design
and functionality that bind it forever
to being little more than a fantasy real estate scheme.
An endless world of uniquely scarce dead malls.
I can't use that right now.
I can't use that right now.
I can't use that right now.
Thank you.
I can't use that right now.
I can't use that right now.
Mighty kind of you.
I can't use that right now.
I can't use that right now.
Oh my god, what did you do?
I can't use that right now.
I can't use that right now.
