All these people want to know where in the world is Carmen San Diego?
Hello again, Gumshoods. I'm Adam Wurzel. Welcome to a very special edition of Hosts at Home.
Now, we knew for our upcoming second season that we wanted to interview Greg Lee, the host of several of your favorite shows.
But today is truly special because for the first time since 1995, we are reuniting the cast of the hit PBS game show
where in the world is Carmen San Diego. That's right. With us, Acme, senior agent in charge of training new recruits.
Greg Lee, also the gentleman, of course, the gentleman who performed as the house band on the show.
They're all here to Sean Altman, Scott Leonard, Elliot Kerman, Barry Carl and Jeff Thatcher, better known as Rockapella.
Of course, the Rockapella incarnation of the early to mid 90s.
Gentlemen, great to see all of you.
Great to see you.
You too, Adam.
So we always start each episode of Hosts at Home by asking, where is home for you? Greg, we'll start with you.
These days, it's in Santa Monica, California.
Sean, I live in Manhattan with my wife and my daughter.
How about you, Scott?
I live in New York City, but I've escaped to Florida at the moment.
How about you, Jeff?
I live in Denver for two years now, but I used to live in New York City.
It probably coming back.
Oh, East.
How about you, Barry?
I'm about 20 miles north of Manhattan, in a foreign country.
Elliot?
I'm also in Manhattan, still.
Can I just say, Elliot, I love the hat.
The hat is fantastic.
Thank you. It was a, it was a Carmen throwback.
Oh, very good.
I love it.
Greg, let's start with you.
You were working at a very iconic place for other kids' game shows when you got the job on Carmen.
Tell everybody about that and how you transitioned into this role as host of Carmen San Diego.
Well, I, you know, I did a lot of stuff for Nickelodeon.
I started off as a audience warm-up guy for a lot of their stuff.
There was an old, old show called on CBS Saturday morning.
That's how long ago this was.
It was called Dr. Fad, which is about kids and inventions, I guess it was.
So I was doing a lot of audience warm-up and then some announcing stuff.
And then it was just a regular, you know, audition for, for Carmen.
And I'd been down in Florida doing some more Nickelodeon stuff down there for, for a total panic.
And then it came back to New York.
And then we just had the audition with the, with Carmen.
So we started there.
How involved were you in the development of the show?
Not much. They, they already had, had it pretty much going when I got there, you know.
Just trying not to screw it up too bad.
I remember my stuff.
Say them, say the big words.
Elliot, Elliot, let's go over to you now.
Can you tell us a little bit more about the group's audition process for the show?
Um, God, I don't know if I even remember that.
I think I can't remember what happened.
I think they, does anybody remember actually?
I do remember.
I remember at least how we got the audition.
So we had just, um, Spike Lee and company do it acapella had aired and that was our
first national prominence.
And sometime after that aired, I remember being in my closet in my, uh, on East 10th
street of my apartment and the phone rang and it was, it was way pre cell phone and
I answered it and he said, my name is Dana Calderwood and I'm directing a, um, a show
in development about, uh, that's based on a, on a, on a, um, on a popular kid's computer
game and we saw you guys on Spike Lee and would you be interested in auditioning for
the role of the house band that I remember after that, I don't remember much at all.
Let's talk to you, Scott, because Scott, you joined rock a pella in 1991, the same year
as we're in the world is Carmen, saying, sending up from here.
Can you kind of just go in depth a little bit about how crazy life was for you in 1991?
It was crazy.
I just got back from work, uh, in Japan and wanted to move to New York and, uh, there
was something in the backstage publication about various things.
But one of the things is rock a pella, it sounded like a good fit.
So I went out and sang with them and we decided to do it.
And then my first, then to actually move up to New York, I think the, I moved up the
first, the day before we had a meeting with the producers of Carmen San Diego.
So as soon as I got there, we started doing that.
And then a bunch of stuff hit.
Like we did a Whoopi Goldberg HBO special and, uh, Taco Bell commercial for the MTV
movie awards.
And then we, and then Billy Joel.
And it's all been downhill for 30 years.
Really, I thought it was really going to be great.
Hoping to get back there.
Uh, Charm, let's, let's chat with you because we can't move forward without talking
about this iconic theme song.
How did you get the idea for the theme song of the show?
Um, I would, I wish there was a, uh, I had an erudite explanation, but I really
think it was a weird beginner's luck because I wasn't a, and now I consider
myself a songwriter, but when I wrote that, I, I think I, I consider myself someone
who had an ear for, for something catchy, but I, I think I kind of got lucky and it
was, um, you know, they, they, they told us they, they wanted music and, and I had
this idea for the, for the thing.
Somewhere around a microcosette, I have like the, the recording of me calling it,
calling into my answering machine because that was before there was, uh, smartphones
where you could record an idea.
And, um, you know, the, the, the most seasoned songwriter I knew was my old
high school friend, David Yasbeck.
And I said, I've got, I've got three ideas.
What is any of these any good?
And he said, this one is the good one.
And I said, would you, would you help me flesh it out?
And he did.
And, uh, and we did a demo and the group liked it.
And next thing you know, it was on TV and we, we never had any concept that it
would be featured in the way that it was.
That was really unusual.
And I think that's pretty much explains why the song has, uh, a lasting impact is
that we were on camera singing it or lip syncing it every day.
But you know, what kind of, what theme song gets that kind of placement anymore?
So that was, it was a weird confluence of happy accidents and luck.
The world is Carmen Sandiego.
Where in the world is Carmen Sandiego?
Rockapella was featured prominently throughout all five seasons of Wearing
the Worldest Carmen Sandiego.
Barry, you guys did these song clues throughout the show.
A lot of times these clues were arrangements that Rockapella had already done
live with new lyrics.
How quickly did you have to learn all of this material?
The group was just, uh, it was kind of mind blowing to sit in a dressing room.
And without a keyboard or anything, throw together arrangements of songs and
then go out on the set and record them.
Uh, I felt like I was, I was working with a bunch of like most art level geniuses
because they, we figured out parts and jammed, you know, they'd write these
lyrics and we, we jam them into songs.
And we were kind of used to doing that anyway with, with, uh, industrial shows,
you know, taking songs from our repertoire and putting somebody else's
lyrics to them.
But, uh, now when I, when I look back and I, and I, uh, I'll, I'll watch one
of those clues and go, damn, that was tight.
For our next clue, here's Rockapella.
We put this together and went out and did it.
It was just, it was amazing process.
Does anybody remember, did we even use cue cards?
Cause I don't recall.
Sometimes.
Okay.
But also what was crazy was that I think in the first three seasons, we did them
live. It wasn't until the latter, maybe the fourth and the fifth season that they
started taping our clues.
So we would get, we would literally have to put together an arrangement, do the
arrangement, learn the thing, and then go out and sing it live during the show.
Wait a minute, something's going on out here.
Let's find out what it is.
Hey guys, what's up?
Calypso.
One, two, three, four.
It was a zombie jamboree, took place in an island cemetery.
It was a zombie jamboree on an island in the Caribbean Sea, just out of the
windward islands.
You can hear some great Calypso bands.
Zombies of the season of County Valor, they get together and knockin' out.
First year, they would do the whole show straight through.
That they started splitting it up, where you do all the middle game or all the end
games, right? That first was like a radio show.
It was crazy.
It is horrible.
We were there very late at night, too.
Very early, very early in the morning.
I didn't see spring for five years.
You guys, you guys may not have known that you remember that first several shows,
they kept changing the rules.
Did you, were you aware of that?
Even continued to change as we were going.
The scoring system on today's Carmen San Diego is different, but the game is the same.
That's not happening.
Now we're going to do this, and it was just so horrible.
You were really good though, by the seat of your pants.
I think I was just dazed.
It's very kind of, I think it was out of my mind.
Well, you look cool.
It's the coat, baby.
It's the coat.
And this is special agent in charge of training new recruits.
Greg Lee.
Greg Lee.
Seriously, that first year was a lot of reinventing the wheel as we were going.
And I still have some parents who are mad at me from the first season, because if you guys remember,
as Scott said, we would do the whole thing, or Elliot said we would do the whole thing
all the way through.
So you would do all the business with you guys and the songs.
You were doing those live, and I would go to Lynn's office and she'd be sitting back there.
We'd do our bit, we'd come back out, we'd keep rolling.
We'd go right into the middle part, into the big map part.
And the rules of the big map for the first season, at least for most of it was,
I had to give three clues for each country.
So while the kids staying in there with the thing.
Let me tell you a little bit about this particular country.
Isn't it iron ore, and it's so very temperate, and the kids would just tell me the name of the country, man.
On your mark, get set, go.
Side of landmark civil rights protest is Capitalism Montgomery.
Carmen went to Alabama.
All right, sorry, try it again.
That's it, okay.
So come on, let's go.
The nation's leading dairy producer is Capitalism Madison.
Carmen went to Wisconsin.
Rattling off all this information, cancer, man, I can see him off to the side.
They're screaming, why is he reading so slow?
That got changed relatively early, but I don't remember any pilots,
but I do remember just, as they said, a lot of, you know, the beginning time,
just kind of making it up and staying very late and getting up very early.
But it was a, I gotta tell you, man, it was still some of the best,
best friends I've ever had working ever.
Met my wife on that show, and it was just one of the greatest experiences
because I think it was more than it, you know, it was more than just a game show.
I think it was, it was a lot going on there.
And I wish they still had something like it, because, you know,
I think one of the things we always said about that show was people would always ask,
you know, do you really think you can teach kids about geography in such a short period of time?
We would always say, well, no, but we can't get them excited about it and interested in it,
because it's not just about the places on the map, you know, it's,
you got people there and cultures and food and religion and all these wonderful traditions.
And as we've seen the world get so much smaller, you know, it seems so much more important to be
aware of that. And I kind of, I'm sorry that they still don't have something like that.
They can do that for kids and for us too.
Hey, Greg, when did you, at some point I know you started writing for the show.
Yeah.
And I was, I remember being really happy because I felt like you're, you know,
I always felt like I was completely in the dark about anything having to do with
the inner workings of the show. You know, I feel like I did what I was told, but at some point
you started writing and that must have been very sort of freeing and creatively exciting for you.
Yeah, it really was, it really was fun, you know, because working with you guys and of course with
Lynn was just such a, I was, I always felt very, because like I said, I'd basically come from
audience warm up and out, so it was still kind of new to me to even do any of this kind of stuff.
And I always felt like I was, you know, learning so much from you guys and from Lynn too.
I remember when it dawned on me that she was hilarious. Like, I don't know that they really
realized how hilarious she is. When I asked if I could just take a few shots at starting to
write some stuff, you know, I started with those, what we call Jilos, the Greg and Lynn's office,
you know. And I said, I remember saying, for a while, my character kept taking all the hits
and I kept saying, I think my character is the kid and she's like the parent. And I'm telling you,
she can't hit herself in the face with a boxing glove and fall back and it will be funny because
she's hilarious. And I just remember that just for a lot of the writers, it seemed like it opened
a lot of possibilities because she was so great and you guys were always so up for anything and,
you know, and for whatever could happen. It just opened so many things that we get so
fun. So I wasn't just the guy having to read those cards. Did you write the Floyd the Barber stuff?
Yeah, Floyd the Barber, which is basically my brother preacher character, which is basically
the mayor from Doug. It's all the same. No, no, nonsense. That burning sensation is normal. It's
the, well, it's the puffiness that has me concerned. Be back with you just a little bit. Hi,
you Craig. Of course, there is one cast member, as Greg said, that is no longer with us. Jeff,
tell us about your memories of Lynn Thigman. You know, Lynn, you know, she's a total professional.
I've come to learn over the years how much she was respected at every show. She did a lot of shows,
not just PBS goofy stuff, but really serious drama stuff. And there's just so much respect for her.
And I'm sorry to not have her here. For our next clue.
She was a great singer. So we got to sing what she did, the number with a few numbers with us.
And when she would sing and tear it up, it was, it was really something. She won a Tony award.
And she was the, she played the stage manager in the movie Tootsie. Oh my God. She's kind of,
you know, she's an icon and such, such a nice, they're nice to us. Just always really warm to us.
She was lovely, a lovely, and she was very generous. She's a very lovely, generous person.
She was a joy spreader. And I thought she just kind of up leveled the whole production. She was,
she was probably the, the, the one real pro amongst us. No offense, Greg.
I only agree. I was the act and it was a way. Yeah.
They hired us to do the, the next generation of Rockefeller to do the,
where in the world is Carmen Sandier go planetarium show? You remember that Scott?
And we, it was like surround sound. It was supposed to be on a dome and a planetarium.
It was after this, this show had ended. And I was so relieved to see that she was part of that.
Because we felt, to me, it seemed like a little bit adrift without her. And there she was,
comfortingly talking about planets and stars.
None of you guys have a Tony award like Lynn did, but there was a lot of acting on this show.
From the outside looking in, it kind of felt like Scott and Barry that you guys were doing
most of the acting. Barry, we'll start with you. Did you come from an acting background?
I did, but let's make a distinction here between acting like Lynn did and stick like we did.
Oh, I take offense at that.
What do you imply?
The fine art of stick.
I'm sorry, I'm sorry.
Okay, I was deeply committed. Stanislavski method, really getting in there,
really penetrating the character. You know, I had a long, passionate relationship with Mrs.
Pumpkin Clanger. The stench of crime lies heavy upon us like a patient etherized upon a table
and a loss by downstairs neighbors are the clumsy surgeon entrusted with its cure.
Thank you, thank you, thank you.
Can you still do the voice Barry? Can you still do the Mrs. Pumpkin Clanger voice?
No, I guess not. You know, the most interesting thing about that character was coming out of
hair and makeup in my house dress and full drag. I had a bra and each cup was stuffed with two pairs
of like thick athletic socks. And even though the camera crew, everybody knew me, you know,
it's like, it was me, but there I was and you know, awakened makeup with these huge tits.
And I, the poor guys in the camera crew, they couldn't help looking at them.
And I was like, guys, guys, it's socks. It's me and socks. You're not looking at what you think
you're looking at, but I know you can't help it. It's really funny. Scott, the Emmy, the Emmy for
Best Dying Informant goes to you. I think we have a serious problem on our hands.
Do you ever lose your voice from all that screaming? I basically scream for a living. I mean,
if you've listened to the parts of Rockapellets. Yeah, I don't think I've ever, well, I've lost
my voice funny. Yeah, sure. But not from the Dying Informant.
With me, it wasn't really shtick. It was shtick because I was such a wooden actor.
But it was, I guess, everybody's dream to put on an Elvis outfit, do Elvis. So that was actually
really, really fun. That was one of my favorite moments of the whole show. That and consistently,
actually, the middle game was absolutely phenomenally crazy on the edge of a cliff fun.
Aruba's fruit market. Attention, fruit market shoppers, no. Aruba's fruit market. Attention,
fruit market shoppers, still no. Stampede. Stampede. That sounded like a real stampede.
Caravan town. Not here, not now. Right, nothing there, turned around. Trying to get the warrant
in the loot and like trying to crack Greg up. And like that whole thing was just crazy live TV.
I should find your turn. Gillette tassel. Gillette tassel. Ow!
Cut myself shaving, Greg. Get it? Oh, I don't know.
By the end, they would make us show them the list we had made of the terms for the loot,
because they got a little blue or a little bit too pushy, too edgy for PBS. So we would have
to have Howard, the producer, come and look at our list, say, okay, okay. My favorite was when
they had that statue in Belgium of a little guy that's urinating. A little monkey piss. And we
said, little us weep weep. And there was also a European. They vetoed that one. They vetoed
European. Yeah, I was so disappointed. I thought, European, okay. It was like, no.
That would be totally allowed nowadays. Bring on more pee. We had the list of where everything
was. And when they were, when they said something, we would all go into this, like a sprinter's
crouch, you know, and we were, you hear the breathing of the guy next to you to know when
to come in. It was, it was, it was athletic and very exciting.
That was like one of the most creative parts of the show is that we would actually get to write,
five or six of them. And we were so, so frustrating when the kid would get it quickly and we didn't
get to use this brilliant comedy, right? I think, I think we came up, I don't think we started with
the loot. I think the loot came after they started censoring us. And so when they censored us, like
with European and what those ones, then we would just be pissed and say, the loot.
Jeff, when you, when you joined this group, I mean, what were your first thoughts? Because,
I mean, these are some, some wild and zany people. Yeah, I had seen them on the Spike Lee special
that they got Carmen from. And for my audition, I had to interpret the sequenced drum sounds from
the soundtrack album to Carmen San Diego. That was one of the things that Sean had me do in my
hotel room audition. So when I got there, it was, you know, it was a well-oiled machine. It was
already in Queens, in Kauffman Astoria Studios, and Elliot would pick me up in his car service in
the Upper West Side of New York. And we would, off we would go to this crazy thing that I'd never
seen before. I'd worked in production staff for TV for a couple years, but I had not been a part of
something this colorful and seemingly freewheeling, I guess you could say. And, and I, you know, that
something that these guys have kind of alluded to, there was definitely a little bit of a rebellious
vibe. There was a creative versus structure kind of thing going on. That was really interesting to
watch because that kind of sense of rebellion is kind of what Rockapella is in many ways. In my
interpretation, I've seen that a lot and it's, and it's something that is hilarious.
What's going to happen is Greg's going to come out and Scott's pants are damped.
And Greg's going to creep into me.
Let's go, I ate one. Yes!
Go Dino, go, go, uh, word. Let's see if I can look from there.
Oh, there you go.
Well, I have to use that one. I'm locking it.
That's a good one. You can use that.
Yeah, let's do it.
There's a fine shit of, what do you call those things again?
Uh, fiber optic sparklers.
I knew how a TV show was made, but I had not seen that level of creativity in action, like moment
to moment. It was really interesting.
There was a lot of moving parts to this show. Greg, what was the most challenging part of your job?
Well, I mean, I make jokes about it, but I really did, it was hard for me to read those cards.
I mean, some of those names are very hard for me. I'm a fairly dyslexic person.
And I mean, seriously dyslexic.
And so some of those were like, you got to be kidding me, man.
I couldn't even pronounce them.
I read them.
Okay guys, name the city, if you will, please.
Is it Bratislava, Gdansk, or Odessa?
Remember the clues that we heard on the Danube River?
The answer we're looking for is Panampan.
Nice job, guys.
Kunming, Hong Kong, or Taipei?
Remember the clues that we heard.
Thanks a lot.
If there was ever any pressure about it, that for me was always the hardest part, to just be rolling
and then have a Herzegovina sitting there. I have no idea what that said.
What in the world is that, you know? So that was always the hardest part for me.
The rest of it was fairly, you know, when you could move and do things, it was fairly
just enjoyable. It was just fun, you know.
And of course, the map was the most fun, because that's the time that I felt like I was the kid's
teammate. So you just really wanted them to get there.
Do you think your geography skills got better through the years?
Possibly. I mean, I mean, they were okay before, I guess.
I remember the, I don't know if you guys remember this, but I think it was at the very first show.
It was early on, I remember that the Soviet Union broke up right before we went to Tape when
done. Do you guys remember this?
Yes.
They changed all the maps like the night before.
Check in Slovakia.
Yeah. So everything had changed like the night before. So they'd been up all night changing
the big map that we're going to use that day.
That story has an ending somewhere, but I don't have it right now.
Can we, while I have everybody here, and I want to kind of set the record straight,
because Barry before we went on told me a story, Greg, about this unique accident that happened
on set between the two of you. Do you remember that, Greg?
Who was it? What was the who?
Between you and Barry, an accident happened.
To me, Barry?
Barry knows it.
Barry, you know it?
Was it? It sounds like an unplanned pregnancy.
A ten ton weight?
Ten ton weight?
No, no, no, but Ash, do you remember?
Actually, we were rehearsing one of the one of the big baby scenes, and I was making a lot of
noise. I was probably crying, and you silenced me by shoving a big binky in my mouth.
I don't know what got into you that day, but it just slugged me in the mouth. I had this big,
huge, fat lip.
I have no memory of that.
My mouth remembers.
Greg, you apologized at the time. There was no hard feelings.
I just remember that enormous binky slamming into my mouth. It's been years of therapy,
but we're good.
I do remember hitting a shot with a snowball when we had that big grunt around it.
Yeah, that's one of the ones that's on YouTube.
Now, we have just heard that Nimoy has left Conakry, so let's pick up the chase.
Okay, quite enough of this, mister. I'll tell you right now.
My daughter loves that one, but it was good. When I watched that, my main impression is,
wow, I could run, because that was good.
I remember some of the stuff we did was, I wouldn't call it athletic, but
the four or the five of us crammed into the doorway to sing to Greg, sing some of those
clues. I don't know how we did that, because we were all three of us, two of us must have been on
our knees and we were all just kind of squished in there.
We remember banks, banks, banks. The three of us, four of us were singing some background
thing and our lyric was banks, banks, banks. Before the skit, we said, okay, on banks, banks,
banks, we're all going to jump, hop on each banks. Of course, we all got together except for Sean
and said like, let's not do it. So Sean's is hopping. Oh my God, it's great.
I think we got the point. Thank you. On the final taped episode of Carmen,
Sean cut off, or Greg dressed as the barber, you cut off Sean's iconic braids, but is it true that
nobody else knew what was going to happen? Thank you for calling the braids iconic.
I look back at them with the mixture of embarrassment and
I spent a lot of money on this. I remember that the only people that knew was going to happen
were Greg and I guess the director and one of the producers. I think maybe I was done with wearing
an 80s haircut in the 90s.
I just found almost all of those braids. I'm going to try to sell them.
This is Lynn Bigbin for wearing the world is Carmen San Diego and remember the Acme
Triangle of Excellence, vigilance, dedication, courage.
All geographic information was accurate as of the date this program was recorded.
It's Carmen San Diego.
Including all the hair gentlemen, I mean, I truly loved wearing the world as Carmen San Diego,
every element, Greg, Rockefeller. So the big question is, why do you change a show?
Why do you make a show wearing time as Carmen San Diego when the show was already such a huge hit?
I remember somebody in power telling me it's easier to get funding for a new show than to
get an existing show refunded. I don't know how that works. It was disappointing. I mean,
especially in retrospect, when you realize now how valuable to a career being on television is.
At the time, maybe I can't speak for everyone else, but at the time, I remember thinking,
we'll get on another TV show or some other amazing thing will happen, but these things
don't happen very often. And to be on television every day is, wow, that's a powerful thing for a
career. That sound means it is time for the lightning round, just like on Carmen San Diego.
You're on host home. We also have a round. Are you guys up for a challenge?
Scott says reluctantly, yes, sir. Here's what's going to happen. Let's see how well
you know your Carmen San Diego crooks. I'm going to go to each of you. I'm going to ask you to name
a crook. We're going to keep going until we have one winner. Name any Carmen San Diego crook. Jeff,
we're going to start with you. It's a brute. Elias. Nick the slick. Barry. I lose. Greg.
Eddie Larison. Scott.
Top Grunge. John.
That was great, by the way. That was great. Back over to you, Jeff.
Oh God, what's left? Those two guys, the twins, double trouble. Yes, double trouble. Elias.
That was the last one I could remember was double trouble. You have five left.
Five left? There's five left.
I got one. Three seconds. No idea.
All right, there's Scott. There's four more left.
I got nothing. All right, I'll give you guys a hint.
Robo crook. Robo crook. And the Contessa.
And Nana Rap, but people didn't realize that. She was very diverse. She was.
She had suffered a lot. Nobody knew. She's no good.
Nana. You got the Nana.
By the way, the two that nobody named just so we can put everybody out of their misery
was Sarah Nade. Oh yeah. That was the rock one.
And then nobody, nobody names Carmen San Diego.
Well, we want to talk about what everybody's doing now. Scott, you have been in Rockefeller
coming up on 30 years and you're still making great music with Rockefeller.
Like you hear that statistic that Scott Leonard has been with Rockefeller for 30 years.
Does it surprise you? Yeah, it's kind of, I don't, doesn't really mean anything to me. I'm like,
it may after day just get up and do it again and then it just accumulates like that, I guess.
Crazy. I can't believe it's been 30 years since we did Carmen San Diego. I mean, that's another life.
Yeah. And Jeff, you're also still with Rockefeller. Can you tell us what the group is up to nowadays?
Well, we never stopped making stuff and we've had a lot of albums and,
you know, Folger's coffee commercials and all kinds of things like that. So,
you know, if that sound is something that you enjoy, please come and check us out.
Elliot, you left Rockefeller in 2004 and I'm really jealous of you because
you work on my wife and my absolute, like, favorite TV show besides Carmen, of course.
Can you tell us about that? I guess you're talking about the Marvelous Mrs. Maisel.
But so I work on my, I built a business over the years consulting on and submitting
tax incentive applications for many, many, many TV shows and films in New York.
So I work for big studios and one of them is, one of my shows is the Marvelous Mrs. Maisel.
Wow. That's a fantastic show. How about you, Barry?
How about you? What are you up to? Well, you know, I left the group in 2002
and my primary incentive was my kids were growing up without me.
So I spent a good amount of time kind of having a relationship with my kids, which went by really
fast, you know, because then college happened and out of the house. I retrained as a therapist
and I've been doing that for, gosh, 15 years. But I still get to do music and I have,
I've been doing voiceovers for since 1983, I think. So I'm still basically doing everything
that I was doing except singing with the guys and traveling. And of course, we have to mention this.
How could we forget? You were the announcer of the game show. You would have. I was. That's right.
And one of these don't shoes put fire. She's trouble to South Carolina and collects basketball
cards. Meet Eshra Parham. He's Mr. Niagara Falls and has a travel guide collection. Meet Adam Irby.
She's been to Spain and Columbia, likes martial arts. Meet Stephanie Donozo. We all wear a lot of hats.
Literally, literally. Like Elliot, literally wear a lot of hats. Sean, you always wear a lot of
hats. And now you have this incredible duo, the Everly set. Wake up, little Susie, you wake up.
Never felt like this until like it's your love hurts, love scars. I'm in a Everly Brothers
tribute act. I've become one of the, you know, when I was, when I was focused on writing original
music, I used to laugh at tribute acts. And now I've become, that's what I do now.
And finally, because the show is called hosts at home with the most Greg Lee in very sunny Santa
Monica, California. What are you up to nowadays? Mostly I just do a lot of voiceover like Barry
and, and then we do a lot of writing pitch. And I just did a show for audible for highlights
magazine. We did a bunch of kid stuff for them. So we still do a lot of that stuff.
Well guys, this has been truly phenomenal to reunite the cast of Where in the World is
Carmen San Diego. Did you guys have fun? Yes, I did. Yes. Yes, I did. It's great. It's great to see
you guys. Very great to see you. I was key. You got to count it off, Sean. You got to give it a shot.
Is that it? That's it. Wow. That's so high. Oh my God.
Cut. Let's take it down a whole step.
Oh God.
It'll never, it'll never sink up. It'll never sink up, right.
Warning. What you're about to see is living proof that live music does not work over Zoom.
One, two, three.
See, I told you. You guys are amazing. Thank you all so much for being with us here
on Host at Home. Thank you, Adam. Like every episode. Thank you guys. Like every episode,
I don't close the show. We're going to go to the host of Where in the World is Carmen San Diego,
senior agent in charge of training new recruits. Craig Lee, over to you.
Thanks, Adam. This has been a true blast. Thanks to the boys for showing up. Thanks to all of you
for showing up. Please be sure to join us again for Host at Home. Until then, do it, Rockefeller.
Carmen San Diego.
This is Linda Quinn speaking for Where in the World is Carmen San Diego. And remember,
we chase crooks down to towns and states. They end up stamping license plates.
Where in the world is Carmen San Diego? Where in the world is Carmen San Diego?
All geographic information was accurate from the date this reunion was recorded.
Where in the world is Carmen San Diego? Where in the world is Carmen San Diego?
