Good morning.
Good response.
All right.
Welcome to Caltech.
We're happy that you're all here.
Just a couple of housekeeping notes before we get started.
Is everyone's cell phone on silent or off?
Sure of that.
Double check.
And then also please make note of all the exits around the
cross the back of the room and on the side should we need them
and just be aware of that.
And we're going to get started.
I'm Mitch Akin and I head up educational outreach here in
our Center for Teaching, Learning and Outreach at Caltech.
In CTLO and in the outreach office in particular,
we provide Caltech connections to the local K-12 community
and beyond with opportunities for our undergrads,
graduate students, postdoctoral scholars, staff and faculty
to develop communication and pedagogical skills,
while also connecting with local students,
teachers and families such as yourselves.
We hope to ignite curiosity,
mentor future scientists and give a peek into what's happening
on our campus.
We have a teaching program at local elementary schools.
We come to science nights at schools near Caltech
and we invite Pasadena Unified School District students
to do summer research with us here on campus.
We also help identify great speakers for the Science Journeys
program which brings us all here today.
Our speaker today, Sneha Anugu, is a graduate student in the
Social and Decision Neuroscience Program here,
advised by Professor John O'Doherty.
She received her Bachelor of Technology in Electrical
Engineering from the Indian Institute of Technology,
Madras, her Master of Science in Computer Science
from the University of Massachusetts, Amherst,
and the next stop on her science journey was Caltech.
I'm very excited for you to hear her presentation,
I, Human, Unlocking the Secret of Human Intelligence.
Thank you.
Music
Hi everyone.
So welcome fellow humans, welcome to my talk.
I'm here to share with you today the story of how I came to
Caltech and what made me decide to play the detective of the
human mind.
So the story starts here.
This is where I was born, in the city of Hyderabad and
country of India.
So I've been asked this question many times.
What did you want to be when you grow up?
All of you have been asked this question.
With a show of hands, can you tell me how many people stuck
to the same answer given at the age of 10?
Oh wow, you guys had a lot of clarity at such a young age,
I'm impressed.
But I was not like that.
At the age of 10, I didn't know what I wanted to be
and all I said was I wanted to be a civil servant.
I didn't know what that meant, all I knew was that my father
wanted to be one and couldn't be.
So I just thought I would be one.
And I also knew that that is a way to help people,
work with the government and help people.
So that seemed like a noble profession.
But things changed.
I moved away from helping people.
I still want to help people, but in a more indirect manner.
So what made me change my mind?
The story begins with stories.
I am a big fan of novel stories and I grew up reading a lot
of books, watching a lot of movies and recognized this one.
How many of you love this one?
Yes, it's a universal favorite.
I loved Harry Potter growing up and the reason I love the story
is that it lets us think of an alternate universe.
What happens if there was a world with magic where we cannot,
we can do things that we cannot do in our daily lives.
Like we can make objects fly.
We can appear and disappear at will.
No more long lines at airports.
Just operate.
That's fun, right?
And this is a second story.
How many of you know this story?
A lot of the rings.
Yes, a great audience here.
We all like the same things, right?
This is a great story.
This is a story about friendship, courage and sacrifice.
And it's also a story in an alternate universe where there are
hobbits, wizards, dragons, elves and dwarfs.
Something that we don't see in daily life.
And that fascinated me.
So things I love about these stories are weaving alternative
realities, things that don't exist anymore.
Anyone recognize this?
It's a major movie.
I think all of you have seen this movie?
Yes.
So what does this movie talk about?
What if we live in another world where water is just as
scarce as gold?
And what if there is a spice that can make you live longer and
help you predict what happens in the future?
None of us know what happens in the future.
But if you take this spice, you will know the consequences of
your actions.
That's power, right?
So in such a world, what happens?
And this story, I, Robo, Space Odyssey, it's about machines gone
wild.
We create all these machines that think like us, act like us
and are more intelligent than us.
And they take over the world.
Or what are the consequences of living in such a world like this?
So what is actually the commonality between science fiction,
fantasy and science?
It's just that these media help us conceive of an alternative
reality that does not yet exist, right?
And that's fun.
So what's common between science fiction and science, right?
But imagine you're a time traveler.
So you decided to travel back in time and visit this place in
time where you're using PGMs to send messages to people far off.
If you had gone back in time and talked to those people that I
come from a land where I can talk to my fellow humans all the
way across on the opposite side of the globe within a matter of
seconds.
And what would they tell you?
They tell you that you're crazy.
That is science fiction.
That is fantasy.
But that is now a reality.
So what does science do?
It can make today's fiction become tomorrow's reality.
And as a big fan of science fiction, I realized science would
be a great profession for me.
But it took me a long time to come to that realization because I
never thought, I never imagined I would be a scientist.
And the most important reason is this.
Who do you think of when you hear the word scientist?
Actually, when I say go, I want you to shout out one word of one
person who you think of when you hear the word scientist.
Go.
So, yes, legends.
You think of legends, right?
Einstein, Isaac Newton.
When you hear these names, you feel like, oh, my God, I can never
match up to them.
They're special.
They're geniuses.
And who is this tiny, puny human compared to them, right?
Yeah, I'm not special.
Like, how can I be special?
They're genius.
Look at this Albert Einstein with all this geniusness.
But I came to, by interacting with scientists, when I was little,
like you, sitting there as an audience and seeing scientists speak
about their lives.
I realized that science does not want you to be special or anything.
It's just the only requirement that takes to be a scientist,
a curiosity and passion.
And it's just another profession, like any other.
Like a teacher, lawyer, doctor.
You just be a scientist because you love doing it.
And that's the only requirement.
You don't have to be special.
You don't have to be brilliant.
You can learn this like anything else.
Only requirement is curiosity and passion.
This took a long time for me to realize.
But I finally did it.
I felt like I'll do it because I love doing it.
So growing up, what did I love?
I loved mathematics and physics.
And I struggled with chemistry and biology.
Who are in the same boat?
A few of you.
But that's mostly because our early experiences are largely
governed by who inspired us or how it would start in our school.
Like if you had a great teacher who was very friendly
and who taught math and physics in an exciting way,
you would end up loving that subject.
On the other hand, if you had a great biology teacher
who made you like that subject, you would love it.
So yeah, I had great math and physics teachers in my high school.
And basically math and physics, you have a finite set of theorems
and you combine them in unique and creative ways.
And it's like puzzle solving, mystery solving, and I loved it.
Whereas chemistry and biology, you have to remember a lot of things,
a lot of equations, a lot of formulas and a lot of names.
Oh my God. And I struggled with it.
But there are some highlights in my high school biology.
One time, my biology teacher bought a human brain to class.
And I was fascinated. Oh my God.
Look at that. It was like jello.
I mean, I covertly touched it.
I was told not to touch it, but I was like, let me touch it.
Because it was like, it was jello.
It felt like jello.
And how can this three pound of flesh do such amazing things?
And I wondered it back then, but I didn't realize that I could do it
because I was afraid of biology.
So I thought, okay, maybe somebody else will solve this question,
not me.
Sneha, you do what you love, what you're best at.
Leave these problems to somebody else.
So what did I love?
This is my favorite textbook in high school.
How many of you know this textbook?
Oh yeah. I see a few fans' hands up.
So this was my favorite textbook.
And I particularly loved the chapter on electricity and magnetism
and I loved physics.
So I felt like the natural next stop for me would be engineering,
especially electrical engineering.
That brings to my next stop, IIT Madras.
It's again in India, Chennai, very hot place,
but it's a very beautiful campus.
We lived with wildlife because it was a jungle converted into campus.
So we lived with gorgeous creatures like black bugs
and annoying creatures like monkeys.
This was an actual picture actually.
This in the campus.
It was funny when we saw it.
But yeah, in this beautiful campus,
I took my first steps towards engineering
and life as an electrical engineer was fun
because we worked with all kinds of things that we use in our daily lives
like cell phones, what goes into cell phones,
like all these different devices
and login digital circuits and signals and communication.
Those are the kind of stuff I did in my college.
And if you see on the right, this picture is a nano satellite.
We students built and the Indian space program
offered to launch it into space for us.
And I think there are a lot of student satellite programs here in the US too.
So I did lots of cool stuff, but still something did not fit.
I feel like I didn't know what I wanted to be when I grew up.
I was having fun, but do I want to continue being an engineer?
Or do I want to do something else?
I didn't find the clear answer.
I was 20 years old and I was still confused.
Then I went to Munich.
I took a semester abroad program, which my university offered
and I could spend like three, three, four months
in a place called Technical University of Munich,
which is in Germany.
And this was my first travel outside the country.
How many here have visited other countries other than the US?
Ooh, a lot of travelers here.
But this was my first kind.
I first traveled when I was 21,
first time I stepped out of my country and I loved it.
I explored all the local cuisine,
went to this amazing castle which inspired the Walt Disney logo.
It's called Neuschwanstein, I think.
So I visited all these amazing places and it was fun.
But more importantly, I took a course
in electrical engineering department
at Technical University of Munich
that dealt with brain-computer interfaces.
And the name is just what it says.
It's a machine linked to the human mind
so it can read the signals from the brain
and do the tasks for you.
So imagine what it can do.
For example, if you have a person who lost their hand
and lost their hand in an accident,
so you can connect a machine hand,
that machine can read the signals from the brain
and can just work as a normal hand.
So that's great, right? That's awesome.
When I heard about this technology,
I was mind blown because not just that it's fantastic,
but it also provided me an insight
that language of the brain is electricity.
I was scared that study of the brain is just biology,
but the primary ingredient is electricity.
And I was an electrical engineer back then.
So I felt this is something I can totally do.
This is something I can work on.
I can figure out the biggest mystery of the human mind
and I can do that by just doing what I love,
which is math and physics.
And so that got me interested in the biology
and the study of neuroscience.
And talking about electricity, this is neuron,
the primary electrical element in the brain.
So you can see what comprises of a neuron.
Neuron has a cell body, dendrites, axon, axonal terminals,
and these are the other neurons
which are connected to the neuron by synapse.
So this neuron generates electrical currents
which are passed on to its neighbors
thus creating this communication between different elements.
But this is the basic element, electrical element in the brain.
And using this just a simple electrical element,
there was a revolution in AI back then,
which is converting how biological neuron works or operates
into simple mathematical abstraction of an artificial neuron.
So how does this work?
So first you have a cell body
which takes inputs through its dendrites.
So the inputs come to the brain, to the neuron,
through these dendrites, and the cell body integrates all the inputs
and then sends the signals to its axon terminals,
which are the outputs which communicates to other neuron elements.
The same thing can now be expressed as a simple mathematical equation.
This is the cell body, it gets all its inputs,
and it integrates it with some function and gives its output.
So whatever the complex biology there is here
is abstracted into a simple mathematical formula here.
And this is a simplification, like observed simplification
because neuron does much more than this.
And currently people are trying to solve,
trying to construct more complicated models of neurons,
but even this was enough to start a revolution in AI.
And how did that revolution go?
It's artificial neural network,
which is many of these simple neurons connected together in layers
created this enormous intelligence that it can learn different things.
It can learn complex things.
And the revolution that happened in 2014 is the deep neural networks,
which is you give the neural network an image
and through its many, many layers of neurons connected,
it can identify what that image contains.
So if you show it a picture, it can tell you whether it's a bird
or a dog or a cat, anything like that.
So that's awesome because whatever a human can do,
machines can do right now, like at least this part.
So this is what you can show in my machine, these images,
it can tell you the probability of it being a mite or a cockroach.
It can give you the probabilities.
If it's confused, it'll say it's confused,
but it'll give you like its score.
I think this is the motorboat, something like that.
So inspired by this, I joined, right after my college,
I joined an artificial intelligence industry.
Back then this revolution was so successful
that there were many companies built on this to make money out of this.
And the company I worked for, they decided to market this product
to fleet companies that can analyze their drivers,
like whether they're driving well or not well.
So they have a device that's placed inside your car
and that can see the car just as a human does
because it has a camera and it can scan all the surroundings
and it can tell you whether you're going too fast,
is there a car in front of you, is there a stop line,
have you just violated a traffic line, traffic light,
you just start through, like you know,
just went through a red light,
all these signals will now go to your fleet company.
So that means the drivers are being monitored.
And that was the use case there.
But working in this company,
I realized that this technology is not as impressive as it should be
because even after seeing a million examples,
it gets confused between minor things
and that creates a lot of problems.
We humans don't make these errors.
We might be distracted, we might cause a lot of accidents
but we don't make silly errors like these machines do.
And let's do a small test like to see how great,
we all know this.
So this is a bird called Northern Cardinal.
Take a look at this picture for about a few seconds,
Northern Cardinal.
And now tell me which of among these is the Northern Cardinal.
Shout out.
Awesome, that's the correct.
And how many examples did you take?
Just one.
You saw it just once and you just knew now that it was,
and it was the Northern Cardinal.
And all of these birds are red
but you still knew that there was something different about this image
that makes it Northern Cardinal.
But machines get confused a lot
and they have to see like thousands of examples.
And even then they make mistakes.
So machines are a little different.
They can't do things just as well as humans do.
But machines can do something else.
They're good at many other things.
Like there was this deep blue machine,
that built, that bet,
world's champion grandmaster at the chess,
Gary Kasparov at chess.
Machine bet, human.
And today's chat GPD, now it can do things that humans can
and sometimes humans can't.
Like solve complex code, write stories.
It does a lot of things.
And AI beats humans in retro games.
I don't think you guys played these games.
Did you?
Oh, you played?
These were the great games I grew up with.
Back in the days we used to play with cathode ray tubes
and my mom says that's how I got my glasses.
But these days AI can do this very easily.
But humans can beat AI in complex strategy games.
AI can't do this yet.
You do recognize these games, Minecraft and civilization.
Anyone play these games?
Oh, you guys do.
You guys are awesome.
So you guys can play this pretty well, right?
Or at least reasonably well.
But AI cannot play these games.
It's not at that stage yet.
But people are trying to make AI play these games.
But they can't play.
So AI struggles.
So human intelligence and machine intelligence
is very different at this point.
So what is human intelligence really?
If they're very different, what is human intelligence?
And how is it different from machines?
What we are doing today?
Now, when you think of human intelligence,
you might think, okay, it might be just an IQ test.
It's not just a simple IQ test.
It's more than a single metric.
There's a lot going on there.
So you learn music, right?
That is intelligence.
You write poetry.
That is intelligence.
You play soccer.
You learn to play soccer.
Complex games.
That is intelligence.
You learn math and solve physics.
That's intelligence.
And last and foremost, people forget always about this
because you see your fellow humans
and you kind of can interpret what they're feeling,
their feelings, their beliefs, their intentions.
And you can understand what they're going through.
And that's intelligence too.
That's called emotional and social intelligence.
So human intelligence is a lot of things.
It's multifaceted.
So how do we even begin to go about this question?
How to study intelligence?
So we know that this is causing intelligence
or this is most important organ.
So the question we need to tackle is from the brain.
How does the brain give rise to behavior?
And that's the question we need to solve
if we truly want to understand how humans are intelligent.
Now we can solve these questions at many levels.
Like how can we start to look at the brain?
You can study at many different levels.
You can study at the level of proteins
that make up these synapses
and then at the level of individual neurons
that make up the brain.
Or you can study at the level of circuits
like what happens when many neurons are connected together?
How do they give rise to behavior?
How do they work things?
Like just like the deep neural network still.
And level of systems.
You have different systems going on.
You have like vision.
You just now said the northern cardinal.
That's because your vision is working
and then converting it to your response.
So there are motor functions.
They are memory.
There are different kind of systems
that are happening in the brain.
And you can study them at that level too.
But think about, if you want to study just humans,
maybe you can study the top two layers.
No, I don't think that works.
You have to study everything.
But it's hard to study these bottom layers in humans.
Because how can you really get at the level of neurons
in the human brain?
But thankfully we do not have to
because we are not the only intelligent creators on Earth.
Animals are intelligent too.
Animals have a lot of intelligence.
So we use a lot of animals in neuroscience research
to understand what.
Because at the bottom layers,
all of us are identical.
Dogs, cats, mouse, housefly.
All of us have common electrical elements.
The common principles.
Only be humans differ in the top two layers.
How these come together and how these are organized.
That's where we are different from animals.
So if you want to study the bottom layers,
you can always go to animals.
And that's what neuroscientists do.
They go to different animals.
So these are the different animals that are used in neuroscience research.
This is a squid, zebrafish,
fruit fly,
mouse, monkey,
and last human.
So yeah, we use all these animals
to try and understand the human brain.
But since I'm not a biologist,
I'm more of a computer scientist,
I want to stick to the top two layers.
So I want to study with this last animal,
which is human.
I want to study humans.
So only the top two layers,
at least that's what I'm going for.
So that brings us to my next stop,
which is California Institute of Technology,
which is this lovely campus.
Is this your first time visiting this campus?
No.
But it's a beautiful campus and a beautiful place.
And here I work with John O'Doherty in the O'Doherty Lab,
which is Human Reward and Decision Making Lab.
This is my advisor.
And here I study human reinforcement learning,
which is I study how humans learn,
act, and plan in response to rewards.
So let's deconstruct this.
What is reward?
What is reward?
Really, rewards are anything
that is of value to us.
Like that is something
towards which we are willing to work towards.
Put effort to.
So you want to eat because food is a reward.
You want food to survive.
So that's a reward.
And there is money.
You're willing to work for money.
And money is like a secondary reward
because money helps you to buy food.
So that's a reward too.
And love is a reward.
It's a social reward.
And you like Instagram likes or Facebook likes.
That's a reward because you like them.
And then this one.
Why information?
Why am I doing a PhD right now?
What is my reward?
I want to know things.
Curiosity and information.
That is a kind of reward too.
So all our universe filled with rewards.
And our objective as humans
is to maximize the rewards in our environment.
We try to get good grades
because that gives us happiness, right?
Having a good score, having a good grade
that helps us achieve better things in future.
So that is a reward.
And that's why we were willing to work for it.
And rewards are very personal too.
What is rewarding to one person
cannot be rewarding to another
or may not be.
So it's like we have our own reward systems in the brain.
Like what makes us happy
or what is of value to us.
And so do animals.
We first studied this classical conditioning in animals.
It's called Pavlov's dog experiment.
So let's see that experiment once.
So you know that when you show food to a dog,
it starts salivating because it likes food.
Food is its reward.
But when you show a bell,
it doesn't respond anything
because bell is of no use to that, right?
Bell is nothing to it.
But what you do is you first ring a bell
and then give it food.
It starts salivating.
This is during conditioning.
You do it enough number of times
for it to learn that once you ring a bell,
it can expect food.
So after conditioning this for a long time
when you show a bell,
it will start salivating.
Which is weird, right?
What is bell to the dog?
Because it has learned that
whenever I get a bell,
I know I will get my food immediately after.
So it has learned to predict.
And why do we need to learn to predict these rewards?
Because it helps us take actions towards them.
Because once I know if I get a bell,
if I hear a bell, I can get food.
So even if it's away from the bell,
when it hears it's ring the bell,
it will run towards it
because it knows it can get the food.
And that's why learning these associations are helpful
because it helps us to get these rewards.
And this is called Thondite's box.
What this scientist did is,
he locked the cat in a box
and created some complex puzzle out of it.
So the cat has to press a series of actions,
like press this lever first,
then press this other lever,
and then it can open this box.
And you know what, cats solve this.
And that's intelligence too, right?
It figured out how to get out of the box.
It figured out how to solve the puzzle.
And that is reward too.
And we're willing to act for these rewards.
And that's why games are so fun, right?
Because games are like simulations of the real world.
There are stories in games.
You are like this brave warrior
who's going to kill all these villainous beasts
and like, emerge victorious.
So that's a reward too.
You get high score in the game.
And that's a reward.
And that's a simulated environment.
We don't have that in our daily lives, right?
We don't fight these beasts in daily lives,
but it's still a simulation.
The game is like simulated world
where we do all these fantastic things to earn rewards.
And that's why games are fun.
And guess what?
Games are a great platform to investigate how humans learn
because you play video games every day
and you get better at them every day, right?
You play it for a couple of times.
You understand how it works.
So that means you're learning something about the game.
You're learning something about the reward system
and you act so you get high points in the game.
And that's what we want to get at,
how humans are doing that,
because, yeah, I can't do that yet.
Yeah?
But humans can.
They can learn this.
And so what makes humans so much better
at learning these complex games like Minecraft?
And that was what I'm trying to figure out
as a graduate student in Caltech.
And my proposal is that humans are good at setting goals
and discovering goals in the environment.
They identify, they can break down things
and try to see how each thing fits into the other
and how to combine them
so I can solve this complex task.
So it can build, it can do this complex things
by setting sub-goals and goals.
Whereas machines can't do that.
Machines just see million examples and try to figure out,
okay, I'll do, if I do this, I might get this reward.
But it does not have this picture of the world.
It does not set goals.
And that's what I wanted to solve.
And recognize this game?
Anyone ever played this game?
Yes?
It's called Settlers of Catan.
Now a lot of you guys know this.
And I used to play this a lot with my friends.
You guys know this game.
You collect resources and you build things
so you can have been high points in the game
or reach the score of 10 before anybody else.
Of course there are a lot of complications in this game,
but the essential part is you have a lot of different options to do.
Right now you can build a house
or you can wait to get more resources to build something else
or collect a development card.
You can do a lot of things,
but you have to observe the situation around you,
see what your friends are doing,
see what resources are good now,
and then decide what I want to do right now.
And that part, I took inspiration from this game
and I created a simple game out of my own to study,
to use this as an experiment.
This game is how, so basically through my game
I want to address how do people select goals.
When multiple options are available,
how do they pick the right one?
And for that I created this game called Cosmic Constructions,
where you own a construction company in outer space
and you can build three items.
One is you can build a house
where you can collect stone, concrete, and metal,
and you can build a spaceship
where you can use glass and metal to build a spaceship,
or you can build an observatory
where you can use stone, concrete, and glass to build an observatory.
So you basically have four resources
and each resource is being supplied by an alien.
And you need to select the alien, correct alien
to get the resource.
But the catch here is these aliens
give the resource some of the times and do not.
Sometimes the resource is more abundant
and sometimes it's not.
So you have to read the situation
and see which alien is giving what resource
and how likely it is to give resource,
and whether I can get points or not.
So the objective of the game is to build as many things as you can
because each time they build an item, we give them 50 cents.
So if they build 20, 20 items, they get $10.
So that's awesome, yeah.
So they can actually win money through this game.
So we developed this game,
and so we tried to see how people choose what items,
do they choose the correct item?
Do they choose the right item
when the situation is right?
And how do I go about this?
Like once I have the game,
how do I, what is the next step I do?
I look inside the brain.
Anyone recognize this machine?
It's an MRI machine, yes.
You guys are all smart.
So what does an fMRI machine do?
It basically tries to see
which regions are more active in the game
when you're doing a task.
And how does that do that?
Because when part of the brain is more active,
it takes up more oxygen because neurons also,
neurons are electrical elements,
but they also need their fuel.
They need to run.
So they take up more oxygen.
That's how they run.
And once oxygenated and deoxygenated blood
have different magnetic properties,
then something is taking up more oxygen.
It behaves differently in the presence of a magnet
than the other thing.
So it's again physics.
You've come back to physics.
So what this MRI machine can do
is it can detect these tiny differences
in these magnetic properties in the blood flow.
So that's why when you put people in the scanner
and they do the task,
we know which regions are taking up more metabolic activity,
and then we can figure out those regions are acting
when you're doing this task.
And this is how like an image reconstruction
from MRI looks like.
Like these places where you think there's more blood flow
when you're doing that particular action.
And the right, this is two weeks ago, actually.
I did my first MRI scanning of this task,
and this is my friend Julia,
and she's the participant.
She played the game for me and vile inside the scanner.
So I can see through this, what do I expect to find?
I can see what regions facilitate selection of goals
and how does the brain decide
when it is time to switch away from this goal
and move on to the next one because it realized,
okay, this is not working out.
I need to move on.
And when does that happen?
What regions are facilitating this process?
We want to know because this hasn't been studied before.
Nobody knows it yet.
And I'm the first one who's trying to attempt.
So it's fun.
As a scientist, that's what you get.
You will be the first one to figure out what's happening.
Yeah.
And if there are differences in how people are performing
in the task, so can I find these differences in the brain?
When I look at the brain activity,
when I compare two people doing the task
and doing it very differently,
can I look in the brain and see how are they different?
And that's what I want to do.
That's what I expect to do, understand my study.
And I collected one part I spent.
So I'm doing 30 more and trying to figure out
how I'm trying to see what I find.
And then if I find something cool,
I will present it to the world saying that, okay, I did this.
And this is one of my pictures presenting my results
at a conference in Oxford.
One of the perks of being a scientist is you get to travel
and talk about your science, talk about what you did
and what you found because everybody's excited to know
what is happening.
Yeah, that's fine.
So that is my first project still ongoing,
but I'm also starting a few other projects,
which is about how people learn different skills.
We learn violin, we learn soccer,
we learn all these different cool skills.
And I want to figure out how humans learn this.
You know that you get better at a video game
when you play often, but how does that happen?
They say practice makes perfect,
but how is it strengthening some areas in the brain?
Is it strengthening communication between certain regions?
That's how we are able to act fast.
Nobody knows, and oh, no, nobody knows it well.
So I want to study that.
And so I want to design video games to create these circumstances
where I can pinpoint, okay, this is what is happening.
And that's still ongoing.
But meanwhile, research is not all I'm doing.
As a grad student, I'm also learning new things.
And learning as an adult can be inspiring,
because only last year, I started taking my first,
I started my first violin lesson,
and each time I'm practicing violin, I'm getting inspired.
I'm always thinking about how is human brain solving this?
How is the brain making this problem?
Actually, in this picture, I'm somewhere here.
You can't see me.
But this is my ensemble group at Pasadena Conservatory of Music,
and they provide me with a lot of inspiration every day
because all of us are learning new skills as an adult.
So there is no barrier to learning.
No matter how old you are, you can always learn.
You can be a perpetual student.
And this also inspires my research every day,
because I'm constantly thinking,
how is it that my brain is doing this?
How is it that I'm getting better every day
and doing new tasks?
And that's fun, and that's been inspiring.
But maybe when we figure out why humans are so good,
we can understand how to create genuine artificial intelligence,
true intelligence.
Not the ones we see machines doing today, but the true ones,
like our own R2D towards C3PO in the future.
Maybe science fiction will one day become reality.
That is cool.
But more importantly, we'll figure out how humans are solving
all these complex tasks and what makes us human.
And like an engineer asks, how does a TV work?
How does an airplane work?
I want to ask, how do humans work?
And I feel like I've come a long way through my journey,
but I also feel like I'm just beginning to start.
And the journey goes on.
And thank you here today for coming to my talk
and sharing my experiences.
And I'm thrilled.
I hope many of you will continue and join me in my experience
and join me in my journey.
And neuroscience is great.
No matter what subject you like, no matter what field you like,
you can always contribute to the study of intelligence.
Because we need physicists, we need biologists, we need chemists,
we need statisticians, we need everybody to figure out the human mind.
Because this is one of the biggest unsolved mysteries in the brain.
And you can all do it because I don't know,
I don't think it's going to be solved in my lifetime.
And you guys have to take it up too.
Thank you.
Thank you, Sneha.
Thank you.
Thank you.
So now it's your turn.
We'd like any of the students in the audience to ask some questions.
You probably have lots of questions about how your brain works
and how video games work and all that fun stuff and those connections.
So we have two mics down front here.
If you can come up to one of the mics, it's closest to you.
And we'd love to have some of the students come up and ask some questions.
This is your chance to learn a little bit more.
Don't be shy.
How did you choose what your reward for your games are
and what the objective is?
That's a good question.
Because rewards can be very personal, right?
So here I wanted to decide,
I wanted to see how people select their goals.
So I wanted to make sure that completing a goal will get you a reward.
Like you finish your house and that when you get the reward,
that means your objective is to finish building one item.
So how do you finish it fast?
You have to, one strategy for finishing fast is to select the goal
that gives the best resources or best available resources.
If stone or glass is most available, you go to Observatory
because that will finish your building fast and you'll get a reward
and you can continue building again.
And of course, the situations change.
Immediately after you're building Observatory,
maybe the glass is now devalued or glass becomes scarce.
So then you can shift to another goal.
So when you reward, when you set the reward so that you finish the building,
that's when you get the desired response.
And that's kind of like the real world, right?
You need to finish tasks.
Thank you for the question.
Anything else?
What's the science behind AI?
Science behind the AI.
The neural networks, actually the AI is a very big field.
It involves a lot of statistics and computer science.
But most importantly, these days, the devolution, these days
is because of the neural networks.
So I showed you the symbol of a biological neuron,
which is like a mathematical formula, right?
So when these artificial neurons are connected in big networks,
they can solve problems.
And how do you solve the problem is you learn the weights
connecting these different neurons.
So each neuron connects to the other neurons in a certain way
and it gets the input signals and it generates output.
So you give it a million examples so it knows for a given input
what is the correct output.
So it sees these examples many times and it organizes its weights,
weights between the connections, so that it can identify,
okay, if I see this input, this has to be the output.
And that has been the big revolution in AI today.
And that's the most important.
But AI has many fields, many different things,
like maybe chess, the deep blue machine runs on different
algorithm altogether, maybe.
So yeah, there are different algorithms,
but neural networks is one such algorithm,
and which has created weights today.
Thank you.
How did humans find out that they could train the AI?
Ah, that is interesting.
I think the main inspiration is they see themselves
and they see that they are smart, they can do certain things,
but they also want to see if they can off-source it to something else.
Like imagine how calculators came to be.
We know that we can solve two into two,
two into three, 20 into 30, some of those kind of equations,
but calculators can solve much more.
They wanted to off-source some of the computations to machines
so that they can solve things quickly
because we have our limitations too.
We cannot always remember things, we can always solve things faster.
So if there are machines to help us,
like if there are machines to help us with household chores,
like we all hate chores, right?
We don't want to do them.
We want machines to do them.
But machines currently, they don't know what to do.
They don't know where the things are.
They don't know how to pick them up.
So we thought, why not give machines the ability to do those things?
And that's how the field came to be.
Can we think these robots or machines to think like we do
so we don't have to do all these unnecessary tasks
that we don't want to do?
And it's also fun to do that
because it's always nice to have other beings to help us in our work.
Can you tell more about how AI doesn't know how to play Minecraft?
Yes, that's because it has a lot of steps, right?
Because you need to collect certain resources,
you need to know where to go,
and there are a lot of things to do to achieve a particular goal.
Currently, a machine does not know what to do right now in the game.
So what these retro AI games, how they do is,
you show them a bunch of gameplay data,
and it can kind of figure out because those games are very simple.
But these games require tons of more steps
and lots of more intermediate things.
And like, for example, if you want to build an axe or something,
you need to collect stone, you need to collect wood,
you need to combine them together.
There are a lot of things going on,
which AI can't yet figure out,
and people are trying so hard.
Right now, AI industry is trying so hard to make that happen,
and maybe they will find out a way, I think.
Yeah, they eventually do.
So maybe we will get there soon.
Do you think you're going to create any more games in the future?
Yes, I'm actually planning to create for the skill learning.
I'm planning to create my own games in unity environments
so that I can change the conditions.
So I'm like this, now like a god entity when I'm creating the game,
so that I can make changes to the game as I see fit,
and then in this condition, like a human plays this way,
I know that they are learning something about this environment.
So even several video game companies are doing the same thing
because they want people to play more,
and they know what makes people happy,
and what gives this additional.
They increase this level difficulty in stages
so that people, there's a learning curve.
There's always a learning curve.
You can't just talk in level one.
There's always a level 30 that you can go to,
and that is just for fun,
but we are planning to use that for research.
We'll go to this side.
Do you think AI is going to take over the world?
Yeah, a lot of...
Actually, that's not a bad question
because a lot of great scientists are arguing about that
because we have created this great technologies
that we have no control over, like nuclear power,
even social media we have no control over.
They think that maybe...
But I don't think it's possible
because we can always program the machines
to act in a certain way
but I don't think they will ever have that sentence.
I don't think so, but although a lot of great scientists
are worried about this, but no, I don't think.
I don't think that's a possibility
just because they don't have that ability to set goals,
and if we give them the ability, we can always control it,
and I don't think it's a problem.
I don't think it is there yet.
Now, AI is so bad.
Current AI, I should not say that
because they have done great progress in AI,
but it's not even comparable to human right now.
So, not in the near future, no,
but even big scientists are worried about that.
When was artificial intelligence like first made?
Actually, I don't know this question.
That's a good question.
I should look it up too.
I don't know.
I think it might...
Robotics, I know who first did.
Isaac Asimov, the science fiction writer,
he first introduced the term robotics
and that became a big field today,
so that way it started from stories and science fiction,
but artificial intelligence,
I actually don't know who coined it first.
It's a good question.
Yeah.
How do websites make recommendations
of what you think you will like?
That's through AI.
That's a very good question.
So, they see what these companies like Amazon or Facebook
or any shopping companies, they have a lot of user data.
They see how a particular user, you and I,
we go into the website and do all the shopping things.
So, they can train our preferences,
train a neural network to learn our preferences,
to learn what we like, what we are buying,
so it can try to predict what we're going to need next
or what is our preference like,
and they can give you the recommendations
based on their entire...
They have a big shopping cart, right?
So, based on the network, it learns our preferences,
and then it goes and gives the next best item
that we are more likely to buy.
And that's how these Amazon people try making money.
It's a big industry right now.
They want to just basically sell people a lot of things,
advertisements, everything requires a lot of AI.
Yeah.
Okay.
Any other questions?
Since there is electricity in your brain,
how does it not electrocute it?
That's an interesting question.
I don't think the power is pretty high.
It's not big power.
And let's just say it's...
Our human brain runs on very little power,
and that is also a big asset
because the current AI requires a lot more power to train,
train all these data,
but human brain is very energy efficient.
So, it doesn't take a lot of power,
but it's also connected in a way.
And although there are situations
where human brain can go haywire,
like in case of epilepsy and seizures,
so that's where electrical activity goes a little haywire,
and you have all these seizures in these patients.
So, sometimes it can go wrong,
but most of the times it works very efficiently.
But that's a very good question
because of this uncontrolled electrical activity
can result in seizures, and that's bad.
But what is best about human is we run on very little power.
So, if it builds human-like AI,
we can save the climate crisis
because current AI is taking up a lot of power.
Yeah, it's a good question.
If two people are playing the same game,
but they have different goals,
will it be a different part of the brain that they're using?
And will it be the game that's making them choose the different part,
or will it be the brain that's telling them
to do something different in the game?
Because we are all very different people.
Our rewards are very different.
What is rewarding to me may not be rewarding to you,
and that is a good thing
because it helps to have different people thinking differently.
That's how evolution is also,
because of the diversity in the human mind.
If situations go bad,
one person can handle this situation,
the other person can handle this situation.
So, we are not all functioning alike,
and that might be mostly because of how our brain
is, how different brains are organized,
and that is what I want to see in the brain
that for the same game,
how two different people are reacting differently,
and can I point that back to the brain?
Is there a different brain region that is performing more
in this person acting this particular way?
Maybe the organization is different, we don't know,
and that's what we want to find.
Yeah, good question.
How did humans find out how to program
the first games ever made?
So, first, I think it started all with the invention
of computers and calculators.
So, we know how to create this set of commands
for machines to do back in the days.
Machines were very straightforward.
You have to tell them exactly what to do,
like you do connect these circuits this way,
or 2 plus 2, and that happens again
through the underlying electrical engineering.
You have all the circuits and transistors
inside the computer or something, digital signals,
so they have these bits once and zeroes.
They communicate electrical signals through once and zeroes,
so they can use these different combinations
to solve math problems,
and they can give you the answer,
but you have to clearly tell them how to do it.
But what this AI does is you have to give it examples,
but it can learn.
You don't have to tell them exactly what to do.
You show them once, they will learn the things,
like by reorganizing its circuits
or reorganizing its weights.
Like, okay, I need to give more importance to this input
because this was correct before.
So, those kind of things, it will learn by itself
because of the programming we created
and because of how we train the network.
Again, we are giving it instructions
on how to train.
We are still in full control.
That's why I don't believe AI will take over
because we are in full control of
as to how this machine is going to learn.
So, that we can program.
But all the underlying thing is electrical engineering
because most of the circuits that happen,
all this is happening is because of this hardware architecture.
The way the neurons in the brain work,
the same basically conchips in the computer do these things.
Could AI be trained by YouTube,
like the gameplay on YouTube?
Also, I have 50 million power on Rise of Kingdoms
and you think AI would be able to beat that?
Ooh, we have a star player here.
What game is that?
It's basically a game where you build a civilization.
Oh, civilization.
AI can't do that right now, so your score is safe.
But maybe in the future sometime.
Because like many companies are trying very hard
to solve this kind of problems.
But your score is safe for now.
AI can't do that yet.
But yes, we can use a lot of YouTube gameplay videos to train.
There's something called imitation learning
and emulation learning that machines can be trained
by how humans are working.
They can see how humans are acting in a certain way
and they try to figure out how to do that themselves.
Again, we have to give all the instructions
on how they are there to learn,
but they can even learn by imitating humans.
How long did it take you to program cosmic constructions?
Oh, it took me like a month.
A month?
Because it's just a simple website.
Simple game, it's not a complex game
like civilization or Minecraft, right?
It's just a simple game, very simple game.
Simple choice game.
And first, the main part came from how to set up these conditions.
I want to set up these conditions where one resources cares
and one is not.
So these conditions, that took a while to adjust and design.
But once I figured that out, basic is web design.
Like I used HTML, JavaScript, these are like web design things.
I use them to construct this game so people can play it online.
I recruited people online.
Like I created this website and posted it online
and people played that game, so I got the data.
Once I got that, then now I'm recruiting people in person
to play it in the fMRI machine.
And also, how does it add money to people's bank accounts?
Oh, no, we give them money cash.
Oh, there in the online, we actually directly transfer it to them
because there is a platform that allows people to play these games
and get money.
We pay money to the platform and platform pays it to them.
Okay.
One more question.
What are the similarities from a machine to a human brain?
Similarities is just the electricity part.
I think that's what's similar.
And also, we currently, the AI does a lot of these deep networks.
So connecting of elements together to do this task.
So that's what happens in the brain.
All these neurons connected in a complex way.
And we get this final.
So I think that's what's common between both of them,
at least currently.
Thank you all for your questions and your attention.
Thank you, Sneha.
That's fantastic.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
