This is the Unregistered Podcast, and I'm Thaddeus Russell.
This is a show about ideas, people, and behaviors that are considered inappropriate, out of
bounds, or beyond the pale.
The things you're not supposed to talk about if you're a schoolteacher, a college professor,
a businessman, a politician, a parent, a neighbor, or even a podcast host.
These are the things you're not supposed to say or even think if you're a good liberal,
a good conservative, or a good citizen.
Each week, I'll interview a person who has something bad to say.
They might be a journalist or a professor, they might be a porn star or a drug dealer.
They might just be an ordinary person with an ordinary job who doesn't care about the
rules of polite society.
I'm not interested in breaking the rules just to be a troublemaker.
I'm interested in people who break the rules of conventional thought, and to expand the
scope of what is possible to say in our society.
I'm interested in people who make me think.
When I started college many, many years ago, I thought that college would be the smartest
people in the world arguing about the big issues.
But of course, it wasn't that.
So I left the academy, and I began my own school.
At Unregistered Academy, we are interested in the big ideas being debated by the smartest
people.
And so, at our recent Unregistered Weekend in Chicago event, I brought together two of
the very smartest people, I believe, who work in the space of political theory.
Ben Burgess and Curtis Jarvan squared off in a debate on perhaps the biggest issue of
the moment, which is democracy.
Now this debate followed one-on-one interviews I had with Curtis and Ben, which you can access
by becoming a patron of Unregistered.
Let's go to patreon.com slash unregistered, and you'll see the content there.
Now here is my interview and a debate with Ben Burgess and Curtis Jarvan.
Here we are.
This is the long-awaited moment, Frazier versus Ali.
We have Curtis Jarvan and Ben Burgess here to debate or have a discussion about with
some disagreements.
Over this thing called democracy, which we've already been talking about, I talked to Ben
first for an hour about his feelings, and really we're talking about feelings today.
His feelings about democracy, and then I talked to Curtis about his feelings about democracy.
The funny thing is, neither one of them would tell me what their feelings were.
Did you notice that?
But I'd like to hear more about that, but first, we are going to just let Ben respond
to what Curtis said, because Curtis was the last to go, and Ben was listening, and the
whole time I had you in my mind, I was wondering what was happening in your mind, and you
told me you have a lot to say about it, so let's hear it.
How would you like, what did you hear, and what would you like to say in response to
it?
Sure.
So my feeling is that I've never heard somebody try so hard to interpret somebody who fundamentally
disagrees with them as somehow agreeing with them, as I heard you did with Curtis, that
you might both dislike democracy, but for opposite reasons.
You dislike it for anarchist reasons.
You think you don't like too much authority over you.
Curtis thinks that the government doesn't have enough authority to get stuff done, and
the part I found particularly fascinating about that was that the two were through American
history where all of the people that you seem to regard as the supervillains of American
history said we don't like democracy because democracy leads to chaos, and it doesn't let
us control people as much as we want, and it doesn't let us get stuff done, and so they
move to less democratic things, the move from the Articles of Confederation of the Constitution,
those early capital P progressives you talked about, and so all of this really seemed like
Curtis giving you the hard pitch about why Thad should love democracy, because this is
all look at all this anti-democratic stuff that was done to make government less democratic
by all the people you most hate, and then if it wasn't clear enough what the difference
is between an anarchist critique of democracy and a monarchist critique of democracy got
real clear.
We started talking about cops.
I think if you love cops, you and an anarchist are going to have a fundamental disagreement
with each other, and one thing I would point out is if you think about cops, and you think
about the way we interact with cops and how those interactions could be bad, that I think
that fundamentally bespeaks this power imbalance that you know that there's a much more limited
range of what you can get away with when you're interacting with a cop.
There is what then a cop can get away with when they're interacting with you, and you
know what helped with that a little bit is if you had not just like symbolic oversight
boards that can't really do anything that are toothless, but ones that were really empowered
to fire people, to discipline cops in serious ways that most civilian oversight boards are,
in other words, more democracy.
So I think that Curtis was actually convincing me to like compliance, to abide by the authorities,
whether they're democratic or not, because I just wanted to say this, my heroes, my greatest
heroes are American slaves.
Why?
Because we have lots of evidence of this, and it's in my book and elsewhere, that when
they were working in the field, they'd be working in lines, right?
And there would be a driver, a slave driver overseeing them on a horse usually and looking
down on them.
And he'd ride his horse up and down the row looking to see if they were working.
And of course, and Frederick Douglass actually reported on this, as soon as the slave driver
passed a slave and had his back to the slave, the slave would drop his head and stop working.
And this was reported on by many people.
This is a phenomenon, right?
There's a lot of examples of slaves doing the kind of thing that we have called tacit
resistance, or I've called it tacit resistance, right?
Just doing just enough to not get punished, just enough to not get whipped.
And to me, that seems like the healthiest, maybe, way to live, at least from my point
of view, according to my values.
And it sounds to me like you and I might agree on this, and therefore I'm not such an anarchist.
I might be more of a monarchist, or whatever that is, I'm not sure it's monarchism that
I'm advocating, but it is this kind of, it is the compliance with authority.
So to a degree, but again, without, and this may be where you and I, Curtis and I disagree,
people tend to, as I said, merge their identities with authority, and that can sometimes be
corporations, right?
Some people are like Apple people, and they love putting the Apple logo on everything,
right?
Sometimes they merge their identities with the Democratic Party, or with the United
States of America.
And that's to me the problem.
I don't want to do that, because then I feel like I've lost all autonomy.
But maybe you're counseling, Curtis, that that's maybe best, is that we should give
up on this idea of personal autonomy, and so therefore what Ben is saying about anarchists
not being okay with this, maybe it doesn't make sense.
Wow, there's a lot to talk about here.
I'm wondering if I should keep using my Ronald Reagan voice, I think.
The, yeah, it's sort of, I think it's reflective.
Your perspective is reflective of how much leftism is sort of kind of buried in the heart
of libertarianism in some ways, because what we see, if you can kind of step outside of
the 19th and 20th century perspective and interpret modern populations from a fundamentally
pre-modern sense, you will see that they're obsessed with autonomy, and they're obsessed
with essentially atomization, and autonomy and atomization really go together and are
the same kind of process.
And so your sense, for example, when you're dealing with like a police officer of inherently
wanting to resist that authority, that would be seen by more traditional societies as a
very pathological kind of bias or way to approach that situation.
And you know, I would sort of advise two things, one is that I think sort of historically
it looks bad, secondly, it's like, it was at a Dave Chappelle or a Chris Rocks get,
like how not to get your ass beat by the police, you know, I think that watching that skit
should be mandatory for everyone, and we'll stop you from having bad encounters with the
police, and you know, I just, I don't believe in having bad encounters with the police.
You know, on the other hand, when you look at, you know, there's a sort of use of the
word democracy to mean stuff that I like, which I think is very insidious and Orwellian,
and very, very wrong.
So for example, to use an opposing use of the word democracy, there was a blog that
I really loved called Second City Cop, which was a Chicago cop blog.
It was amazing.
It was the true voice of people who actually work in the police.
It was run by cops.
All the commenters were cops.
They were very literate and funny cops.
Unfortunately, this blog had been, you know, the target of the sort of progressive media
machine in Chicago for quite some time, and they came too close to the guy running it
and he shut it down.
And you know, so is that democracy in action?
Well, you know, it's certainly the action of the same people who would be running these
oversight boards.
And so in practice, what you're seeing, for example, with this is that when you see, you
know, what you'll look at when you look at a place like Chicago is you'll see massive
violations of human rights going on constantly because these are violations of the basic
governmental responsibility to maintain a monopoly of violence.
And what the maintaining the monopoly of violence means is that you are responsible for all
violence that happens.
Even if that is interpersonal violence that does not involve a cop, that violence is the
responsibility of the state.
And there's a con—you know, the concept of anarcho tyranny, Ben?
It's sort of the, you know, you have this idea that's kind of, if you're kind of thinking
of terms and things in terms of autonomy, you get sort of very confused because I'm
like, I'm like against the state or like for the state, should there be like more government
or less government?
What, you know, this concept of anarcho tyranny, which is a San Francis concept, I believe,
tells us is that these things are actually go quite together.
And so the principle of your life is not safe on the street really comes along with the
principle of your life is enmeshed in sort of pointless paperwork, or your life is not
safe on the street comes with the principle of, for example, the real impact of these
kinds of oversight processes is de-policing.
Because what you see is that basically you reach a certain point where any—like I believe
this is a problem in Chicago now, actually, although I can't really follow it because
the only media I trusted got shut down, but the, you know, once you reach a certain point
where any kind of interaction with that may result in some kind of criminal apprehension
generates a pile of paperwork, people just, cops just don't do that anymore.
They just sit and eat donuts.
And so they sit and eat donuts and basically condone just this insane level of violence
that goes on.
You know, I was reading—one of the ways I like to explore the past is by reading
travelogues of like European travelers.
And there's a great one called Ultramare by Paul—I'm kidding, I'm forgetting the
last name—and he travels to Chicago in the 1890s.
And he's really disturbed basically as a modern Victorian European coming to America
because he's heard that sometimes there are robberies within the city limits of Chicago,
even in the daytime.
This is something that is unheard of in like a major Victorian city.
These places were as safe as Tokyo is now.
And so, you know, we see this massive, you know, decline in standards of public order
and massive like flight of people from violence.
And, you know, to say that, you know, the somehow the problem there is excessive policing is
like completely cockeyed to me.
Well, I think that the statistics certainly on police violence do tell a very different
story.
I think that, you know, certainly the global comparative statistics on police violence
tell a very different story than that.
And, you know, I agree—by the way, I'm all for using the Reagan voice because that
is a reminder that, you know, because Ronald Reagan, man, that is somebody who was committed
to governing, didn't let Congress push him around and tell him that he couldn't send,
you know, arms from Iran to fund terrorists in Nicaragua.
So if you were a big fan of a strong executive, I guess that is your guy.
But I think that what were—there are two issues with policing, just to stick with that
example for a second.
One is democracy, and I agree.
I don't think we should use democracy to mean stuff we like.
I think we should use it to mean the people having more control over the people who exercise
power over them, the people who exercise that power being more accountable to the government.
I don't think shutting down a blog particularly helps with that.
I think that meaningful democracy requires people having access to a wide variety of
points of view so they can make up their own mind.
But absolutely, having a real oversight board with real power I think does increase democracy.
By the way, what has the least democratic accountability, and hence the most worry about how you're
going to be treated in those interactions with cops that Thad was talking about, how
worried he was earlier, is if it's like the corporation from RoboCop has just gotten the
police contract, and then they don't need to worry about what you think at all anymore
than minors had to—Pinkerton's had to worry about what minors thought about them in the
19th century.
Now, I agree with Curtis, of course, that do I think that people have a right to safety?
Yeah, absolutely.
Do I think that having a harsher regime of policing is a particularly effective way of
enforcing that?
I think if you compare different cities in the U.S. with different levels, different
criminal justice policies, I'm not convinced of that.
But hey, you know where you're really safe on the streets?
Norway, Sweden, Finland, places like that, which have vastly more lenient, more humane,
more minimalistic criminal justice systems.
What else is the difference between Chicago and Norway?
I think the difference that actually matters, you can tell yourself a just-so story about
culture or race that doesn't really make any sense, but I think the difference that's
actually relevant is the reason that they can have a vastly more humane and minimalistic
criminal justice system.
Anders Brevik is getting out of prison eventually, and while he's still in, it's much nicer
than American prisons, and they can also have a much lower rate of street violence, is that
social democracy works, that having a big expanse of welfare state, regulatory state,
tied to strong unions with much more egalitarian social consequences results in much less crime
even with a vastly more lenient criminal justice system, which I do think is a win for democracy.
So another place with an unfortunately very high crime rate is Haiti, and as you may know,
Haiti has been in the news lately because the State Department is proposing its nth invasion
of Haiti.
How would you propose applying your Norwegian model to Haiti?
Well, I think that Haiti makes my point, so thank you for that, as much as would be humanly
possible to do with any example in the world, because if you wanted to pick the single country
in the world that was least like a Nordic social democracy, it would be Haiti, which frankly
vastly more closely resembles anarcho-capitalism.
Run that last part past me again.
How much of a welfare state does Haiti have?
How much of a regulatory state does Haiti have?
One of the things in the WikiLeaks cables, the State Department cables that were leaked,
is that there was an effort during the first Obama term to increase the minimum wage in
Haiti to, I believe, the princely sum of about $5 U.S. a day that was successfully lobbying
against, among others, by the American State Department on behalf of American companies.
That's about as weak a regulatory state as you could hope for.
Power is wildly dispersed again.
This is one of the least social democratic countries on the planet.
Do you suppose that's a cause or an effect?
Have you spent a lot of time in the third world?
When I was six or seven, and seven I lived in the Dominican Republic, which is next door
to Haiti, I'm sort of wondering why you think that this model has not been more widely applied
in the third world, given the fact that these policies can turn Haiti into Norway?
Well, I don't think that your lived experience of being there is actually very relevant.
I think what's relevant is the trivially available public data that you yourself just recited
a minute ago.
Right?
The int intervention in Haiti that, like Jean Bertrand d'Arrested, when he ran for president
of Haiti, his original campaign slogan, swear I'm not making this up, was that he wanted
to raise the Haitian people from misery to poverty.
This is a very unambitious reform program.
This is the most minimal effort at some kind of lefty reform program you could get, but
you try that shit in America's Monroe Doctrine backyard, and you end up getting stuff like
Arrested being literally kidnapped and taken out of the country by U.S. Marines in 2004.
You broaden your view beyond Haiti, and you start looking at the rest of the Western Hemisphere
south of the United States.
You see, for example, you want to talk about attempts to implement something like a Nordic
model.
You see Salvador Allende in Chile being a Democratic socialist, get a president, being killed and
removed in a coup that's very openly supported by the United States.
You see that in Guatemala in 54.
You see that versions of that in Haiti numerous times.
This is not ancient Cold War history.
I mentioned Haiti in 2004.
We could also talk about Venezuela in 2002.
Unsuccessful attempt.
We could also talk about Honduras in 2009.
Can we actually?
It's like, so I think that there is a pattern that emerges here, and I understand you don't
want to see it, but this isn't really clear pattern.
The pattern is one that I'm sort of very familiar with from my experiences with Nate Reader.
My dad was a Foreign Service Officer and worked in the State Department for many years.
His first post was the Dominican Republic, which was the site of one of these interventions.
I think it's very possible to take that view when you look at a sort of very high and blurry
level at these things, when you descend a little bit deeper into, for example, the Nelson
Rockefeller era of, you know, he was the coordinator of Inter-American Affairs, which
means he was basically the sort of pre-consul for Latin America.
You'll see, for example, let's take, for example, the example of Allende versus Pinochet in
Chile.
What you'll see if you do what's called a prosopography, which is an analysis of social
network connections, is that Allende is...
I would say much, much more of an American figure than Pinochet.
Pinochet is a very Chilean figure.
Even in Argentina, he would have been weird.
Allende is a globalist.
He's a member of basically the global Americanized elite.
You know, one time I had, in the early 2000s, before I acquired some of my political direction,
I had a boss who was Brazilian.
He was actually Brazilian Chinese.
One day he came to me, and he's like, you know, what's really strange is that my wife
is a documentary filmmaker, and so she's kind of part of this world, and she's like
very Americanized, and she hates America.
My brother-in-law runs a video store, and he loves George W. Bush.
How does this come about?
I'm like, you know, it's very simple.
The most Americanized people in the world are the most anti-American, and you'll find
this pattern among kind of Latin American elites everywhere.
And so from my perspective, the State Department and its Latin American policies is actually
very much guided by a sort of mix between kind of the Orthodox School of Latin American
Studies kind of program that we've been hearing from you, and reality.
And so if you take, for example, the case of Aristide in Haiti, the idea of a $5 a day
minimum wage in the country where the average wage is probably 75 cents a day would go very,
very far toward ruining what is left of the Haitian economy.
And when you look at Aristide in particular, there's a lot that reminds us of, for example,
our good friend Comanante Chavez, in that Chavez managed to take Venezuela, Chavez managed
to escape all of this alleged CIA, you know, ExxonMobil plotting, and actually run his
own country in Latin America, and with great advice from the more radical wing of the School
of Latin American Studies, and the Sandalistas, if you know the term, and all those kinds
of people, and the result was that he basically took the country in Latin America with the
most resources and turned it into this incredible pit.
And so, you know, the idea of doing that same kind of maneuver in a country without oil
would have been, you know, sort of extremely remarkable.
And you can bet your socks that among the people in the State Department who sort of
countenanced the withdrawal of Aristide that there was not a Republican among them.
There are no Republicans in the State Department, zero.
Like if they exist, they spend their time deep in the closet.
Moreover, I'd be happy to point you to a link that basically, you know, far from being,
you simply don't notice all of the times that, from this perspective, that America has gone
out and evangelized the, quote, non-communist left.
You know, all of the, you know, Kennedy going down to Latin America in the 60s and supporting
opera, Alliance for Progress in Peru and saying things like the only alternative to violent
revolution is peaceful revolution.
You're going to get a revolution whether you like it or not, guys.
And, you know, the sheer amount, I mean, this goes on with Wilson's intervention in
Vera Cruz in Mexico where Wilson basically, you have this Porfirio Díaz who, you know,
basically anything that works in Mexico was either created by colonialism or by what were
called the Cientificos of Díaz.
Díaz retires, you know, and he's like, okay, I want this guy, was it Maduro?
You know, basically this other thug to replace me.
And America is like, oh no, we must not have thugs.
And so, you know, you basically get this kind of classic Wilson Debs split between American
candidates in Mexico where the Wilsonites support Cardenas and the real hotheads, the
John Reed types, support Pancho Villa, the, your heroes would definitely be all beyond
the Villa side.
And the result is this incredible Mexican civil war that kills like two or three million
people and reduces the country to a state of anarchy that it has not yet escaped from.
And so, you know, when I compare, you know, the American, America's guilt in promoting
leftism in Latin America, which by the way goes all the way back to the original Monroe
doctrine because the original Monroe doctrine was a policy inspired by England.
It was really an English policy that was treating us as a satellite state.
And the goal of that policy was to assure commercial dominance for English merchants,
tribalists in Latin America.
This is why soccer is such a big thing in Buenos Aires.
And it worked very well at that.
And the policy was basically no monarchs, no European monarchs in Latin America.
And then the Brazilians tried to have their own monarchy, which was actually kind of frickin'
cool, being emperor of Brazil and all that.
And then the policy was, and of course, you had the affair of Maximilian in Mexico, which
was only possible due to the Civil War.
As soon as the Civil War is over, the Americans are like, hey, Louis Napoleon, like, didn't
you read the paper?
Like, we have a huge army here, and we're ready to invade Mexico if you don't get rid
of this empire.
So Mexico had to go back to, like, broken Third World government.
And so, you know, the sort of influence of basically imposing leftist systems on what
was originally the peaceful and happy empire of New Spain is, for me, basically the sort
of cause of all these troubles.
Yeah.
So most of that's wrong.
Perferio Diaz did not retire.
He was overthrown after fixing an election to get himself reelected.
He was overthrown.
He died.
In Europe, still applauded his unsuccessful return to power.
Cardenas, you were talking about, didn't come in until the 1930s, couple decades ago.
No, no, no.
You're talking about a different Cardenas.
Oh, okay.
I don't think so, but people can look into this.
I'm talking about the constitutional list that Wilson was supporting.
Certainly the initial legitimately elected government immediately after Perferio Diaz
overthrown with direct, with very direct participation from the U.S. ambassador in Mexico, another
of those famous examples of America promoting leftism in Latin America, which is very much
the opposite of what most of the track record is.
We also heard a bunch of things that I'm not quite sure how they all fit together or how
they're supposed to be relevant to the original point.
The original point being that even very mildly reformist left governments in Latin America
are very hard to keep going in the face of American state opposition.
Now, we heard that people in the State Department are Democrats instead of Republicans.
I don't know why that distinction would be relevant to anything.
Of course, this stuff is bipartisan, LBJ, look at what he did in the Dominican Republic,
for example.
I've never had the slightest doubt about American Empire being a bipartisan project.
We heard that social democratic policies would have been a disaster there, so I guess it's
good that they couldn't be implemented in these various cases.
None of this is particularly relevant to the original point, which is that if you look
at economic models, what you have in a place like Haiti is the polar opposite of something
like the Nordic countries with their strong labor unions, strong regulatory state, extremely
expansive welfare state, and the latter works a whole lot better than the former in delivering
those basic goods of a more reasonable, less authoritarian criminal justice system married
to a low crime rate.
And you really think that nobody has ever had the idea of using the Norwegian system
of government in Haiti?
Like you're convinced of that?
When on earth did I say that?
Did I just say that and black out?
In fact, what I said is almost literally the opposite of that, Curtis.
What I said is that attempts at doing things that fall way short of that were not allowed
to happen.
There's, well, I mean, if we go back to the Haitian Revolution, my God, certainly that
was allowed to happen, that was some pretty...
We should read Lothrop Stoddard's, the French Revolution in San Domingo.
It's a really amazing work.
And the...
No, I mean, this reminds me of the story of...
The Haitian Revolution was allowed to happen and that they were forced to pay reparations
to France up until the 20th century.
So if you want to know something about the economic origins of the distinction between
Haiti and Norway, that might be a place to start.
Because they were paying off their relatively small national debt.
It's true.
They don't have oil there.
They do have sugar, though.
Yeah.
I mean...
They had to pay reparations to their former slave owners for the loss of property and
the slave revolution.
That's what happened.
And the genocide and the...
The number of people that we're talking about there is tiny now in comparison to what...
As Stalin...
I really enjoyed what you mentioned, George W. Bush earlier, because if you want an executive
who's not going to let himself be pushed around by Congress, who's going to get stuff done,
like detaining American citizens without trial, like starting a worldwide torture regime, like
starting a drone war, that's your dude, unitary executive.
I hope everybody enjoys the result.
Let's go back.
I recently mentioned that for many years, I drank several cups of coffee a day.
And that about a year ago, I started to experience an irregular heartbeat from it.
My doctor told me very directly that I needed to cut down on my caffeine intake.
Amazingly.
Shortly after that, the folks at Magic Mind got in touch with me.
Apparently, their CEO had had the same issue.
And he started the company to address it.
He and his team of nutritionists developed a new herbal supplement that comes in a delicious
two-ounce shot, which has replaced coffee in my morning routine.
It contains matcha from Japan, which gives me exactly the right kind of long-lasting,
but not edgy stimulation that keeps me focused and going, as well as several amazing adaptogens
and new tropics sourced from India and British Columbia that keep my stress in check and
my mind on task.
Best of all, my irregular heartbeat is gone.
Now, I start every day with my shot of Magic Mind.
And now that I've been using it for several months, I can report a significant increase
in productivity.
The book manuscript that I was having a famously difficult time finishing is now complete.
Right now, my friends at Magic Mind are offering listeners of unregistered an unprecedented
offer.
You should go to magicmind.co slash unregistered and get 40% off your subscription for the
next 10 days with my code UNREGISTERED20.
Again, to get this phenomenal deal on the best part of my morning routine, go to magicmind.co
slash unregistered and use my discount code UNREGISTERED20.
Thank you.
Let's go back instead of debating Latin American history, let's go back to Ben's
original point, which is twofold I think here is that, number one, I think you're positing
that social democracy is the vehicle for democracy, right?
But then also you then said that the, I think you said the United States state, the American
state has been hostile to social democratic movements abroad, is that right?
And it sounds like it's inherently to you that the U.S. state is inherently hostile to
social democracy in other countries.
I think that the U.S. state is inherently hostile to anything that's bad for American
business interests and that certainly in what it's traditionally regarded as its backyard,
it's been very violently hostile to anything perceived as getting the way of American business
interests.
So let me give a little history, which is not Latin America, but it is U.S. foreign
policy thinkers.
So, I mean, Franklin Roosevelt's whole intention with World War II was to export the new deal
to Europe, and then that's exactly what happened with the Marshall Plan, right?
And also, LBJ and Eisenhower, both, they had the exact same intention for Vietnam.
They said we want to bring the TVA, the Tennessee Valley Authority, to the Mekong Delta.
They wanted to develop these countries in all sorts of ways, and one of them was to
just simply establish new deal type social democratic political structures in those countries.
So there's...
And also, I mean, the social democracies that you like so much in Northern Europe have been
the greatest allies, the staunchest allies of the United States, and the United States
has loved them.
No, definitely not.
I mean, look...
No?
No, absolutely not.
They have a look at the relationship between some of the most significant social democratic
leaders in Northern Europe, look at some of what they were saying about Vietnam.
They have...
There's...
Like, I don't think the staunchest allies claim is true.
I mean, now, if you want to do the more minimal claim, right, that they have a...
That's sure.
I mean, the United States may be happy to work with countries that, especially ones over
which it's in a position to exert very little direct control, but that can benefit the United
States in all sorts of ways, geopolitically as happy to work with places that might have
a variety of internal regimes, yeah, of course, right?
But I also think that really, especially if we're going to talk about social democracy,
yeah, I mean, I know of Red Robert Carrow, I know that LBJ expressed some fond thoughts
about who would be great if we had a TVA in the Mekong Delta.
I think if you actually look at the regime that we were propping up in Vietnam, it did
not do a lot of stuff like that.
But I think that more broadly, when we talk about social democracy, what we're really
talking about is not just sort of any kind of reform that might include some element
of welfareism.
I mean, you certainly have that coming from all sorts of sources that are totally separate
from that.
I mean, you've got Bismarck establishing some basic social insurance.
And what we're talking about is stuff that comes out of the labor movement and the socialist
movement and expresses the aspirations of those things.
Typically, we talk about social democracy.
We're talking about reforms rather than revolution.
But I think if we're going to be historically specific, that's what we're talking about.
And certainly, in those countries over which America has expressed the most economic and
political dominance, any attempts at doing anything that would be even close to what
we have in the United States, never mind this kind of more extensive democracy has been
often met with quite a bit of hostility.
And that is a major reason why it's been so difficult to implement that in Latin America.
Can I offer an alternate reason for that?
Sure.
I would say the alternate reason for that is that the farther you go from Norway, the
more transparently insane these policies are.
I would love to make you like the dictator of Haiti for a year or two.
You should actually look into the 1920s and 30s occupation of Haiti because I think that
if you read primary sources from the period, you might change your very, I hesitate to
say, your very linear perspective on what was going on there.
I feel like in some ways you're sort of a prisoner of this kind of 20th century Cold
War worldview, which is itself really an American propaganda construct.
So one of the things that you see across the board within the Cold War is I would sort
of encourage you to compare the U.S. response to the Soviet Union, for example, to the response
to right-wing powers like Nazi Germany, where the idea of we're going to be at peace with
Nazi Germany and have a Cold War with them rather than starting a worldwide war and invading
Europe was not even considered an option.
Why do you think that is?
Why do I think that is?
I think that's because America, it boggles my mind how difficult it is to see as an American
that America has always been a fundamentally left-wing power.
We forget that Karl Marx praised Lincoln to the skies constantly.
We forget that Lincoln's party was the most left-wing party in the world at the time.
We forget the incredibly close and really, I would say, culpable relationship of the
U.S. with the USSR, not only during the 40s, but during the teens and 20s and 30s when
it was committing its worst atrocities, even in the Cold War period when the American
liberal establishment-
The teens, not only did the United States not recognize the Soviet Union, but Woodrow
Wilson sent troops in order to aid the White Army after the Russian Civil War.
When you look more closely at what happened, you realize that, for example, I think 0.7
of the 14 points is essentially hands off the Bolsheviks.
You realize that the troops that the U.S. sent to the Russian Revolution were not actually
there to suppress the Russian Revolution.
They were there to essentially sandbag certain British and French efforts to suppress the
Russian Revolution, which would have saved tens of millions of lives.
No, that's an all true.
This is an important point to make.
This really is news from an alternate dimension here.
For example, there's a great book, which is a biography.
I'm curious as to how you feel about Wilson, but there's actually a biography of Wilson
by Herbert Hoover that I read.
It includes this wonderful detail, which is entirely consistent with what I find when
I look into the period, that in 1917, Wilson was coming back from his grand tour of Europe,
in which he's received as basically the president of the world, in this insane experience.
Who happens to be coming back to him with him is David Francis, who was the U.S. ambassador
to Russia.
Now Francis was the former governor of Missouri, and he was essentially during this conflict,
the U.S. had two embassies to Russia.
It had an embassy to the Kerensky regime, and then it had what was called the Red Cross
Mission, which was actually basically Wall Street's embassy to the Bolsheviks.
This business of basically supporting revolution around the world had become a very big American
business and actually kind of lucrative when you looked at relationships with these revolutionary
regimes.
For example, the massive magnesium concession in Georgia that Admiral Harriman got in the
20s, that's Georgia, the other Georgia.
Francis is coming back on the same ship as Woodrow Wilson, who's appointed him the ambassador.
He's coming back for medical reasons.
Wilson won't even see him, even though they're both on the George Washington together.
Then there is an episode, which I find entirely convincing, but I've never read about before,
but I don't see why Hoover would make it up.
Hoover, of course, was a big progressive of the era, where Wilson sends this cable to
Paris and London.
This cable is like, hey guys, I've just been informed that you're supporting these whites
in Russia, and they're really very bad people.
They're monarchists.
The term fascist wasn't available yet.
They're reactionaries.
They're really bad people.
What I don't understand, and what I'm going to find really hard to explain to the American
public, is the fact is you guys owe us a lot of money.
Instead of paying us back, you're aiding these monarchists, these reactionaries.
I don't think American public opinion is going to take to that very well.
Essentially, the cutoff of Allied aid to the whites, which is what allows the Reds to win
that war, was very much a policy of liberal internationalism in Washington.
Moreover, you keep using the term, you keep using the term, prop it up.
Moreover here, because we just went over a lot of territory, and I just want to note
that all of that adds up to saying that when Wilson, yeah, what do you think I think about
Wilson?
He's somebody who...
You're one of a devs man, right?
He's somebody who, yes, very much so, who rounded up and imprisoned all the people who
agreed with me, who were in the United States at the time.
I think exactly what you think I think.
But also, note that when we're thinking about this, USSR, Nazi Germany comparison, that
they say, well, look, all we did with the USSR was initially support the whites in the
Russian Civil War, but do it in kind of a half-hearted way, and then cut off aid.
So really, if you think about it, it's as if we were supporting them, and that's being
contrasted to Nazi Germany, where there was certainly nothing remotely like that level
of attempt to counter that system in 1933, 1934, and where the United States did slowly
get there over time in response not to, as I'm sure you know and would recognize, not
in response to some humanitarian objection to what the Nazi Germany's internal system
was, but as a response to its global ambitions and the things that it was doing in pursuit
of those global ambitions, and ultimately to defend England against it.
I guarantee you that if the Soviet Air Force had been bombing London, that would have played
out in a very similar way.
I think that, I guess I would say, it's kind of, I sort of want you to broaden your historical
reading beyond Howard Zinn.
Like, you know.
This is so glib and silly, and there is just no trace of a real argument here.
This is just lines and insults.
There's no engagement with any ideas.
I'd like to recommend a couple of books.
I think Charles Beard's history.
He was certainly a progressive, and so his histories, and you know, you'll find a lot
of your perspective in early Beard work.
I think, you know, reading his President Roosevelt, and he was the most esteemed, he was the most
esteemed American story book.
I'm going to really recommend that you broaden your reading.
You know, this is the least reasonable way to engage with people.
If we want to actually talk about this stuff, you've got to cut that out.
Sure.
Well, you know, again, if you don't, I mean, like, I'm sort of hearing these kinds of arguments
from authority from you, and it's very true, like, for example, you're like America supported
the whites in the Russian Civil War.
All historical authorities will agree with you.
And my point was that when I basically read the primary sources, I find that what was
going on was, in fact, the reverse.
So the argument from authority is that I said something that most historians would agree
with.
Yes.
That's right.
The problem is, none of us, even me, the professional historian up here has read those primary sources,
not many of them, at least not the way that you have.
Sure.
No, no, no.
So you can't really test this.
Of course.
And it's very, it's sort of when you're basically sort of within the sort of narrative of like
most historians appears to you as sort of as broad as the world.
But for me, like this narrative that you're within, it's like, imagine if you'd grown
up in the Soviet Union, and you got everything you knew from the great Soviet encyclopedia,
which is a work that actually exists.
How would I sort of convince you that basically that narrative, which every Soviet historian
believes in, is, you know, a fairytale?
Wait, hold on.
Has the United States government been interested in exporting democracy?
Yes or no?
Oh my God.
Since the very beginning.
I mean, if you read, you know, Washington's farewell address.
The farewell address is the sort of wonderful kind of piece of isolationist rhetoric.
It's really great.
And it basically, it's doing no more than repeating basically the essential tenets of
classical international law as understood by everyone at the time.
And one of those tenets is that one thing that you don't do is support rebels in other
people's countries.
That's an act of war.
And so you sort of read, Washington is saying this, and you're like, well, this is like
the great American tradition, and then you read about Citizen Genet and so forth.
And you're like, no, actually, what you're really reading in the farewell address is
basically like a drunk swearing off alcohol.
And you know he's going to keep drinking.
And so, for example, you see the same thing, for example, in 1848 with America's just incredibly
enthusiastic reception of like Louis Cassuth when he comes to America, you know, the Cassuth
story.
You know, Garibaldi is a huge hero to like Americans everywhere.
And you know, this sense of basically like promoting Castro when he comes to the UN in
the late fifties is treated like this incredible rock star.
I mean, you know, America is very well known for its love for Fidel Castro, and it's attempts
to keep him.
Oh, yeah, absolutely.
Absolutely.
The numerous attempts to assassinate the guy.
I can point you, I can point you, the almost literally ended human civilization to stop
Cuba from defending itself.
I can point you to the testimony.
It gets stuck.
It gets to invasion of Cuban Missile Crisis.
I can point you to the testimony of the last ambassador to Batista before Congress describing
how essentially everyone at state and CIA was supporting Castro, who essentially got
his job through the New York Times, as they say, by having an interview with Herbert Matthews,
where he basically presented himself as like the voice as like the John F. Kennedy of Cuba.
That was essentially widely believed by all the cool people in America, all the Ernest
Hemingways.
Gosh, how long did that last?
Yeah, lasted until basically Castro declared that he was on the side of the Soviets at
that point.
At that point, at that point, basically, of course, you switch to a Cold War pattern,
where what you see over and over again, all of these patterns that you see make perfect
sense if you see the US and the Soviet Union as competing revolutionary empires.
For example, let's look, for example, at South Africa, okay, at South Africa, again,
you have this sort of standard, well-worn Udney reader, oh, we supported the regime in
South Africa.
Actually, the US was trying to overthrow the regime in South Africa basically constantly
from 1945 after.
What you mean by support is essentially condone.
When you use this word prop up, what you're actually saying is that the US is not trying
hard enough to revolutionize these countries.
That's not all what I'm saying, not even close.
What I'm talking about is the United States supporting coups against democratic-led governments
during and after the Cold War.
What I'm talking about is the armies that enforced systems like Pinochet and Chile,
who, by the way, may have been less Americanized, but is definitely America's man in that situation,
that the officer corps being trained in Fort Benin, I'm talking about all sorts of military
aid to these places.
This is not trying hard enough to overthrow it, and certainly, if you think that the United
States is acting like a revolutionary empire, I don't know what the cause of this revolution
is because to go back to Thad's original question about the United States exporting democracy,
I think very frequently the United States has used that rhetoric.
Sometimes there's been some alignment between that and what's actually happened.
Very often, it's used that rhetoric when there's been no alignment whatsoever between
that and what was actually happening.
It depends on what's convenient to American interests at any given time.
I mean, go back to that Mexican Revolution example, those constitutionalists that Curtis
is talking about.
There we go.
Supporting.
Yeah.
So, Caranza.
Yeah, big, big, big Democrat there.
They have this guy who basically proceeded to govern just like Porfirio Diaz had, and
who the United States was actively helping to crush Pancho Villa and then try to crush
this opportunity.
You're more of a man.
This opportunity.
How do you feel about Chavez?
Can you give us a Chavez story?
Sure, but I'm going to finish this point first.
By the way, they have, in the course of doing that, they have, I think, let's just say this,
I think that the United States, the idea of the United States has been friendly certainly
in any sort of consistent way to democracy in Mexico is going to be very hard to square
with historical record, but sure, let's talk about Venezuela.
I think if you look at the, most of the time Chavez was actually in office.
They have, like, the economic effects you're now talking about didn't happen yet.
Now you can say, you can tell a story where you're going to say, well, okay, but this
was just like a time bomb, that they was all set up to do this.
So even though those first 10 years in power, extreme poverty in Venezuela was sliced in
half, this was all predestined to lead to what eventually happened mostly in the Maduro
years.
Mostly in the Maduro year.
I think that they have a, and in, and I think that there's all sorts of stories you can
tell about why that happened.
I think some of them, I think multiple ones of those include some element of truth that
you could tell a story about currency mismanagement, you could tell certainly a lot of stories
about corruption, but one thing that I think is not going to make a tremendous amount of
sense is to do the usual lazy right wing thing and say, oh, ah-ha, see, see what did this
is socialism, socialism did this in Venezuela.
When you actually look at the stats on Venezuela, even at the height of Chavez's welfare state,
you know, the public sector in Venezuela was smaller than the public sector in France.
You know, it was barely bigger than the one in the United States, and so certainly the
idea, you know, whatever your preferred explanation is of what happened there, the idea that this
is just like an inevitable consequence of getting a little too socialist and this is going to
happen to your economy is really hard to square with the global comparative stats.
What's your best example of third world socialism?
So when you say third world-
I mean, not Norway.
Not Norway?
They have a, so why is it, you know, tell me your story about why you think that what's
effective in Europe can't be effective outside of Europe, because I've been really unclear
about this this whole time.
Oh wow, that's a really interesting question.
Let's take Japan and Haiti as their examples, because they're both island nations and they
both, you know, one of them is very economically successful and the other one isn't.
So if we look at, we could say, well, the infrastructure in Japan is much better than
the infrastructure in Haiti.
So what would be your expectation if we, leaving the governments of both countries the same,
we transport all the Haitians to Japan and all the Japanese people to Haiti?
So is there going to be an answer to the question I just asked that's like coming through Socratic
Dialogue or are we going to get to it?
Yes, yes, yes, yes.
Give me your answer first.
What's my answer?
What's your answer for my answer is the same answer given by Joseph Dermastre, you know,
200 years ago when someone talked to him about the human race and human rights and his answer
is that he had never met a human.
He had met Russians and Frenchmen and Englishmen, but as far as these humans, he had no evidence
of them whatsoever.
So it's just about the innate difference between Japanese people and Haitian people.
An innate difference or cultural difference?
Curtis?
An innate difference or cultural difference?
Well, design an experiment to separate the two and then I'll tell you.
Okay, here we go.
That's an interesting answer.
So I think that certainly part of the answer, and by the way, useful to this comparison
to know which one of those countries is more internally democratic, not even close, right?
Japan is vastly more internally democratic.
How do you define, I really want to get back to this definition of democracy.
Because in Japan, you know, has been run by, has been a one-party state since 1945.
It's been run by the Liberal Democratic Party, and it's been run specifically by the LDP
bureaucracy, which is one of the most famous bureaucracies in the world.
And so over which the electorate seems to have absolutely no control whatsoever.
So how you define Japan as very democratic, I think, would get into this.
Japan is much more democratic than Haiti.
I know, I know, I know, I'm getting you to answer the question.
I didn't say very democratic, and I answered your question like half an hour ago, but I'll
answer it again.
They have a, that democracy is about the empowerment of the public to have more influence over
policy, to have ways of getting their will done, and the accountability of decision makers
to the government.
Now, again, it's a spectrum.
I did not say Japan is very democratic.
I said it's vastly more democratic than Haiti.
The current government of Haiti, very much, by the way, propped up by the United States,
and not in some sense, the United States isn't trying hard enough to overthrow it, but we're
literally about to send over some troops to help that government hold on to power, which
absolutely nobody in Haiti voted for, the current government.
And in general, in Japan, one party system or not, I think that you wouldn't deny that
they have much more real elections.
They're much less likely to do things like ban wildly popular political parties like
Lavaless and Haiti.
Like they don't have, like it's a one party state, like what part of one party state don't
you understand?
Okay.
The part of how you're using it, I don't understand, is what you mean because it's the way the
rest of us use this phrase.
The way the rest of us use this phrase, one party state, is for a state where only one
political party is allowed.
There are several political parties in Japan.
They elect people for their parliament.
There were several political parties in communist East Germany.
There were several political parties in communist Poland.
This problem is a problem that has been solved of having a completely non-democratic government
with a perfectly good simulacrum of government.
Here's a suggestion.
Let me ask a question to evaluate your belief in democracy in that sense.
Suppose that we say we're going to make America more democratic by rendering government more
accountable to the politician who America elects in the only election that Americans
still really care about.
We're going to put the president completely in control of the executive branch.
Would you feel that that made the US government more or less democratic, or would it depend
on who was elected?
That's a good question.
I would say less.
I think if you look at, for example, I think it was a good thing back, I've heard you make
the claim many times about FDR, a beta essentially like a king, but FDR still felt the need even
after Pearl Harbor to get Congress's permission to declare war because the norm hadn't been
established yet that the president could just ignore that.
Now, maybe you think that transition is a good thing, that you can just go to war without
having to ask Congress.
I think that transition is a bad thing.
I think that when George W. Bush started setting up procedures by which people could
be held outside of any normal judicial systems, that people could be assassinated by drones
in countries that we're not at war with, et cetera, I think that was a bad thing.
If you think that's a good thing, then we have a real disagreement.
I also point out, by the way, just in terms of the effects of democracy on current US
foreign policy or the lack of democracy for US foreign policy, you can look at the Quincy
Institute, they have a bunch of good information on this.
Americans 49% to 37% think the United States should be doing more to promote diplomacy
to end the war in Ukraine.
If we all die due to the war in Ukraine, it's going to be because that doesn't count for
anything in terms of how American foreign policy is made in practice.
I'm glad, I'm glad, can we agree on that note of isolationism, can we find out a really
good note?
For reference, the US was basically involved in a de facto war against Nazi Germany for
most of 1940 and 1941, but that's relatively well established, so I think the Declaration
of War is a nice touch, but it came from also our rubber stamp Congress.
But to sort of move past the historical point, I'm not sure if you really answered my question
or not, it seemed the question of whether putting the president in charge of the executive
branch, it would not make things more democratic, even though it would give the people more
power.
Well, I don't accept the premise that it would give the people more power, but they're
choosing the politician who's in power.
In fact, when you pitch this, right, at least when I've heard you pitch this before, you
know, I saw you up here at the Young Turks, for example, the way that you pitch it is
precisely that in your preferred model, which sometimes you use words like monarchy, sometimes
it just sounds like you're saying, well, you know, it would still be Democrat, we just
have a very strong executive, but in your preferred model, what you see as a virtue
of it is that instead of there being public input on specific policies, the only public
input is like choosing a wise ruler whose judgment we're just going to trust for the
next four years, and that's the part that seems fundamentally at odds with democratic
values.
So what do you mean by public input?
Do you mean the like notice and comment period for federal regulations?
Do you mean?
I mean the actual ability and practice of the public to work its will.
I see no such ability.
Give some examples.
Sure.
How does the public work its will?
Well, here's an easy example.
We were talking earlier during my one-on-one with that, we were talking about Florida.
So you know, my favorite, this is an extreme example, but my favorite stat, about the
2020 election, my favorite fact about the 2020 election is that Trump won Florida, but
the $15 minimum wage won by a lot more than Trump did in Florida, or you can look at what
happened just now in Kansas, for example, with the rejection by a high double-digit
margin of attempts to make it easier to restrict abortion.
Now those are really easy examples because those are cases where the public is actually
directly voting on things.
How do you feel about the public rejection of gay marriage?
Yeah, I think that in that case, the public has made a decision that I don't like, but
I absolutely think that's better decided democratically.
So you believe that the Supreme Court decision?
I don't believe in judicial review.
I'm thoroughly on record about this.
I think that we want an empowered, mobilized public protecting basic rights rather than
the courts.
This idea, the popular right-wing narrative at the time, that the people want marriage
defined, well, the way the Bible actually doesn't, but whatever is between one man
and one woman, but see it's these elitists in robes who are stopping that, actually,
whereas that had been very recently true, by the time the Supreme Court decision happened,
public opinion has shifted wildly on that in the direction of support for marriage equality.
Probably the Supreme Court decision wouldn't have happened, if not for that, because they
wouldn't have felt that they could get away with that.
But yeah, I do think that it's better to establish these things democratically.
I think it's very healthy that like in the Republic of Ireland, for example, abortion
rights and gay marriage came about by popular referendum and both of those, I actually trust
building a majority consensus on a topic like that, a hell of a lot more than I trust,
that somebody on the panel of nine Harvard and Yale graduates is just going to do what
I want.
Do you think that the construction of this popular consensus, and this is sort of what
I really want to get into in the difference between populism and democracy and managed
democracy, as your George Soros men will call, for example, what's going on in Hungary.
One of the things that's very clearly established by the 20th century is that essentially control
of the media allows you to control public opinion.
Public opinion is not a cause but an effect.
If you had basically all of mainstream journalism in the United States had somehow been Nazi
for the last 30 years, everybody would be a Nazi.
You're basically when you basically sort of punt things like, and I happen to just personally
agree with this particular decision on gay marriage, but that's sort of neither here
nor there.
When I look at basically how public opinion is changed and to borrow a nice word from
Noam Chomsky, manufactured, of course Chomsky is really going back to Lipman when he refers
to manufacturing consent.
What I see is simply a machine that could manufacture consent for really just about anything.
Yeah.
Fortunately, that's not true, and I think we have evidence that that's not true that
in some of the very examples that we just went over.
So I think that, for example, it's not the case that 12% more Americans support diplomacy
in Ukraine than oppose it because, you know, what the New York Times and all those people
you call the Cathedral have been so relentlessly advocating peace and de-escalation in Ukraine.
I missed that.
I think supporting diplomacy for most people means supporting the State Department, which
is not.
I think if you look at the wording of the poll questions, that was specifically even if there
were territorial concessions involved.
I think that something like the $15 minimum wage example, I think that there are a lot
of cases in which, look, does propaganda work?
Sure.
It often works for a long time.
It's variable.
It depends on the issue.
It depends on a lot of other factors.
I don't think that seeing the media and academia as being omnipotent over public opinion is
particularly accurate.
I think it captures part of a complex reality, but I also think it misses a lot of it.
Ben, how many Americans do you think are capable of being democratic or would be interested
in being democratic?
Would be interested or capable in participating in a real way that you would respect in government,
governance?
Yeah.
I mean, I think it's already the case that, you know, that Americans do have some avenues
for public participation, and I think that's a good thing.
I think that there are other avenues that we could have, for example, by having a much
stronger labor union movement.
This has historically been a hugely important way for ordinary working class people to have
more influence collectively over the political process that somebody like LBJ was mentioned.
Can they speak to that for a moment?
In a moment, you can.
If they agree with the union.
Well, but I think that in that case, again, if you're talking about sort of expression
of widely perceived interests that there is going to be some collective influence, there's
certainly going to be much more collective influence with that than without that.
Is this going to be good for the wages of people who work menial jobs?
Jobs is a question that politicians are going to have to spend a lot more time worrying
about.
If they're worried about what organized labor is going to do, then if they're not worried
about it, and again, I think to the extent that politicians whose natural instincts may
not have been at all in those directions and go back and look at LBJ in the 40s, if you
look at what some of them have done in a political environment where workers did exercise more
political influence, yeah, that's a good thing.
I think that if people have more free time, which by the way is also something that can
be a function of social democracy in the regulatory state and welfare state, if people have more
free time and at least some of them, not everybody, doesn't have to be everybody, but if some
of them spend that time being more politically active, again, that's a good thing and you're
going to get decisions that take their interest into account.
Again, it's a spectrum.
If you just say, do we have perfect democracy, do we have no democracy, then sure, it's easy
to go with the no democracy option, but I think more democracy is broadly speaking.
A good thing and I'll appeal to the example.
I'm sorry, but it seems very clear to me that most Americans, probably the vast majority
of Americans, are not only not interested in being democratic, but they're not interested
in politics at all.
Now what do you do if you want democracy and that doesn't it require them to be at least
somewhat involved in this and what do you do if you impose, I mean, it seems to me you're
in the situation that the Founding Fathers were in, where they're looking at streets
full of drunks and fornicators and they're thinking, well, we're going to give these
people power over governance.
That's still somewhat the case, but it's now, it's just apathy, people play games.
QAnon, let's not forget QAnon.
So we're back to the transition to less democracy from the Articles of Confederation to the Constitution
carried out by people you don't like for reasons you don't like, which somehow is an anti-democracy
lesson to you.
No, I'm just asking what you want to do with American people, with the Americans as they
are.
Yeah, I think the American people as they are, if they exercise more political influence,
that would be a good thing.
Okay, I don't think that's true, and I'm going to give you a couple of specific reasons
to think that that's not true.
One, go back to the Union example, look at polling on who wants to be a member of a labor
union versus who actually is, who says they would like that, versus who actually does
actually organize in the Union under current circumstances, involves a tremendous amount
of risk, people get fired for it constantly, look at what's happened in Starbucks last
year.
They have their all kinds of ways that are set up to pressure and blackmail people into
backing down from it when they start, but you look at the polls say, hey, would you
like to be a member of a union, you'll get several times more people than are actually
members to say yes.
You get enough people voted in Florida that even though it's not what you predict for
the partisan alignment of the state, you get the $15 minimum wage through.
Again, I think if public opinion counted more, even in foreign policy, I think that
the outlook right now for World War III would be a lot less terrifying.
I think that Afghanistan, sure, if the public had had more control over foreign policy,
I'm sure the invasion would have happened at the same time that it did, but I also think
it would have ended 15 years earlier.
I don't think there's any question about that.
That was wildly unpopular many, many years before finally the bandaid was torn off.
I think that even more people would be willing to participate more given less financial stress
and more free time, which by the way are social democratic policy goals, but even if you look
at right now, people as they are, yeah, QAnon or no QAnon, I think that there are, sure,
lots of wildly irrational things that lots of Americans believe.
There are lots of wildly irrational things that members of the American elite believe.
There are lots of wildly irrational things that whoever, whatever tech CEO gets to become
Caesar, if Curtis gets his way, I believe, that they have so.
I think that if we're looking not for perfect outcomes, but we're saying are the outcomes
going to be better or going to be worse?
If the 68% of Americans who want full federal weed legalization got their way, for example,
is that better or worse?
I think it's better.
If the large majority of Americans who want universal health care and higher minimum wage,
Curtis and I judging by the Latin America discussion would have very, very different
takes about whether that would be good or not, but certainly in my book, that would be very
good.
I will take a little belief in angels in exchange.
So I want to just, I think the history of labor unions is sort of a very good way to
discuss the difference between populism and progressivism because you can sort of often
get a progressive to endorse kind of populism and broadly in general, but when it comes
out with its real populist shit, it tends to elect Trump and people don't really like
that.
And because people find themselves concerned about all sorts of things, they shouldn't
be concerned about their personal safety and stuff.
And so when you look at the history of the labor union movement in America, I think it's
very, there's a clear, to me, populism is basically an organized sort of genuinely grassroots,
bottom up exercise of political power.
And progressivism is basically organized farming of political power among essentially a disempowered
client class.
And for me, the moment in the history of American unionism, of the American labor unions, like
the labor union is just a ridiculous anachronism in today's world, like it can in no way be
compared to what it was a hundred years ago.
And what you see is you see this transition from kind of more wildcatty labor organizations
like for example, the Knights of Labor, which are actually led by laborers.
And when these organizations are actually led by laborers, the problem is they tend to
do like crazy shit, like what was the time the Knights of Labor massacred a whole camp
full of Chinese workers because they were being competed with, right?
And basically what you see is a coordination of these supposedly independent movies, movies,
movements, until they're sort of no more than what is the SIU, but a branch of the Democratic
Party, come on, let's get real.
And so you basically see them becoming essentially the kind of controlled, your, you know, establishment
controlled labor unions that you also see by the way in Eastern Europe between 1945 and
1989.
And so you're essentially, when you're sort of looking at these things and you're like,
you know, why doesn't Joe Sixback, who drinks, you know, Pabst's blue ribbon, stop complaining
about illegal immigrants and imports taking his jobs away, and why doesn't he vote to
contribute 10% of his salary to some guy who was educated at Harvard?
You know, I think it's a pretty obvious take in a way for Joe Sixback, and it's kind of
surprising how long he's like kept with this insane program.
Incredibly lazy caricature of working class Americans.
Is it a different galaxy than what public opinion tells you about what most Americans
think?
Hang on a second.
So we're going to go to Q&A in a second, but I want to let each of you say whatever you
want to say before we do that.
Go ahead, Ben.
Sure.
I think if you actually look at Joe Sixback's immigration views as measured by actual polls,
which I think are a better way of figuring out what people think, take a broad randomized
scientific sample rather than just sort of what's Curtis' impression of Joe Sixback,
I think that you'll find out that actually, certainly by global standards, that there
is a lot more support for things like a path to citizenship and even liberalization of
legal immigration than you might think.
I would also point out that Donald Trump, when he was elected, was really underselling
the very Reaganite economics that to a great extent he actually implemented, and he was
going around in line about how he was going to bring the jobs back in places like West
Virginia where there were even fewer by the time he left office than when he came in.
He was going around in line about wanting a less hawkish foreign policy when he actually
tore up the Iran nuclear deal and assassinated Soleimani and, by the way, sent heavy weaponry
to Ukraine, which Obama had been unwilling to do, et cetera, et cetera.
So I don't think it's that now Joe Sixback doesn't really support any of the social
democratic stuff, whatever the polls might say about universal health care and the minimum
wage.
They're really Trumpians.
I also don't think it's true that the SAEIU is nothing but a branch of the Democratic
Party.
It's certainly not true that it's remotely comparable to meaningless state unions that
couldn't go on strike, et cetera, in Eastern European countries during the Cold War.
I think if you actually talk to most members of that, they're very aware of the difference
it makes for wages, the difference it makes for job security.
If you're worried about free speech or being canceled, by the way, then probably the main
thing you're worried about, America in 2022, unless you're Edward Snowden or something,
you're probably not that worried about being killed or imprisoned, you're probably worried
about losing your job.
And whereas the alleged candidate of Joe Sixback, Donald Trump, filled the National Labor Relations
Board with people who were so reluctant to undermine employers' firing abilities that
they sided with Google against James Deymore, unions actually, in real life, protect the
free speech rights of members who disagree with what union leadership thinks all the
goddamn time.
So yeah, I think that widespread unionization is a good way to make this a more democratic
country in the simple sense of giving ordinary people more power over what's going on, and
that would be a very, very, very good thing.
Curtis.
I would say I sort of...
It's sort of difficult coping with a level of mythos this intense, because you kind
of live within a certain narrative, and it's a narrative that, of course, we all know very
well, having grown up in a world where basically Howard's Inn is everybody's high school history
textbook.
And the sort of the sense of suggesting that there are other ways to parse and understand
these realities is hard for someone, it's hard to convey to someone who doesn't seem
to have that spirit of questioning per se.
And so I think that what I would recommend, honestly, for you as a progressive intellectual,
I guess, have you done a lot of medial labor?
Have you worked in factories and stuff for anything?
I have worked in...
I have worked at jobs where I've stood in more trucks for eight hours a day, every day,
loading and unloading boxes.
That's not anything I would bring up, because I actually don't think...
I think that much like liberals who fetishize lived experience, I think that there's all
these constant appeals to what anybody has or hasn't done or pretty intellectually vacuous,
almost as much so as saying, well, I pity you because you're trapped in narratives,
and if you only understood the truth, which I am a conveyor of, you would understand that
I'm right, which cannot possibly be mistaken for an argument.
No, it's not an argument.
It's actually sort of because we live in very different realities, we can't really argue,
and this is why basically, rather than encouraging you to read right-wing materials, I want to
encourage you to read older left-wing materials, I think that this will give you sort of a
little bit more of a perspective of simply how different the time of your sort of, you
know, like how different a thing unions were 100 years ago from now, and you seem to be
sort of conflating that America with this America in many, many ways, and it's sort
of, it's hard to like, that's kind of the best advice that I can give you on how to open your
mind a little bit, and I sort of welcome, I welcome the reverse- Jesus Christ, this is
vacuous nonsense.
I'm going to give you advice about how to open your mind a little bit.
I welcome the reverse.
We're here to talk about this underlying issue, and Curtis is wasting all of his time grandstanding
about how he's discovered the truth, and he pities people who don't get it yet.
Sure.
I mean, you know, when I talk about things that to me seem like obvious realities, they're
not valid realities within your mythos, and so we can't really have that conversation
because you're simply referring back to facts within the story.
That's why we should talk less about history.
What a silly waste of this opportunity.
Less about history and more about ideas, and so I want to turn it over to you all.
Please, fire away.
Oh boy, okay, we have a lot here.
I'm trying to think about the audio.
Do you want, should I just, you can just talk, and then I will relay the question through
the microphone.
I'll restate it, so give it a beat before I, before you answer.
I have no idea who answered first.
I'm going to go with Tori first, here.
Okay.
I guess the question that I felt was most relevant, I don't know, sort of, is to Ben.
It was, in relation to what he was talking about, what people not being interested in
politics in a real genuine kind of way, which I agree with, I don't think people are, there
would be more people here, but I think the question is like, do you, do you not think
irrationality is a result of disinterest in reality?
Do you not think irrationality is a result of a disinterest-
I'm sorry, I couldn't phrase that double negative.
Do you think irrationality is a result of disinterest in reality?
Do you think irrationality is a result of disinterest in reality?
Yeah, and for people who are watching this or listening to this later, the setup to the
question was about what that had said earlier about, you know, not enough people maybe being
interested in political involvement.
And so I do want to just quickly do both halves of that question.
So I think that, sure, you know, irrationality, you know, one source of irrationality can
certainly just be a kind of epistemic apathy that you're not, you know, that you're not
sufficiently driven to, you know, to figure out, you know, what's true if we're talking
about an empirical issue, you're not sufficiently driven to figure out how to have internally
consistent values if we're talking about a normative issue, fair enough, right?
But to connect the two subjects, the reason why I'm so unpersuaded by this as an argument
against democracy, even beyond what I would see as the sort of in-principle right that
people have to govern their own lives, their own collective destinies, is that I'm not
convinced that we could avoid that problem by empowering an elite to make these decisions
because they can be plenty irrational in their own ways.
Again, I think that, you know, I think that right now we're kind of on the verge of a
global thermo-nuclear exchange because of extremely irrationality.
Wait, hang on.
Follow up.
Yep.
Go ahead.
I was just going to say, the only thing I have to say to that is I think that there are
plenty of people in power, and that's like even the powerful to have a disinterest in
reality, and that's why we can't even, you know, border.
I don't necessarily think we're that close to that, but also like, I think a lot of that
has to do with their disinterest in engaging with reality because it might be less desirable
than, you know, just to chill life or whatever.
Yeah.
Yeah, so part of what you said is that people have, that it shows that they too were disinterest
in reality, and fair enough, right?
But if we agree there's irrationality all around, then what I need to hear next is a
really good reason for thinking that elite irrationality is less worrying than popular
irrationality, and then we, I think, might have at least the beginnings of an anti-democratic
argument.
Well, I think that there's fortunately, if you're looking at, it's good because I feel
like we've sort of arrived at some common ground in a way where we've basically admitted
that there are sources of oligarchic elite error, as you say, and like, I really like
the skepticism of the Ukraine thing because as far as I'm aware, your skepticism of the
Ukraine thing is not really aligned with any particular movement or any particular authority.
I think it's just your own personal opinion, and I think that that's like, and it's out
of step with what the New York Times wants you to believe, and I think that's great.
Trust me, very few beliefs I have line up with what the New York Times thinks.
And yeah, they're normally, to the left of them I would expect, but this one is not because
you're basically more pro-Putin than the average American.
I would push back against the...
Let's not descend into the...
That makes...
Let's get to a point of agreement here.
That makes you pro-Putin.
Let's get...
Okay, okay, okay.
That was unfair.
I don't think that...
That was unfair.
I don't think being against the war...
The war to Iraq...
That was an unfair jab, and I retract the remark.
I want to say that basically when we...
I think when we look at these two systems or forms of power, one of them which we could
call oligarchical progressivism, and the other one of which we could call democratic populism,
we both agree that there are significant structural flaws with both of these ways of governing
mankind, and that's why it's so unfortunate that there are only two possible systems of
government, democracy, and oligarchy.
No, for sure.
As you point out, labor unions that could actually protect people's free speech rights,
actually give them a living wage, et cetera, and actually are starting to have many of
these benefits from people who organize them now, that's anachronistic.
We need to go with cutting-edge new ideas like monarchy.
Absolutely.
All right.
Right here in the front.
Great.
Thanks, Tom.
Another general point of perspective.
For you, Ben, you talked earlier about universal basic income, and you were talking about how
if you work for an employer, your free speech rights are restricted, certainly true.
You can't say anything sometimes, and whatever you want.
Sometimes you have to say exactly what they say in particular job circumstances.
But then you overlay the intersection of UBI and democracy, and you start giving everybody
money.
There's no world that I can see them in, I don't think this is just a lack of imagination.
I think this is human nature, where those people who are controlling that money are
not also controlling behavior, and maybe that's being done democratically, it's democratic,
but just like the antitha, who ultimately wanted something for their money, the government
or whoever is controlling that money is going to want something out of those people.
If this was a year ago when we had UBI, you would not be able to get it if you were unvaccinated.
Whatever the popular democratic feeling is at the time against any particular ideology,
those people are going to be shut up.
This is very testable.
If they will be shut out, democracy will work against truly you, UBI, so how do those...
You're really good at restating their question.
Sure.
The question was going back, and I'm not sure when people are actually watching or listening
to this, if they'll have all seen our previous discussion.
Earlier during my solo with Thad, he was talking about his aunt, who gave him these very generous
gifts of money when he was whatever, starting when he was 12 or 13 or something, and he
get like $100 gift from his aunt, and he was excited about it, but then he'd have to pick
up the phone when his aunt called, and then she'd start objecting to his behavior, and
you should be smoking weed and all that.
Is this a good metaphor for a more expansive welfare state, essentially, the kinds of universal
social programs that I would support?
The questioner connected that discussion up specifically with whether if we had UBI, then
that would be changed to a NUBI, non-universal basic income.
There would be conditions.
In the context, especially of democracy, and not a strong man who'd been like older.
The strong man would actually be able to impose conditions, it'd be much harder for
democratically elected politicians to, and I can explain why in a second, but so the
suggestion from the questioner, again, just for people watching or listening later, was
that specifically last year you would have been denied it if you weren't vaccinated.
Now I point out a couple things about this, because I think it's much better when there
is empirical evidence that's available to go with that instead of just speculating about
what sounds to us like what would happen.
So Alaska, for example, actually does have a small UBI, the Alaska Permanent Fund, which
is a just bizarrely socialistic thing that exists in Alaska of all places from their
oil drilling that everybody gets sent to check.
Far as I know, if there are Alaskans here who can correct me, that was not conditioned
on vaccination last year.
Now you can say, well, maybe that's Alaska, maybe that's because the politics of the state.
So now we can start to ask questions about other countries that have various sorts of
universal state provision of services.
We're Canadians who didn't—
Sure?
No?
Go for it.
Just keep in mind before you say this that I'm going to have to repeat it before I respond
to it, because people are not going to hear you.
So I am one of those people who moved from Canada to Florida to the glorious Republic
of Florida two years ago in very large part to get away from what was happening there
with the COVID lockdowns and whatnot.
And there was the denial of medical service to the unvaccinated and a lot of other stuff
that went around with it.
So the popular will there was way, way, way more aligned with the pro-vax thing that was
in the U.S. and what you saw was that manifested itself specifically in policy and in denial
of service to certain people under certain conditions.
Everything directly from operations not being done to people who weren't able to visit
their loved ones in the hospital because they weren't vaccinated.
So there are two very different things that are being grouped together there and I think
it's important to make a distinction.
So what the questioner said when he came back in is there's from Canada and he moved to
Florida because he doesn't like the COVID policies in Canada.
And there was a claim about denial of medical services and there was a claim about people
not being able to visit hospitals because that was seen or claimed to be unsafe because
of concern about the spread of COVID was specifically when they were unvaccinated.
That was the question.
And I would say that I think we'd have to have a bigger discussion about this but certainly
one thing and please just correct me briefly so I don't have to repeat a bunch of stuff.
If I'm wrong about this but it's not the case that like there was a law passed in Canada
saying you're no longer eligible for Canadian Medicare in general if you're not vaccinated.
I think what you're talking about are specific policies, specific hospitals saying we've
made a determination that it's not safe to do this at this time because it's not medically
urgent and there's this risk that goes with it because we're concerned about the spread
of COVID which is a very different thing and then really to connect it back up with
Thad's uncle and the larger issue about welfare states and personal freedom.
If you have a private hospital that is especially in a more laissez-faire environment less regulation
man they could go way further in that direction if they wanted to and there's a reason why
you're not getting that law saying like oh no Canadian Medicare is no longer universal
like the social insurance only applies to people who've been vaccinated because even
in a context where those COVID policies you don't like were actually fairly popular in
the broad mass of Canadians including by the way the majority of Canadian truck drivers
but even in that context that would have been wildly unpopular it would have been really
hard to get away with that because of the level of popular opposition that provokes
because once you've got those universal programs in place as you know people with other politics
may bemoan it's really really really hard politically to take them away which I would
celebrate and I just say look if you're worried that if you're worried that the that if we
had the America Permanent Fund instead of the Alaska Permanent Fund that that would
be made contingent I would just point out how much harder it is to change a well-established
social program and and end its universality how much harder that is than your boss just
saying you know what I'm sick of you you're fired so if you're worried about that's that's
and private employers private charity private sources of funds are going to be a way bigger
concern about depending on people's whims and how they can you know give and take away
than things that you get as a universal right of citizenship.
So can I interject a little?
Yeah you can go ahead.
So you know there's always this equation that I see in your reasoning about democracy and
especially democracy and bureaucracy that it always seems that the things that you like
are democratic and the things that you dislike aren't and so when we look at these specific
kinds of policies in Canada you're absolutely right that these policies are not carried
out by these sort of symbolic elected arms anymore oh no they're done by permanent commissions
and they're done nationally by permanent commissions and so the question of basically what sort
of the cause the kind of we must enforce vaccination kind of hysteria over the last
year or two is I think very interesting because it certainly didn't come from popular enthusiasm
it became a popular enthusiasm in some quarters it became a popular enthusiasm in quarters
that are basically very NPR listening quarters you might say and the way in which basically
that side of the you know I do you remember the amazing flip in like public versus elite
opinion about COVID that happened in February 2020 do you remember how in like basically
through all of February the message was like what you really should be worrying about is
the flu don't be a bigot go to Chinatown and like doorknob and then Donald Trump Donald
stupid fucking Trump changed his mind and was like you need more leftist you'd be surprised
how many people are pointing that out just like with the Ukraine to be surprised by how
many leftists that yeah yeah and and and you know you can point that out the meaning of
that is sort of kind of extremely dark and disturbing in a way because basically this
policy effectively was left up to the whims of Donald Trump because if Donald Trump had
come out and instead of saying oh no if COVID is real the stock market will go down and
I won't get reelected if he'd instead come out and said you know general jack the ripper
style we must preserve America's bodily precious bodily fluids you can guarantee that American
elite opinion would have followed basically the Swedish path and I think that that and
it's remarkable even that Sweden's own bureaucracy followed a not a path that was out of step
with basically global elite opinion that was remarkable and and sort of you know kind of
an interesting case of sort of the exception that proves the rule in some ways but the
whole world just like they went mad for George Floyd went basically mad for let's take the
anti-Donald Trump position in early March of 2020 and I think that there you know in
some ways cases to be made for both perspectives I'm kind of a COVID moderate which is I know
is very unusual in this in this group but I think the dynamics of where that elite opinion
came from tell us a lot about basically the flaws in essentially elite governance and
I think that agreeing with you that there are really systemic flaws in elite governance
and there are really systemic flaws in like unfettered uncontrolled unmanaged public opinion
is like I think an important point of agreement between us and I don't want to like let that
form of agreement slide and I think that understanding sort of building more of an understanding
of why elite governance goes wrong I also I'm a I don't know how you feel about the
lab leak theory but I'm a believer in that as well I wouldn't surprise do you believe
in the lab leak or do you believe I'm not I'm not sure yeah I'm not completely sure
but even to be not sure is great and and and the because there are very few elite sources
of opinion telling you to be not sure there's great articles in Vanity Fair actually about
the the lab leak but most journalists on the science beat are captive to the virology community
and the virology community basically doesn't want people to know that like this was a gain
of function experiment that got out of control or at least even that it was possible that
it was a gain of control as you know right again I think that the way you know one of
my sort of bigger picture beefs with a lot of what you say is that you know the way you
use terms like left and right tends to be I think about cultural attitudes often much
more so than it's about what politics I think is most fundamentally about which is distribution
of power and distribution of material resources so so then you know when it comes to something
like the New York Times because you see that as the left then you know you're surprised
when I disagree with them but look I mean you know don't like Norm Chomsky who's come
up a couple times in this conversation there's this there's a story you can find on YouTube
both Christopher Hitchens and Gore Fidel tell you the story about Chomsky at the dentist
where he's he's being I was told his dad his dentist asked you to grind your teeth he says
I don't think so right and then he asks his wife of Mrs Chomsky does does he grind his
teeth like in the night was asleep she's no I don't think so I've never noticed that and
they can't figure it out until the next morning she realizes that he grinds his teeth in the
morning while he reads the New York Times because it pisses him off so much right I don't I
don't I don't I don't like the New York Times I like and I know you read this article because
you brought it up on the young Turks I like current affairs right where my friend Nathan
Robinson you know I put out a big thing about this that's one of the reasons you know oh
yeah no no I really respected that Nathan Robinson piece and he's also a very snappy
dresser no no comment no comment but the I think we could all take a leaf from Nathan
Robinson's page there and he dresses like does really in fact and and the it's so good
and yeah and and so you know sort of whenever you find kind of the light of independent
thinking burning and there are ways in which it can sort of burn in this like sort of fatally
flawed like kind of very historically cliched leftist perspective and sort of explode out
of that in beautiful ways and like you know one of the ways in which you see these kinds
of beautiful explosions of independent thought are very like Nathan Robinson being like no
actually I'm gonna think for myself on this thing and once I think for myself it's obvious
what's going on and so so so can I if I promise this really is a question this is not a this
is not a statement yeah can I can I just ask you okay yeah so so brief question right
because you spent all this time talking up the values of things that I also care about
about curiosity about independent thought about you know standing outside of established
narratives all of which would make me think that you know that you'd be a big fan of of
free speech diversity of perspectives all that stuff so does it seem to you that in
dictatorships monarchies that those tend to be things that in which free speech and a wide
variety of views tend to flourish more than they do in democracies that's an excellent
question and I think that that you know if you read Tocqueville for example Tocqueville you
know people are like oh cancel culture this is the thing that you know is invented in like 2012
or something you know Tocqueville in democracy in America describes it almost perfectly in the
1830s and he describes basically democratic America as the place in the world that had the
least free speech and I think that's absolutely true if you basically look at for example the
latitude of political opinion that you could express in let's say France in 1770 it's wildly
greater than than the latitude that you can express today in fact the latitude of opinion
there are many things you could say in America in 1850 that you can no longer say and so you
know to me when I basically look at you know sort of democracy in the sense that we have it
today no I feel that that the range of perspectives within the entire Overton window is incredibly
narrow on a historical perspective and the way in which it looks large to us and this is sort of
why I've sort of been kind of encouraging you to kind of just go wild and go into the Google
Books world and go outside the kind of the world of that bubble because just read any book from
the 20s you'll find all kinds of crazy as for sure for a minute there you were actually having a
conversation about the ideas instead of retreating to this smug shit where it's like oh open your
mind and you know reset and receive the truth we were just talking about when I show you how to
actually do it you're like oh my god Curtis you cannot be this fucking dumb about this they
have a this this is not I'm not horrified by reading shit on Google Books I am sad and disappointed
that you're wasting time in what could be a useful conversation doing this posturing about oh see
you're trapped in narratives I've realized the truth which is why we're going to go to the questions
right here okay so I got two questions one for each that's okay sure okay two questions one for each
good big democracy component you talk about polls that Curtis thinks polls are fake in that it's a
way to manage democracy the question is to Ben is do you think we live in a managed democracy
yeah at the setup to that question was about me talking about polls and Curtis thinking polls are
fake I didn't say that exactly but Curtis you know Ben thinks we should help her the
would be improved with the question is because we got to get make sure we get this recorded the
question is Curtis do you think Haiti would be improved by introducing a eugenics to improve the
human stock the population I'm not really a big believer in population replacement in general
and when I think of Haiti when I think of a place I think of a people really and you know
sort of the idea of like improving Haitians by making them non Haitian doesn't really make any
sense to me the question I would ask instead is you know one of the things that you find in all
pre-modern political thinkers is this belief that the Constitution has to be fitted to the country
and its people especially obviously the people and not the geography because I think you know if you
move the Japanese nation to Haiti I think they do perfectly fine and so the question of what sort
of governance the actual people of Haiti need I think is somewhat unanswered I think it doesn't
look like anything like what they have now and I also doesn't don't really think it looks pretty
good like like Norway and the I would love to see Ben be dictator of Haiti for like two or three
years I think that would be absolutely informative and I think if you think that if you think that
I just listen to public that I think that the that that is how think anything I want in Haiti
could come about man you have not paid attention for the last couple hours I don't think that that
could come about but I'd still like to see it but I think it would be it would I would like to hear
you explain your views about this to Haitians I think that'd be fascinating no I think that
actually if you go one of the things that I love doing is I love talking to immigrant Uber
drivers and it's surprising how much they their perspective of their own country differs from
the perspective that you get from reading the New York Times if you ask you don't listen if you
ask no no because the thing is you're to me like your New York Times thing is you're like no I follow
the other reader instead and like Jesus you know my my grandparents I barely know what the
other reader my grandparents does anybody read the other reader you know is the Washington post
part of the cathedral they just they just they just called for it was the current US intervention
in Haiti no no I mean my my grandparents were American communists so I recognize this line of
of discourse very very well and no idea what that's supposed to be they never use the word
communist to me they would always say progressive and and so so you know when I basically like lump
together when I one of the things that's very irritating when you talk to leftists is you
know you'll basically be ascribe some policy to like the popular front of Judea and they'll be
like no that's a policy if you're gene in popular front we're totally against the people's front
of Judea right you know and sort of that's kind of the like when I use the New York Times as a
metonym for sort of the whole space of intelligent opinion yes you're right it is irritating to
leftists when you say things that lump together things that are at opposite extremes fail to make
basic distinctions because there are very much they're very much very different they're very
much at opposite extremes and certainly on the question of views towards American foreign policy
again there's a reason that that the New York Times makes Noam Chomsky you know grind his teeth if
you read Chomsky and Herman manufacturing consent which is where everything that's plausible and
what Curtis says about the cathedral comes from if you if you read that I think he's very he
is very point he is very on point about the ways in which Cold War anti-communism certainly
shaped the space of political discourse that could be allowable in the New York Times about how
certain reflexive assumptions about American foreign policy did and certainly about the
relationship between the thing that he never wants to talk about which is the actual power
centers in American society which are not journalists and academics at all right those
are hired hands you know Pete the actual power centers in American society are people who own
that stuff and no what they want I think differs just a little bit more you know I think that I
think that what corporate oligarchs who own media want is not particularly what I want and if you
think the difference between corporate oligarchs getting everything they want and democratic
socialism is a difference between the popular front for the liberation of Judea and the Judean
liberation army or whatever the hell the Monty Python line is I would just respectfully submit
that you're not thinking about it very carefully yeah it's it's actually let's go into actually the
ownership of journalism question or the management of journalism question because I think it's
actually a super interesting question I think one of the important you know a lot of a lot of what
you of your narrative which basically strikes me is almost entirely out of touch with the way
things work in this country today strikes me as much more resonant with the way things worked in
save the 1920s and so I feel like I'm sort of when you talk about corporate oligarchs I feel like
I'm like we're talking about the ghost of JP Morgan and Henry Clay Frick and and people like that or
I think if you actually if you look at so so let's talk about Jeff Bezos for a moment because
I would be if Jeff Jeff Bezos owns the Washington Post okay the Salzburger family has managed in
control of the New York Times there is an important difference here and the difference is it is almost
impossible for me to imagine Jeff Bezos trying to manipulate the New York Times the Washington
Post news desk in order to get for example favorable coverage for Amazon that would be unbelievable to
me based on the limited knowledge I'm not in the profession based on the limited knowledge that I
have of the way journalism works whereas at the times the Salzburger family which is the last
great family of media oligarchs still has an influence on the managing editor and basically the
choice of the news I was talking to not the person you would think someone who's connected to like a
media oligarch and they were like from a left-wing perspective actually not a media like a tech
oligarch a left-wing tech oligarch and they were like you know maybe we should just buy the New York
Times and like convert it to like effective altruism or whatever and I'm like you know look at the
market cap it's like I could put on my MasterCard you know and I'm like no you can't put it on your
MasterCard because you can't if the Salzburgers would never sell to you but if you could buy that
you would find that you were just another basically sponsor of an almost entirely autonomous
organization and that like but yeah if you go back to the 20s and you know the golden age of you
know or the system that say Joseph Pulitzer was trying to destroy the golden age of like
Hearst and Yale journalism if you look at Hearst influence over the Hearst press and you compare
it to Bezos's influence over the newspaper that he owns I would say there are probably four orders
of magnitude indifference between that level of influence and so it's like when I basically
think of you as a kind of operating in this kind of caricatured mythos which I can trace back to
the 20s I think one of the ways that you could have of asking yourself that question is by going
back to when these things were actually true and looking at that reality and comparing it to the
reality of today yeah how about the early 2000s would that be more like the the 1920s would it be
more like now tell me tell me your early 2000s well how about MSNBC look at the look at the
political transformations that network right that they had a yeah that they were they were at one
point trying to to compete you know with Fox for the right wing space they hired they fired the
people who are against the Iraq war who worked there and then seeing a better marketing opportunity
later they dramatically transitioned into what they are now so okay so so which is which is the
lib network and I don't think let's talk about Fox can we talk directly about Fox and we can talk
about Fox too but I think about the point the point the point of the MSNBC examples that's a very
direct example of of ownership making making decisions that dramatically change what the
newsroom looks like so yeah so if you basically talk about and I didn't know that piece of
history with MSNBC let's talk about Fox which is something that I know basically much better
so the Fox business like Fox is not the real media like and and this is something that it's
sort of only become clearer over time it's like these sort of idiots who wanted to expose you
know the sort of biden Ukraine corruption by leaking Hunter Biden's emails to the New York Post
they might as well have been leaking them to the trash can or to QAnon or to 4chan they probably
would have done better to leak them to 4chan actually and and you know the the the sense in
which basically journalism that is respected journalism operates by changing a lead opinion
let me give you an example from my own well not my knowledge so I you know have a number of DC
kinds of connections and one of the things I like to brag about is that my mother has actually
kissed Joe Biden and it was not a romantic kiss it was because she's married to my stepfather
who worked on the Hill for Biden for many years and he in turn got his PhD in 1965 in political
science from Harvard and then went off to work for Democrats on the Hill which he did for 20 years
now he teaches at Hopkins and he recounts this story do you know the name of George Bundy
he was in a seminar taught by McGeorge Bundy um in some time in the mid 60s at Harvard
and there was something that happened back then uh when they had sort of more real unions which
they had strikes and there was a newspaper strike on at the time and McGeorge Bundy comes in and
of course he has a DC role in addition to being at Harvard he comes into the room with these like
bright eyed bushy tail you know 1960s suit and tie wearing you know political science students
he's like well you know Washington can't function now we've lost our interoffice memo system
meaning the New York Times and and you know the effect of essentially authorized kind of official
story journalism does not go through the public before it has an impact it goes basically from
one arm of the state to another and so when the Times you know basically writes a story about
hey you know EPA isn't cracking down on this abuse EPA gets on it tomorrow you know that's real
that's real power Fox doesn't have that power and Fox so you know when you basically see Fox going
out there in marketing to the plebes they've basically made a decision to make money rather
than power out of journalism and um you know I believe that's crass and horrifying and you know
I have the negative opinion about it but you probably do but that's to me a really really
huge difference okay let's take another question uh let's go to John in the back
Ben yep what do you think I'm sure you would agree with the policy objectives of
ESG do you think that's uh adequate or is that a representation of democracy in your view
sorry ESG oh oh and it's uh it's environmental and social governance it's um it's um
destroying returns in the market well it's a code it's a code of conduct I believe for corporations
that oh yeah some governments are starting to impose and and corporations are imposing it on
themselves too right yeah it environmental social governance yeah I think that's mostly
epiphenomenal and mostly meaningless well why I mean because I I think that the case for that
having a meaningful impact being most of what drives what what's gonna happen in corporations
would would have to be made I think the more obvious the more obvious case would be that
that corporations are by and large interested in maximizing maximizing revenue and that sure it
could be nice it could be a nice you know public relations thing to to slap some of this environmental
social you know social governance rhetoric on and to occasionally generate some piece of writing
that where you know where you you justify what you've done in those terms but I I think it just is
very unlikely on the face of it that that would be by and large what would dictate actual behavior
in fact I think this is kind of a perfect case for you know Curtis has this very antiquated
view about the influence of the New York Times but I think that they you know the sort of broader
issue here with all this stuff is who do you think actually exercises power when push comes to shove
and I agree Jeff Bezos would have no reason that he would need to mess with the news desk they're
never you know none of those nerds are ever going to do anything that would that would hint at anything
that would undermine his interest in any way in fact if they would they wouldn't have those jobs
in the first place right you know you don't need to interfere the you know like the editors who are
ultimately making those decisions if they were if they had a thought in their heads that would
somehow undermine Bezos and his economic interest they would never have passed through any of the
hoops to get those jobs in the first place but there's a sort of more general thing which is
this view of the world that that well no it's not real power is not exercised by the guy who can
say Jeff Bezos with his ownership of newspapers with his ability to blackmail entire you know
not only local but state governments by threatening to pull out of of areas who can donate vast
amounts of money to politicians no no no that's not real power the real power is is is being exercised
by his well-healed hired help who who run the Washington Post for him or who have some sort
of like diversity officer you know a job in you know somewhere in the corporate structure
and I think that that's just fundamentally wrong so we have 15 minutes left so I want to go to
to another question right here so Curtis has quoted the motto of the state of Missouri
so I translate that as the quality of the people not the health of the people but the quality of
the people is the most important thing and ever listening to both of you and having read some
of what you've been written I think that's actually something you agree on that that's the most
important thing yeah so if we look at a century of progressivism we here's what county you know
we spent twenty two thousand five hundred dollars per pupil for education the state has a monopoly
on education k through 12 education 40 percent of the students can't correctly label the Atlantic
and the Pacific Ocean on a map okay that doesn't look like I didn't get any value for my tax
to order when I look at the defense of the country we haven't won a war in 70 years and the amount
of money we're spending is incredible it looks more like a transfer for looting the public treasury
and transferring the money to defense contractors and various other people involved in the war
when I look at health 85 percent of the population is obese overweight or obese
40 percent have diabetes and I can go down the line there are some things that government does well
but I don't I don't see how anyone can avoid the conclusion that progressive government has
failed utterly and why are we even talking about continuing more progressive government how do
we improve the quality of the people and I don't know the answer to that but neither one of you
has actually touched on that do you want to do so he listed several things that
have been government projects funding of things like education and the military
and we've gotten only bad results and so it seems to me it seems to you you're saying that progressive
government has resulted in nothing good nothing worth supporting so well I would say it's uneven
yeah there are some things so for example national ocean administration that did some
good right and there are many other good things that have been done but if you look at the money I
would say maybe 80 for 80 percent of the money suffered from social security 80 percent of the
money has just been flushed down so why continue spending money on progressive on progressive
projects been yeah so I would say that it's worth broadening your view out from the United States
to the rest of the world and well no okay all right all right he anybody didn't hear that he
doesn't care about the rest of the world he's numeric he's okay let me know when I you want me
to respond to your question but it's gonna be a while okay he says he's not interested in the
rest of the world which I would just I think the gentlest way to put this is if you want to have a
well-informed opinion or one that has any relationship with reality you should take an interest in
the rest of the world because that's the only way to find out is to have you know if you want to
I'm actually going to if you shut the fuck up and let me answer at some point you've interrupted
several times as I've tried to answer your question but given more speeches but in any case
yeah so if you want to to have an answer that bears any relationship whatsoever to reality
you have to start looking at at global at global comparisons to to look at see okay
here's a problem in the United States what are places that are doing this differently what are
places they're doing that differently how might these differences be relevant to the difference
in outcome for example you anyway you incorrectly stated earlier no good to Finland this time
you incorrectly stated earlier that America has a monopoly public schools have a monopoly
which is which is not true that they have that there are in fact plenty of private schools
parochial schools plenty of home schooling in in the United States now a country where there
actually is something much closer at least to a public monopoly on education as Finland
they essentially don't have private schools that they in in Finland you know you can you
can have things that are sort of private schools you have to have the same curriculum and it's
funded ultimately same way you can't charge tuition you know so it's like essentially
this is a place that actually does have a public monopoly on education and they have what's widely
regarded including by right-wing charter school advocates when they're looking for with their
cherry picking things about it that they like as the best education system on the world and the
one the one that gets the the one that that gets the the best the best results and so I would say
that there are in fact a lot of global reasons to think that the United States if if it implemented
policies that that have been successful in yes in Finland in Norway
in Iceland sure you know Iceland actually less but yes they have a that's the that in
plenty of other places these are some of the ones where it's been the most advanced
which I understand why Curtis doesn't want to talk it doesn't want to talk about them because
if you talk about the places that have come closest to my preferences Sweden then you're going to
you're going to get this incredibly ideologically inconvenient result for him that it worked out
fucking awesome but but even if you look at places that are a lot further from from those
sort of Nordic enclaves of social democracy in many ways and much closer along the spectrum
to the United States you look at your Canada's you know you look at your UK's and you start
comparing their healthcare systems for example and in every way that we can rank those things
that that we that we know how to do them then you know I think maybe the survival rates for
some cancers not cancer in general is is better than the United States but in almost every way
that we know how to rank these things those do better than the United States so if you're just
going to make generalizations about what he referred to as progressive governance footnote
I think the word progressive doesn't really shed very much light on everything and we probably
all be much better off if we stopped using it because it's used to describe everything from
milquet toast centrist centrist liberalism to up through you know democratic socialism
and we're talking about very different things and we're having more clarificatory discussion
about them if we distinguish them and if we distinguish them one of the things we'd find
out very quickly is there are many countries that have much more extensive welfare states than
the United States and much better results than the United States can I can I I just had a brilliant
idea which I don't know if anyone's thought of this but like I want Ben's what if we put the
government of Finland in charge of Haiti pro or con yeah then they would get eugenics
yeah so I have a slight answer you're pretty evasive about eugenics earlier I want to uh
but but I don't know what the fuck you do think would be good for Haiti you've you've used it as
a punchline a lot but I have heard you commit yourself to very little oh um um you know for
Haiti I'm I'm with um John Stuart mill who was when he was talking about um um India said you
know I'm for governing India as we govern Ireland with a with a good stout despotism this is the
author of uh considerations on representative government um I think that probably the best
government that Haiti had in the 20th century was the government of the marines in the 20s and 30s
and uh so I think colonialism is an absolutely fine uh process for that I also think that
if you basically left if the state department could leave Haiti alone for like a year or two it
would come back and it would find a Haitian in charge of the entire island probably one of
these gang leaders that they're having problems with these days I think that would probably work
out actually considerably better than the system that they have at present it's always it's always
convenient I so I think more I think more isolationism or more colonialism either of those things
would actually be much better for Haiti than the present I want to answer you know your question
sort of briefly because I think that in addition to considering the rest of the world you know
there's a slight problem which is that um the US and the USSR together basically conquered the
world in 1945 and so we live in a kind of political monoculture that came out of these two if I can
use the word progressive um um regimes that conquered the world and so I think that we
make a very big mistake and we're very parochial when we do not value the experience of the past
as equal to the experience of the present and so when we talk about for example the Salis
populi we go back and we look at for example how for example Lord Burley who governed England
under Queen Elizabeth would have regarded that question and I think that there are sort of answers
in those kinds of directions that would I think that noting that we agree on that point is like a
very very important and relevant point and I think that um you know Ben's referred to I guess in
private of his his like program of federal jobs guarantee I sort of appreciate the spirit under
which that's offered I think it's better than UBI I think there are other policies that can sort of
give more people the dignity of labor in a way that's a little more dignified than I think that
that would result in but like understanding that basically the goal of government is to use absolute
power because all governments have absolute power to support the health and the broadest sense of
the people is something that I think we can both agree on yeah I would like to give the dignity
of labor to people who live off of their stock ownership or inheritance all right last question
and then we gotta go I'm gonna go with Casper right here okay um this is for both of y'all in
relation to the I guess concept of democracy what do you think the interplay between rights and power
is what do you think the interplay between rights and power is yeah I don't you know the sort of
concept of rights I think rest on a kind of misunderstanding of power people are always looking
for a power that's above power in a sense and then they delegate this power to the power that's
above power they're like oh this is just a power so this for example is why Ben and I sort of agree
on this question of judicial review where we're like oh we'll set a power that's above the power
and it will have the power to do non-democratic things like legalized abortion or ban abortion or
some weird shit you know or legalized gay marriage when most Americans don't support it and then
magically American public opinion will swing around to support whatever power supports which is
the way public opinion works and so you're sort of trying to always there's a sort of quest for
the magic power that's above mere humanity and I think that that quest is sort of always going to
fail yeah I hope any libertarians in the audience realize that they disagree with Curtis way more
they disagree with me you know what he's talking about what he says US and USSR both you know
progressive and all that what he means is they both reflect broad enlightenment values which
you know I and so we have they actually both use the way we have this we have this difference in
opinion about the last few hundred years and you know the advent of the modern world in the end of
the enchanted regime more like where I think it's a I think it's a good thing so I will leave people
to contemplate that but just real quickly on this question about rights and and power I'd say that
I'd say there's a little bit of a category confusion here right one is a question about facts
one is a question about values I think that the the goals that we may value might involve certain
people being allowed to do things or having certain expectations and that's what we're labeling
when we use this this concept of right which I think is just a useful way we've all got normative
goals you might as well admit to that right come clean and and try to be internally consistent
about it and and so yeah I I think there are various things I would refer to as rights like
self-government and but that is the sense in which I'm using the term great well this got a little
testy but we ended on at this moment a beautiful agreement but I want to say I think you're both
brilliant and I learned a lot from this and I can't wait to listen back to it because I have more
to learn when I when I listen to it more carefully and I want to thank everyone who came and all
the great questions and I'd love for you to just give them a round of applause
thank you
this is the unregistered podcast and I am Thaddeus Russell to become a patron of the show
and have access to bonus episodes AMAs and the unreported news analysis show
go to patreon.com slash unregistered thanks for listening
so
You
