Pickles. And you don't like pickles. And you say, pickles. Barf. Pickles barf is not something
that can be literally true or false.
Recording another one of these lecture videos. Today, we're talking about AJ Air and chapter
six of his book. But let's talk about what I just said. That utterance, can that be true
or false? Literally. Can it literally be true that recording a lecture video? No, it can't.
That's not the kind of thing that can be true or false. I don't mean that that statement
or that utterance isn't true. I mean that it can't be true. And I don't mean that it
isn't false. I mean that it can't be false. This kind of utterance, this kind of linguistic
expression when you say, ugh, that can't be true or false. Or you see some pickles. And
you don't like pickles. And you say, pickles. Barf. Pickles barf is not something that can
be literally true or false. Whereas by comparison, an ordinary assertion, something along the
lines of, it's raining can be true or false, right? It's raining is true when it's raining
and it's false when it's not raining. So there's a difference here. Some utterances have what's
called a truth value. They can be true or false. And some utterances don't. They can't
be true or false. These, these ones, this one in particular is just merely an expression
of a sentiment. It's just merely expressing how I feel. I come in here and I say, recording
another one of these lecture videos. Ugh. That's just expressing my sentiment about having
to record another one of these lecture videos. It expresses the sentiment of distaste or
not wanting to record the lecture video. But it doesn't literally say, I don't want to
record this lecture video. That would be something, that would be an assertion. That would be
something that could be true or false, right? If I said, I don't want to record today, that's
a full blown assertion. That can be true or false. And it's true if I don't want to record
today and it's false if I do want to record today, right? So these two utterances, they
express the same feeling, but only one of them, as air would put it, asserts a proposition
that can be true or false. This one makes a claim. It makes a claim about how the world
is. In fact, it makes a claim about a very particular part of the world. It makes a claim
about me and my mind, this part of the world, the part where my wants are. It says, I don't
want to record today. That's just a statement about what I want. This is not a statement
about anything. Okay. So why are we talking about this? Well, air is going to make a claim
about a particular type of talk or a particular type of discourse. Namely, he's going to
say that moral talk or moral discourse is not the kind of thing that can be literally true
or false. He's talking about moral talk. Notice something. Previously in this course, we've
been talking about something very different. We haven't been talking about moral talk. We've
been talking about morality. Previously, we've been talking about what's right and what's
wrong, right? So if you read a philosopher who's arguing, for example, that you should
give all of your expendable income, all of your extra income to charity, then that philosopher
is making a claim about morality, a claim about what's right and what's wrong. It's
different to make a claim about moral claims, a claim about moral language. Talking about
this is a meta-ethical claim. We're making a move from talking about morality or ethics
to talking about morality or ethics. Okay. So the key thing to take away is that everything
we say about air is about moral talk. There is a connection with morality, and I'll say
what that connection is right now, but just know that all of the central claims that air
makes are about language. They're not about what's right and wrong. They're about our
talking about what's right and wrong. Okay. So what is the connection between moral talk
and morality for air or for anyone who wants to say anything about the nature of moral
talk and philosophy? The connection typically is this. Let's say that you wanted to be a
moral skeptic. You wanted to say that there's no such thing as morality. You're a moral,
another way to put it is that you'd be a moral anti-realist. You'd say there really are no
moral facts. Well, you still have to explain something that there obviously are. There obviously
are lots of statements that people make in real life about morality. He says to Tyson,
maybe, violence is wrong. That's a moral claim. That's moral talk. That's real. People really
do say that. Now, the moral skeptic is going to want to say, well, there really is no
underlying morality that would make a statement like this true. And so it looks on the surface
like you've got two options. If you deny that there's any morality, but there obviously
is moral talk, you can either say that all of this moral talk is false or misguided or
confused and that therefore, presumably, we should stop engaging in it. We should stop
the moral talk. We should stop saying this sort of thing. And we say it a lot. So that's
a huge revision of what we're doing is to say that all of this talk is mistaken and
misguided or false and that we should let go of it. That's one option. But the other
option for the moral skeptic who wants to get rid of morality is to say that all moral
talk is not really truth act. It's not true or false. So it's not false. It's doing something
else altogether and so we can keep it. We can keep this moral talk, which is a big part
of our lives, even though we're getting rid of morality itself. And so what we're going
to get from Ayer today in the little snippet of the chapter that we read is an account
of this kind of language that allows us to say that it's not true or false. It allows
us to say that it's like, it's like, ugh, ugh, right? It's a kind of talk that can't
be true or false and therefore the fact that there isn't some underlying moral reality
does not entail that we need to get rid of all this talk. We can keep it. So here's
something that Ayer says. This actually wasn't in the part of the reading that we read for
today, but it was on the reading guide that you read. Here's what he says. So he says
value statements are not in the literal sense significant, but are simply expressions of
emotion which can be neither true nor false. What does that mean? Alright, well let's just
go through some talk, some examples of talk. Here's some things that you can say. Ready?
One thing that you could say is the door is shut. You could say that. That's an assertion.
You're telling me something about the door, right? The door is shut. This sort of thing
can be true or false. The door is shut. It's true if the door really is shut and it's false
if the door is not shut. That's easy. Okay, but there's lots and lots and lots and lots
of language that can't be true or false. One example is the one that I already gave at
the beginning of video, of the video which is if you just say ugh or something like that.
That's some kind of exclamation or something like that or some kind of expression and you
can say that and it can be very meaningful. That can be a very meaningful thing to say,
but it's not the kind of thing that can be true or false, right? Ugh, true or false doesn't
make sense. It's neither true nor false. It's just merely an expression of emotion which
can be neither true nor false. That's ugh. But it's not just sounds like that. Also what
if I said this? Is the door shut? We have a name for utterances like this. Questions.
A question also can't be true or false, right? A question isn't making a claim about how
the world is. It's not saying that the door is shut. It's not saying that the door is
open. It's just asking what's up with the door, right? So a question can't be true or
false. But it's still a perfectly meaningful thing to say. It's just not in the business
of describing how the world is so it can't be true or false. Or here's another one. Ready?
Shut the door. What's that? That's like an order or a command. An order or a command.
Can that be true or false? No. No, that can't be true or false, right? It's not telling
you that the door is shut. It's telling you to shut the door, right? All of these, these
three at least, they are all talking about the door and its status. But one of them and
only one of them is describing the status of the door, whether or not it's shut. The
others are well asking about the status of the door and commanding someone to make the
door have a certain status, being shut, right? So actually it looks like most language, most
talk is not the sort of thing that can be true or false. Most of the things we say or
that come out of our mouths, or at least a lot of them, are not assertions. All right.
Here's the thing. These statements, the kinds of value statements that we care about. We
care about moral statements. We care about value statements, at least right now we do,
right, in this course. These kinds of statements, the ones that look like this, violence is
wrong, right? That statement, it sure looks like the door is shut. The door is shut. Violence
is wrong. It looks like this is an assertion. It looks like lots of our moral talk is the
kind of thing that can be either true or false. And therefore, if there is no such thing as
right or wrong, of course, then all of these statements are going to be false because they're
the kind of thing that could be false because they're assertions. But Ayer thinks, no, these
aren't assertions. They look like assertions. This looks like this, but actually, really
literally, all it means is something like this. According to Ayer, this is the part to remember,
don't miss this. According to Ayer, violence is wrong is really like saying,
boo, violence, boo, violence. That's not the kind of thing that can be true or false.
That's not actually making an assertion about how the world is. Okay, so let's go back to the
sentence. Value statements are not in the literal sense significant. That is, they're not assertions
that can be true or false. They are simply expressions of emotion, which can neither
be true or false, which can be neither true nor false. That's what Ayer is saying. Ayer is saying
that value statements like this, they look like this, but they're really like that.
Strictly speaking, they can't be true or false. Okay, so to further understand this point,
think about the context where we say things like urgh or boo. Say that you're at a sporting event
and half of the crowd in the stands are fans of one team and half of the crowd are fans of
another team. And they introduce a player at the beginning and they say, and now the
point guard for the Golden State Warriors, Stephen Curry. And Curry comes out and half
of the audience says boo and the other half says yay. Imagine the announcer then comes along and
says, well, who do you think is right? Boo or yay? No one's right. No one's wrong. No one is making
a claim about how the world is. They're just merely expressing how they feel.
Okay, notice one thing about these mere expressions and assertions.
They can still be criticized, both of them, actually. So compare, for example, the following
two things. I could bump into you on the street and say sorry, right? Sorry. Or an alternative
thing that I could say in the very similar or exactly the same situation is I could say
I am filled with sorrow because I bumped into you.
I could say that, right? This one is an assertion. This one is not, right? This can be true or
false. I am filled with sorrow because I bumped into you. This is a description of how the world
is. It's true if I really am filled with sorrow and it's false if I'm not filled with sorrow.
But just saying sorry, that can't be true or false. You bump into somebody on the street,
they say sorry, you can't come back and say false. I don't think you are filled with sorrow. What?
You can criticize them for being insincere. You can say that didn't sound sincere. I don't think
you're really sorry, right? If they bump into you in the street and they say sorry.
Oh, sorry like that. That's insincere. They're not really sorry. Sorry is capable of being insincere
because it expresses a sentiment or a feeling. It expresses a feeling and therefore it can be
sincere or insincere. I'll write it like that. Sincere or insincere, right? It can be a sincere
or insincere because it expresses a sentiment and if you really have that sentiment, then it's
sincere to say you're sorry. But if you really don't have that sentiment, if you're not filled with
sorrow, if you don't have regret, then it's insincere. This can be insincere too, right?
An assertion. This is an assertion. It's an assertion about how the world is. It just says
that the world, a very little bit of the world, the part right here is a certain way. It says,
I am filled with sorrow. I feel lots of sorrow. So this is an assertion, but it also expresses a
sentiment. It expresses basically the same sentiment, maybe. And because it expresses that
sentiment, it can also be sincere or insincere, right? Just in the way sorrow can. But the assertion
does a second thing. The other thing that it does is that it, well, it puts forward a claim
and it puts forward that claim as if it is true. It says of this claim, this is the way the world
really is. This claim is true. I am filled with sorrow. It describes the world. Because of this,
it can be true or false, that assertion, right? So notice that the assertion is doing two things
and the mere expression of sorrow or sympathy is just doing one thing, right?
Ayer is able, because of these facts, Ayer is able to say, when he translates violence is wrong
to boo violence, he's able to say that you're still able to criticize this kind of claim.
We still can criticize these claims. We criticize them as sincere or insincere.
We just can't strictly speaking criticize them as true or false.
Okay, so in a minute we're going to talk about an alternative theory, a different theory,
a theory other than Ayer's own theory that's also about moral talk. But let's just reiterate
really quick. This is Ayer's claim. His claim is that value statements like violence is wrong,
the kind of statement that he might have made to Mike Tyson during that encounter that we read
about, right? That kind of claim really just means boo violence. It's really not an assertion,
even though it looks like an assertion. Value statements are not in the literal sense significant,
but are simply expressions of emotion which can be neither true nor false. Okay, he's going to now
talk about an alternative theory. Let's get to that. Remember that we are talking about language.
We're talking about moral language or moral talk, right? And our running example is this claim that
Ayer might have made to Tyson or something like that, the claim violence is wrong.
Ayer says that what this claim really means is something like
boo violence. That's Ayer.
All right, can you see me? There's this line in my face. It doesn't matter. Okay, violence is wrong
really means boo violence. But there's an alternative theory. The name for that theory
that Ayer uses is the orthodox subjective theory. We're just going to call it subjectivism.
Okay, this is an alternative theory of what this phrase means. And the alternative theory just says
that this phrase means something like I dislike violence.
That's the subjectivist claim. Okay, so notice that these are very different, right?
Whoops. Ayer is claiming that this looks like an assertion, but it's no assertion at all. It's
a mere expression. It can't be true or false. The subjectivist is claiming that this assertion
is an assertion. It's just a different assertion, right? Violence is wrong looks like it's a claim
about violence. It looks like it's just saying violence is wrong. Really, according to the
subjectivist, this is an alternative to Ayer's approach that he brings up and then attacks.
Really, according to the subjectivist, this is not a claim about violence. It's a claim about the
speaker. It's a claim about me when I'm talking. Let's back up for a second. We'll explain this
claim in a sec, but first, let's just see that these aren't the only two alternatives. This is
one translation of violence is wrong. This is another translation of violence is wrong,
but then there's the just sort of ordinary naive translation, right? The naive theory, the theory
that you would have if you weren't thinking hard about these things, and it might be the right
theory, by the way. The naive theory about statements like violence is wrong is just that it means
violence is wrong. That's what it means. It's an assertion. It asserts that violence has a certain
property and the property is wrongness, right? If you just take the statement, a regular ordinary
statement like grass is green, if you take an ordinary statement like that, what does that
really mean? What are you talking about? It really means that grass is green. That's what it means.
It's an assertion. It's true if grass is green. It's false if grass is any other color. That's
what grass is green means. Grass is green means grass is green. It says that grass has a certain
property of being green. That's it. You might think the same thing about violence is wrong.
That's the naive view. Violence is wrong just means violence is wrong. It has the feature
of being wrong. That's it. So both Ayer's theory and subjectivism are departing from the natural
way of interpreting this kind of language, this moral talk. Okay, but put that aside for a minute.
Let's understand these two alternative theories, Ayer's and subjectivism. Subjectivism means,
or subjectivism claims rather, that moral talk really consists of claims about the individual
who's speaking at the time. When I say that violence is wrong, my statement can be true
or false according to subjectivism. It can be true or false, but its truth or falsity depends
not on the nature of violence and whether it's really wrong. It depends just on the nature
of me, the speaker, and whether I really dislike it or something like that, whether I have some
negative sentiment towards it. That's what really determines whether the statement is true or false.
Whereas on Ayer's view, the statement can't be true or false at all. Ayer brings up this theory
subjectivism for three reasons. The first reason is to help clarify what his own view is. Once you
see that there's an alternative theory about what moral statements mean that makes them into
assertions, just different assertions than you might have thought they were, then you realize,
oh whoa, his theory is rather radical. It says that they are not assertions at all. They're not
claims that can be true or false at all. Okay, so you get a clearer sense of what his view is.
His view is the violence view. You get a clearer sense of what his view is by just bringing this
view up and saying, my view is not that. Okay, so that's the first reason he brings up subjectivism.
The second reason he brings up subjectivism is because subjectivism is obviously wrong
and he can attack it and that shows that his theory has a certain advantage. It doesn't fall prey to
the kind of attack or mistake that destroys subjectivism. He only talks about this for like
two sentences in the part that we read. They come and go really fast, but basically the objection
that kills off subjectivism but that doesn't hurt Ayer's own theory is this. Violence is wrong
for any moral claim. It seems like if it's true, it's not true because of something about the
speaker, right? Imagine that a philosopher comes to talk to you and they make some moral claim.
They say spending money on luxuries is evil. You cannot do it. It's wrong. Buying a cup of coffee
made at a coffee shop rather than just making the coffee yourself at home and donating the extra
money to famine relief is wrong. Those are all moral claims. They make moral claims like that and
maybe you start arguing with them and you say, oh no, you know, I live in a capitalist society and
blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. The philosopher can't just come back and say, no, no, no, no,
you don't understand. It's wrong. Let me prove it to you and then they cut open their skull and rip
it open and put a brain scanner on them and then the brain scanner reads off on a screen and there
on the screen it says it shows all the things that they think and right there on the screen it says
this guy dislikes coffee. That's what it said on the screen of the brain scanner or it says something
like this guy dislikes spending money on coffee instead of donating that money to famine relief.
Does that, does that evidence, that brain scan evidence, does that prove that the moral statement
you know, coffee is evil? Does that prove that this statement is true?
This brain scan? Brain scan? No, no it doesn't. No one takes that seriously. That's not the kind
of evidence that you'd ever try to give for a moral statement like this. It's just obvious. We,
we take this for granted in all of our moral discourse. It's just obvious that moral statements
like this are not statements about the speaker. If I make a statement about me we all know that
it's a statement about me and we talk as if it's a statement about me. I say I'm exhausted and someone
might say oh is it because you haven't gotten enough sleep? It's all about me right whereas if I say
violence is wrong no one says oh is it because you're like a curmudgeonly person and you dislike
a lot of stuff? Is that why violence is wrong? No that's not why violence is wrong. That might
be why I think it's wrong but my thinking that it's wrong or my disliking it that's not the same
as it's being wrong. If this is true it sure isn't true just because I dislike violence.
This theory, subjectivism, this theory is no good. It makes this crazy claim that these statements
are true or false based on what the speaker is thinking or what the speaker feels and that's
just not how anyone thinks about morality. So that is the second reason why air brings up
subjectivism is to argue against it in that way and it shows that air's view doesn't have that
problem. I mean air's view is in a way more radical. It says that moral statements don't even have
truth values but that that radicalness gives it the advantage of not having to say that the truth
value of a moral statement depends on the speaker of the statement or the mind of the speaker of
that moral statement. Okay so he argues against subjectivism in that way but then the third reason
the third reason that air brings up subjectivism is to give an objection to subjectivism raise an
objection that comes from the philosopher G.E. Moore Moore's objection. So this objection is not
like the one that we just saw towards subjectivism where it only applies to subjectivism and doesn't
also apply to air's view. This objection if it works also is a problem for air's own view. So we're
going to talk about that objection and then we're going to get air's response to it. This all happens
in like the four pages that we read. So what is Moore's objection? This happens by the way in the
reading that we're using on page 110. We get an explanation of Moore's objection and then also on
110 going on to 111 we get air's response. So if you follow and understand everything I'm saying
about Moore's objection and air's response but you didn't pick it up in the reading go back to those
pages reread those pages to get Moore's objection and air's response. Okay well what is Moore's
objection? The objection is this fundamentally Moore is claiming that we have genuine moral
disagreements. We have genuine moral debates. We productively argue with one another about
morality and when we when we do this we literally contradict one another. When we have moral debates
or moral discussions we very frequently have situations where one person says something
and the other person says no that's not the case that's false right. So one person says
uh abortion is wrong and another person says abortion is permissible. It's not wrong. It might
not be great but it's not something that's always wrong. These two folks are disagreeing with one
another. They are contradicting one another. They cannot both be right. If air's view is true
then they're not really contradicting one another because really one of them is just saying
boo abortion right that's the first one and the other one is saying okay abortion
they're not contradicting one each other one another. If one person says boo and the other
person says yay and they're screaming back and forth at each other from across the stadium
at a sporting event they're not arguing. Now there's a sense in which there is a tension
between the sentiments that they are expressing. One of them feels a certain way and the other
person feels a different way and an individual person can't coherently feel both ways at the
same time. They can't as it were well be in favor of something and be against it at the same time
right but that doesn't mean that the things that they've said contradict one another they're not
productively disagreeing. Here's an example that goes back a little bit to subjectivism. Say that
I'm sitting at a table eating pickled tomatoes and someone comes up to me and says I don't like
pickled tomatoes and I say I do like pickled tomatoes and they say I don't like pickled tomatoes
and I say but I like them. We don't disagree with one another we're just screaming back and
forth and I'm talking about me and this other person is talking about themselves and so we
don't really disagree there's a kind of confusion we are as it were talking past one another.
If you're a subjectivist about moral talk then you have to say that disagreements like this one
are really just two people shouting back and forth at each other when they're really
each talking about different things one of them is talking about themselves and
and the other one is talking about themselves right and so too with air moral disagreements
like this it looks like these people are arguing with one another but they're not really arguing
with one another one is just yelling boo and one is just yelling yay right and here's Moore's claim
moral disagreements are real they're genuine they exist and so any theory more things that gets
the results that there aren't moral disagreements that theory is no good that's Moore's objection.
Okay what's air's response to Moore's objection? All right air does something that in philosophy
we call biting the bullet. You bite a bullet in real life I mean you probably hopefully will never
bite a bullet you bite a bullet in real life when you have to do something really painful
like get surgery without anesthesia and you're supposed to bite the bullet in order to bear
the pain right so air is as it were going to take on something that's a little bit painful
but he's going to do it to save his theory which he thinks has many other advantages
right he just bites the bullet and accepts that we don't have genuine moral disagreements.
He denies that we have genuine moral disagreements. He says that it looks like we have genuine moral
disagreements but we really don't. How can he possibly say that? It really seems like we have
moral disagreements. Here's a little bit of an argument for air's view that defends him from
Moore's objection. Say that we're talking about public policy drug policy right here's a moral claim
marijuana that's just how I'm going to write marijuana because I don't know how to spell it
marijuana should be legal let's say you think that well if you do think that you're using
moral language you're making a moral claim you're talking about what should be the case you're talking
about how our society ought to be arranged what is the just way to arrange our legal system and our
laws this is a moral statement if there ever was one right marijuana should be legal okay
say you were arguing for that claim or you were arguing against it what might you say
think about it actually pause the video right now and make up an argument either for the claim
that marijuana should be legal or that it shouldn't you didn't you didn't you didn't pause the video
no you don't really pause it you're not actually going to think of something you're just going to
keep on watching okay well listen here's what you could have said here's what you probably would
have said you might have said something like this well marijuana should be legal because marijuana
maybe stops seizures oh I don't know how to spell seizures but something like that okay marijuana
stops seizures you might argue in favor of marijuana legalization by making that point
or if you're a opponent if you're an opponent of a marijuana legalization you might say marijuana
impairs judgment impairs judgment and that in turn causes car crashes which cause death
we could go back and forth about all of this sort of stuff but did you notice something
this was a moral statement a normative statement about a statement about how things should be
but then when we started to actually have this debate or started to have this discussion
all of the claims that we started hearing were factual claims they were factual claims factual
these ones are factual this one is moral or normative in at least some sense but these are
not claims about how things should be the fact that marijuana stops seizures if it does in some
cases is not a fact about how things should be it's a fact about how things are it just is
true that this chemical interacts with this other chemical in this certain way that's it
it's a factual claim it's not a moral claim it's a factual claim same thing for marijuana
causes impairment which in turn causes car crashes if you're driving that's a factual
claim that's a claim about chemicals chemicals interacting with other chemicals chemicals
in the marijuana chemicals in your brain nerves leading to your hands and feet when you're driving
these are all factual claims air thinks this he thinks that when we are having disagreements
that are genuine they're not really moral and when we're having disagreements that are really
moral they're not really genuine right so we can have a genuine disagreement about well whether
marijuana should be legal but that's only because we were really at the underlying level
disagreeing about some factual claim whether or not marijuana stops seizures or whether or not
marijuana has some other effects or something like that we're just disagreeing about factual
things we're able to have that disagreement because under the surface there is actually
some degree of moral agreement we agree about something namely we agree well we agree about
something moral we agree that stopping seizures I still don't know how to spell seizures is good
that's a moral claim too we agree about this and it's only because we have this kind of agreement
we have the same sentiments here that we're able to have this kind of disagreement
Moore's claim is that we can have our sentiments aligned
on certain things on certain matters we can have the same sentiments we would express them in the
same thing and then when we get to the level of disagreement really we are disagreeing about
factual things because there's some underlying moral convergence that's his response to Moore's
objection is that we don't have genuine moral disagreements or at least not nearly as often
as we think we do what we have are moral agreements and genuine non-moral disagreements
now we are able to explain what I think is the most difficult sentence in the reading so right
now I'm going to explain to you given everything I just said right what this very difficult sentence
said so let me get the sentence
here's the sentence it happens on the bottom of page 111 and I'm going to write it up now and then
we're going to use everything that we just said our understanding of air's view our understanding
of subjectivism and Moore's objection to subjectivism and then air's response to Moore's objection
we're going to use all of that to understand what this sentence says okay here it is
let's go through it real slow if our opponent concurs with us in expressing moral disapproval
of all actions of a given type t then we may get him to condemn a particular action a by bringing
forward arguments to show that a is of type t okay what's going on the background is that
Moore is talking about how actual moral disagreements work how we actually try to persuade one another
to change our minds about moral matters suppose you wanted to convince some people
that marijuana should be illegal you were jeff sessions or something like that you want to
convince folks that marijuana i really hope that's how you spell it right should be illegal
okay you want to convince someone of that fact how do you go about doing it well we just heard
that air's response to more involved him saying that underneath this disagreement where one person
thinks that it should be illegal and the other person thinks it's fine it should be legal right
underneath this disagreement are factual disagreements and then underneath those factual disagreements
are moral agreements right so here's something here's something that well if you're jeff sessions
and you're trying to argue for this you know that your opponent is going to agree with you about
okay they're going to agree with you that
we're talking about behavior that leads to murder everyone is going to agree that that's bad
they're going to have the same negative sentiments towards that right okay everyone agrees that this
is bad let's call this type of behavior behavior type t behavior type t is any behavior that leads
to murder okay and then let's talk about some more specific type of behavior behavior type a
and this will be smoking marijuana let's say you were jeff sessions you thought that marijuana was
terrible it should be illegal you know that everyone agrees with you that if something leads to murder
then it should be illegal too so you just have to well make a factual claim you make the following
factual claim that this type of behavior smoking marijuana is really just some of this type of
it's a subset smoking marijuana is one type of behavior that leads to murder and you do this
with science or made up science if you don't have real science to back you up right or whatever
you're going to use right this is a factual claim the factual claim is that smoking marijuana
is a type of behavior that leads to murder that's a factual claim air is saying that this sort of
thing is what goes on when we have moral disagreements right and that his theory is perfectly able to
explain this all right let's go back to the quote let's read it again if our opponent concurs with
us so if our opponent agrees with us if we all agree what do we agree about we agree in expressing
moral disapproval of all actions of a given type T so we all disapprove of anything that leads to
murder right okay so we all agree that this is to be disapproved of any action of a given type T
then we may get him our opponent okay we may get our opponent to condemn a particular action
a right so we want to condemn a your Jeff Sessions you want to condemn a right we may get him to
condemn we may get our opponent to condemn this by bringing forward arguments to show that a is of
tight T to show that this is really of this type that this is the claim now i'm not saying it's true
and i'm not saying it's false i'm just saying that according to air this is the kind of moral
argument that we make we say that this type of action is really of this type of action
and we already agree in condemning this type of action and so by making this factual claim
it's a factual claim to say that smoking marijuana leads to murder that's just a factual claim
that's not a moral claim right this kind of factual claim is the kind of claim that we
actually disagree about and that that's what's really at the heart of moral disagreements one last
thing before we're done we've said all these things about air's theory and air's theory one more time
is a theory of moral talk or moral language not of morality itself why again do we care
about moral talk or moral language the answer i've already said this but it's worth repeating
is that if you want to be a moral skeptic if you want to deny that there really is any such thing
as morality then you're going to need to explain all of the moral talk are you going to say that
it's all false air is able to say if he's right about moral talk which he might not be but if
he's right about it then he's able to say that well morality is not real but we don't have to throw
out all of our moral discourse and all of our moral language that's fine we disagree about factual
matters that are underlying our moral debates and when we do express moral sentiments we do so in
a way that doesn't also assert that things are true so we don't have to throw out all of our moral
talk because it's all false just because we're moral skeptics because moral talk was never the
kind of thing that was true or false in the first place
you
