Thank you. Thank you, Pauline, for that generous introduction and a big thank you to the organizers
as well for inviting me to this beautiful city with its rich history and its gorgeous
surroundings. It really is a pleasure to be here.
And I should say that as a proud European, it's a pleasure in particular to be here at the European
Society for Aesthetics. We live in a world, unfortunately, where a narrow-minded nationalism
in all its different forms is very much on the rise. So I think a society or an event that brings
people together across boundaries, across national borders deserves our full and enthusiastic
support. Having said that, I'm ready to begin. Let me just switch the screen a bit.
But before I really get started, let me warn you that my talk is quite long. It's going to be
about 50 minutes long, and it has many slides. So there's going to be 60 slides in total.
And this is not because I think that what I have to say is so important, but it's rather
because I unfortunately have and have always had a bad case of stage fright, which means that
I am usually very nervous before I have to give a talk, and I always
am afraid that I'm going to forget what I have to say or mess up what I'm going to say.
So in order to prevent that, I've just made sure that everything I want to say is on the slides.
Now, this is not how it's supposed to be done, I know, and it's not necessarily helpful for you,
but please know that it's helpful for me to have this backup. And so I want to thank you in advance
for your understanding. Okay, so let's get going. So here's the structure of my talk.
So first, I'm going to give you some background on the origins of my project and how I got
thinking about existential aesthetics in the first place.
Secondly, I'm going to try and explain what existential aesthetics is and is not.
Thirdly, addressing potential concerns. And then fourthly, and finally, I'm going to try and
explain why it's important to foreground this new area of research. So the background then.
Many philosophers of art and aesthetics choose their field of study because art or certain
pursuits are of deep significance to them. I haven't done any empirical research on this,
but it's an informed guess. So we're here in the room full of philosophers of art and aesthetics,
and my guess is that many of you would have chosen your field of study because you care
about art, because you care deeply about art. It certainly is true for me. So
some works of art have had a profound effect on me throughout my life. And just to show you that
I'm not lying, I'm going to give you two examples. So here's a picture of the so-called before
trilogy directed by Richard Linklater. And when I saw the first film before sunrise
one long time ago, I fell in love with it. I really did. So I saw it multiple times.
And when I saw it, I felt like butterflies in my stomach. And I went to see it several times.
And then when the sequels came out before sunset and before midnight, I felt like that love only
deepened in a way. So I went to several screenings. Again, I organized a joint screening of these
films. I went to visit the locations where these films were made. It's the kind of silly stuff
that one does when one falls in love with someone or something. So that's just one example.
Here's another example, quite different. So this is a portrait drawing by Hans Holbein,
which was made in the 16th century of a woman. It's usually referred to as a woman with a white
hair dress. And we don't know who this woman is. When I first saw this, that was in the
National Portrait Gallery. It was during a quiet day. So I was the only person in the room there.
And the room was dimly lit. I think that helped. And it was part of an exhibition called
The Encounter. And while I was standing there in front of this portrait drawing,
that's really the feeling I had, like a feeling of an encounter. And I had the sense of
across the seas of time, encountering someone in this drawing, in a way that I found
incredibly mesmerizing and moving. Because that's one of the reasons why I found it to be so moving
was that this portrait was made of someone who was clearly very important in their time.
Otherwise, they wouldn't have had Hans Holbein make their portrait. And yet she had been completely
forgotten, so fallen into oblivion. And I found that really poignant. And it's one of the few
times that I actually found myself to be in tears in front of a work of visual art.
So two examples just to illustrate that art has profoundly affected me in the course of my life.
And I want to go a bit further and say that precisely because art has had this deep
significance to me, that that's why I came to study philosophy of art and aesthetics.
So when I was doing my PhD, I was studying philosophy, and I had to starting my PhD,
and I had to decide which area to focus on. In the end, that didn't prove to be a very difficult
decision. Because I figured, well, I care about art. I love philosophy. I love art. So I'm going
to do philosophy of art. What can go wrong? And it really felt like it was a marriage made in heaven,
so to speak, and for a very long time it was. But recently, that kind of changed.
I think five or six years ago, five or six years ago, I grew disappointed with maybe my own work
in aesthetics and philosophy of art. And I felt a bit disenchanted. And so I started reflecting
on why that's why that was. So I took a look at the work I had done in aesthetics. And so here are
some of the essays or book chapters that I wrote at the time. I see that that's not really very
visible. But so one of the topics I've written about is the role of the artist's intention
in the interpretation of art. As Pauline had mentioned, I've also written about
the difference between erotic art and pornography. And another topic that I started writing about
was portraiture. And I wrote an essay on what makes something a portrait. So what's the difference
between a portrait and a genre painting or a portrait and a pastoral scene, for instance?
And I wrote these in these papers and I edited these books. And I did that, I think,
in a way that I did enjoy myself. But I, after a while, it dawned on me that something was missing
and that something was the fact that none of these really touch on the deep significance that art
holds for me. So while it's fun to think about these topics, none of them really,
at least that's the way I felt, none of them really went to the heart of why I care about art.
So why did I write about these topics then if they didn't address what I really care about it?
The short answer is because I could. So those are the topics I could write about. And there's a
bigger story here, and maybe if there's enough time in the Q&A, we can pick this up. But those are
the topics that were being discussed at the time in the literature, and certainly as a junior scholar,
that's what you're supposed to do. If you look at the existing literature, and you try to see
whether you can maybe add an objection or formulate a new account, and people will writing about
the intention of the artist in the interpretation of art. Stekker, Eisenmaner,
Sherry Irvin, Levinson, portraiture was being written about by Cynthia Freeland, Paulos Benuti,
and other people. And similarly with the erotic art versus pornography discussion,
people were writing about that. And so I thought I can make a contribution to that.
But if I'm honest, it wasn't really, really what I was interested in when I was thinking about art.
So five or six years ago, I thought enough of that really. So I decided to take things more
personally, and I decided to write about the ways in which art and aesthetic experience have been
centrally important to me. And so the first thing I wrote was an essay, a short essay,
on what it means to fall in love with the work of art. And my key example
was the Before Trilogy. And then later on, I also edited a book on the Before Trilogy,
as Pauline had mentioned. I also started thinking about why I was so moved by this particular
portrait. And I wrote about this in an essay, which has as the subtitle on being moved by
portraits of unknown people. And later on, when I reflected a bit more on that particular
emotion that I felt, it dawned on me that maybe this was an instance of what I have come to call
aesthetic melancholy, when you reflect on harsh existential truths, such as the fact that at
some point, we will all be forgotten. But in a way that makes some experiences stand out more,
or can make you appreciate the beauty of what you're looking at even more. So that's a case,
I would say, of aesthetic melancholy. Now, while I was doing that, I was also keeping my eye on
the rest of the field. And I was noticing that other people in aesthetics and philosophy of art
were also writing more and more about the ways in which art can be of real importance to people,
or have a profound effect on people. One of those people is in the room here, Maria Jose
Alcares-Leon, who wrote about aesthetic intimacy, which is the feeling of profound connection that
some art works and artists can engender. At the same time, John Holiday was writing about the same
phenomenon, but specifically in relation to fictional literature. I'm just going to give you a few
examples. See, I'm blending in already. UC Sarian has written a book on effect in artistic
creativity, painting to feel, in which he examines how painters pursue certain kinds of effects via
painting because they galvanize and reach and restructure their overall sense of being. This
means, and these are his words, this means that painting and painterly effectivity carry
considerable existential import, as he calls it. Dieter de Klerk, my colleague at the University
of Kent, wrote a really nice essay on irony, disruption and moral imperfection, about how
engaging with ironic storytelling, such as the one we find in comedy series The Good Place,
can yield existentially significant insight. Kathleen Higgins, as many of you will know,
has been writing about grief and mourning. So in this essay, Life and Death in Rock,
she discusses the role of stone memorials in dealing with existential matters of life and death.
She's also written about the role of music, for instance, in dealing with matters of life and
death. And in her new book, she considers how aesthetics can be helpful in dealing with these
very existentially important moments in life. Nick Riggle is another prominent esthetician
that is worth mentioning here. He's written on what he calls transformative expression.
So the fact that art can radically change our lives and selves.
And this is something that Anthony Aumann has also written about, art and transformation is an
essay I always recommend to people. In the final example, Gerald Levinson, another prominent figure
in contemporary aesthetics, has this essay about how you are, what you audit. So you become or you
are what you listen to. At least that's been the case for him. So he says, the music that
I have responded to most deeply as a listener over the years is perhaps the dominant element
in the fabric of my life. So it's become really crucially important to him. And these are just
a few examples. So there's something, at least that was clear to me. So something has been going
on in the last few years that I find really interesting. Something genuinely new, I think,
in the field of aesthetics, at least as I have known it. Because when I was starting out in
aesthetics and philosophy of art, there was none of that. And I double checked. So I went back to
the the reference works that in my time, were seen as the works of reference in aesthetics and
philosophy of art. So the Blackwell anthology in aesthetics and philosophy of art and the Oxford
Handbook of aesthetics. And if you look at the table of contents here, so it has 46 different
articles, the Blackwell Handbook, that is, and not one of them addresses the existential importance
of art, not one. And the same is true for the Oxford Handbook of aesthetics. So I thought that
was pretty relevant. I thought this is something I want to write about. And I wrote the essay,
Existential Aesthetics, which was published in the Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism
in 2022. In that essay, I try to explain what existential aesthetics is and is not. And I'm
going to briefly summarize it for you before going on to what I think is the most important part of
this talk. This is what I think existential aesthetics is. It's philosophical work that
investigates the various ways in which works of art or certain aesthetic practices or aesthetic
experiences can be of existential importance to people. So when I say that works of art or aesthetic
experiences can be important to people, this can mean individual people. For instance, when you
reflect on the 10 albums that changed your life, for instance. But it can also mean communities.
So how certain works of art or aesthetic experiences can be important to communities,
like really important, or perhaps even to humanity as a whole. We're facing a climate crisis at the
moment, which I think rightly so is an existential crisis for human beings. And so you can reflect
on how art maybe can play a role in addressing this. And Ben Oakley actually has done just that.
And in this study for The Guardian, he asks how artists should confront the climate crisis and
what role art can play. And you're not going to be able to read that, but he calls for something like
what he says is existential creativity. And so that's a way in which maybe art and aesthetic
practices can be important in addressing an existential crisis at the level of humanity.
Anyway, now existential aesthetics, I think is a distinct area of research, but one
which has, I think, some overlaps with other areas or debates in aesthetics. So take the book I was
referring to earlier on, UC Sardinian's book about painting, that's a contribution to the philosophy
of painting. But I think it's also a contribution to what I would say is existential aesthetics.
Overlaps of this sort are to be expected. One has them in all sub areas of philosophy and
aesthetics. I don't think that's a problem. And I don't think they prevent existential
aesthetics from having a distinct identity. And I think that's important to note.
So while there are affinities between, let's say, existential aesthetics and everyday
aesthetics, it's helpful not to equate the two. And just to make that point, existential aesthetics
does not need to focus on everyday phenomena, but it can focus on works of high art. Take the
portrait I was referring to earlier. Conversely, everyday aesthetics may examine experiences
that have no existential import. For instance, Sherry Irvin, in a really nice paper on everyday
aesthetics, gives this example. I run my tongue back and forth on the insides of my closed teeth,
feeling the smoothness of their central surfaces and the roughness of the separations between them.
That's an experience, like an everyday experience that you can aesthetically enjoy.
But I think it has no existential import.
Now, it's also important, I think, to distinguish existential aesthetics from public philosophy.
I see existential aesthetics as part of the academic discipline of philosophy of art and aesthetics.
So, for instance, Nick Riegel's essay on transformative expression is
an instance of existential aesthetics, but it's not public philosophy. It's geared,
it's aimed at academic philosophers, it's very much an academic paper.
And working public philosophy, I think you'll agree with this, does not have to focus on
themes or topics that are of crucial existential importance to people. So, if you take the
brilliant aesthetics for birds blog, which I think is a venue for public philosophy,
they talk about all sorts of topics and only some of them will really touch upon
things that are of existential significance to people. So, this slide will show you
like an entry on the death of the author. Public philosophy, not existential aesthetics.
Finally, and maybe most importantly, existential aesthetics is not to be confused with existential
list aesthetics. This is an important one. Existential list aesthetics, and I'm here
referring to the Stanford and Scolopedia of Aesthetics, a philosophy I should say.
Existentialist aesthetics is, or you could define as contributions to aesthetic thinking
made or inspired by existentialist philosophers such as Albert Camus, Simon de Beauvoir,
Gabrielle Marcel, Maurice Merleau-Ponti, Jean-Paul Sartre.
Now, it's pretty obvious that one can engage in existential aesthetics without subscribing
to the tenets of existentialism. Nick Regal, Levinson, myself have made contributions,
I think, to existential aesthetics, but we're not existentialists. Conversely, not everything
that fits under existentialist aesthetics will count immediately an ipso facto as existential
aesthetics. So, existentialist philosophers and Sartre is actually a good example. Existentialist
philosophers have made contributions to the ontology of art, the philosophy of fiction,
the nature of imagination, and really valuable contributions, but none of them really address
the existential importance of aesthetic experiences. One of those contributions
addressed those or existential importance of works of art, not directly at least.
Right. So, having given you this brief summary of what existential aesthetics
is and is not, let me address some potential concerns. And this is new material here. I'm
departing from what I wrote about in the earlier essay, and it will allow me also hopefully to
refine some of the things I said earlier on. I want to consider three potential concerns.
I'm also slightly concerned about that talk there. Three potential concerns. One is,
isn't the account too thin? Secondly, shouldn't this be subsumed under hashtag first world
problems? Thirdly, isn't this old hat? So, let me begin with the first concern.
Existentialist aesthetics, as I've defined it, is philosophical work that addresses
the ways, the various ways in which art and aesthetic experiences can be of existential
importance to people. Now, in the original paper, I make a distinction between two ways in which
these can be of existential importance. So, a work of art can be existentially illuminate
when it clarifies certain aesthetic existential questions, or it can be existentially impactful
when it profoundly affects the course or the quality of a person's life.
Now, that's a neat distinction, but so the objection might go, that account is too thin and too imprecise.
Surely, there are other ways in which words of art and aesthetic engagements
can be of existential importance. Moreover, if a piece of sculpture were to follow me and break
my spine, now that would profoundly affect the course and quality of my life, but it doesn't
mean that it's of existential importance to me, and I really like this objection. This was actually
a referee who made this point, and I think they're 100% right. So, it made me realize that
my account, as I presented it earlier, was too imprecise. So, we need a more substantive and
precise account, and that's what I want to present to you now. So, I want to argue that
works of art and aesthetic experiences or practices can be of existential importance
in at least six different ways. They may help address certain existential questions or an
existential crisis, or they may precipitate an existential crisis, they may give meaning to life
or make life worth living. Potentially, number four, they can bring about a constitute an epiphany,
they can be transformative, and last but not least, they can evoke or be expressive of existential
feelings, emotions, and moods. And I'll briefly introduce each of these different ways.
Works of art can help to address certain existential questions or even an existential crisis.
I mean, it raises the question, what is an existential question? Here, I'm just borrowing
David Benatar's formulation that existential questions deal with the most fundamental concerns
we have as human beings, such as how to face our own finitude and mortality, how to cope with the
human condition, is there a purpose to life, does it all make sense? And an existential crisis
occurs when such queries become particularly pressing, for instance, when people are desperate
to make sense of their life and exist. Okay, I think we have an idea of what existential questions
or existential crisis can be. I simply want to make the point that works of art help us sometimes
to deal with this. A really good example is given in John Stuart Mill's autobiography.
I'm sure some of you are aware of this, that John Stuart Mill, at the age of 20,
fell into a really severe depression. And he talks about this at length in his autobiography.
And what pulled him through, and I don't know whether you know this, is art and beauty. More
specifically, it was the beauty of Wordsworth poetry that really helped him out of this existential
crisis. This is John Stuart Mill. What made Wordsworth poems a medicine for my state of mind
was that they expressed not mere outward beauty, but states of feeling and of thought,
colored by feeling, under the excitement of beauty. From them, I seem to learn what would be
the perennial sources of happiness, when all the greater evils of life shall have been removed.
I needed to be made to feel that there was real permanent happiness in tranquil contemplation.
Wordsworth taught me this. So just one example. Here's a more recent example. This is an essay
by Mala Chatterley in Aeon, where she writes about how she was saved from the brink of suicide
by the novel Infinite Jest. So novels can have this effect on people. And just to show you that
it's not just works of art that can have this effect. Aesthetic experiences can do so as well.
Here's just a brief reference to the film Taste of Cherry. Those of you who have seen this film
will know that the main character talks about his own depression and the fact that he was going to
kill himself. And he tells the story of how he was going to this orchard with a rope,
climbing a tree to fasten the rope in order to hang himself. And then
he says, then I felt something soft under my hand. Mulberries. Deliciously sweet mulberries.
I ate one. It was succulent. And then a second, third. Suddenly, I noticed that the sun was rising
over the mountaintop. What sun? What scenery? What greenery? I felt happy. Then I gathered some
mulberries to take them home. My wife was still sleeping. When she woke up, she ate mulberries as
well. And she enjoyed them too. I had left to kill myself and I came back with mulberries. A mulberry
saved my life. A mulberry saved my life. It's basically the aesthetic pleasurable experiences
of mulberries and that glorious setting is what convinced them not to kill himself and to overcome
that existential crisis. Now, works of art, maybe unfortunately, can also precipitate an existential
crisis. And here's just one example of an author who says that after watching Citizen King,
they had an existential crisis. So works of art can do that, but
sublime nature can also do this. And for instance, this article claims that if you
watch a particular time lapse video of the Grand Canyon, you will have an existential crisis.
The idea being that being faced with the temporal sublime and your own insignificance might for
the first time, perhaps, raise certain existential questions like, what am I doing here? What does
my life mean? I am this tiny speck in fast cosmos. Thirdly, irrespective of any existential
questions, works of art may just give meaning to life or make life worth living in the strongest
possible sense of that word. And just this newspaper clipping of someone who says that
dance give my life meaning before I know that I needed meaning in my life. And I'm sure you
can think of other examples like that, maybe even take it from your own experience.
Works of art can bring about epiphanies, and sometimes aesthetic experiences can count as an
epiphany. For those of you who are interested in epiphanies, Sophie Grace Chapel has written a great
book about epiphanies, and she gives this helpful definition of what an epiphany is. And she says
it's an overwhelming, existentially significant manifestation of value, often sudden and surprising,
often sudden and surprising, which feeds the psyche, which feels like it comes from the outside,
which teaches us something new, which takes us out of ourselves, and which demands a response.
Now, in that book, she gives several examples, and you won't be surprised to hear that some of
these examples are taken from art. But she also gives the example, and I'm sure that some of
you will be familiar with this, taken from Iris Murdoch's book, The Sovereignty of the Good.
It's perhaps the most famous passage in that book, where she talks about looking outside of her window.
I am looking out of my window in an anxious and resentful state of mind, oblivious of my surroundings,
brooding perhaps on some damage done to my prestige. Then suddenly, I observe a hovering
kestrel. In a moment, everything is altered. The brooding self, with its herd vanity,
has disappeared. There is nothing now but kestrel. And when I return to thinking of the other matter,
it seems less important. Sophie Grace Chapel says that's an epiphany, and the contemplation of this
kestrel, I think, could legitimately be called an aesthetic experience. If so, it's just an example
of how an aesthetic experience can count as an epiphany. Works of art or certain experiences
can also be transformative. And in philosophy, transformative experience has become a technical
term since Laurie Paul published her book, Transformative Experience. Transformative
experiences are experiences, you could say that radically change the experience in both
epistemic and personal ways. A person transforms epistemically when they gain knowledge of what
the experience is like that they could not have had. Otherwise, the person transforms personally
when key, agential features such as core preferences, life goals, the way they maneuver through the
world change. Standard examples of transformative experiences are becoming a parent. Like when
you become a parent, the idea is that can be transformative. You change as a person. I'm not
saying that happens all the time or for every parent, but it can be a transformative experience.
But I think I hope you'll agree with me that art and aesthetic encounters can also be
transformative in this technical sense. Maybe you can think of examples of your own, but here's an
example that is discussed by Jean Kwok in The Guardian and she writes about how for her writing
a poem was a transformative experience. She was off, she was off on a particular career trajectory
that had nothing to do with art and her values seem to be quite removed from art, but writing that
one poem changed her completely, transformed her, and she abandoned her studies and decided to become
a writer. It really changed her life fundamentally. This is maybe a sillier example of how people
after watching certain films, and these are actual people who decided to emigrate.
This guy moved to New Zealand after watching Lord of the Rings.
So, you know, works of art can be transformative in all sorts of ways.
Finally, works of art can evoke or be expressive of existential feelings, emotions, and moods.
This is not my area of expertise, but in combing through the literature, I noticed that a lot of
people are writing about this. I've already mentioned UC Saarinen's book on painting to feel
and in that book, he argues that painting may induce oceanic feelings, which involve a sensation
of self-boundary dissolution, which can best be understood as shifts in existential feeling.
In existential feelings, as he understands them, are pre-intentional background feelings
that structure experience as a whole. They are ways of finding ourselves in the world.
Other authors prefer to talk about certain existential moods. For instance, David Weberman
refers to maximally existential moods as philosophical because they reveal something
about the general character of being human. Now, I think a good example of an existential
mood might be ennui, what the French call ennui, which is not being bored because, say, your train
is delayed, but because you have no idea how to act meaningfully in a meaningless world.
Works of art can express, I think, or be expressive of this particular existential mood,
and I can't think of a better work of art than Antonioni's film trilogy, which seems to be
expressive of that very basic mood, la ventura, la noche, and le clis.
Then there are people who prefer to reflect on what they call existential emotions,
existential gratitude, for instance. There's a whole literature on existential gratitude,
which is being grateful not for this or that in particular, but for one's life or
for existence as a whole. Again, there are works of art that are very expressive of this.
If you haven't read Alan Hollinghurst's The Line of Beauty, it's a marvelous novel, and I think the
final page of that novel is extraordinary, and it really is very expressive of what I would like
to think of as existential gratitude. To sum up, I think works of art and aesthetic experiences
or practices can be of existential importance in a number of ways, at least six. Now,
this is ongoing research. It's a provisional list. If you have other suggestions for me,
they would be very welcome. Obviously, some artworks will take more than one box.
For instance, Gene Quack's transformative experience of writing this poem, I think also
counts as an epiphany. Nevertheless, I think the conceptual distinctions I made are real and
informative. At least, I hope so. I don't think one can be subsumed under the other. Just to give
you a few examples, not all epiphanies will constitute transformative experiences. For
instance, Iris Murdoch's epiphany, I don't think, isn't transformative experience.
The transformative potential of art does not always come in the form of an epiphany.
Anthony Allman, in his article on art as transformative, has this really good example
of Molly, who watches the film Free Solo about mountain climbing. That sets her on a trajectory
that is transformative, but it's not sudden. It wouldn't count as an epiphany straightforward,
but I think it's a really good example. Some artworks may give meaning to life irrespective of
any existential musings. I've already given this example. This is just to illustrate that the
third way in which something of existential importance cannot be reduced to the first two
ways, which focus on existential questions. Okay, so that's one concern, hopefully out of the way.
Second concern, pondering existential questions. Isn't that really a luxury?
If you're a member of an oppressed group or a marginalized group,
you're going to be too busy trying to keep your head above water to start musing about
the meaning of life. Shouldn't all of this just be filed under hashtag first world problems?
In other words, isn't existential aesthetics only of interest to white cis male able-bodied
philosophers? Now, I think the short answer is no, but I really take this objection seriously,
and I've thought about it, so I want to give you a robust answer. It's going to be a three-fold
response. First of all, as I've just noted, the concern, the second concern, your focus is on
existential questions, but I've just tried to explain that works of art can be of existential
importance in other ways beyond merely raising existential questions or addressing existential
questions. For instance, they can help to give meaning to life or make life worth living,
and this is going to be all the more so in precarious circumstances,
and this article is a good source. It gives you many examples of people
repressed or marginalized circumstances who've clung to art as something that is of
central existential importance to them. One example being that of the musician Mostafa Zimi
Talar, who said about his art, like he was detained, he was in prison for a very long time,
that music is a tool for preserving my sense of personhood. It is so I don't forget
that I am a human being, so clearly it's of existential importance to him,
but he is a member of a persecuted minority. Secondly, I just want to make the point that
existential questions are not the prerogative of privileged people. Each person, no matter their
station in life, I think, can face existential questions simply in virtue of being human.
Here is a quote from Kieran Setia from his book Midlife, which if anyone is struggling
here with a midlife crisis, I really recommend it. It's a great book of philosophy. He talks
about what existential questions are specifically to midlife, and I think these can come to anyone,
no matter what situation you're in. Questions of loss and regret, success and failure, and so on.
Thirdly, true. If your life is in imminent danger, in situations of oppression,
you will have little time to pause and ponder the big questions in life. I think that's true.
If philosophical questions are going to arise in that situation, they will more likely be
questions of justice and fairness, about what is morally right or morally wrong.
However, I think such questions, justice and morality, can be, and in fact often are,
stepping stones to more existential ponderings. For instance, being faced with an injustice might
lead to precisely these kinds of questions, like what an absurd world is it where one group of
people is allowed to exploit another group. How can the universe be so indifferent to such unnameable
suffering? These questions are lifted to the level of real existential musings, I think.
That is the point that Paul Taylor also makes in his essay on very influential and great essay on
black aesthetics. He says, racial conditions inflect the general existential considerations of
despair, joy, meaningfulness and absurdity. If the prospect of life's meaninglessness is terrifying,
how much more terrifying is it to be enslaved and stripped, even of the feeble existential
armaments, such as religion, language, ties to one's ancestors and descendants, with which
humans try to ward off despair? And he adds, the existential challenges of life under white supremacy,
have famously been subject to black aesthetic production, and he gives a few examples.
And he also quite significantly, I think, adds, there's also been the subject of aesthetic criticism
and theory from studies of black music by Angela Davis and Leroy Jones to Saraya
Hartman's remarkable study of slaves being forced to dance for their masters. And so,
I want to say any existential aesthetics worth its name can and should make room for the voices of
the oppressed and really stands to be enriched by the important work that has already been done in
this area. Final concern, and I will deal with this very briefly, we're near the end of the
presentation. I'm happy to report. It's this like the idea that beauty and art can be a vital
importance to people. Oh, that's not new. Isn't it like old hat Plato already writes about the
vital importance of art. Nietzsche very much writes about the vital importance of art. Heidegger has
written about the epiphanous potential of art. Kierkegaard has written on the existential import
of the aesthetic life of the transformative power of art, and so on and so forth. So how can I present
this as a new sub area of aesthetics? Well, in a way, I don't and I do. So the first thing I want to
say is, I think it's a newly emerging field within the field of aesthetic that I'm familiar with,
which is Anglo-American aesthetics, broadly speaking, maybe analytic aesthetics.
And I want to make the comparison here with environmental aesthetics. So as the first sentence
in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy says, environmental aesthetics is a relatively new
subfield of philosophical aesthetics. It arose within analytic aesthetics in the last third of
the 20th century. And one of the pioneering essay was Ronnie Hepburn's contemporary aesthetics and
the neglect of natural beauty. Now, when he wrote that in 1966, of course, that doesn't mean that
no one before him had written about natural beauty. Obviously, in the history of philosophy,
many philosophers have written about natural beauty. In the 18th century, there was Kant,
there was Burke, there was William Gilpin, there was Overdoll Price. In the 19th century,
there was Thoreau, there was John Muir. So clearly, people had been writing about nature
before the second half of the 20th century. Nevertheless, what happened was that
Hepburn was looking at the work of his contemporaries in his field as he saw it and noticed that
no one really was doing that. And so that's why he was one of the key figures and only one of the
key figures in and starting what is now become a really significant subfield called environmental
aesthetics. Basically, I want to make the same point about existential aesthetics. I do think
it's something newly emerging within the field as I know it. Of course, it doesn't mean that no one
has written about existential concerns and art before. Clearly, they have. But when I looked
around five or six years ago, and certainly 10 years ago, at aesthetics, the field as I was
moving in, that wasn't present. And certainly, going back to when I was a junior scholar,
think again of those handbooks that I showed you, no one was writing about this. So there was a
neglect there. And I think it needs to be addressed and is being addressed. I think I could make the
same point about everyday aesthetics, but I'll skip that and move on to the final part, which is
why is this a good thing, basically. So existential considerations are coming more and more to the
foreground in our discipline. It's a growing subarea, I think. And that's definitely true. It has
great potential for expansion. I think philosophers should be encouraged. I want to encourage you all
here, of course, to try and help to fulfill that potential. And I just want to give you a couple
of good reasons for doing this. I think it might help to underscore the relevance of aesthetics
within philosophy. It might enhance the relevance of aesthetics outside of academia. It can provide
a common ground between analytic and continental philosophy. And I think it presents an interesting
common ground between art and philosophy. And then it may also have some personal relevance.
Aesthetics as a discipline, I think, has been pushed to the margins of philosophy,
unfortunately. And I'm pretty sure that all of you will agree that that is an unfortunate
event, if you want to call it that. It used to be more central. If you think about Kant,
if you think about Hegel, those towering figures in philosophy thought of aesthetics as really
central to the profession. Unfortunately, that's no longer the case. Now, this has multiple reasons,
I think, multiple causes. But I think one of the reasons is that many of our colleagues in philosophy
tend to think of aesthetic features as mainly or merely decorative. They think of art as a hobby
and as a luxury. It's nice. Aesthetics is nice, but it's not of any fundamental significance
to human beings. And it's certainly not worth the same sort of attention as the epistemology
knowledge gets or morality. Well, I think once we start foregrounding the existential importance
of art and aesthetic experience, I think it's going to be much harder to make that case that
aesthetics is just the icing on the cake. So it might help us with the relevance of aesthetics
within philosophy. It might also help to address or enhance the relevance of aesthetics outside
of academia. Aestheticians, philosophers of art, and of course, I count myself among those,
were sometimes surprised that our work finds no uptake outside of academia. So as many of you
have, I've published essays, I've published books, but they're not read by a lot of people.
And that's fine with me in a way, but as far as I'm concerned, I don't care that much,
but I do find it a pity that the work that we're doing here is not really taken that seriously
in the art world or beyond academia. So, and that's odd if you think about it, because so many
people are really deeply invested in the arts because they make art because they appreciate art,
they go to museums, they paint, and so on. And yet so few have any interest in aesthetics as a
discipline. So that's, I think, a really odd mismatch. I'm being optimistic here, but I think
existential aesthetics might help to change some of this, since it addresses themes and topics
that are never just of academic interest. If the making or the appreciating of art occupies an
important place in one's life, then it should not be difficult at all to relate to work in
existential aesthetics, because that's precisely the sort of aesthetics that is about the ways
in which art and aesthetics is of real importance to people. There was a time, and that's not so
long ago, that analytic philosophers did not pay much attention to existential matters.
In stark contrast with continental philosophers, I was trained as a continental philosopher,
but then I moved into analytic philosophy. I consider myself an analytic philosopher,
and I guess as a result, I haven't been doing anything on existential matters for most of my
career. That is now changing. Analytic philosophers in general and philosophers of art and aesthetics
in particular are engaging more with existential matters. When they do so, I think they may be
inspired, they should be inspired by what continental philosophers have done, and in turn,
hopefully they can inspire their continental colleagues. I think I hope existential aesthetics
might be this field where the two shall meet. Again, maybe I'm being too optimistic, but I
really think that might be the case. Common ground between art and philosophy. When people are faced
with existential questions, that's in general when they turn to philosophy, when they turn
philosophical, they ask philosophical questions. It's also when they might turn to art,
and here I'm just going to defer to Ethan Hawke, the actor and director and author
who played in many different films, but including also, of course, the Before trilogy,
and he did a recent video, which I kind of liked, in which he tried to address this question,
what is art for? He's not a philosopher, but I think the answer he gives makes sense.
So he says most people don't spend a lot of time thinking about poetry, right? They have a life
to live. They're not really that concerned with Alan Ginsberg's poems or anybody's poems until
their father dies. They go to a funeral, you lose a child, somebody breaks your heart,
they don't love you anymore, and all of a sudden you're desperate for making sense out of this life,
and you ask yourself, has anybody ever felt this bad before? How did they come out of this cloud?
That's when art is not a luxury. It's actually sustenance, we need it.
So art is there to address this in these times of existential need, and philosophy as well,
I think, is eminently placed to address or raise existential questions. So look at it that way.
There's a real common ground between the two. They may do so differently, and it's interesting to
think about those differences, but they have that in common. Yet, that is curiously under
examined, I think, in philosophy of art. So much material nowadays is being written about
the ethical dimension of art or the cognitive value of art, and all of that's great,
but there's so much less on the existential importance of art and the similarities and
differences with philosophy in that regard, and I think that's worth writing about as well.
It's interesting common ground between art and philosophy. Finally, I'm just going to return
to the very first claim I made, that many philosophers of art and aesthetics choose their
field of study because art and certain kinds of aesthetic pursuits are of deep significance to
them. Undertaking work in existential aesthetics, I think, may be a way to reconnect with that
original spark of interest. It certainly has been for me. So I have decided, as I said,
in my philosophical work, at least to take things personally, and for me, that's been a blessing.
So if you're in any way similar to me, if your relation to art and aesthetics is in any way
similar to me, I can only invite you, encourage you to do the same. Thank you.
