Hello, it's John back again. I was talking to another teacher recently who was
talking about singing to start their videos, going for a door of the Explorer
feel, but I like you guys, I'm gonna spare you that. Although if a chance comes up
to sing, I'm the map, I'm the map, I might go for it. Alright, so this is just a
quick video to talk through how I think about one of these function families
where we're getting more than one function defined by a parameter. So in
this case, it's activity 322 from active calculus by Matt Volgens, and as a
changes, the function is going to change, right? So when I'm looking at this, even
before I read on, I'm already thinking a little bit about cubic functions, what do
I know about cubic functions? I know they can have kind of this wavy sort of
design. As I look at that x cubed minus a x, I'm thinking that I could factor an
x out. So it's like parabola times a line. I notice that this is going to be
different depending on a, if a is positive, like x squared minus four, that has two
solutions, x equals two and x equals negative two, meaning there'll be two
places where it's zero. So this function will have a root at zero, and if a is
positive, it'll have two roots, plus and minus the square root of a. If a is
negative, I'm guessing that means no extra roots, right? Because there's no number we
could put in for x that would make x squared plus four zero. So we're not
going to get any extra roots. So it's only got the one root at zero. So I'm
guessing that that means it kind of straightens out. Now it's okay if you
don't have all these things you think about, right? This is from a lot of years
of experience thinking about functions. But what I'm trying to do is to just kind
of open up my head and think aloud as to what I notice when this is happening.
Okay, so before I go farther into the activity, I'm just gonna quick kind of
read over the whole thing to see what's going on. Find p prime of x, find the
derivative, and determine the critical numbers of p. So maybe I want to think
about what does that mean to be a critical number of p? Mostly we think
about that's where the derivative is zero or undefined. So in this case, the
derivative of a cubic is going to be a quadratic. So I'm guessing two critical
numbers will find them as we move on. Construct a first derivative sine
chart for p. What can you say about the overall behavior of p if the constant a
is positive? Okay, so they want us to be breaking down things into cases much
like what I did already, right? Thinking about it makes a difference if a is
positive or negative. The shape of these two functions I was guessing from
experience, definitely critical numbers would be different. So I'm guessing that
that's where that's going. Alright, so find the p double prime, the second
derivative, and construct a second derivative sine chart. That tells us
concavity, where is it concave up, concave down. I think both of these look like
it's going to have kind of one concave up part and one concave down part. In this
one, even though it's more subtle, right, it doesn't have that kind of cup shape.
So I'm guessing that that'll be the case for that. Now you notice I'm kind of
making predictions before I've even started. One of the things we know in
math education is that if you make predictions, for one, it helps you
construct what's called a schema. So kind of a framework of knowledge gives you a
place to kind of organize what you do, what you find out. It also engages you a
little more, like as you do the work, you find out whether your prediction was
correct or incorrect, how it could be sharpened, right? So you're kind of
paying attention a little bit more as you go through. And at the end, it also gives
you some of the start of thinking about how to check your work, right? So if
it's really different than my prediction, maybe something went wrong along the way
and gives me an incentive to check. Alright, without using a graphing
utility, see it's good I'm reading through, because otherwise the very first
thing I would have done would be to graph this somewhere. And I might still do
that, right? So without using a graphing utility, sketch and label typical graphs
of p of x for the cases where a is greater than zero and a is less than zero.
Label all inflection points and local extrema. So I kind of did a first guess
at that already. But we want to use the kind of the calculus information we've
got to think about that a little more. And then says, finally, use a graphing
utility to test your observations above by entering and plotting the function p of
x equals x cube minus ax for at least four different values of a. Alright,
several sentences to describe your overall conclusions about how the
behavior of p depends on a. So in other words, we've got this family of functions.
We have a parameter that we want to imagine being able to change the values.
We want to be able to describe the effect that that parameter has on that
family of functions. Okay, so let's dig in a little more kind of let's just think
about these first two ones. So find p prime of x. So the derivative of x cubed
three x squared. It's not an exponential. It's a polynomial term. And then the
derivative of minus a times x. So a, even though it looks like a variable, we're
thinking about it as an unspecified number. Again, to talk about the math that
a little bit, one of the difficulties learners have transitioning into
algebra and then into calculus is thinking about variables the way
mathematicians do, which is much more about relationship. Often when you're
introduced to variables, it's representing some unknown. But by the time we get to
stuff like p of x equals x cubed minus a x, we're thinking about the variable as
relationship, right, an input. And then we're getting this output x cubed minus
a x and we're thinking about how are those connected, right? So x isn't
representing some number we don't know. It's this variable ideas a little more
distinctive. And so I could just as well think about this as minus two x and the
derivative of minus two x is going to be the constant minus two. So same thing in
this case, the derivative is the constant minus a. So so it's a constant, even though
we've got this fancy name for a parameter. Okay, so when is this equal to zero? When
x squared is equal to three. So x equals plus or minus square root of a over three. I
could have put a couple extra algebra steps in there, but I'm not worried about
it. If you're confident in your algebra and you can skip steps. That's not a
make or break. It's not talking about calculus understanding. On the other hand,
if skipping steps makes you make mistakes, then be careful and take every step. Okay,
so this is saying that on either side of zero, determined by the square root of a
thirds, there is a critical point. Okay, so this already means kind of thinking
about that in this cases way. So if a is equal to zero, the only critical point is
x is equal to zero. If a is greater than zero, that works. We get two critical points. If a is
less than zero, we get imaginary values out, which means no critical points. And we're not
going to dig into this too much. But there's turns out there's still a meaning to that,
right? That those are special values for the function. And if we did more math with complex
numbers, we'd be finding that out. Okay, so if we think about first derivative of sign chart,
oh, they're talking about this case where a is positive and we have two places, right? So regardless
of whether it is positive, we get a parabola opening up. So we've got these two roots.
And pretty steep parabola. It's zero. It's going to have this value minus a. It opens up pretty
quickly. So it's positive before that first root. It's negative before that second root. And it's
positive afterwards. Okay, so in other words, this is for the derivative p prime. So that means the
function's increasing, decreasing, increasing, which in a cubic means we're talking about something
with that kind of pattern. If a is less than zero, that would be like negative two. So that would
be wind up being three x squared plus two. So that's something that's always positive. Right? This
is still minus a. So in our case of thinking about is negative two, that would be up to two
because we have three x squared minus negative two. And then it's going to open up from there. So no
roots. Always positive. Alright, so if a is zero, we just have three x squared. That's always
positive. And it would be just touching the axis there. So that's a critical point, even though it's
going to turn out in the function, not to be a local min or a local max. Right? So that happens
sometimes and we have that x squared multiplied in there. So that kind of makes sort of a redundancy.
Interesting thinking about the effect of that on the graph. Alright, so let me look over. Each case
describes a relative extremes of p. I didn't think about that at all. So in this case, it's going to
have a local maximum when it switches from increasing to decreasing and a local minimum. And
there's no global minimum because it goes off, keeps decreasing going out that way, and keeps
increasing going out this way. So no global maximum. And then this one is just always increasing.
Right? So there's not going to be a local or global extreme. Okay, so let me look one more.
All right. Part C, think about the second derivative. So remembering the first derivative was
3x squared minus a. So the second derivative is going to be 6x. And then the derivative of a
constant is 0. So I could put a plus 0 there. But I'm remembering that I'm taking the derivative
with respect to x. So the a doesn't have any x's in it. It's just a separate number. It doesn't
change when x changes. So its derivative is 0. So if we think about when is the second
derivative equal to 0? Well, that's pretty clearly going to be when x is equal to 0. Okay.
So, and then the second derivative is going to be negative if x is negative. So that's concave
down. And it's going to be positive, if x is positive, which means concave up. Let me
write the exact same thing again, which means concave up. Okay. So that's kind of my second
derivative, sine chart. What does it tell me about the concavity? I already thought about
that. What role does a play in determining the concavity of p? It doesn't play any role.
There's no a in the second derivative. So regardless of what a is, it doesn't make an effect. Now,
would that be different if it was minus ax squared? Definitely. Because then, with the first
derivative, it would have had a minus 2 ax. And then the first derivative, I mean, and then the
second derivative would have a minus 2 a in it. So would definitely change the effect. So kind of
having a quadratic term is very different than having a linear term with the cubic. That might be
worth investigating on your own. Okay. So without using a graphing utility, sketch and label typical
graphs of p of x, in cases where a is greater than zero and a is less than zero. Feel like I've
kind of already done this. All right. So I know the point is going when x is zero, and this is an
original function, I get zero out. So it's always going to cross through here. And I know it's concave
down on the left side and concave up on the right side. It has a root figured out back on that first
slide. The phase greater than zero. That's concave down increasing decreasing decreasing increasing.
Oops. So it changes concavity at zero. My roots are plus or minus square root of a third.
And then I want to be able to label these critical points. And if I look back, oh, those are the
critical points I've labeled. What were the roots? Plus or minus square root of a pays to have all
your work on one page. All right. So the roots were plus or minus square root of a. And that makes
sense. Then plus or minus square root of a thirds all under the square root are going to be the
critical points. Okay. Finally, use a graphing utility, test your observations above by entering and
plotting the function p of x equals x cubed minus a x. So we could definitely use Desmos. I'm going to
use geogro just because you probably use that a little less. And we'll see what happens, right? I
mostly use the desktop geogro instead of the sound line. But it's pretty intuitive. If I sign in,
then I'd be able to save my file. It might sign me in automatically because we're looking at my tabs
up above. You can see I have bunches of geogro open as it is. Okay. So I've got my p of x. Now
what's going to happen if I just type it in with arrow to get out of the superscript was minus a x.
Oh, it gave me a slider. Okay. So as it gets more positive, those bumps get more pronounced.
Once I get negative, they get less and less and less pronounced. Almost even looks like it's getting
linear. But really, it's just increasing and decreasing so quickly, it's hard to see. Okay.
So does the geogro know how to do the derivative? What is the hazard parameter in it? Let's see.
p prime of x. Oh, it tells me the particular value, depending on what a is.
So as a changes, you can see it having the value here. So I know this is 3x squared
minus a. And the second derivative, I'm expecting a line passes through the origin.
And that's what I get. Okay. So I think that confirms everything that we said about it.
Checks whether I was taking the derivatives correctly. Checks our
sense of what was important. Now, geogro also does kind of these important points.
Right. So the extremum, this is says as x is equal to 0.9. So I said that that was going to be
the square root of a divided by 3, which is 0.9. So I can even check that kind of information.
And the root is at 1.50. Again, some rounding going on there. And we said that the root was
going to be at the square root of a. And we got 1.5. Okay. So we're completely verified.
We're justified. We finished an activity. So I'm asking you to think about one of those next
two activities on your own or with a partner. So thanks very much for watching. If you have
questions, you can always ask them directly or put them in the comments. I'm happy to answer them.
Thanks very much and have fun with families of functions.
