let's play this dumb eric Weinstein clip uh... or Weinstein clip or whatever
the alley is
uh... the uh... the uh... this is on uh... trigger nomitry
are you
that's
are you serious? this is a real uh... that's the name of the podcast i mean it's just like
the just
the it is it's just uh... it it's unbelievable serious people it's it's it's
unbelievable so it's it's so it's math but it's about
ending woke me an anti-woke yet
it's being anti-woke it's it this is uh... we will bring you into a uh...
uh... a dorm room at a uh... college uh... full of sophomores who uh... none of the
other kids like
and uh... and so this is what they do and kids it's good college like this
actually you know the word trigger nomitry man it kinda sounds like trigger
uh... where are you starting is it at twenty two okay yes okay
the frame should give us the frame
the way that you think the frame should be
well my my my first comment is is that
you're gonna use words like palestinians
you're gonna use words like occupied patient occupied territories
somebody else may use judaean samaria somebody else might say palestine
as soon as i know the language
i know what the arguments are gonna be
this is not my language and i don't believe these things and i've agreed to
be more or less silent
uh... on a bunch of things while there was a peace process okay paul's and i'm
sorry it's not your language it is not your language you're right it's the
language of the united nations is the language of amnesty international it's
the language of human rights watch it's the language of scholars who actually
cover this is the language of people within uh... israel who write for nine
seven two magazine it's the language of people who write for her rats
um... it is the language of many scholars and experts on this very topic
which he is not one so i think the palestinian is the language is the word
he's subject to well i mean look at the this is this is what what he's doing is
actually telling on himself
because uh... there are people who said there is no such thing as palestinian
and that was uh... go to my ear uh... famously uh... former prime minister of
israel
and it's just arabs they say well the idea being that there was no nation state
there
within the uh... we within the you know the
the ideas in which we
we perceived it which is
which is also sort of funny in safaris like you know there are some people say
that
you can't say that israel is a settler colonial project because uh... jews were
there
two thousand years ago
but uh...
let's just i mean
imagine the idea
uh...
i saw someone use this example on twitter the other day
the idea of a an african-american in this country
whose ancestors
uh... came from uh... somewhere in uh... the eastern part of uh... the african
continent
uh... they were forcibly removed
kidnapped brought to this country
you imagine the claim that they would have
just a short two hundred years are talking two thousand
not talking fifteen hundred years i'm talking
two hundred fifty three hundred years later
to go to uh... some place in the east africa
and not just settle there
but you
forcibly remove people living there to say like
this is where i was
and then concentrate them in a small space uh... a hundred forty one square
miles two point four million people control all the doors
details it's more than that though in the details the details are secondary
terms of the question of like settler colonialism like that idea would be
ridiculous
people would laugh at you if you said that one in the the colonel colonial
history of libiria actually has a lot to say about that and it played out
exactly how you'd expect but but so
but what wise things doing here is he's telling on himself
i can hear his language and it is
because it is anomalous to what is it basically what the world agrees
these terms to mean
and that he has an issue with them but he was silent as you want to disrupt the
peace process
island
uh... on a bunch of things while there was a peace process
because peace processes are about
bs to certain extent
you have to lie through a peace process in order to get
something at the end of it and that failed
you know the first thing i'm gonna say is i don't believe that this isn't uh...
an occupied people
i don't believe that the Arabs are under occupation that's gonna sound crazy
because you're not exposed to any perspective that sounds like that so
how are you ever come to that conclusion
you have groups of people who are offered a state
who you're not listening to they do not want
the state that they're offered
they're offered a choice for a second i just don't want to make something clear too
and this is this is uh...
this is an interesting sleight of hand
they're not talking about the people who live in a specific area
the t when you say arabs you're talking about essentially an ethnicity
and
if you say arabs
like all arabs are the same
then
why wouldn't you know if i was
grew up in this area in palestine
why wouldn't i be shipped
to egypt i'm an arab
why why can't they go to uh... to jordan uh... i'm an arab
i mean the point is
they lived
there
whatever there you want to call there is
okay if i'm living in
massachusetts which is really not
fundamentally different
once the borders are taken away the laws from like road island
or canada kit
or you know new hampshire right or vermont
and the idea you move me is like well
you're new englander it doesn't matter
like let me give me a break
it's absurd
and then there's also the underlying racial undertones of it there without a
doubt
uh... but here he goes into explain how like they're little children who are not
accepting things
want
the state that they're offered
they're offered a choice between a state and a chance
and if you know the chance from the river to the sea
from the river to the sea is what they chose you could have a state
or you could have a chance
and i'm sorry i'm sorry pause it
it's not a chance
it is a chance at the protest but is he saying he doesn't think
that the if in a two-state solution which he's talking about here which is
really taken over so much territory that this makes this quite difficult
but like
palestinians should not have access to both the river and the sea
is that really what the central claim is here is not a chance saying that the
chant is is uh... basically calling for the elimination of israel
and uh... but the the false dichotomy that he's setting up here is that there
was an option between a state
if israel
as a body politic
had legitimately want
wanted
and saw that as the future
they would not have been on a multi decade project
to put
illegal settlements in the west bank i mean this is
this is it like
this is quite obvious so
and if you say to me
those
literally tens of hundreds of thousands of people in these illegal
settlements
is a bargaining position
i can say to you so is a chance
state
or you could have a chance
and they want the chance
they are the
tip of the sphere
in the global battle against western hegemony against an occupying european
power
in holy arab land
and
they're not going to give up
on
that
as a collective political entity
for a relatively
modest
prosperous state
repositions just to be clear what he's saying because this is really sort of
like full-on insanity
he is saying that the palestinians are actually just simply part are being
used in part by the greater arab world
here's all because there is a holy arab site
we should be clear
in a holy arab site
there is a
the uh... third most holy location for muslims
well holy arab site
and and and just if you need the differentiation
you know that there were
arabs
who's uh...
christian
church
was bombed in gaza
just so that i can a bit but uh... let these geniuses be able to make this
are like broad generalizations here
and he is suggesting
that they at the the palestinians represent
an assault on western hegemony first of all
okay
uh... western hegemony
uh... ostensibly by all the other uh... arab nations are using the
palestinians
as a way like this is the way you break apart
western hegemony
in israel
uh... it's
uh...
it's funny he says that he went on level derangement that we have to like
we're pretending that we're accepting as some sort of like legitimate
local with regards to western uh... gemini it's funny he uses the term tip of
the spirit because that is literally what the armed uh... portion of the
african national congress uh... translates to the mk
uh... you know
in stain where this uh... you know speaking of word clouds
modest
prosperous state
trading with it with the occupier
with you know joint economics joint fate
that's very troubling to us because we have this idea why wouldn't you want a
state you can have a state you can be prosperous you can send your kids to
produce you know
and
that's
that's not easy for us this is basically if you think about motherhood
you don't think about monchasm by proxy
what
right now what do you do with them
deal
what do you do when you have a mother who comes to the hospital
with a child is continuously getting sick
you know and getting all harmed
you know
you have to ask well
is it possible that the mother is harming the child so you're about to see
tiny children pulled out of rubble
in northern gaza
you can see ad nauseam
you can see people rushing to the hospital you can see mothers wailing
so we can talk about the whole thing about the martyrdom and how everybody
prays that their family will be martyred
and you know what sometimes it's true sometimes you see on camera somebody
saying
thank god they took my son you know blah blah blah
what
those are actually much more complicated things sometimes you turn the camera off
and the person is crying because they know what they're supposed to say and
they know what they're actually feeling
so my problem with this is that
this is so much more complicated
than the discussion we're pre-programmed to have that is guaranteed to fail
the richness sorry but this problem you don't have to cut but
maybe have anybody competent to discuss it then if it's so complex i hadn't
known where this was going so when i called this qanon level derangement a
second ago he's just now essentially saying that the mother's wailing some
of them some portions some are wailing earnestly
but some are crisis actors
very very serious person over there at trigon trigonomics trigonometry
trigonometry whatever the hell it is
well this is this is a there's the long-standing uh... sort of like uh...
chant
that folks like winestein
uh... views in the past have been
uh...
they uh...
when they love their children more than they love killing israelis that's when
uh... you know this will end in that sort of with the territory was in
but he did concede that maybe part of that might be
uh... a function of like
they're part of a political movement and they're oppressed
he doesn't say a press he doesn't believe that they're pressing believe that
they're occupied which is a bizarre thing to do because that is the rat you
know
to the extent that the word occupied means anything in any context
the measurements we have are the international community and there's no
there's no with controversy there
uh... but he can't talk about that he's just decided that's a made-up term for
you know that uh... people like if they want to frame it in a certain way
that's the reality
i mean liberal scientists are saying that they're saying using the term occupied
occupied genocide apartheid all or anti-semitic tropes but what's
fascinating about that is he starts to go down this way you're going to see
horrible images
uh... of babies being pulled out of rubble and then
he realizes like
there's really nothing that he can say that is in somehow going to mitigate
that so he's got a shift quickly
to saying that the mothers are happy that their kids are dead and then he
realizes like well i've probably gone a little too far with that
i mean the fact is
the reason why there are posters
i see them all over new york now
of of kidnapped uh... israelis
is because uh...
activists
are trying
to uh... keep these uh...
the there's really two things one
keep the key people in mind that there are uh... two hundred hostages
uh... taken by uh... humas
and to
to sort of mitigate
the impact
of the images to the extent that we have any of
the several thousand children who have now been killed and that the parents who
are having the the the several thousand i mean adults killed
and then the and the and the parents and the sisters and the brothers of people
who have been killed there
those are the two reasons
the first i think is you know fairly legitimate
i would also recommend that they make sure that they put those posters around
uh... bb net and yahoo's residents
because they clearly don't care
i mean that the reporting coming out of israel is that the families of the
hostages one a ceasefire and negotiations that the hostage transfers
which is what's happened in israel before but the it seems to me and this is
again by uh... udi greenberg on america prestige
but that uh... the settler uh... component of the uh... uh... and then
yahoo government liquid
uh... prefers of course to use this as a pretext on gaza i also frankly think
that uh...
i suspect
that the the story of those first uh... couple hours and days frankly
uh...
in the hamas attack
uh... we're gonna find it's not so uh... clear cut in terms of how much
uh... the the potential for hostages were were uh...
how that was treated
by the israeli government i mean there are you know i'm just reading stuff in
haratz and there's only so much that i can read but we'll see
but nevertheless
uh...
he's out there trying to say
figure an argument where when you see these images
here is an ability for you to not have them impact you to dehumanize to do to
dehumanize and it's this and and and
notice also how he's invoking a very well trodden anti muslim anti arab
trope about the way that they value their own
lives in their own children's lives
uh... he's trying in essence to evoke imagery of suicide bombings and things of
that nature of martyrdom when he says people pray that they are martyrs
that is essentially saying look at the savages on the other side who don't
support gay rights that's another trope you hear all the time
don't support gay rights in in in gaza
uh... they they're just uncivilized i mean and they don't they're they're
engaging in a holy war where they're fine with being martyred and dying
uh... because they'd rather chant instead of listen to us
the civilized white folk over here
who are offering them this generous state
that you have a pathological they can't govern themselves i've seen that a lot
like it and uh... like like from the uh... like look i i i i i i like to be
both sides about this but the huma stack prove that uh... palestinians can
govern themselves like what this whole situation proves is that
there's one state that is one government governing and it's not capable of
governing and we need an international solution and
uh... what it can't be trusted for like the post gaza thing can be trusted like
i think even if it doesn't do the ground invasion we need the international
community step in and say like
we need to uh... put this on a different track
let's just listen to a little more this because it's a
huge opportunity for us now that there's not a uh... peace process uh... that
uh... i want to think i like that he would have
i mean think of that i've been holding back
because i wanted to let the parties uh... but now i speak
this is so much more complicated
than the kind of the discussion we're pre-programmed to have that is guaranteed
to fail
the richness
of this problem
where humas is effectively the mother in a monk house and by proxy situation
right and the children in you get you damn straight you can be pulling babies
out of that rubble because that's what humas wants
and israel cannot figure out how to extricate herself
from the state of death
but that's why we're here
that's what we're talking about
so what i'm trying to say is
you don't
get out of this
you have a very unconventional so
in humas oh my god and in totalitarian islam and in jihad and in isis
in al-qaib
incidentally incidentally
how does this explain the west bank
where you have the secular leadership
how does it explain that the nurturing of humas
uh... when the plow and fatah were essentially
secular
organizations
and israel wanted to disempower them
not terribly different from us funding uh... the you know that the madrasa is
in the mujahideen against uh...
uh...
the soviet union at the time
uh... but you know that's
details details i mean it was muslims
this is details that's what he'd say about the west bank is that in their
arabness they're supporting the humas anyway the idw special
there's a little more
mainstream media
refuses
to show us the images that they showed us during the vietnam war
through mainstream outlets
if you saw what i've seen
if you if you watched
the humas
videos the isis videos that
if you read the big if you did any of this stuff
you'd be sick to your stomach you'd be a changed person
well i don't have that i remember the night i can't i mean uh... first off i
mean he goes into
talking about the images from vietnam and uh... that we never saw the falling
man from uh... the twin towers
there is no doubt
the footage uh... of uh... the humas attack would be uh... stomach turning to
watch
there's also no doubt
that uh...
there's a reason why israel
i put uh... gaza into a complete blackout because they didn't want images
coming out of there as well
there's a reason why there have been uh... dozens of reporters uh... targeted
in kilt
uh... because they don't want images come out
this is not that there's no
well profundity there
uh...
and
the uh...
the dynamic between isis and humas
uh... it
and to the extent that there is
uh... any shared tactics the the situation is completely different
uh...
but again the
where does he go with this
it ultimately is a way of basically just saying
i'm not advocating
a complete annihilation
of the palestinians living in gaza
but i'm also telling you
don't have your heartstrings pulled by all these images you can see
let's just let things take their natural course yeah um... probably i just
wanted to shout this out because friend of the show francesca furantini you
know she is that her partner madly is a comedian he's uh... also you know he's a
jewish man he put this out here and this is just like a great
short funny kind of live it's good for levity
explanation of all of these arguments that you're hearing and how absurd it is
on its face
just because it was so much of what wine scene was deploying there is
mad is talking about here
an american jew and going to tell you
how to correctly criticize israel without being accused of anti-semitism
here are some don'ts do not overstate your case don't go thrown around the
word apartheid state apartheid
only ever happened in south africa and you you can't use that word again you
can't just keep using words call it something that is correct like a
kerfuffle you know just be like oh kerfuffle they go
do not mention the palestinians or the occupation okay if you want to talk
about problems in israel talk about how there's a lot of stray cats and how
the traffic's really bad do not throw around the word genocide you guys just
throw it around like it's just nothing do not support a one-state solution if
there was a one-state solution israelis might lose their demographic majority
and that is literally genocide do not support a two-state solution do not
support a solution why you think you got all the answers you're so smart do
not be a palestinian an arab a black person or a muslim okay all of those
groups are racist against jews and I think I know a thing or do about racism
because I just said something racist do not be a reformed jew the only real
jews are religious jews or you know israeli citizens do not be an
anti-zionist israeli what the f**k are you doing do not be an anti-zionist
orthodox jew that ruins my narrative f**k my s**t up I don't like that do not
call yourself an anti-zionist there's many definitions of zionism there's the
nice one and then there's the what's actually happening and while you may be
against what's actually happening in Israel right now when you say you're an
anti-zionist you make me think that you're against the fantasy version of
zionism that I have in my head just call yourself a liberal zionist it's that
easy do not be a liberal zionist liberals are basically leftists which are
basically socialists which are basically communists which is Stalin and
Stalin hated jews so what are you Stalin to be safe call yourself a zionist do
not not be a jew if you are not a jew and you're like oh but what about the
Palestinians and like how am I supposed to know that you actually care about the
Palestinians what if you're just crying because you hate me do not call for it
okay so that's basically it's great I just thought that was such a good
explanation of like the boxes that you're put into to avoid saying what's
react and what's actually happening here and just don't care don't it's hard
right now but don't don't back down what you know history will remember this
moment trigger nomitry is the math that you do to figure out who's gonna get the
biggest whiff when four guys sit around smelling fart and I'll just say like on
you know we talk about I distinctly differentiate myself from like the
isolationist like not another tax dollar another tax dollar to like an
exclusionist ethno-state absolutely but if this was a one-state democratic
state where we could use our government money to try to actually build a state
where people could live together and we could maybe withhold okay if the
Palestinians aren't treating if it's gonna be a jewish minority then we start
with drawing funding like and we use our leverage that way I actually don't
have a problem with that I'm not so I think we can actually afford that given
like the position America's been put in I don't I don't disagree yeah
