Welcome to the Larry Arn Show on the Hillsdale College podcast network.
I would be Larry Arn, President of Hillsdale College, and I have a great and mighty guest
today.
His name is Jordan Peterson.
Jordan Peterson is a psychologist and an academic, and he's had two careers, I think
it's fair to say.
In one, he taught some at Harvard and whatever he taught later for a long time at University
of Toronto.
And wherever he taught, he leaves a trail behind him of students who love him.
And they testified what it is about him that they love, and you're going to see it for
yourself in a few minutes.
In his second career, it starts when a few years ago he took stand about something, which
was a law in Canada that would require people change all kinds of things that defy everything
ordinary, gender stuff, mostly.
And he stood up against that.
And of course, a firestorm came, and he didn't retreat into any hole, he'd never been any
good at being in a hole.
He decided to go public.
And what I like about, I admire him very much and know him well, I'm privileged that way,
is that his public career follows the same pattern as his academic career.
He's a teacher, and he's relentless, and he's curious, and he knows a lot of stuff.
And he teaches people, and they are grateful, except for the ones who don't want teaching
to happen, and they are enraged.
And he's courageous in the face of that, welcome Jordan Peterson.
Thank you, sir.
Because you're a teacher, and because I'm curious about it, I want to talk about psychology
about what it is.
And I know that you like Carl Jung, and because of that, I never did without knowing much
about him.
I've been reading up on him some, and I want you to explain the general thing.
What is the discipline of psychology?
And then something about him, if you care to say.
Well, we all exist at multiple levels simultaneously.
We exist at subatomic level, and the atomic level, and the molecular level, and the level
of organs, and the level of our body.
And we have motivational systems, and emotional systems, and cognitive systems, and perceptual
systems.
And psychology is the study of the integration of all of those subordinate levels into the
individual.
Right?
So you can study all those levels, right up to the level of the individual.
And you're in the domain of psychology, and so I like that, that integrative function
of psychology.
And so when I was in graduate school, in particular, the PhD work I did was really quite biological.
I was looking at the genetic, the psychological manifestations of the genetic predisposition
to alcoholism and antisocial behavior.
And alcohol is a pharmacological agent, and it spreads through the brain like water, because
it crosses the blood-brain barrier, it's one of the few chemicals that can do that.
And so to study alcohol's effect on psychology, you have to study alcohol's effect on the
brain, but it affects every bit of the brain, and every bit of the brain is quite a lot
to study.
And so as I was studying alcoholism and the predisposition to alcoholism, I was simultaneously
studying how the brain works to understand how alcohol and other drugs changed its function.
And that got me deep into the study of neuroscience, and affect of neuroscience in particular.
That's the neuroscience of emotion and motivation.
And that was a burgeoning field at the time, and I read some of the great early classic
works in that field.
And at the same time, I was reading a lot of work on the clinical front, great clinicians,
including the people you mentioned, Freud and Jung.
And I was integrating across those, which was something that hadn't been done.
And my first book, Maps of Meaning, was an attempt to integrate across all those levels
from the biological to the narrative.
That's a good way of thinking about it.
Jung, do you call yourself a Jungian?
To some degree, yes.
I don't describe myself that way, but it's definitely the case.
I mean, I started reading Freud before I read Jung, and I liked Freud a lot for a variety
of reasons.
So we could go back to Nietzsche to explain this more properly.
So Nietzsche, back in the late 1800s, announced that God was dead.
And what he meant by that, essentially, was that the unity of conception that had brought
us together psychologically and socially was disintegrating.
And Nietzsche knew what the consequence of that would be.
He knew that the consequence of that would be nihilism and hopelessness on the one hand
and a turn towards totalitarian certainties on the other.
He nailed that.
Dostoevsky knew the same thing.
And Nietzsche saw a way out, he thought, and his way out was that human beings would have
to become, they would have to adopt the mien of what they had deposed.
And so he thought that people would have to become gods in some way.
And that we could do that by creating our own values, that we would have to take it
upon ourselves to create our own values, since they were no longer handed down on high from
some transcendent source.
And all of the arguments that Nietzsche laid out were very powerful, including that one.
But reading Freud helped me understand why Nietzsche was wrong, because Freud noted more
clearly than anyone else, at least at that time, that we were not the masters in our
own houses, and that the notion that we could produce our own values was predicated on an
assumption that in some manner we were intrinsically unitary masters of our own destiny, our own
cognition, our own perceptions, our own emotional states.
And Freud really flipped that on its head.
He said, no, we're more like a haunted house full of autonomous spirits.
And those spirits have, those would be complexes in the psychoanalytic term.
Those complexes, those autonomous spirits, some of which are motivational forces, let's
say, or emotional, emotional systems, they have an autonomy and a will that can easily
supersede our own.
And so it isn't obvious at all that because we're masters of not masters in our own house
that we can in any way create our own values.
And Freud, I think the weakness of Freud was that he pronounced one motivational system
superordinate sex.
And you could say with some real truth that Freud replaced the god of his ancestors, Yahweh.
Freud was Jewish.
He replaced the god of his ancestors with sexuality and put that at the pinnacle of
the human psychological hierarchy.
And Jung, who was a student of Freud's, although also a student of Nietzsche's, and perhaps
more deeply a student of Nietzsche's, objected to that.
He did not believe that it was appropriate to make the presumption that sex ruled overall.
And I read a lot of Jung when I, especially when I was in graduate school, I think he
had, I think there's 20 volumes in his collected work, something like that.
I read every single one of them, and I didn't just read them.
I actually understood them, and that took a lot of work.
I read Archetypes of the Collective Unconscious.
It was the first book by Jung I wrote.
I read, little Freudian slip there.
I read it three times before I knew what the hell he was talking about.
Because what Jung is talking about is so strange that it's almost impenetrable, and then when
you do penetrate it, it's terrifying.
That's why psychologists don't like Jung.
That's why people in general don't.
It's like, he's very hard to understand, and then when you do understand him, he's very,
very terrifying, because Freud made the case that we were haunted by ghosts, and Jung made
the case that we were haunted by demons and gods, and that's much more accurate.
And when you start to understand that, man, the world is not the same.
It is seriously not the same.
So we're going to talk about sex today, because that's all over the place.
Does our estrangement from and fascination with sex today have to do with Freud?
It has to do with what Freud observed, and Freud was correct in that sex is a dominating force.
Nietzsche said, every drive attempts to philosophize in its spirit.
Brilliant, brilliant aphorism.
He was really something.
And when the world collapses into materialist atheism, let's say, it's highly likely that
sex will arise as the dominant goddess, likely goddess.
It's likely on the feminine side more accurately, if you think about it historically.
Now, did Freud bring that about?
Partly because Freud made the case that there was no metaphysical reality, let's say.
There were biological realities, and that the prime biological reality was that of sex.
And so he laid some of the groundwork for those metaphysical claims.
But Freud, to speak in Freud's defense,
even though he believed that sex was a dominating force,
it isn't clear at all that he believed that it should be.
Now, if you pushed Freud in what he thought should be at the pinnacle of the moral hierarchy,
he would say something like, the ability to work and play.
And that's not bad.
You know, that's not too bad.
And he had a wisdom, and Freud was also a very practical clinician.
But he also viewed, see, Freud was deeply anti-religious in the enlightenment tradition.
And he told Jung at one point that it was necessary to make of the doctrine of sexual
motivation an unshakable bulwark against a black tide of occultism.
And it's an interesting, interesting phrase because there was a black tide of occultism
coming, and we've certainly seen that unfold over the course of the 20th century.
But it also highlights one of Freud's metaphysical weaknesses.
And it was the weakness that separated Jung from Freud.
And that was that Freud's materialist deterministic atheism
made him incapable of contending with the realities of the religious world properly.
And that undermined his, what would you say,
his ability to sit at the proper pinnacle of the psychoanalytic hierarchy.
So Jung believed, like Jung believed that he had a conception that he put forward as the self.
And the self is you, is the four-dimensional you.
And so why four dimensions?
Well, because here you are now in this room at this time,
but you are something that extends across time from birth till death.
And the totality of you is that entire being is stretched across time.
And Jung's self is the four-dimensional totality of the person.
And Jung was a very sophisticated thinker.
And he believed that Christ was a symbol of the self.
Now, what Jung believed religiously, that's a very difficult thing to put your finger on,
because he was a very sophisticated thinker.
I would put him firmly in the Christian camp,
but he's not a normal Christian by any stretch of the imagination.
When he says something like Christ is a symbol of the self,
he meant something very deep.
He meant that, well, he meant, for example, that at the highest level of conceptualization,
the human being is something doomed to suffer through death and hell and to emerge reborn.
And he really believed that.
And not in the way that you believe something preposterous because it's an element of faith,
but because he saw that as the deepest form of wisdom.
And he also saw it as something that was inevitably true.
The soul is by nature Christian.
That was certainly something Jung believed.
Now, let's try to relate that.
Because so something amazing is going on in the world.
We are trying to transform ourselves into whatever we want to be,
sexual and everything else.
And you've taken a stand against that.
I'd like you to apply.
And also, what in psychology has led you to do that?
Well, when you say, so there's a battle right now going on in our culture about
self-definition.
I am whatever I say I am, which is, by the way, what God said to Moses when he proclaimed his
identity, right?
And that's not a trivial comment on what's happening now.
Jung believed that the logical conclusion of Protestantism was that everyone would
become their own church, right?
And he really meant when Jung said something, he meant it like all the way down.
And so the logical conclusion of you being your own church is that you're your own God
and that you get to define yourself.
And you might say, well, why can't I define myself?
And the answer, the right answer is, what the hell do you know about who you are?
And you think that there's something in you that's yourself that's defining you.
But how do you know you're not just a pawn of that thing you think is yourself?
And so the fatal weakness on the self-definition front is, oh, I see, you're gripped so firmly
by your sexuality that your sexuality now proclaims that it's you and you believe that.
And you think that's you.
You don't think that you're worshiping a polytheistic pagan goddess or that she's got
you in her grip.
You think that's you because you have an intrinsic theory of yourself and your
theory of yourself is whatever you want hedonistically in this moment rules,
everyone, including you.
And that's right.
And that everyone who opposes that is nothing but a demon, essentially.
That means everybody who opposes that doesn't get the same favor.
They can't define themselves the way they want.
Well, that's the incoherence problem.
But the radical types, the narcissistic radical types, they don't give a damn about incoherence
because what they give a damn about is that they get to do exactly what the hell they want
with whoever they want this moment.
And if that's now this is this is where the rubber meets the road.
You might say, well, what's the problem with that?
It's like, why can't I just do whatever the hell I want?
Whenever the hell I want to do it with whoever I want to do it with.
And the answer is because everything goes to hell.
If you do that, including you and you say, well, I don't believe in hell.
And I say, well, keep acting the way you are and you will.
Right.
For sure.
Now everyone with an ounce of sense and iota of sense, and this is actually what defines sense,
knows perfectly well if they only do exactly what they want to do in accordance with the
whim of the moment, which then becomes their God, right?
Because if you're motivated by the whim of the moment and you place that above all else,
that is now your God.
Well, what's the God?
Well, in this case, let's say it's sexual motivation.
Well, if sexual motivation is your God, you will end up in something indistinguishable from hell
because you will you will misuse other people.
You will make them objects of your own narrow and immediate desire.
And you'll have no relationships.
You'll exploit everyone, including yourself.
And there's that's no way to live.
Well, why is that no way to live?
You're just moralizing.
It's like, no, live like that for two years and find out what happens.
No one with any sense will want to be within 20 feet of you.
And that's because you'll do nothing but exploit including.
And the thing you'll exploit will include that higher self whose existence you don't you don't
even imagine, right?
Because you've already subjugated yourself to the immediacy of your idiot whim.
And the people who identify themselves on sexual grounds do that all the time.
My paramount feature is who I'm sexually attracted to.
Really, that's your paramount feature.
Is it that's your definition of your intrinsic self to call you primitive is an insult to primitive people.
If so, I want to suggest what's been swept away by all this.
In the classic philosophy and most philosophy since then,
the idea was we have a nature.
Everything has a nature.
And the nature and our happiness and well-being depends upon fulfilling our nature.
My little bit of reading of Young suggested he thought roughly like that.
In other words, if he was going to give somebody therapy,
he tried to help him become a better person like a person would be.
Well, that word nature is interesting because it comes from a Latin word that means birth.
It means the process of beginning and growth by which we come to be.
Well, if you lose your nature,
then you have no purpose outside your own will.
And now my question, you've been particularly helpful and popular with men, young men especially.
Why is that do you think?
Well, you can't lose your nature exactly.
You can lose your higher order integrated purpose driven nature.
Here's some natures you won't lose.
Pain, anxiety, like you can lose your higher nature all you want.
And all of the negative elements of your nature will predominate.
And you're not going to rationalize yourself out of pain and anxiety.
This is the thing about those who believe life has no meaning.
It's like, I see.
So you think you can argue yourself out of your pain because pain is a meaning.
Now you might say, well, it's not a meaning I want to pursue.
What does that have to do with anything?
Pain is an undeniable reality.
Well, if you allow your higher order self to disintegrate,
you just you disintegrate into a landscape characterized by pain, anxiety, and hopelessness.
That's the metaphysical desert, by the way.
That's the place you end up devolving into when your tyrannical presuppositions are
disintegrate, which is why people cling to their tyrannical presuppositions.
Because there's a mystery.
Well, you don't want to end up in the landscape of pain, anxiety, and hopelessness.
And I actually mean that technically because what happens when you lose direction,
the biological systems that mediate negative emotion signal loss of direction.
That's what anxiety is.
It's a signal of loss of direction.
So if you lose higher order direction, you become anxious.
Well, and you can argue with anxiety, all you want with your atheistic nihilism,
but it isn't going to go away and neither is your pain.
And so one of the things I've told my audiences is,
you have to be a fool if you doubt the reality of pain and anxiety, pain and terror, let's say.
Are they real?
It's like, well, of course, that's an ontological argument.
They're real enough so you'll act like they're real if they come knocking.
So maybe we can satisfy ourselves with that proclamation.
And you say, well, are they the ultimate reality, pain and suffering?
And that's a good question.
That's a tough question.
And I would say, no.
The things that transcend pain and suffering are more real than pain and suffering.
Well, what transcends suffering?
The eternal verities transcend suffering.
And the higher order nature of man is the antidote to catastrophic suffering.
It's the antithesis of hell.
Well, what is that?
Is that real?
Well, if pain and suffering are real, and if you can transcend them
through allegiance with a higher order self, well, then the higher order self is obviously
not only real, but more real.
Well, what is that?
Well, this is why Jung said Christ was a symbol of the self.
How do you transcend the eternal realm of suffering?
How do you escape from hell?
It's the same question.
How about voluntary self-sacrifice?
How about that?
Well, that's absolutely no different than the image of the crucifix.
Those are the same thing.
Well, why does the spirit of voluntary self-sacrifice protect you against suffering?
Well, I need to sacrifice my idiot whims in the moment to serve that element of me that
is continuous across time.
This is like Kant's categorical imperative in some ways.
If I'm wise and mature, then I don't make decisions now that will cost me tomorrow
or next week or next month or next year or five years down the road.
I contemplate my extended self, which is like a community across time,
and I bind my decisions in the present by my covenant with my future self.
And there's no difference between doing that.
That means I sacrifice the whims of the moment to the optimization of the medium and long run.
And I do the same thing in relationship to other people.
Those are the same thing.
There is no difference.
This is a gospel equation in some ways.
There is no difference between treating you properly and treating myself properly.
And that's because in the final analysis, there's actually no difference between you
and me, not fundamentally.
The classic account of this, the American account for most of our history is,
that's because we're the same kind of thing.
We're equal, and in what way are we equal?
We're equal in our natures, and the troubled part comes this way.
If our natures include how we come to be, then the differences between the sexes
are also part of our rights, and also therefore our obligations.
And that's what you're telling me this morning about a law that's proceeding in Ireland,
and they're going to make it illegal to possess books that claim that sex is an innate feature
or that you don't get to choose your own.
Is that what it is?
That's part of it, yeah.
Well, it depends on how they define, it depends on how they end up defining hate speech,
but that's already built into the law, the idea that making a distinction between men and women
that's categorical, that's already part of hate speech.
Well, it is in part, it is in part an out spring.
This is, again, where you see the weakness in Nietzsche's argument.
Well, here's the values we've created.
Well, that's not a very good replacement for God.
Our replacement for God is narcissistic radicals get to do whatever the hell they want,
whenever they want, all the time.
And if you oppose it, then it's prison for you.
Well, you know, that's not much of a substitute for what we had before.
And that was our, I went to the church of the Holy Sepulcher in Rome,
and that was the first established church.
And it became the model for European society.
And so it's so interesting, the way these conceptions are laid out,
let's say architecturally, rather than conceptually.
So at the very center, you have the crucifix, the cross.
And that's, what would you say?
That's the point where all of reality comes to a point.
And it's the point of maximal suffering, and it's more than that.
It's the point of voluntarily accepted maximal suffering.
And the notion is that that's a sacrifice.
Why is it a sacrifice?
You have to sacrifice, you have to sacrifice your lower self to your higher self
in order for you to proceed in a healthy manner to be resilient,
but also for you to participate in the covenant that would make for a united society.
You have to, and there's no difference between that maturation,
because a lot of what maturation is, is to give up the attractions of the immediate present
in the service of something broader and higher.
And that would be you in the broader sense, and what's in your best interest,
but also the community simultaneously.
Those are the same thing.
So at the center of the community, you have the sacrifice,
the voluntary sacrifice of self.
That's the center.
Around that, you have the church, you have the altar, then you have the church.
Then you have the town, and around the town, you have the state, and then you have the nation.
And that's all resting on this spirit of voluntary self-sacrifice, right?
And that's the foundation stone of the community.
Jung knew that, Jung knew that, and Freud didn't.
And because Freud was, he was a materialistic deterministic atheist of the 19th century,
and Jung is a 20th century thinker.
Maybe he's a 21st century thinker even.
That's certainly possible.
So Churchill said, he wrote once in a book called My Early Life,
you must nail your life to a cross of thought or action.
Now he ended up doing both.
But in other case, whichever way you go.
And so you could say, in your life, Jordan Peterson,
it was more thought in the beginning, and it might be more action now,
but in other case, it's a cross.
And that's how you think of it.
Well, you can either lift up a cross or have one dropped on you, right?
There's no non-cross option in this world.
And that's really worth knowing too, and I tell my audiences that consistently.
It's like, you all know perfectly well that your idiot hedonism,
your idiot immature hedonism is going to vanish in a puff of smoke at the first sign of trouble.
You know that, and you know that it's thin, gruel.
That's why you're hedonistic and hopeless at the same time.
You know that, you need something beyond that.
Why?
Because life in some ways is unbearable.
And so you need something worth bearing to make it bearable.
And life is very heavy load.
And so that means you have to carry something very heavy to justify it.
Now, I see this in the biblical corpus, for example,
quite clearly laid out in the story of Abraham,
which is a very interesting story.
And of course, Abraham is the founder of nations.
And so, and you might say, well, is that true?
It's like, those are such stupid questions that that's such a stupid question.
It's a definition in this story.
So the definition is the spirit of Abraham is the founder of nations, right?
That's the declaration of the story.
And you're to come to understand that when you read the story.
Now, you might say, well, what did the people who wrote the story mean by that?
And the answer is, well, they didn't know.
And that's why they wrote the story, like the story is the explanation.
Okay, so what's the story?
Well, Abraham is a human being.
And that means he's like a natural human being.
And that means he's useless and lazy.
And if he can have it easy, he will.
And so Abraham is like the first case of white privilege.
There's a good joke.
He's rich.
His parents are rich.
He's rich.
His parents are rich.
And he can just lay around his tent all day and eat peeled grapes
and have like beautiful slave women wave palm fronds over him and do nothing.
And he does that for like 83 years.
And then one day a voice comes to him, right?
A spirit.
He's inspired by a spirit.
And what's the nature of the spirit?
Well, it's the spirit that calls him to adventure.
And it says to him, get your lazy ass the hell out of the tent.
You're made for more than this.
And so Abraham, in a great act of faith, abides by the intuition of this spirit.
And he leaves his comfortable infancy, right?
Because he's an infant.
He lives in an infantile utopia.
It's like, well, what do I want?
Well, I never want to be hungry and I never want to be thirsty.
But I never want to be deprived.
It's like, well, great.
You're an infant sleeping in a crib.
You've got infant paradise.
Is that what you're made for, right?
The mere cessation of your needs.
That's your vision of utopia, is it?
Well, that was Abraham's vision of utopia.
And a counter spirit came along and said,
get your lazy ass the hell out of your tent and get out there in the world.
And of course, it's a complete catastrophe, right?
Like he faces tyranny and war and the necessary sacrifice of his son
and collusion among the aristocrats to steal his wife.
And like, it's just a disaster in 10 different directions.
But it's an adventure.
It's an adventure, right?
And so what's life?
Is it like, is it hedonistic infantile bliss?
This is something Dostoyevsky objected to.
Or is it a romantic adventure?
Well, what do people go watch when they go see a movie?
They watch a romantic adventure.
Well, why?
Because that's what they want in their life.
They don't want peace and tranquility and guaranteed basic income
and the pleasures of infantile, gratified infantile dependence.
They want a bloody adventure.
And if they don't get a real adventure,
they'll take a false one and wreak havoc.
And we have no shortage of false adventures in our culture.
So the woke culture and the transgender movement
and all these great things that have come upon us so hard,
are they going to suppress that for people?
You're not going to get to have your adventure.
You're going to have to.
They put forward a false adventure.
And the false adventure is,
wave a placard and save the world.
That's right.
Great.
Isn't that wonderful?
I have to.
You know how I stopped getting protesters to my events at university?
I held them in the morning.
That's great.
No kidding, eh?
I'm the Messiah.
Yeah, really?
Well, as long as you don't want me to get out of bed before noon.
Yeah.
So that's the false adventure sold to young kids.
It's like, well, the planet's going to hell in a handbasket.
That's the claim.
It's like, yeah, yeah.
The planet's always been going to hell in a handbasket, right?
The apocalypse is always nigh.
And that's because we die and so does everything else.
And so, well, the apocalypse is nigh.
And you can save the world by protesting against those who are at fault.
That's what universities sell young people.
Well, it's an adventure, right?
They have a messianic urge at that age.
And that really never goes away in people in some fundamental sense,
but it's particularly acute when adolescents, late adolescents,
are trying to catalyze their identity.
And the left offers these false adventures.
You can be, you print out a sign that says,
I oppose poverty as if anyone doesn't.
And you wave that around publicly,
which is the same as praying in public, right?
It's a great sin.
And you proclaim your moral virtue and bang, that's your adventure.
And it's a cheap pathway to reputational accomplishment.
And part of the reason young guys do it, you know perfectly well,
is because they're trying to impress young women.
And it's kind of, what would you say?
There's a surface attraction to being a kind of rebellious quasi-shea-guvera type
and to be taking on the evil corporations of the world when you're 18,
instead of working at 7-Eleven and handing out sugar water to kids.
Do you think that there's something that young people really need
that will ultimately redeem them from this, enough of them at least,
to save the world?
Do you think that they need a burden?
They need a burden.
Absolutely.
And they want one.
You bet.
Absolutely.
Well, and you can explain that to them in some ways the way I just explained it.
It's like, look guys, you're going to suffer.
And most of them are already suffering, so they know that.
It's like, and you want to suffer stupidly too, because that's even worse.
And then you do you want to contemplate for a moment what's going to
be your arc when the storms come?
Well, I can tell you what it is.
And you already know this because you've consulted your own conscience.
When you're awake at three in the morning thinking about what a useless bastard you are,
how many sins you have on your conscience.
If you're fortunate, there'll be a few of your adventures come to mind where you think,
well, you know, I didn't do so bad then.
You know, maybe there's something to me.
And so what do people remember when they have those memories?
They remember the times when they stepped outside of their narrow selves
and took on some bloody responsibility, at least for themselves.
And then maybe for someone else too.
And then maybe for a lot of other people.
And so if you tell young man, look, you're going to find the meaning in your life
by adopting, by adopting maximal responsibility, right?
That's going to be extremely difficult because you're so bloody useless.
You can't even get your own house in order.
And you're, and you're going to be called upon not only to get your house in order,
but to do that well enough so some woman can stand having you around for more than
like 15 minutes in the back of a car.
And then maybe you're going to have to do it so that you could be
a good father to a family and a pillar of the community.
And that's not just empty words.
Like if you do that nobly, there'll be something to you.
And then when the storms come, you won't be blown over by the first four foot wave.
And young men think, huh, mean I could be something that wasn't blown over by the
first four foot wave.
They think, oh, well, that's, that's, that's inspiring.
Maybe that's worth doing a little work towards it on the off chance.
It might be true.
And the thing about it is, it is true.
So it's not that difficult once you understand it to make a case for it.
It's true.
And it is also true that you grow in proportion to the weight you take on voluntarily.
And it's also true that we have no idea what the upper limit to that is, right?
So, you know, you, you've met remarkable people in your life.
People can do remarkable things.
And there are inevitably people who take, who took on remarkable burdens.
And because they did that, their development was forced by necessity.
They were forced by necessity to grow beyond what they were.
And who knows what the limit to that is.
People, so something I see in the college business, our college, Hillstone College,
has got about the same number of boys and girls, a few more boys.
And they come from a pool of applicants that are equal size and equal qualification.
Almost nobody has that.
Right.
And the boys do just about as well as the girls, although they do get into contests
doing things like throwing deer year on each other and stuff.
They've done that.
But some of the best boys I've ever met have done that.
As a matter of fact, they're in the Marine Corps now, stupid boys.
And they, and, and the thing is, people will say, how are you successful with boys?
And I say, we treat them like boys.
You know, they want to be treated like boys.
They, and, and girls, women, we've always had boys and girls here, women and men here, right?
And they've always done well.
And their intellectual capacities are, you know, they're the same kind of thing.
And their physical paths are not the same.
And they can wish them the same if they want to.
But, but they don't.
No, really.
They don't.
I mean, I, you know what I find is, and, and, you know,
I have two daughters.
You have one, I think.
And she's, your daughter is like my daughter's very tough, very assertive, very womanly,
you see.
And so in other words, the classic account is they're good at being what they are.
And that's a service, you know, human above all, but also male or female.
And that's a service that burden you're talking about.
The first burden everyone carries is, how do you become a good one of these?
And by, if by thinking it, that's all, as you say, that's no burden.
So no satisfaction.
How do you think, predict the future for me a little bit?
What's, what's going to happen?
It seems to me things are coming to a point.
Do you think so?
Yeah.
Well, I think things have always been coming to a point, but they're coming to a point
way faster.
And I mean, that's partly a consequence of the technological revolution.
I mean, we know that, well, we have Moore's law, right?
Computing power doubles every 18 months.
It's like, no, no, you don't understand computing power doubles every 18 months.
That's not some casual phrase.
That's an absolute bloody revolution in every possible direction.
And it's not just computing power, it's storage power.
And there's all sorts of doublings taking place.
And we're now at the point in the course of technological progress, where those
doublings are happening multiple times within the span of a single life.
And so it's pretty obvious.
And that means the ancient archetypal battles are accelerating.
That's exactly what it means.
The battles between good and evil is accelerating.
And it's always been there.
As the apocalypse nigh, it's like, well, it's always been nigh.
But it might be a little more nigh than it has been in the past.
You've been talking about artificial intelligence.
And recently, I have become more concerned about that.
What are your concerns?
And what are your hopes for it?
Well, I suppose my fundamental concern is that we'll automate a super intelligent tyranny.
Right?
And I mean, that's not a concern that's limited to me.
That's the motif of endless numbers of science fiction dystopias.
And science fiction is where engineers dream, right?
And sometimes it's where they have their nightmares.
And engineers are notoriously atheistic.
And so they turn to worship of Star Wars, for example, as an alternative.
But their nightmares and dreams are in the popular culture, in popular imagination.
And dystopian science fiction is the nightmare of engineers.
And the nightmare of Tower of Babel building engineers
is that we'll automate a super intelligent tyranny.
The Chinese are hell-bent on doing that.
They're doing it at the moment.
Could we do it here?
Absolutely.
Are we?
Yeah.
Will that dominate?
We'll see.
You know, my sense, and I learned a fair bit of this from Jung, by the way.
You know, one of the things I learned from Jung was that deeply was that salvation,
redemption was an individual enterprise, which is why I'm a psychologist and not a
politician, because I believe that to be true.
I think that hell is, what would you say, kept at bay one person at a time.
And I do believe that people have a divine destiny, let's say.
And one of the proper elements of our divine destiny is to keep hell at bay.
And you do that by, you do that as a consequence of your choices as an individual.
I also believe that every single individual is in that up to their necks.
You know, Dostoevsky said something very strange at one point.
He said, every man is responsible not only for everything he does,
but for everyone, everyone else does.
And of course, that's insane, right?
In that crazy Dostoevsky way that is more sane, that insanity,
that's more sane than sanity.
That's Dostoevsky in a nutshell.
And I think there's something true about it, is that we each have an archetypal destiny,
and the fate of the world rests on each person's shoulders, like genuinely.
And when I'm traveling around the world talking to people, I'm trying to tell them that.
It's like, no, no, you don't understand.
This is up to you.
Now, I don't understand how it can be up to you, because it's also up to me.
And I don't exactly see how it can be equally and finally up to both of us.
But that's okay.
There's lots of things about the world I don't understand.
And I suppose being, what would you say, touched by a spark of divinity,
which is, I suppose, what characterizes us, each of us bears an infinite responsibility.
And people need to know that, and that this is no game.
So you have to carry the burden for more than your own sake?
Well, your sake is indistinguishable from the sake of the totality.
See, the Buddha figured this out, right?
Because Buddha, what would you say, he achieved enlightenment under the bowtree.
He was in Nirvana.
He was in paradise.
And he could stay there.
That was on the table.
And that's a hell of an offer to be able to stay in paradise.
And he rejected it.
And the reason he rejected it was because in his estimation,
any paradise that he didn't include, everyone wasn't the real paradise.
And so he left Nirvana to come back to earth, so to speak,
to serve as a teacher, to drag everyone else along on the road to Nirvana.
And that's, well, that's correct.
It's correct in that, in the final analysis,
there is no distinction between you and someone else.
It's a terrible thing to contemplate.
They're the same thing.
And that's why you're supposed to love your enemy, I suppose.
And what does that mean to love your enemy?
Well, first of all, it might mean to begin with,
to hope that he wouldn't have to be an enemy,
because why not have a friend?
But it's even more than that, is that to the degree that it's possible,
your actions, even in the presence of your enemy,
should be devoted towards the redemption of your enemy.
That would be better for you and for them.
I mean, if you're good and your enemy is not good,
you'd be right to oppose him for the sake of the good,
and those who represent it.
Well, you redeem what you can redeem and you reject the rest, right?
And that's the separation of the wheat from the chaff.
That's it.
Well, I learned something a while back about,
there's this idea at the end of Genesis,
when God throws Adam and Eve out of paradise,
he sets these cherubs up to guard the gates of paradise,
and their monstrous forms, these cherubs,
and they hold swords that are on fire that turn every which way.
It's a very horrifying image.
And what does it mean?
It means that, well, a sword cuts and cleaves and butchers and kills,
but a sword can be used to carve.
So you can think about a sword as an implement
that separates the wheat from the chaff.
And a burning sword, well, that's even worse, right?
Because it burns the dead wood away.
And so a burning, a flaming sword is a sword that cuts
all that isn't necessary away and burns all the dead wood off.
And of course, that's the case because everything unworthy
has to be cut away in order for it to enter paradise by definition.
And all dead wood has to be burned away
before the living essence can enter paradise.
That's another way of thinking about it.
And if you're 99% dead wood and pathology,
it isn't obvious that the encounter with the flaming sword
that turns every which way won't just do you in.
And that's the issue of evil in some regard.
You want to redeem what can be redeemed,
but you need to reject what's truly serpentine.
And that's Eve's sin, by the way.
She doesn't do that.
She hearkens to the serpent itself.
And that's a narcissism of compassion.
That's her sin.
It's a pride of compassion.
My womanly embrace is such that all things can be clasped by breast,
including the poisonous serpent.
It's like, well, yeah, maybe not including the poisonous serpent.
Right.
And I see that playing out in the world now
because we have this epidemic of narcissistic compassion
where everything can be invited to the table.
It's like, well, maybe not everything.
Right.
Right.
And maybe there's only a small remnant
of what is truly hellish that has to be rejected,
that there's no hope of redeeming.
I mean, this is an ancient theological issue.
Right.
But this was played out quite recently
in the case of Nicola Sturgeon.
Right.
Because Sturgeon in the Scottish prime minister,
you know, she famously proclaimed that,
well, any man who says he's a woman is a woman.
It's like, I'm so compassionate.
It's like, people can do whatever they want.
It's like, any man, eh?
How about psychopathic, serialist, serial killing, sadistic rapists?
How about them?
Well, when she was asked that question, which she was,
she had to hand wave partly because for someone like her,
no one like that exists.
Not really.
But the problem is that people like that do exist
or spirits like that exist.
So there's an immediate thing we see here
coming from artificial intelligence.
And it's, it can do a passable job writing a term paper.
We can stop that here.
We have an honor code and most kids won't do it, almost all.
And if they do, it's not too, you know,
eventually it'll be indistinguishable, I'm told.
Oh, yes.
But they're already.
But, you know, oral exams, but here's what I'm worried about.
This is the chairman of Microsoft,
who I used to think was a pretty good guy.
He proclaims, well, it's not going to write your final,
it's going to write your draft.
But writing your draft, that's where you do most of the learning.
That's where you read all the stuff that surrounds your subject
and decide what's relevant.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
And that means that, and it goes back to something you've taught me,
and that is if you can't write a draft of a paper
or write your own paper, you become a cripple.
Well, that's, see, that's the fundamental issue in the argument.
It's, it's because you could say, well, why not just let,
if your point is the degree, why not just let AI write your paper
and hand it in and get your A?
And it's simple.
It's really quite simple.
I think it was Alfred North Whitehead who said this,
a very very wise thing.
You think so that your thoughts can die instead of you.
Okay, now this is biologically true.
This is what makes human beings different from all other creatures.
Right?
Maybe this is the spark of God in some sense tied to the biology.
So the prefrontal cortex, which is the part of the brain
that generates abstractions, grew out of the motor cortex,
which is the part of the brain that enables you
to voluntarily sequence your actions.
So what thought is, thought is the space
in which you create avatars of action.
Right?
So what a thought we think, because we're materialist atheists
and we think we're scientists,
we think that a thought is a description
of the objective nature of the world.
And that isn't what a thought is.
A thought is a microcosmic avatar of you.
That's what a thought is.
And if it's a stupid thought, then you could act it out.
You could embody that avatar and then it would become you.
But if it's a faulty avatar and you act it out,
then you'll die.
Or worse, because there are worse things than dying.
You'll end up in something like hell.
And so why think?
So that you can generate virtual selves,
then why think critically?
So you can kill off the idiot virtual selves
before you enact them.
Why do that?
So you don't die or end up in hell.
That's why.
So why should you think?
So you don't die or end up in hell.
How do you learn to think?
Well, not by having AI write your damn papers.
The reason you're learning to write
is because there's no difference between writing and thinking.
And the reason you're learning to think
is so that you don't, not only so that you don't fall into a pit,
but so that you don't pull everyone you love kicking
and screaming into the pit with you.
And so you have cheat.
Cheat.
Go ahead.
See what happens.
So what you do with a liberal arts education,
which you do very well here, is you say,
don't cheat because you'll put your immortal soul in danger.
And people say, well, I don't believe in that.
So that's like, go right ahead.
Take your chances.
You make the presumption that you can manipulate the world
by lying and cheating.
Go out there and enact that and watch what happens.
We're having an argument about your culture,
in our culture, about what's true.
It's a deep argument.
The scientists say, well, objective truth is true,
but that's problematic because objective truth
gives us no direction.
And the postmodernists say, well,
there's no overarching metanarrative
and everything is relative.
And they do that to justify their hedonism.
And the truth of the matter is,
we don't know how to define what's real.
And most of us are materialists.
The material world is what's real.
Here's a different proposition.
What's real leads you away from hell.
Now, that's actually a definition, right?
It's a proposition that your life will be conducted most fully
if you abide by the dictum that what's real
is what leads you away from hell.
And you might say, well, why would you assume
that hell is real?
And I would say, if you were there,
you'd think it was real, right?
And I don't really know what to make of that metaphysically.
I mean, I believe it's true,
and I've believed it for a very long time
because I read a lot of literature about hell.
And you think, well, hell isn't real.
It's like, read about Unit 731.
That was a Japanese medical unit in China.
You read about Unit 731,
and I would recommend, by the way,
for those of you who are watching or listening,
that you don't do this because you'll regret it if you do.
You read about Unit 731,
and then come and tell me you don't believe hell is real.
If you read enough about atrocity
and totalitarian catastrophe,
you will absolutely walk away
from that thinking that hell is real.
And then if you have any sense, you'll think,
well, whatever I'm going to do in my life,
I'm going to do whatever takes me as far away
as from that as I can possibly get.
You know, when this political scandal
blew up around me in Canada,
people come up to me and they say this,
they say, you're so brave, and I think,
you don't understand.
The difference between you and me
is I know what to be properly afraid of,
right?
And I know that when the cat gets your tongue,
you will end up in hell.
You lose control of that logos, right?
Because that's your capacity for voluntary speech,
voluntary thought.
You lose that link with the logos.
You are headed for hell,
and that is definitely worse than death.
How many, could you estimate,
how many hours have you spent
in private therapeutic counseling?
I mean, doing counseling with people?
Doing counseling with people.
15,000 dollars.
Yeah, see, that's seven.
Might be more than that.
Seven full working years.
And eight.
But here's why I ask-
That's a conservative estimate.
Why I ask the question was, when you talk,
like, academics should have a good education,
which I fancy I do, are pretty good at understanding
the implications of propositions, you know?
Like, if you said that we're material beings,
if we were purely material beings,
of course, we couldn't know it.
Dogs don't know that they're dogs.
But so we're good at things like that, right?
You're good at describing the consequences
as they appear in individuals.
And it's very dramatic.
And that's-
This is one thing, you know, in many ways,
it's terrifying to be a therapist.
And there's a variety of reasons for that.
I mean, one of the things you learn if you're a therapist
is that you really learn something
about the intrinsic worth of people.
Like, some of the best people I met
in my therapeutic practice, the best people morally,
were people who were on the surface.
They had nothing going for them.
No, nothing worldly going for them.
They weren't attractive.
They weren't intelligent.
They weren't accomplished.
They weren't popular.
In fact, they were often friendless.
They often had devastated families.
They had terrible developmental histories.
They just had devastated lives.
And yet there was still a core of ethical goodness
to them that was stunning under the circumstances.
Miraculous.
And so you really-
That really takes you back to see that that can happen, right?
To see that essential nobility of the human spirit.
And so that's a terrifying thing to see.
And that that goodness can shine through
in places that just look dark
and that no one is attending to.
And the next thing you learn is don't impose your notions
of someone's destiny on them.
You do not know how that person's life
should unfold.
You're there to help them think that through.
You are not there to give them advice.
That's-
It's a theft.
Giving someone advice,
especially if you're a therapist,
is theft because it's theft
because if they succeed, well, then it's your success.
And it's corrupt theft because if they fail,
they bear the consequences and you don't.
So that's terrifying.
And then the other thing I learned that was terrifying was
I never saw anyone in my therapeutic practice
ever get away with anything even once.
Like, you know, there's that old idea
that God has a book and everything you do is written down.
It's like, that's not just an idea.
You get away with nothing.
And of course it makes sense.
It's like, reality is real.
And you distort and bend it at your peril.
And you may produce a rift temporarily,
but that will snap closed on you.
And you may not even notice the connection
between your initial sin, failure to meet the target,
to hit the target.
And the consequences of that,
but the consequences are inevitable.
And it's even worse than that
because not only are they inevitable,
they tend to multiply.
And so all of that to the degree that I've been capable
has scared me straight, let's say.
It's like, no, I'm not going down that path.
And so, and you learn to as a therapist,
you learn the ancient truth that the truth is redemptive, right?
And this is another of the great accomplishments of Freud
because Freud shed new light on the logos in some ways, right?
Because Freud understood that true speech heals, right?
I mean, that's his entire therapeutic approach
is bring people in and don't disturb them
when they're trying to tell you something.
Let them say anything.
Absolutely, and that's what he told his clients too,
is like, say whatever comes to your mind, right?
Let no matter how, off color, off pudding, embarrassing,
shameful, aggressive, sexual, find out who you are.
That's the first draft.
Lay yourself out on the table.
While he had them laid themselves out on the couch,
he hid from his clients so they couldn't,
he was afraid that if they saw his face,
they would censor themselves by watching his emotional reactions.
So he sat off to the side of his clients
so they could just say what they had to say with no interference.
And you know this because you're an educator,
but people cannot organize themselves
and come to who they are without laying themselves out
and they can't lay themselves out without thinking or talking.
Most people think by talking.
In fact, you learn to think by talking.
You can't talk if no one listens.
Most people, most people have no one to listen to them.
Yeah, so, you know, education is a little bit different
than therapy, but sometimes not.
And one way it's different is now education is a common project
that people share and each has to do his part
or he won't get any benefit from it,
but better together, as you say.
And so around here, we have a lot of psychological counseling here,
but also the kids counsel each other.
And that's a different thing because they're in the same boat.
They're trying to get the same thing done.
They want to understand the most important things.
And that's a form of therapy, actually.
Well, actually, therapy is a form of that.
Right, because yeah, sure, I mean,
the therapeutic endeavor is dialogue.
Right, and it's, I guess, the advantage
if you have a good therapist, which is very rare
and becoming more and more difficult,
as it becomes illegal to be a good therapist,
which it already is, by the way,
because it's now illegal to tell your clients what you think.
And so that's the end of that enterprise
because that's all there was to it.
So, but therapy is, it's dialogue in search.
It's dialogue.
Look, it's a religious enterprise.
It's motivated by love.
What's our aim here, therapeutic aim?
To make things better.
Why?
Because we think it's worthy,
it's a worthy enterprise to make things better.
That's the proclamation of love.
Right, love aims at making things better.
Love aims at making the world more abundant.
It aims at reducing unnecessary suffering.
Right, it's an ennobling enterprise, love.
And so the therapeutic process aims at love and uses truth.
And that's a religious enterprise.
It's a logos enterprise.
It's a dialogical enterprise.
And it's a form of secularized religious practice.
So one last question.
I know you're doing things.
You go all over the world.
You got friends and fans everywhere.
You started in some kind of organization.
My last question is, how are you going to save the world?
One person at a time.
Right, that's always how it's happened.
That's always how it's happened.
You know what's the leftist mantra?
The long march through the institutions.
Well, how do you combat that?
With the longer march through the individuals.
Right, the rest of it's an illusion in a way.
There are individuals.
Right, that's where the rubber hits the road.
Individuals suffer.
Individuals bear responsibility.
Right, one of the gifts, I suppose, that the biblical corpus gave to the UK,
the UK transformed into political wisdom and transmitted to the US was
the proposition that the individual was the proper unit of analysis,
the fundamental unit of analysis.
And I believe that that's the case, which is why I'm a psychologist,
as I said, and not a sociologist or a political operative.
It's always been the case that the route to heaven and away from hell
is the route of the individual's soul.
And I believe that that's theologically true, it's metaphysically true,
it's philosophically true.
I also believe that it's materially true, right,
insofar as that sort of truth can be instantiated materially.
It's true at every level simultaneously.
In agreeing with that, I will say all of the greatest philosophers, political philosophers,
and all of the greatest statesmen thought precisely that the purpose of the nation,
or the regime, is the happiness of its people.
And they come together to help make it, but each has to make his own.
And I think that's a very beautiful way.
That's how the founders of America organized the country.
And my own view is beautiful things cannot abidingly lose their luster.
And I will say that in our time, which is a desperate time,
your success and influence is one of the key signs that I'm right about that.
Thank you for being with me.
Thank you, sir. It's always a pleasure to be at Hillsdale and to see you.
