I am so glad you convinced me that the family car
should be the Defender 110.
It is so beautiful inside, it's so comfortable,
and it just feels indestructible.
Yes, it really is.
I've been waiting a long time for the new model to come out.
The Defender 110, I'm telling you,
it's my favorite car of all times.
It's my third one.
You know, I have stories of going off road.
The guy managed the group.
He was like, what are you doing in this beautiful car?
I'm like, I'm going off road.
He's like, are you sure?
Because you can use one of ours,
and then they look like Mad Max cars.
I'm like, no, no, no, we're going to do this,
and he was shocked.
Wow.
Well, it's great because the Defender
has been reimagined for 21st century adventure,
and its unparalleled off-road ability,
as well as its robust interior, are invaluable,
whether you're headed towards uncharted territory
or just a weekend of exploration.
The Defender 110 tackles challenging surroundings
with absolute confidence.
The SUV conveys strength outside and in,
featuring peerless technology,
like an intuitive driver display,
and an award-winning infotainment system.
That's my favorite part.
To keep you connected no matter where the journey takes you.
Adventure is unique to everyone, and so is the Defender.
Choose from the two-door Defender 90,
the four-door Defender 110, or the larger Defender 130,
with the ability to seat up to eight passengers.
You'll find uncompromising performance in all three.
So pack up and go even further with the Defender 110.
Learn more at landroverusa.com forward slash defender.
Sometimes it takes a different approach
to help you unlock your true potential.
Capella University's game-changing flex path format
helps you learn at your own pace
and fit earning a degree into your life,
from before you enroll to after you graduate.
You'll be supported by people who are invested
in your success,
so you can pursue your goals.
Knowing that help is available if you need it.
Imagine your future differently at capella.edu.
This isn't your average business podcast,
and he's not your average host.
This is the James Altiger Show on the Choose Yourself Network.
Today on the James Altiger Show.
You're, you know, managing director of a big BC fund
slash hedge fund.
So we're gonna talk about our hair.
What do you do during the day,
other than brushing your hair?
It depends.
Sometimes I'm working on physics.
Sometimes I'm thinking about markets
and contributing in our research group.
Sometimes I'm listening to somebody,
you know, talking about a company,
or we're trying to think about
where we might take the philanthropic arm.
But I don't get a chance to talk too much about Peter Teal,
and I consider him not only my employer,
but he's an amazing friend,
an amazing human being, and a great teacher.
What's a couple of your takeaways
from interacting with him?
Part of the problem, you see,
the reason I don't talk about Peter almost at all,
is that the news media created a fictional character
called Peter Teal,
and the two of them are totally different.
The real Peter Teal and the fictional Peter Teal
aren't the same person.
So every time I talk about the real Peter Teal,
people imagine that I'm talking about a vampire
who lives on a seastead off of New Zealand
drinking the blood of virgins to stay young,
and I've just never met that person.
They figured out a very effective gambit
for trying to silence his insights.
But I'll give you one insight
that I think is really particularly good.
So let's take this to the, you know,
you coined the phrase, the intellectual dark web.
You felt free to express opinions
among the select group of friends and colleagues
you chose to be around you on a daily basis.
You feel comfortable saying what you think,
because they don't slander you for it
or ruin your career for it.
No, I don't feel comfortable saying that, I think.
I just can't stop.
Okay, well, that's what I think.
I just can't stop.
Okay, that's fair enough.
But I'm assuming some of the people in your life,
including your wife, your boss, some of your colleagues,
you feel like they're not gonna fire you or divorce you
or whatever if you say what you,
maybe you think I'm taking a risk,
but you're willing to go up against that edge.
Well, I mean, yes, if that's a safe environment,
then you should definitely use those people to practice.
Right, and then as the audience gets bigger
to include strangers or Twitter or media
or ways in which you build a model with the safe people,
now your model is breaking down
because you're in the crowd.
And for instance, let's take a recent tweet
or not so recent, but a fairly recent tweet of yours.
I don't want my daughter to think going to HR
is her path to financial success,
something like that.
That was very specific to the James DeMore situation.
I want to be very clear about that.
Right, so it was.
So in a world where the context is absent,
that was in no way, shape or form about sexual harassment.
It was specific to having had my brother as a biologist
ejected from his university where he was a professor
to watching another biologist, James DeMore,
ejected from Google.
And it was hyper specific to reading a tweet
from a woman who worked at Google saying,
if HR doesn't get rid of this problem,
I'm quitting, I'm leaving, this is ridiculous.
And so I thought about, okay,
this is a woman complaining to HR
that the situation in which Google asked
for James DeMore's feedback,
and he gave feedback based on the literature,
and then they fired him for the feedback
that they asked him to give.
I mean, that's some form of entrapment to me.
It's bananas, and the idea that you're going to listen
to people complaining to human resources
for somebody doing what you've just told them to do,
he's carrying out the orders of Google.
Right, so, and I should have been more specific
because it was specific to that.
Obviously you didn't mean, you know,
everybody runs day-chars, ridiculous.
Wait, wait, this is an important point.
The problem with what you just brought up
is what I'm calling the gotcha game, right?
So lots of people understood that this was about biology
and Google being very uncomfortable about the fact
that men and women scored differently
on big five personality inventories.
And that success in the workplace
may be correlated much less to gender,
but to the attributes of openness, conscientiousness,
extroversion, neuroticism, what have you, right?
And that males and females may differ in that.
And so it may be expected that in certain lines of works,
you'd expect a female tilt or a male tilt,
and it can be different.
What was outraging me was understood by many people
who tried to go after that tweet.
And this is the interesting and dangerous part.
They like the fact that it doesn't carry the context
so it can be made to sound different than it is.
And the reason that many of us get upset
is that we understand that the game that the left,
which in which I live, right,
is playing a game of gotcha, right?
And the idea is that you say something,
oh, can we take it out of context?
Can we mean it to suggest something that it never meant?
Can we lie about you in a way
that you will have to work day and night
to clear your own reputation
as we attempt to make you null and void?
That's the tweet you're talking about.
And one of the things that was fascinating about it
was that it had a tremendous amount of support
and the news media, I mean, I saw it on MSNBC,
people were trying to construe it as something it wasn't.
So anyway, what would you like to say about that tweet?
So, and by the way, I've had not,
well, maybe an experience on the same level.
Like one time I wrote an article about an evening out
with my daughter on her birthday
and that basically asking please everywhere allowed us
to open doors at various places where doors were closed to us.
And someone wrote an article against me saying,
and she said specifically in her article,
imagine the last part of every sentence in James's article
was because I'm a white male.
And she got millions of views in her article
and people were threatening me physically.
I got death threats, it was all over everything.
It was in people who had previously been strong readers
of mine left and it's very personally frustrating
and affected my income, perhaps it's hard to judge.
Right, they got me and it was completely ridiculous too
in the same way.
But so given this experience,
given that I felt safe initially
with my readership writing this
and that obviously they would know what I meant
and obviously you thought people would know what you meant.
Now you're expanding out to a crowd where they don't quite,
A, they're playing the game gotcha,
which you would never experience that
with your crowd of close associates.
And you've widened this audience.
So now you're able to, again,
there's a missing neutrino all of a sudden.
The missing force is that people in a large enough group
are not gonna quite understand
or there's gonna be someone who's going to attack.
And I think that's always going to happen.
I wouldn't think of that as a missing neutrino situation.
There is a scale feature that as you become more visible,
the bounty for taking you down.
I mean, there are life forms that simply exist
in a very negative energetic environment
where they're just hunting for things that are large
and it's easy to bring large things
to their knees at the moment.
Right, so what I'm saying is that
you got into a large enough experimental group
that the neutrino, there was a missing energy.
The missing energy was people understanding you.
Oh, all of a sudden,
people are not understanding me the way I thought they were.
Let's do that a little bit differently
if you wanna get to the neutrino thing.
Very interesting where video presence,
telepresence and teleconferencing
is initially not very successful.
And it turned out that it was hard to put the camera
where people's eyes were on the screen.
And so if you were looking into the eyes
of the person projected to you,
you were never looking into the camera.
So you always looked to them
to be unable to meet their gaze.
So you think like the naive hope would be
telepresence and teleconferencing would be awesome.
The realized disappointment would be,
boy, do we have a lot of deals breaking
when we do them through teleconferencing?
And then you would try to discover when those deals broke.
Then you might discover that it had to do with eye contact.
And so the failure to transmit extra emotional data of trust.
You see people using emojis, for example,
because text like Unicode or ASCII
doesn't carry enough emotional instruction
as to whether you're joking, whether you're serious.
And so you'll find people will fight over text
because in speech,
they would have been able to give each other enough cues
as to the fact that they were in a caring and loving place.
And over text, it just doesn't communicate any of that.
So that would be more of a neutrino example,
which is what would be the difference
in having this conversation via text
versus doing it in person.
So you and I are now actually physically
in a room looking at each other.
But my guess is, is if we were doing this over the phone,
we would be missing all sorts of facial cues.
Right, and I'll tell you,
when I went from podcasting over the phone
to podcasting in person, downloads went up about 5X.
So it's a huge difference.
Fantastic.
Yeah, and that was the missing neutrino.
I didn't understand why might not have this great guess.
Okay, so let's do it like that.
So you think, this is perfect now.
So now we have a model and the model is,
I'm a great podcaster and I can count on X downloads.
And then you notice that sometimes you get the downloads
and sometimes you don't.
And so now you try to correlate it
with something that's different.
Hey, I noticed that all the times I'm actually in person,
I get a much higher download account
than when I'm doing it over a phone.
So then you start trying to say,
okay, well, what's the delta?
What's the difference?
You come up with an object that measures
all of the differences and you find out
it's not the line quality you pay for,
a line with fantastic fidelity.
You do it through video conferencing.
Still isn't good because the eye contact is off.
Eventually you realize that it's the warmth
of eye contact facial muscles
and all of that kind of human stuff
that we've always known about
and we've forgotten in the modern age.
That's your neutrino, right?
And the first time I did Sam Harris's program,
I think I was the second guest ever to go to his house
and record, why?
It's because I didn't want to touch a topic
as dangerous as Sam's relationship with Islam.
If we weren't in the same room
and able to kind of see each other,
reassure each other and communicate.
Well, I think that is a great example
and it neatly fits the neutrino,
but I still think the missing neutrino model
applies to my article about saying please
and your tweet about that was very specific
to Google and HR and biology
that somehow or other you, me, whoever miscalculated
the response of the mob, right?
You miscalculated that there would be people,
once your audience was big enough,
there's always gonna be people trying to establish status.
I'm not sure that I really miscalculated.
I mean, probably that tweet
probably took me 45 seconds to compose.
I definitely miscalculated the level of the reaction.
The last time I checked, that tweet had more support.
It had like 37,000 likes and then it got taken down.
So I'm kind of interested what Twitter did
to make them go down.
But the number of people who've said to me,
I joined Google because I thought it was an exciting,
bold company that wanted to take on the future
and I can't stand my life there
because it's become this politically correct camp
in which you can only, you know,
be genuine in front of social justice
or you have to keep your mouth shut.
Well, that was fascinating to me.
So, you know, people may remember it
as a controversial tweet, but take a look at the tweet.
There's a tremendous amount of love
and a lot of that love is female
and a lot of that female love that that tweet got
was technical females
because a lot of technical females are fed up with this.
Right, and so maybe I'm trying to fit the missing
neutrino model too much,
but I think it's such a strong idea
about reinvention and skill acquisition
that I want to push it.
Patience then was your missing neutrino.
At first it must have been very frustrating
that people were under taking things out of context.
It's still frustrating.
I mean, I don't think it simplifies.
I think that what's really present in this is that,
you know, and I want to jump out of just like the skill
acquisition, which is this kind of formal thing.
Emotionally, how sad that we can't actually talk
in a trusting environment about well,
what are you going through
and how are the rest of us perceiving it
and how does your solution now feel like you're,
you felt bullied and now you're taking it out
by bullying somebody else.
Like this is a very fraught situation
and we can't get to a more human level of understanding.
I really believe that the women who are frustrated
in a technical context have a lot of reasons
to be frustrated, even if it's nothing more
than not having enough role models of how to combine,
you know, the different pressures on women and men
or, you know, or even trans, you want to do any of that.
So I think that there are real problems
that these groups have.
And what's peculiar to our age is that they feel
so emboldened that rather than making sense
and being modest in your aim and scope
to try to correct the problem,
we're seeing these kind of, you know,
what was the Sarah Zhang, you know, like cancel men
or, you know, she got pleasure from like,
the amount of pleasure I derive
from making old white men angry or something like this.
It's just such negative, aggressive,
uncivil behavior that it crowds out the healing
and the worrying about each other's problems
and the listening and the comedy and the, you know,
just the best aspects of civil society
that cancel culture seeks to destroy.
Well, you know, you look at a platform like Twitter,
which is all about, I make a tweet,
how many likes do I get?
How much approval do I get?
It's all, you know,
related then to your neurochemicals
and how happy I get.
So it is a way of achieving status.
So these people, so people who are, let's say,
below status on you in other ways,
it's a way for them to suddenly kind of overwhelm you
and try to get an attempt to start to get status over you.
There's so many other ways to get status.
But they don't know that.
Oh, but that's the thing,
you can have a negative energy,
you can have a positive energy about it.
And I think that when you hunt somebody using gotcha stuff,
it's a very short ride.
Okay, you're very quickly,
you get your little dopamine hit,
maybe you'll have a circle of people who cheer you on,
but it doesn't lead anywhere really deep.
That's the thing that I want to tell a lot of these people,
which is if you want to actually correct these problems,
that's super exciting, that has a future.
If you really enjoy hunting people,
boy, that's a bad business for you.
Forget your quarry, maybe you'll be very successful,
you'll take a bunch of people down.
But it's just, it's not a positive energy about it.
And if I think about the people who've done the best by me,
either taking me down or trying
or contributing something, I mean, just try the reverse,
try both if you have to,
but like try contributing to somebody as well.
Give them some positive feedback, constructive feedback.
If you don't like something they did.
And yet, and yet outrage porn is almost like an addiction.
So, and it's getting larger and larger.
Well, this is what I talked about,
outrage templates recently.
So for example, I claim that there will be a,
an article in the not too distant future,
which will show the difference between women being highly
dressed up and men being dressed down.
And it will then come with some commentary
about this picture beautifully shows us the different standards
to which women are held.
Well, how do I know that?
Because it's a template,
because I've read that story multiple times.
And that outrage template will be, it's reusable.
And so they figured out what we find outrageous.
And what we haven't understood is if it's a template,
don't bother reacting to the story,
react to the series of stories.
Right, but people are incapable of doing that.
So you, you're capable of doing that
because you're, you've got your robot, you're seeing what.
No, but this is why I push out language.
You know, like you asked about,
you came up with the term intellectual dark web.
Well, do you remember before we had the word selfie?
It was really interesting.
There were all of these photos,
typically of a woman in a bathroom pointing the phone,
the camera on her phone at the mirror
and regarding herself is like, yeah, I look pretty good.
Okay, it was such a strange thing.
I mean, we'd never seen this particular photo.
And in fact, we were seeing thousands of them
and nobody had a term for it.
When the word selfie was discovered,
it was like, oh, this thing that we've been,
is in our mind, but we can't talk about it
because it has no language around it.
Suddenly you could say, oh, you're taking a selfie.
Boy, that person's too into their selfies.
You know, I'm drowning in selfies.
You see how Instagram is saturated by selfies, whatever.
That's, that's a huge shift
because you gave something that everybody knew tacitly,
the ability to promote it to consciousness and communicate.
So like when I tried to come up with the Thinkquisition
or the intellectual dark web or-
What's the Thinkquisition?
Well, it's the, so in the Inquisition,
the Jews of Spain were chased by the Spanish Inquisition
into say Turkey in the Ottoman Empire.
My claim is, is that a lot of analytic leftist,
analytic lefties have been chased into the center right
by the madness of these progressive lunatics.
And that, that thing I'm calling the Thinkquisition
is that people who are worried about, you know,
homophobia or xenophobia and all these things,
but don't for a second sign up for the progressive
revolutionary sort of pseudo Maoist agenda.
Those people are now hanging out as if they were in Turkey,
even though their home, you know, was originally
in the analog of Spain, that the center right
has become the Ottoman Empire to receive people
chased out of the madness of Spain.
You know, so what I'm wondering is,
what are we missing in terms of-
Language.
Yeah, so-
Concepts.
Right, so, but how do you educate the mob of strangers
that I think there's another thing we're missing,
which is that people feel their status
has been somehow stripped from them
and that they only get it on Twitter or Instagram
and are able to join the team, let's say,
of polarized left in order to achieve status over people
they don't, they simply don't like,
like let's say straight white men or whoever.
But who doesn't like straight white men?
I mean, who doesn't like, you know-
I think those are a lot of people-
Gay trans people, no, I think this is nonsense.
I'm gonna reject this.
Who even taught us to talk like this?
Cause we sound like asses.
I mean, you just take this incredibly vibrant,
multicultural country that we should all be so,
I mean, in this case, this is taking place in the US.
I think this is an incredibly exciting country.
We've broken the ties to bloodlines.
It's pretty peaceful, pretty prosperous.
We do a fairly good job of assimilating
and integrating people.
And then to be talking constantly in their terms
about race and gender and sex and orientation,
it's the most boring, divisive,
invidious conversation imaginable.
I don't want to take debate.
I don't think anybody hates straight white men.
Okay, I agree.
So let's, so again, what's missing
that this outrage porn is only growing?
And it's hard, like I can't-
It's not only growing.
It's growing and shrinking.
I mean, there's so much fatigue around it.
Because first of all, it's just, it's not smart.
We like being smart.
We're an incredibly smart,
this used to be the country of, you know,
Rockefeller University, the Institute for Advanced Study
in the University of Chicago.
We're great at science and math.
Now we're pretending that we're bad at science and math.
We're pretending that we're so evil
and that we're such bad stock
that we have to wear hair shirts from morning til night.
It's just preposterous.
I think it's really important to recognize
that in general, people are sick of this at levels
that are powerful enough to elect Donald Trump, right?
So, you know, it was clear that Hillary was inevitable
because the polls showed that, you know,
people were gonna vote for Hillary,
but secretly they weren't supportive of Hillary.
I don't even think they were supportive of Trump.
They just couldn't stand the nonsense anymore.
So you think then the backlash
against this outrage porn has been growing
and what maybe the outrage porn is getting louder
and a little bit more violent.
Yeah, it is.
So, you know, because a few months ago,
I posted an article, just economic data points
and of the past year, basically since 2016.
And I gave all the sources of data.
They were all basically the Federal Reserve
or Bureau of Labor statistics.
The most common comment I got
was what's the source of your data?
I posted all the sources of data in the article.
There was like almost a blind spot
that the outrage porn was-
It was reflexive.
Yeah, it was so, and I kept saying, I posted the data.
And I'll post it again.
Here's the source.
Right.
So, but nobody, then people come and, James,
people are clearly asking for the source of data.
Where's the source of data?
It was almost like I was in a mental institution
on my own thread, where people were not able to see
this is the source of data and it's reliable sources
that everyone would agree is reliable.
There comes some cognitive dissonance
where on the outrage porn side,
they can't see what they're doing.
And I just wonder, how do you communicate with that?
You do express your opinion,
but you're still gonna get that outrage porn.
Well, here's what I would recommend.
To the people who traffic in the outrage porn
as you're calling it, that's a relatively small community,
but it's very noisy.
So I call it the Chihuahua effect.
The Chihuahua effect is a very small-
Or the vulgar minority.
Very small group of people making a tremendous amount
of noise, making you think that they're
an enormous community.
All right.
So for the tiny minority of people
who have nothing better to do than to try to take down
people who are trying to be constructive
and trying to think through these sorts of things,
you have to talk to them in the exact language
that they speak.
Which is your point from a few seconds ago
that you don't wanna do that.
Sorry, which part are you drawing?
If I'm contradicting myself, I wanna know.
Okay, so the phrase using identity politics,
you're using the language of identity politics
to talk to people is not what you wanna do.
Well, so I think this was at Ohio State,
there was a protest, and the president
found his office occupied.
And if it's not Ohio State,
I apologize to the community in advance, but.
A commune, I mean.
I thought it was a commune, but.
So, assuming it was Ohio State,
I think that the president said,
you'll notice that none of the people
who normally work here are at their desks.
And that's because you created,
and he uses the magic phrase, an unsafe work environment.
And do you wanna know why it felt unsafe
because those people felt like they were being harassed.
And so they needed a safe space, so they had to go home.
I see, so you're using their code words.
Well, the point is that they're not aware
that they've become bullies,
that they are abusive in exactly the terms
that they claim other people are abusive.
They don't see that all of the stuff
that they're trying to enforce
is their own behavior against others.
I mean, the truth and safety committees
at these platforms are trafficking in hate.
The hate traffickers are the truth and safety.
Do you remember what the group was
behind the French Revolution?
It was called the Committee on Public Safety.
I kid you not, right?
And do you know in Islamic nations with religious police,
what they call the religious police,
they call them the squad for the prevention,
the promotion of virtue and prevention of vice, PVPV.
And so what I worry about is in these situations
you mentioned, they just got steadily worse.
So another example is in the book,
a classic book, the Glulive Archipelago,
Alexander Solzhenitsyn mentions,
he quotes the main newspaper of what he calls
the red state at that point.
And it basically says that this newspaper is saying,
it doesn't matter what someone,
it doesn't matter what someone is accused of,
they're guilty based on whether they're bourgeois or not,
based on where they come from,
based on how they were born.
I'm missing a concept.
The concept is called Article 58.
So Article 58 of the Soviet penal code, I believe,
was the provision that made anti-revolutionary,
anti-Soviet activities a high crime.
And the great thing is that everyone is always guilty
of Article 58.
So the only issue about Article 58 is when do you enforce it?
So everybody's guilty at all times.
And this is what's going on right now
with the current moral panic, which is so delicious,
is that every single breathing person is guilty
of Article 58 of the social justice code.
Wait, which I wonder then,
I mean, that's why you could take a guy like Kevin Hart,
dig through his jokes from 20 years ago
and throw him off the Oscars.
What I wonder is, given, again,
this example from the Soviet Union or Maoism
or from wherever, all these examples
never really ended without violence.
Well, all the examples that you brought up,
like French Revolution.
Yeah, I don't think it's quite that simple.
I mean, I think that if we were in 1968,
we would have thought, okay, the country's gotta go
to civil war in order to resolve this.
And it didn't, right?
I mean, the level of violence was much reduced
from what it could have been.
Yeah, I wonder why this psychology was different.
Like you look at even times like 2000,
you know, the election, you have Al Gore, Bush,
obviously a lot of hate on both sides,
but it didn't result in the same kind of outrage
that's happening now.
Because they lost control
of what I've called the gated institutional narrative.
The gated institutional narrative, or JIN,
was the central means by which control
over all of our senses of where the country was,
where we were controlled, right?
And the gated institutional narrative
was subject to a tipping point
between the power of broadcast and print media
versus the power of social multi-directional media.
And so by the time we got around to 2016,
the tipping point had been pushed in the direction
that traditional media couldn't keep the story under control.
So, you know, the New York Times is guilty
of a particular type of fake news that I pointed out
called narrative-driven news.
And you figure out what the narrative is
before the facts are in.
So the narrative at the New York Times
is usually a very long story arc
and all the facts are fit to it.
And the story arc that they had before the election
was Hillary Clinton is the inevitable next president
of the United States.
So all of the facts that came in were fit to that narrative.
And that's why they were so rudely shocked
because they had engaged in this attempt
to use the gated institutional narrative,
but they didn't understand that we can now go around them.
I mean, you know, why is somebody employed
by the New York Times a more interesting journalist
than somebody writing in their underwear
in their parents' basement?
There's no reason.
These days, we're all investors,
trying to be smart with our money
despite our worst impulses.
But at iShares, we believe that deep down inside
of every investor is a better investor.
One that's just waiting to be let out.
Explore iShares' ETFs and insights
and let your best investor out.
Visit iShares.com for more information.
You know what I love about fantasy sports?
Is that even though I'm not gonna be a great basketball player
or a baseball player or a football player or whatever,
I feel like I get to participate and make decisions
and use my knowledge of these different leagues too
or these different sports to compete.
So it's like I can pick my team
or I can pick my favorite players
and I could use my knowledge to make predictions
and maybe even make money.
So with the basketball season here,
you can now pick combo projections
across football and basketball
from the Specials League on prize picks.
This is a league created specifically
for combo projections that include
two or more players from different sports or leagues.
Want to play alongside some of prize picks' favorite players
like rapper Meek Mill and comedian Andrew Schultz,
who's also been a guest on this podcast
and I've been a guest on his.
You can now find community plays under the promos tab
of the app to view entries for some of the biggest names
in the prize picks community each week.
Look, prize picks even offers a reboot policy
so that your entries stay in play
even if one of your players gets injured.
For football and basketball games,
if you have a player who exits the game in the first half
and does not return in the second,
that player is rebooted.
Prize picks is the only daily fantasy sports platform
with an injury insurance policy.
What?
So I love playing it.
I love anywhere where I can use analytical ability
with my interests to demonstrate some skill
and maybe make some money.
And I like the game like aspect.
I do wish they had chess as a category on prize picks.com,
but I'll set up for what they've got.
Maybe I should make my own fantasy chess league.
But in any case, I love prize picks.
Go to prizepicks.com slash James,
use code James for a first deposit match up to $100.
That's the easiest hundred dollars you're ever going to make.
So that's prizepicks.com slash James and use code James.
Daily fantasy sports made easy.
The future of learning is definitely online.
Like it's such BS that you have to spend $200,000
or take $200,000 in loans and go to some fancy school
when it's useless.
It doesn't guarantee you a job.
Most employers, including me,
do not care about degrees or grades or anything like that.
We want to care that you love what you're doing,
that you know what you're doing,
in some cases that you have experience
or that you're rolling to learn.
But people in general love learning and are curious.
Like the key to success is curiosity.
And I think masterclass.com is the perfect model
for online learning.
I'm really happy they're sponsoring this episode.
If you're going to give a gift, give the gift of learning.
Masterclass makes a meaningful gift this season for you
and anyone on your list,
because both of you can learn from the best
to become your best from leadership
to effective communication to cooking.
Let me tell you some of the classes I've taken.
I've taken comedy from Steve Martin.
I mean, can you believe I can take a class
from Steve Martin on comedy or Judd Apatow,
my favorite comedy director.
I could take an actual class from him on writing.
Wolfgang Puck on cooking.
Dan Brown on writing.
Or Judy Bloom who's been on this podcast on writing.
By the way, Wolfgang Puck also has been on this podcast.
It's such a pleasure.
I try to take classes all the time from masterclass.com.
And whether you're watching masterclass on TV
or listening in audio mode in the app or on their site,
the quality speaks for itself.
It's like these masterclass instructors
are your own personal mentors
that are going to help you reach the next level.
How much would it cost to take one-on-one classes
on comedy from Steve Martin
or on chess from Gary Kasparov?
You just wouldn't be able to do it.
I mean, it would cost hundreds of thousands of dollars.
With a masterclass annual membership,
it's $10 a month.
Memberships start at $120 a year
for unlimited access to one-on-one classes
with all 180-plus masterclass instructors.
So it's not just $120 for one instructor.
You get all 180-plus masterclass instructors.
Boost your confidence and find practical takeaways
you can apply to your life and at work.
And if you own a business or a team leader,
use masterclass to empower and create future-ready
employees and leaders.
That's the real education in today's world.
So this holiday season,
you can give one annual membership
and get one free
at masterclass.com
slash J-A-S.
J-A-S, of course, stands for the James Altucher Show.
So right now you can get two memberships
for the price of one at masterclass.com
slash J-A-S.
masterclass.com
slash J-A-S.
Offer terms apply.
You know,
given that social media and these platforms
have kind of created this tipping point,
again, it doesn't seem like there's an end to it.
I mean, I agree.
The backlash probably...
I think they're trying to re-establish
the gated narrative in particular
by making it very frightening
if you're building your business
around social media that you don't know
what can get you thrown off the platform.
Like, they don't have to throw that many people
off the platform.
They just need a few of those cases
to be ambiguous enough
so that people check themselves.
Like, gosh, I've spent eight years
building up my follower count
and I've got a business on top of it
and now they can turn me off in a heartbeat
without telling me that I've violated anything
because there's some strike against me.
I...
I mean,
it doesn't take much.
What they figured out is
is that you can just threaten people's livelihoods.
You don't have to threaten,
you know,
them with bodily harm.
Just threaten their reputation.
The reputation is necessary to earn a livelihood.
Livelihood is necessary to have a life.
QED, you're done.
Yeah, and again, I don't...
How does that end?
What's the final chapter in that?
Well, I don't know,
but I'll tell you where I think it's going.
And the number of people who are fed up
with left cartheism
and are willing to say that it's an idiocy,
and in particular, the people like me on the left
I think are the biggest problem
for this kind of thought policing
because at least when it's people
who use words like libtard
or own the libs from the right,
you can dismiss it as that kind of garbage on the right.
I think that's garbage speak on the right.
And then they've always done that
and it's always been irritating and stupid.
I think that when it comes from the left,
you share your aspirations
for a more equal,
better, healthier world.
But you're the problem now.
I mean, you're out of control
and you're embarrassing all of us
by creating a bloodlust
coming out of the left
that will eventually consume you all.
You're going to end up like Robespierre, aren't you?
Well, and I do think,
again, I think there's some...
some force
has to happen from the outside
to take that up.
And like historically, it's been violence.
And I'm not...
Of course, I'm not advocating that.
I'm just afraid of that.
Yeah, but that's what the IDW is doing.
It's saying, here's an alternative to violence.
Let's just point out that this is ridiculous
and stand up.
And notice the pleasure
that comes from clearing your throat
and speaking in your own voice.
And that's when when people come to the shows that we do,
part of what they're getting
is one of the most moving things
is you're looking around a filled arena
and thousands of people think like you
and they have no voice.
This is why,
you know,
Trump at his rallies
was holding the rally
because he wanted to see
that the public in large numbers
was with him.
Now, I'm not a Donald Trump fan.
I want to see him, you know,
I want to see him defeated in 2020.
What he was doing was he was using the public events
as like Nielsen ratings.
Am I doing okay?
Because if I listen to you guys over in the news media,
I'm the worst human being
since Pol Pot.
But if I actually look at
my crowds, people are cheering me on.
Well, that's a lot of what's going on
with like the intellectual dark web.
We're not at all like Trump.
But I can see the hunger.
People are dying, you know,
for me to start a podcast.
Is it write a book? Tell us more.
How can we contribute?
Why? Because they've found themselves voiceless.
And it's really
interesting to me how a tiny number
of writers
and anchorman
and late night comedians
have
pretended that an entirely different
structure
doesn't exist in the United States.
And I guess because they have such a big microphone
collectively
it's not the bigness of the microphone.
It's the complete absence
of anything else.
You know, where is
the conservative late night host
who is not a racist?
You know, it's like
here's a good missing community.
The number of people in the U.S.
who are both xenophilic
who like Thai food
and they want to travel to Argentina
and they're learning Indonesian
who knows what
and who still don't want open borders
is a very large number of people.
I would say it's probably the majority position.
In general, we don't want
to be inundated
with people who are suddenly being promoted
to citizenship or permanent residency.
We want some immigration
but we don't want to flood
and we're super interested
in the outside world and very happy
with this way in which
we're getting to see a larger portion
of our planet and experience the benefits
of multicultural interaction.
That community of people who are both
restrictionist and xenophilic
there is no record
that it exists, much less a record
that it is probably the majority position
and why is that?
And it's because of a concept that was highlighted
to me by the
founder of the Data and Society Institute
Dana Boyd
where she said we need to use strategic
silence. I thought what is strategic
silence?
Strategic silence is that when you punish
perspectives
that you don't like
by not reporting them
I thought wow how fascinating
so if something happens that's a news story
you the reporters say
I don't like what will happen if I report
on this and I don't want to be used
so I'm simply going to refuse to report
the news.
Well that's what we're
referring from an epidemic
of badly determined strategic
silence.
We're strategically silent on all sorts
of things which the country cares
about and doesn't hold crazy positions
there's nothing crazy about wanting to be
a restrictionist. There's nothing xenophobic
about it.
And
what you understand over time
is that the only reason that this state
of affairs exists is that
somehow
a group of people want to say if you
even mention
restricting immigration to the US
I want to be able to infer
that the only reason that that's true
is because you've got a black heart
your heart is just coated with evil
and it's just
I sort of chuckle
you have to be insane
to think anything like that could be true
and yet there's no counter example
so all of the late night comedians in
essence
have the same voice with multiplicity
10.
And you can't have the counter
example among late night comedians
because they'll get the same treatment Kevin
Hart just got on the Oscars.
Someone's going to be the outrage
and they're going to get fired. At your point
their livelihood is going to be affected.
But that's an interesting face.
We just saw the Sarah Silverman tweet
from 2010
where she said something like
not like there's anything wrong with it
whoa okay
so you're being edgy, you're being a comedian
that's cool
but you want to know what
you just lost the right to police
anyone ever for
microaggressions. I don't think I've ever made a joke
like that in my life on twitter
right I've never used those words
why is Sarah Silverman
still with us and the answer actually
comes down to the system of indulgences
which is the problem
isn't whether you committed a crime
the issue is
are you eligible for an indulgence
so that you can continue to live
in the world. So Sarah Silverman
who's a
Bernie supporter
probably has an indulgence
from the system
but if somebody who's
conservative makes a joke
they won't get an indulgence
so it's not really even the crimes
it's the selective prosecution
of the crimes and whether or not
forgiveness or clemency will be offered
and that's how the magic trick is done
it's not like I forget who was the late night
comedian who used to do the man show
Jimmy Kimmel
I guarantee you therefore that Jimmy Kimmel
is going to have a lot of stuff that would be
considered offensive but my guess is
is that he's got an indulgence
he probably said I apologize
he's a very staunch democratic supporter
and that will mean
that he won't actually have to
stand for these as crimes
or somebody else will be
in the stocks
in the public square
being humiliated. So it seems like
a solution you can't
go out there and earn those indulgences
a solution is basically
kind of to do what you're doing and just be
as
being able to express your opinions
figuring out where the comfort
zone is so career is not ruined
and
giving people permission
to basically say what they think
even if it's different than yours
even if it's different than
this mass media
kind of just accumulating in numbers
these people who can
think and speak freely
and you always talk about first principles
I'm going to veer it towards that which is
where do you
sort of accumulate your first principles
so you can start to think
this way and
be I guess
how do you be careful about where that line is
because the line is very dangerous
sure I mean I think that the first thing
is that you should get a good grounding
in a few fields that have
incredible reach so just
to begin with there's no
framework that is more important to the average
person than the framework
of evolutionary theory so
learn
as much as you can about systems of selective
pressures both natural and sexual
selection
I'd start off with
I'm not sure where to go first but
you might want to try the selfish gene
it's got problems but it's pretty good
I would highly recommend
I would highly recommend the Cambridge Encyclopedia
of Human Evolution
it's a really great book to try to place us
in context as a species
of apes
I think economics
is really important because
markets are the continuation of natural
and sexual selection by other means
so it can be systematized and we interact
with each other through markets
markets organize us where
command and control structures cannot
so thank god we don't have the president telling us
what we have to do every morning the market tells us what to do
and in some sense
that's super important as a framework
I definitely think
having an offbeat history
read regular history
and then read the Howard Zinn version
of history and then read some super arch
conservative version of the same history
learn how to walk around history
from all the different perspectives
and then I think
that
try to find the most
durable parts of psychology
I think one of the reasons Jordan Peterson has been so successful
is that he stayed very close
to the ground floor
with psychometrics
and psychometrics weren't
negatively affected
like the rest of psychology by the reproducibility crisis
so figure out what you can and can't say
in his case he focuses
on IQ and big 5 personality
inventories which are pretty solid
so I think that's super interesting
there are lots of frameworks
that
you just need to know if you're going to try
first principles thinking
and what you have to not do
is find the wrong heuristic framework
that claims that it's first principles
so for example
be highly suspicious of sociology
be highly suspicious
of certain aspects of psychology
which are not based on
reproducible science
be very concerned about
fields that were created
in the wake of campus unrest
in the 60's and 70's
because the standards
for those fields appears to be different
than
for the fields that preceded them
that doesn't mean that there weren't problems
in the fields that preceded them but
various forms of activist
and grievance studies are definitely
not good
because they come from a tradition
of heuristic rather than fundamentals
and there's no way of adjudicating things
that go counter narrative to those fields
once you sort of
realize where bedrock is
and by the way if you can do
mathematics, physics, chemistry
and programming that won't hurt you either
then you'll have an idea
about what reliable knowledge is all about
and you have to be
very bigoted and
prejudiced against fields
that are trying to hawk
non-reliable knowledge as if it was reliable
knowledge
and that can happen in a field like physics
where physics has been pushing
a string theory agenda which is certainly
not reliable knowledge as if it was
reliable knowledge
but a lot of physics
is absolutely rock solid
so you have to know even within a field
the good part and this part is the dangerous part
that's part of why people
are tuning into us I think
and so I guess this is
a final thing
you're managing director of a big
VC fund, slash hedge fund
so we're going to talk about our hair
what do you do during the day
other than brushing your hair
it depends
you know if
sometimes
I'm working on physics
sometimes I'm thinking about markets
and contributing in our research group
sometimes
I'm listening to somebody
talking about a company or we're trying to think
about where we might take
the philanthropic arm
but I think
you know
I don't get a chance to talk too much
about Peter Thiel and I consider him
not only my employer
but an amazing friend
an amazing human being
and a great teacher
what's a couple of your takeaways
from him and from interacting with him
part of the problem
the reason I don't talk about Peter almost at all
is that the news media created
a fictional character
called Peter Thiel
and the two of them are totally different
the real Peter Thiel and the fictional Peter Thiel
aren't the same person
so every time I talk about the real Peter Thiel
I'm talking about a vampire who lives on a seastead
you know off of New Zealand
drinking the blood of virgins to stay young
and I've just never met that person
so I in general don't
love talking about
just because they figured out a very
effective gambit for trying to
silence his insights
but I'll give you one insight that I think
is really particularly good
Peter has this thing
that he does which I call
radical compression
with minimal distortion
and
academics usually will tolerate almost
no distortion
so they often
miss principles that Peter sees
on the other hand
Peter will say something like
I think one of his was a challenge where he said
we've become much less
positive about technology and science
find me
a movie after
back to the future that viewed
technology positively
hmm
well
because he poses a challenge
I worked really hard in my head and I came up with one
there's a little indie film
called safety not guaranteed
that technology makes a really beautiful appearance
but
the point was I was behaving like an academic
I was willing to accept no distortion
Peter it's not true there's one movie that
well if that's
true right that there's only one movie that I can think of
then his point is obviously mostly correct
the Martian
this was before the Martian came out
yeah
I actually discussed that on Tim Ferriss it's the ultimate high
agency movie and Andy Weir
has been on this podcast as well
he's the author of the original novel
yeah so the
but
this is a thing that I learned from Peter which is
be willing to be a little bit wrong
if the principle
can be packed up
into like a single sentence
and right that's a
it's a boast you know it's basically saying
did you notice how much
our artistic world
and our cultural world has turned against technology
and progress
yeah it's so interesting because you look at
I actually do a bit about this
and stand up if you look at
movies just about robots
either they're male robots
who are shooting everyone
or they're female robots
they're throwing you into sex but then locking you up
and leaving
to infiltrate society
so it's like kind of there's this sexism in robots
but they're all evil
well or the Austin Powers ones which are
actually
deadly through their sexuality
right the fembots
so robots are bad
a sub study of that
I don't know why this keeps ringing
but
alright what's another thing you've learned from Peter
Peter's been on the podcast so I'm always fascinated
by more insights
if you can what's another
well another one
of his would be
learn to
live with almost
contradictions
so for example
in both it seems like there's a fuzziness
which I like
well but this is
people say he's a contrarian
but he's not
you can't just put a minus sign in front
of everything and have that work out
you'll bankrupt yourself
he's always finding
the interesting contrarian play
so one of them for example is
most radical individualists
are bad team players
and most team players are
really group thinkers
but there's nothing inherently
contradictory
about being a radical individualist
who's also an exceptional team player
so
go search for that
because it's an almost contradiction
but if you can find a tiny number of people
that's super terrific
a different version
of this is that most smart
people are uninteresting
and you're looking for people who are both
surprising and smart
well most of the people who talk in surprising
ways aren't smart
and most of the people who talk
in smart ways aren't surprising
now which of these categories should you search first
the claim is in general
you should search the surprising
people first why
because while not everybody's smart
there are a huge number of smart people
it'll take way too long
better to look at the tiny number of people
who are saying truly surprising things
and see if any of them are smart
is a better search process
so various ways of just
unspitting the world
and seeing it
differently you know at some point I tried to take
Peter's book
and turn it into a collection of
aphorisms
or sort of little vignettes
so you know Peter talks about last mover
advantage and you think about
well what does that mean last mover advantage
we'll take any look at
bicycle sprints
and in bicycle sprints you have two guys trying
to go as slow as possible around the track
they're each trying to draft the other from behind
to get the other guy to do the work for them
right so it looks like it's going to be
a sprint but they didn't realize that when they
wrote down the rules that it was actually going to cause
a strategic chest like situation
to bring it to a crawl well that's like last mover
advantage you let the other guys make the mistakes
and then you're the last one who's learned
from everybody else and everybody else is
fatigued and you still have energy
or another one would be
you know around
people always want to throw
the outliers out
when they're doing statistics
on the other hand
the outliers may be
all that determines anything in a
given system because kurtosis
and the far right tail is such
a powerful effect
and so you know understanding
that you're not cleaning your data
what you're doing is that you're
you're confusing baby in bath
water you know that's an important principle
it's interesting because the same thing occurs in
relationships people when they meet
let's say on a date they were on their
best behavior and then
three months in finally one has
an outburst that's like out of control
and the other side
might think okay well that was just
he was just frustrated or she was frustrated
but that actually is their real
the real leakage
coming out about what this system is like
what this person is like maybe so maybe
yeah
you know people another one be
Peter's always on about the tech slowdown
I have a different version of this
is a core theory of mine
and whenever you hear the thing
about the tech slowdown
somebody will always say oh
look at my phone I have a phone in my pocket
it's got the library of congress
you know at the touch of a button
it's the most amazing thing
well I tried to create an aphorism
about this which is of course
your phone is amazing it's all that was
it's all that's left from your once limitless future
you know
it was the collision of the two things that
worked best which was the
the semiconductor and communications
technology well well and I view
that as the reason you
can't quite call that innovative is because
it was already predicted in the 60s like Moore's
law predicts your phone in your pocket
predicts super computer
whether it is or it isn't innovative it has
been innovative the
the problem
is that all of the other
things that we were predicting
all of the Jetson stuff
or all of the positive versions
of a technological future
have been much more
stalled and so I often give people this
challenge you're in a restaurant
say
how do you prove
how many ways can you prove that it's not
1973
right and so
files certainly aren't 1973
but it's not a proof because
maybe it's just a funny restaurant
and you know it's always
the things around
like the phones you know or the
maybe there's a flat screen TV
but there's very little
that lets you know that it's not
1973 anymore
and I think we have to just
recognize that
the fact that some
things work is disguising
how much hasn't been working
and that's good news because it's an opportunity
for us to restart
all of these things that are stalled out
and so it's not pessimism
it's optimism it's saying hey great news
we've been neglecting all sorts of areas of
growth and now we have the chance
to do it we just have to recognize that
it didn't get done and if we're going to do
it's going to require rolling up our sleeves and figuring out
who's good at what rather than
constantly complaining that
something somewhere is unfair
and if we're going full circle
would you agree that is the missing neutrino
in our kind of analysis of innovation
we predicted the Jetsons
it didn't happen even though we have
all these brilliant innovators
right and then what measures the difference
remember that was the next part of it
which is
you have to figure out
by what does it fail
and I would say that the failure has been
that the atomic world has not progressed
like the electron world or the bit world
and so
undoubtedly the problem is we have to get good
at innovating in the atoms again as well
as you know complimentary to our
innovations and data structures
all right well
Eric Weinstein thanks so much for spending
hey James thanks
two hours talking with me
it's the benefit of having a podcast as you could just
talk to people like you and learn
well come up to San Francisco we'll do this again
all right definitely excellent
thanks James
A.I. might be the most important new
computer technology ever
it's storming every industry
and literally billions of dollars are being invested
so buckle up
the problem is that A.I. needs a lot of speed
and processing power so
how do you compete without cost spiraling out of control
it's time to upgrade to the next generation
of the cloud oracle cloud infrastructure
or O.C.I.
O.C.I.
O.C.I.
is a single platform for your infrastructure
database application development
and A.I. needs
O.C.I. has four to eight
times the bandwidth of other clouds
offers one consistent price
instead of variable regional pricing
and of course nobody does data better
than Oracle so now you can train
your A.I. models at twice the speed
and less than half the cost of other clouds
if you want to do more
and spend less like Uber
8x8 and Databricks Mosaic
take a free test drive of O.C.I.
at oracle.com
slash advance
that's oracle.com slash advance
oracle.com slash advance
