It's a great joy today to have with us an exceptional personality in science and research,
a great discoverer, a thinker, and a visionary of what can be regenerative and developmental
biology, what creates form, what makes the cells communicate with each other, how they
do it, is it genetically modified or genetically engineered, or to what extent the interactions
of the different components of our biology and physiology lead to the formation of our
bodies and their structure and many other aspects that also relate to even implications
and possibilities in artificial intelligence that Professor Levin, Mike, who is involved
in.
Mike, it's wonderful to have you.
We have always thought that the DNA is the basis of the structure of the entire physiology.
Of course, with some communication and the plasma and the different directions of cells
talking to each other so that they know where to stop and how to grow, but you have taken
this to a completely different dimension and showed something very new in intelligence
and communication and information and also what you call collective intelligence and
how all of these work together and find those mechanisms.
So why don't we start with these important highlights, and we're talking to a general
intelligent audience, but who is not necessarily expert in the fields of biology and developmental
biology in particular.
Yeah.
Well, thank you so much for having me.
Thank you for that very kind introduction.
I want to say a couple of things to set the stage for talking about bioelectricity in
cell regulation and development and so on.
The first thing is that I want to be clear, I am certainly not the first person to suggest
that bioelectrics are important in development.
So there were some really unique individuals starting with Harold Burr in the 1930s and
other folks at that time, and then really a heyday in the 60s, 70s, and 80s with Lionel
Jaffe and his group and so on.
So it's been actually known for a long time that some aspect of bioelectricity is really
important for development and regeneration.
I think we've moved the ball forward in some interesting ways that I'll talk about, but
I want to be clear that in many ways we are standing on the shoulders of giants, right?
And in particular, Harold Burr, the guy was amazing.
In the 30s, he had basically just the first good voltmeter.
That's pretty much all he had.
And based on all the measurements he took, he was able to foresee many of the things
that are just now starting to come up.
And so here's the amazing, amazing vision and so on.
And we are the beneficiaries of some of those thoughts.
But the other thing I want to say is this idea, what you just pointed out, the importance
of genetics and so on.
And I think one area where it was always clear that there was a really important software
component in addition to the genetically specified hardware, and that's neuroscience.
So in neuroscience, we knew that, yes, genetics are important to set up the various cell properties
that your neurons and your brains have and so on.
But after that, there's a tremendous amount of physiology, behavior, learning, memory.
All these other things that come up that are not in and of themselves genetically coded.
And so this idea in neuroscience, this software hardware split in effect many layers, right?
So there's kind of maybe Mars layers of analysis and things like that.
What we have done is ported a lot of that kind of way of thinking to the rest of the body,
so away from the brain.
And to ask ourselves, OK, if electrical networks implemented by physiology, that kind of software,
if that's the answer to intelligent behavior in three-dimensional space, what is the origin
of it?
Evolutionarily, where did it come from?
Right?
It certainly didn't just arise when neurons and muscles appeared.
So it's evolutionarily ancient.
What kind of problems might it have been solving before?
And that gave rise to this notion of broadly intelligence in other spaces, so anatomical
space, physiological space, gene expression space.
And so those are the kinds of things we now study.
Wonderful.
And so when we come to the cell, if we can just start looking at the different aspects
of information, communication, intelligence, awareness, these kinds of values usually are
considered on a higher level of neural activity.
But we see that even on the basic level of almost molecules, but at least for cells in
terms of what we're concerned, that there is not only individual reactions to individual
inputs or information, but that there is also a collective behavior, which you call collective
intelligence.
So even talking in terms of cells, and I think you also shown this in unicellular or some
unicellular organisms searching for that.
Can you explain to our listeners and viewers what this is about?
Yeah.
So there is a field of research known as basal or primitive cognition.
And this looks, it's a field that looks for the evolutionary origin, meaning the simpler
versions of the kinds of capacities that we enjoy as advanced cognitive creatures.
So learning, memory, sort of metacognition, meaning I know that I know that kind of thing.
Planning all of these kinds of things have, of course, as Darwin already pointed out in
his day, these kinds of things have their evolutionary origins of way, sort of at the
beginning of life.
I'll tell you a little bit about them, but before that, I want to make a kind of a more
general point.
As you say, people normally think it's a little weird to talk about cells making decisions,
having memories, having preferences and so on.
But let's remember, and this is one reason why I think developmental biology is to me
anyway, sort of the queen of all the sciences for a simple reason.
In developmental biology, you see in front of your eyes the most amazing aspect of science
to me, which is that the journey from physics to mind, you see it right in front of your
eyes.
Every all of us started life as a quiescent oocyte.
It's a little bag of chemicals, wasn't doing much.
Anybody who would look at that would say, okay, there's no cognition here.
There's just some chemistry, some physics, and that's it.
It's a dynamical system, and that's all.
Nine months plus some number of years later, that system turns into something, whatever
we are, that will make statements like, I'm not a machine and I have cognition and I believe
this and I believe that, okay, that process turning from a piece of a little tiny piece
of physics to a complex emergent mind is smooth, it's gradual, there is no magic lightning
flash that happens at any particular moment that says, okay, now you've got a true mind.
That doesn't happen.
And so this slowly changing system shows you how it is that mind emerges from physics.
So if we were to able to understand this, this is why I study as a computer scientist
interested in our intelligence broadly, artificial intelligence, the making of new minds.
This is why my lab does developmental biology, because that is where you see it happening.
Right in front of you, you can see it happening.
So no matter what other, even if all of the data on single cells being able to learn and
navigate mazes and do all kinds of interesting things, even if those data didn't exist,
we could already conclude that they have to be that they're just waiting for us to find them.
Because we know that our cognitive capacities emerge from very simple origins that were at
one point we're single cells. So we know this has to be the case.
And so I think a lot of people who assume that there's some sort of
magic qualities that are attributable to higher level cognition that is just,
you know, they say it's anthropomorphic to think of cells as doing this or that.
It really is a holdover from a pre-scientific worldview.
It's the Garden of Eden view, right, that Adam is separate from all the animals.
There's a discrete set of animals, and Adam has qualities that none of the other animals have,
and that view has got to go. And so now we have lots of people studying how it is that
slime molds can navigate the mazes and have memories and learn from their environment.
And that's just in 3D behavior. We've seen amazing examples of cells doing creative
problem-solving in physiological space, as bacteria do all the time, in metabolic spaces,
in, of course, anatomical space. That's what we focus on.
There's intelligence going all the way down. Even in fact, actually, you said something very
interesting, you know, cells, does it start with cells? We and others have found evidence of
learning in molecular networks. Never mind cells. We're talking gene regulatory networks, the most,
you know, sort of deterministic model that there is of genetics. You know, here's a bunch of
genes that transcriptionally regulate each other. Those kinds of systems
should have at least six different kinds of learning.
This is wonderful. Can we define intelligence? Because here we have a mechanical exchange
and mechanical reaction, and we can see this in computers and in artificial intelligence.
How do you define intelligence so that we can talk about intelligence on those levels?
So there are many definitions. I'm not claiming that mine is the only one or is
some privileged way the correct one, but I'll give you one that I like that I think is a useful one.
So the definition that I like comes from William James, and he said,
intelligence is the ability to reach the same goal by different means.
And I think this is very profound because, right, because what it tells you is that,
first of all, that it's a matter of degree, because how, because the question isn't whether you are
or are not intelligent, the question is how competent are you at reaching your goals
by different means? And so maybe not very much or maybe very powerfully.
That's the first thing. The second thing is that the whole thing is centered on
having goals, so goal directed activity. So that I think is actually very important.
A lot of people resist it, but I think it's really central. And the third thing is that it
does not pre-commit to a specific problem space. So it doesn't say you can reach your goal in
three-dimensional space. It might be a goal in physiological space. It might be a goal in anatomical
space or other kinds of spaces. But what it focuses you on is this idea that you don't only
take a rote set of steps from beginning to end. I mean, any clock can do that. I mean,
any mechanism can do that. But what it means is that if you are deviated in some way,
either pushed to a different region of that space or your structure has changed,
something happens to you. Despite that, you are able to take a novel path that you otherwise
wouldn't have and you get back to the same goal. And I can tell you some amazing examples of that
capacity. But that's what I think intelligence is. It's some degree of competency in reaching
your goals despite the uncertainty of life in whatever space you operate in.
That's wonderful. You mentioned you can tell us some examples. Why don't we go into that?
Sure. Here's an example in morpho space. Now, what's morpho space? Morpho space is
the space of all possible configurations of some anatomical structure. So if you imagine
a prototypical head, let's say, of a vertebrate, you might imagine the eyes could be different
distances from each other. They could be different numbers of eyes. It could be different in
different dimensions. All of those form a tremendous invisible space of all possible
versions of that structure. And so, of course, every creature, normally, reliably, we start out
as a single cell and then reliably end at one particular region of that state space that
corresponds to whatever your species' target morphology is. So acorns give rise to oak trees
and frog eggs give rise to frogs and so on. So that's a journey that we take. And the thing is
that if we look at normal development, we get the feeling that, well, it's just a mechanical
set of steps. That's all that they do, of course. What else are they going to do? And we're fooled.
We're really very much lulled into a false simplicity by looking at the reliability
of normal development. It's a little bit like a magic trick. When you watch a professional
magician, as long as everything goes right, you'll learn nothing. You know, things go great and you
will, wow, that's amazing. I guess that's how it would have to be. When he makes a mistake,
that's when you start to see how the trick is done, right? So the same thing is true in
development. So I'll give you a couple of examples. First, a very common example,
monozygotic twins. So let's say in humans, when you cut an early embryo in half, you don't get
two half bodies the way we would if we cut any other artifact. If you took your computer and
cut it in half, you would get two half computers. If you cut an early embryo in half, you get two
monozygotic twins, perfectly normal bodies, because each half very rapidly realizes that
the other side is missing, regenerates whatever is needed, and now you've got two normal humans.
I'll give you a really kind of amazing example in the frog. Frogs start out, frog embryos start
out as tadpoles. And tadpoles have to become adult frogs. They have to change into adult frogs.
Their faces are completely different. So in order to change, the eyes have to move forward,
the jaws have to move, the nostrils, everything has to move around. It was previously thought,
that the system is a hardwired system, meaning people would say it has no IQ to speak of,
because all normal tadpoles look the same, all normal frogs look the same. And if you just somehow
genetically encode a hardwired set of movements, so every organ moves in a particular direction,
a particular amount, then you get a normal frog from a normal tadpole. So we took the hypothesis
that what if the system has more intelligence than we give it credit for? Let's find out.
And that's another really important thing about this is that all these,
philosophically, when I talk about intelligence and cognition in these unconventional substrates,
these are not philosophical claims. These are engineering claims. These are all meant to be
testable experimental protocols. And so we get to do experiments and find out what model of
intelligence is the best to explain. So what we did was we created so-called Picasso tadpoles.
Why? Because everything is in the wrong place. The eyes might be on the side of the head,
the jaws are off to the side. Everything is completely scrambled. And we found that this system,
which starts off in the wrong configuration of anatomical space, will still make a really good
frog, because all of these components will move in novel paths, abnormal paths that normally don't
happen. In fact, sometimes they go too far and actually have to come back a little bit. They
go through these novel paths, and then they stop. And when do they stop when they've made a correct
frog face? So this is a perfect example of James's intelligence in anatomical space. This is a system
that even when you deviate it to a wrong location, can still get to where it needs to go through a
novel path. And it knows it's reached this goal, because that's when it stops. That's when everything
stops moving and stops remodeling and rearranging. So there are many examples like this. Regeneration
and salamanders is like this. You can amputate a limb at different levels. They will very rapidly
regrow exactly what's needed, and then they stop. They stop when it's done. And so this ability to
reach the same anatomical outcome, despite abnormal starting conditions, that's one amazing
competency of this process. There's a second, and then we can talk about, there's a profound
lesson to be learned from all this. A second competency is this. The tubule, there's a little
tube that leads to the kidneys in salamanders. That tube, if you think about it in cross-section,
so here's the tube, and you think about it in cross-section, there are eight or 10 cells that
make a little circle that form this tube. One trick you can do with early salamander embryos is you
can increase the amount of genetic material they have. And what happens is the cell doesn't die.
You would think that having extra copies of all the instructions would screw things up, but actually
no, the cells are fine. But the cells get bigger. They get bigger and bigger. So you can have twice,
four times, six times, eight times the normal genetic material. They should do that. The cells
get bigger and bigger. So the first amazing thing is that cracking up the amount of DNA
doesn't hurt anything. You still get normal salamanders out. The second amazing thing is that
the salamanders are the same size, even though the cells are much bigger. What does that mean? That
means that if you take a cross-section through the tubule, there are fewer cells that make exactly
the same structure. So instead of eight to 10, there might be four or five. The most amazing thing,
and the third incredible piece of data here, is that when you make the cells so gigantic
that only one cell fits, that you can't fit even two cells here, what will happen is one cell will
wrap around itself, leaving a hole in the middle to give you that exact same tubule. Now that's a
completely different molecular mechanism. Before you were using cell-to-cell communication to make
that tube. Now you're using some sort of cytoskeletal bending to bend the cell around itself. So
different molecular mechanisms are being called up in the service of a large-scale anatomical goal.
And so think about what this means from the developmental perspective. If you're an embryo,
you can't count on not being cut in half at some point. You can't count on how much DNA you have
because it may change. You can't count on how big your own parts are. You don't even know how big
your cells are going to be. And despite all of that incredible variety, you still need to make,
you still need to be able to make a pretty good salamander at the end. So this ability of evolution
to not just make hardwired solutions to specific problems, but to actually make problem-solving
machines that make very few assumptions about what is going to happen, but figure it out on the fly.
They have the machinery to figure this out on the fly. Those are the kinds of examples of,
and then I have others, but those are some good examples of intelligence.
But the DNA is always a reference, or is it sitting in the background just producing proteins,
which means when you have to set the goal, what are the mechanisms that help cells to talk to
each other and understand what is their collective intelligence, which is a term you also use?
How does it work? It sounds like magic when one hears it. It's really wonderful anyway.
I'll tell you the non-magical component first, and then I'll tell you the part that does
kind of sound like magic. The first thing to realize is that, and I, of course,
didn't come up with the idea of collective intelligence. People have studied collective
intelligence for many years, but a lot of people have this idea that, well, maybe a termite colony
or a beehive is a kind of collective intelligence, but we are good old-fashioned unified intelligence,
as well. Let's remind ourselves. We are bags of cells. All intelligence is our collective
intelligence because we're all made of parts. Somehow, even in the standard case, we have to
answer this question of how does this bag of cells, neurons or whatever else, enable actual
intelligence that has goals and memories that belong to the collective, but not to the individual
cells? You and I have all kinds of memories and goals that none of our cells could comprehend,
but the collective somehow does. Similarly, in morphogenesis, no individual cell knows
what a finger is or how many fingers you have, but the collective absolutely knows how many,
because if you're a salamander and you lose a couple, they will regrow to exactly the right
number. This issue of collective intelligence of scaling from competent parts to a unified
central intelligence is the kind of problem that we're studying here. Mechanistically,
the part that's not magic is the part where we now understand some of the mechanisms,
how that works. Here are some things we understand. The first thing in order to enable the scaling is
you need cells to be able to communicate with each other, in fact, very tightly, so that they can
share information in a way that kind of wipes the ownership of that information. For example,
if two cells have their own distinct information, and it's very easy for them to keep that information
separate, then you have two tiny proto-individuals. You have two cells, but if you can merge cells
in a way where the information that each cell has, it's very hard to know whether it belongs to the
one cell or to the other cell, then you start to get a merging where it's like a mind meld. If I
can't tell if my memories belong to me or to you, we are in some sense, we have a collective
intelligence because we cannot differentiate. The way evolution does this is, evolution
discovered this amazing thing called a gap junction. A gap junction is a tiny little
set of proteins that make a little kind of a hatch or a conduit between cells. They're not
just a signal that one cell secretes and it floats away and it hits the other cell,
it's something much more important. It is a direct connection between the internal
miliures of each cell, so they sort of dock like two submarines docking underwater.
What that means is that information that is generated in one cell immediately propagates
to the other cell. The other cell cannot tell because they all share the same information
molecules. The other cell can't tell, hey, that's not mine. That's not my memory. That's somebody
else's memory. They can't tell the difference. Now both of those cells, in fact, many cells,
are start to share the same memories. That starts to wipe their individual identities
and provide a larger scale system that has more computational capacity. If it's a sheet of cells
that has the ability to sense much bigger areas, then now you can start to work towards bigger
goals. The communication that takes place this way is electrical. Again, it shouldn't be a surprise
to anybody because that's our best example of emergent intelligence in the brain. That's the
system that brains use. They use electrical communication to harness lots of different
cells to the same purpose. What we have done in 2000 or so, my group developed the first
molecular tools to be able to read and write this electrical information.
We borrow many of our concepts from neuroscience. People working in brain, so for many years,
wanted to scan electrically the living brain and be able to decode. It's called neural decoding.
They want to be able to scan the electrical activity of your brain and say, ah, this person
is thinking about XYZ. They have memories of ABC and their plans are whatever.
We basically started to do this in the rest of the body. What we can now do is
use a kind of voltage sensitive. It's a molecule that fluoresces. It glows in different ways,
depending on the cell voltage. We can use that as almost like a brain scan, but of any tissue.
So let's take, for example, a flatworm called a planarian. These planarians are amazing.
If you cut them into pieces, every piece regrows exactly what's missing. They have very clear
anatomical control. What we did was we asked a simple question. How does that piece know how
many heads it's supposed to have? I mean, normally one head, one tail, but how does it know that?
So what we did is we found an electrical signature that seems to specify one head, one tail.
We actually then tested that hypothesis by modifying that electrical pattern. No change in the DNA.
We did it using drugs that open and close ion channels in a very specific way. So no changes
in the genome, standard factory issue hardware, so to speak. But what we did was we did what you
do with a computer, meaning that when you want to reprogram a modern computer to do certain things,
you don't rewire the hardware. I mean, we did in the 40s and 50s, but now we don't need to do that.
You provide stimuli. It exposes an interface, in fact, an electrical interface, and you use
that interface to give it experiences. You control it by giving it stimuli through the keyboard or
through whatever your interface is. Cells also expose an electrical interface. Those are ion
channels. Now, they're not doing it for our benefit. They're doing it for each other so that cells
can control each other's behavior, but we can engineer that and we can hijack that. And so we
can exploit it by using drugs that mimic certain electrical states. And when we do this, we were
able to modify that electrical pattern to say not one head, two heads. And when you do that,
the fragment that you cut looks at that electrical pattern. That is literally the memory of what a
correct planarian looks like. How do we know? Because when we change it, guess what those cells
build? They build a two-headed worm. Now, I call it a memory because, like any good memory, it is
stable, meaning that when I take a two-headed worm and I cut it again, that piece will, again,
make a two-headed animal, even though the genetics is untouched. The genome is totally wild. So that
tells you right there that the question to how many heads do you have is not nailed down in the
hardware. Rather, what the genome, it's not nailed down by the genome. What the genome does
is create hardware that by default says one head, the same way that when you get a calculator from
the factor you turn it on, first thing it says is zero, always, 100% of the time. So it's a reliable
piece of hardware. By default, it does a certain thing, but it's a reprogrammable calculator. If
you give it inputs, it will say something else. And that's what we found. So that part is the
non-magical part. We actually, we literally now can see the memories of the tissues of the body.
We can rewrite them in some cases, certainly not in most, but in some where we figured it out,
we've been able to rewrite them. And we can track them, and we can track those changes as
sources of birth defects, as regenerative limitations, as cancer, we can talk about that.
And we can now start to rewrite them. And this is something that we're actively doing for
biomedicine. That's kind of the non-magical part. There is kind of a deeper, I think,
philosophical issue here, which is a little more magical. And if you want, we can talk about that.
Yeah, I know you have been interested in philosophy of mind, and you have already mentioned
few words about mind and connection to the mind. Because when you think of memory, information
exchange, intelligence, agreeing to be one kind of cell, and the other one agrees that it will
let go of its own and becomes with you or will be called upon to become one kind of cell or the
other, it really evokes the idea of consciousness, of awareness. It's like, it's another word just to
use it. It's not like, as you said, anthropomorphic awareness, which means my feeling as a human being,
they might have these cells, a different kind of awareness. Still, they are kind of aware of each
other working together. And somehow they have an element of consciousness. And is that maybe where
it takes us to the magical side, or there are other aspects of the magic in it?
There's more magic. That's some magic too. The thing about consciousness, and in my work,
I haven't said yet too many things about specifically consciousness. I try to stick to,
at least in most of the things I've written, to cognition and behavior, just because it's
easier to talk about those things. But I do think that the thing about consciousness is that
for whatever reason, we attribute consciousness to brains. So there are many theories of
consciousness, and at least the good theories are supposed to tell you what is it about specific
structures like the brain that make them associated with consciousness. If it's going
to be a good theory, it has to pick it out. What is the feature that enables consciousness?
I have yet to see a theory that where the features that it picks out are not
existing elsewhere in the body. So for the same reasons that you might say that brains
are associated with consciousness, those would be the exact same reasons to say that, yeah,
probably the rest of your body has some level too. And now we can't access it anymore. I mean,
this is the other mind's problem, right? We can't access each other's consciousness. We can't access,
you know, there's probably in the split brain studies, there's some interesting work that says
maybe there's at least two residents in most of us, right? Many, many. When you ask a neuroscientist
today, there are many people working here, and then it's kind of the same, but it's different. Yeah,
exactly. Exactly, right? And we don't have access to that primary, you know, our primary, at least
the two of us here that are talking to each other now, we don't have access in our phenomenal
consciousness to all of those things, right? We kind of feel unified. But for those same reasons,
you would have to say that other cells, I mean, one thing that you can do when I, this is a game
I play with with my students, I asked them to do this, I said, take any paper in neuroscience,
put it through Microsoft Word, do a kind of find replace. And anywhere it says neuron,
just have it say cell. And anywhere that says millisecond, say, minutes or hours. And that's
it. And now you have a developmental biology paper, because everything else works, right?
So, so neither the tools nor the concepts of neuroscience largely tell the difference between
between neurons and non neurons, with some with some specific differences, but largely
everything carries over. And so, so yeah, I think I think it's completely reasonable if we're talking
about consciousness. I mean, some people deny it even in us, of course, right? But but if you if
you accept that at least at least our brains are conscious, then I see no reason not to extend it,
not to extend it down into into other simpler systems, other spaces and so on.
Yeah, that's so so that's that's the thing about conscious. I mean, the thing that I was mentioning
before in terms of kind of kind of the other magic is simply this. There's a there's an interesting
sense in which evolution gets more back than it puts in. And what I mean by that is, because there
are there are there are generic laws of physics of computation of networks of mathematics of many
different things, where if you just if you just make the appropriate piece of matter in the
appropriate machine, you immediately become coupled to some sort of invisible. This is, you know,
what what what Pythagoras might have called the you know, the world of forms or something you
you immediately become coupled to all this other stuff that exists, that gives you a variety of
what what a physicist might call free lunches, I'll give you just some very simple examples.
If, and this is just this is with some of the silly one first imagine imagine your revolution,
then you're trying to evolve a triangle. So when you're in this world, a triangle
has to have the right the right angles to be successful. So you do a search through all
the possible you get the first angle and you get the second angle, you don't need to evolve the
third angle, you know what the third angle is, it's it's immediately given to you for free.
Where does that free gift come from? Well, it comes from geometry, but you didn't have to evolve
it right so okay so so now if evolution discovers an ion channel, an ion channel is basically a
it's a voltage gated current conductance so it's a transistor basically a transistor.
If you may if you put a few transistors in the right way you get a logic gate.
And if you have ands and ors and you know if you get not and you can you can do all the computations.
Well you have a truth table to this lot. Did you have to evolve the truth table? No,
all you evolved was the ion channel, the truth table you get for free you get you get the ability
to do propositional you know basic logic with the logic gates just because you had that very
simple machine and there are many ways you know there are laws of biomechanics and laws of networks
you know Stu Kaufman's work on networks and so on. All of this stuff is this incredible
set of these free lunches so one could imagine that what evolution is doing it's not micromanaging
all this stuff it's not trying to evolve all the pieces of it what it does is searches the spaces
of a kind of almost like a kind of key into this into this massive database and each each key brings
with it it's sort of it sort of pulls down each each physical machine pulls down all this stuff
that you know mathematicians have been talking about this for a long time where do the truths of
mathematics live I mean I have no idea it's somewhere but right but evolution pulls this
stuff down it exploits it all the time in in electrical signaling and biomechanical signaling
laws of diffusion all of these things so that to me is one of the truly one of the most magical
things is that you get more out of this process than you put in. So when we go back to goal like
we have to say you know there is a goal and then there is a set mechanism to reach the goal
and you can tweak the goal a little bit and you can get two heads and the flatworm or something
like that but is there like where these goals come from if we take this to some kind of philosophical
perspective yeah I think I think yeah go ahead yeah that's that's that's really the one of the most
important questions I will give you a simple example I mean one thing one thing you might
think to start off with is you might think okay the goals are set by evolution in other words
in other words certain goals are adaptive and and result in more offspring other goals are
maladaptive and do not result in more offspring so evolution finds these goals that's a that's a
decent place to start but let's think about this we make we made something and this is a
collaborative work between my lab and Joshua Baumgart's lab we made something called a xenobot
what's a xenobot so so you take you take an early you take a frog embryo and it has some skin cells
and the skin cells normally sit quietly on the outside of the of the embryo and they keep out
the bacteria and they and they have these little hairs that move around and they move the mucus on
the side of the frog and you look at that and you look at normal embryos you might say okay well
that's what these cells know how to do and the frog genome is such that it creates this hardware
that does that so we asked them we asked an interesting question how much plasticity is
there in the system in other words if we were to liberate these cells from their environment and
give them a chance to reboot their multicellularity okay let them let's just see what they do now what
could they do they could do nothing they could crawl away from each other they could die they
could make a flat monolayer like cell culture makes they could do many things so we took these
cells away we did not modify their genome we did not put in any weird nanomaterials they are
completely a wild type frog skin cells what we did do we did a we did a new kind of engineering
which is engineering by subtraction of constraints we released constraints so so we said in the
absence of these other cells what do they do well what do they do they come together they make a
spherical little little creature which we call a xenobot because xenopus laevis is the name of
the frog and it's a biorebotics platforms we call it a xenoma these these little balls they take
their cilia which are normally used to redistribute the mucus and they now use it to swim around so
so if you're f a ball like this the cilia on this end row this way the cilia on this end row this way
and the whole thing swims so it's completely self-actuated we don't have to pace it we don't
control it it it has all kinds of different motions you can see this there's a whole website
devoted to to the staff from our center they have all kinds of motions if they do amaze they
take corners without hitting the opposite wall so they know where where the where the opportunity
is to take a to take a corner they have spontaneous behaviors they they sometimes they go sometimes
they stop they go in circles they go straight they they regenerate so if you damage one it will try
to heal back to its to its configuration and one of the most amazing things that they do and this
is this was our latest paper on this is they do something we call kinematic self-replication
let me just tell you what that is and then you'll see why i'm i'm bringing all this up for the
talk of goals we made these animals these these these creatures unable to reproduce in the normal
froggy fashion right they're just skin they have no nerves they have no reproductive organs they
can't do the way that frogs normally reproduce within 48 hours they figure out a new way to
make copies of themselves what is that new way it's von Neumann's dream it's the ability to
for a machine to make copies of itself from loose parts in the environment what we did was we
sprinkled loose skin cells into their environment so think of this apetri dish there's a there's a
bunch of loose cells and we put in some zanobots what the zanobots do in that scenario is they
run around and those cells are are similar the same kind of some other exactly the same
exactly the same kind although we although we could make a different kind that this is all
ongoing that will we're we're mixing we're doing experiments now where you mix these things but
then when that's the same kind the zanobots will run around they collect these loose cells
into little balls and they sort of polish them they run around and they and they polish them
they work in groups by the way to do this they they polish them and because they are working not
with a passive material they're working with the same material that we worked with when we made
zanobots this is an agential material this is a material with an agenda what do the cells like
to do when they're packed into a ball well they like to make a zanobot and of course within a
couple of days those things become the next generation of zanobots what do they do they run
around and they find loose cells and they make more zanobots which is the third generation
and the fourth and so this this now now now here's this so so let's get back to the issue of goals
these these critters have this new properties kinematic replication to our knowledge no other
creature on earth uses this they there's never been evolutionary pressure to be a good zanobot
because there's never been any zanobots in the lineage of the frog there's no point at which
that we know of at which there would have been selection to be a good zanobot so why is it that
the frog genome knows how to make zanobots it certainly knows how to make tadpoles and frogs
and we can come up with you know selectionist explanations for that right the environment
is such and everybody else died off and so on but at the same time that same genome is actually
in a different environment makes it a completely different creature that does something completely
different which in an extremely surprising nobody knew it was going to make copies of
itself in this way and who knows what else I mean we're just scratching the surface right who knows
right and there's no evolutionary pressure and that's it no evolutionary pressure that we know of
no long period of adaptation just immediately they do this so so now we start to think okay
where do these goals come from these guys have anatomical goals and they have behavioral goals
possibly physiological goals maybe we have we're doing some transcriptional studies of these things
so now your question right where do these goals come from well so now I don't think anymore that
we can just blame everything on evolution the way that we typically do is that oh well it's evolved
I don't know why where these goals come from so it may be my gut feeling so I don't know I'll
tell you my conjecture my conjecture is that we're back to this world of forms idea my conjecture is
that if you let's go back to the electric circuit idea if you make a set of transistors
you can there are a number of computations that you will be able to do you will have AND gates
NOR gate and you know NAND gates you will have latches and counters and there's some stuff you
can make by making that machine by making that piece of hardware in the physical world you are
able to pick out of this cloud of potential computational capacities and then you say well
where did they come from well you didn't design them they were probably you know in the in the
sense that uh the prime numbers are always there they don't wait for us to sort of you know count
them they're just always there I think that's what this is I think what what evolution has done in
creating the frog genome is create a little machine that is capable of accessing a number of a number
of different coherent ways of living in the real world one of them looks like a tadpole one of
them looks like a zenabot who knows what else is it's able to access but it's able to access all
the stuff because it has some simple components that are physical machines that index into this
into these available forms and so of course our job as scientists is to understand what that
space looks like what else is in there like what else can we and as engineers we want to access this
space so and so you know for for medical applications for example if we want to make
biobots that do particular functions and you know heal broken organs and fine cancer and whatever
else we have to understand that space and we have to say what stimuli would we have to give to these
cells to enable the collective to pick out other cool tricks from this from this space that contains
all of the all of the laws of you know physics computation all this other stuff so so so I think
goals to answer you know this a long-winded answer to your question I think goals come from a
couple of different places they are a mix of specific things that were selected for for example
the ability to live at room temperature in salt water you know that was probably selected for
specifically but also generic laws that are not specifically selected for but you gain access to
by having certain flexible kinds of hardware and I think that's what evolution is really good at
is is is picking out that hardware that's wonderful I'm glad you gave a long long answer which was
very clear well this might kind of take us a bit because you highlighted the Pythagoras and then
in direct way Plato also and the world of forms and ideas and even more and more scientists and
particularly physicists looking at quantum mechanics and ultimate reality of a potential
unified field and as my work also and consciousness is exploiting that field or exploring rather that
field do you do you feel like I know as a scientist one would not commit but there would be like
the ultimate reality is somewhat mathematical somewhat abstract forms because you mentioned
that and that there is you know the the the thing you get for free as you mentioned is the
expressing which makes things fit together and the fact that so many aspects of physics
and quantum mechanics quantum field theory are pointing to something more of consciousness kind
of level of dynamics that are not so physical and material as we we feel and are we ultimately
able to connect to that even from the empirical hard science perspective
it's just your intuition and feeling about this since I know you're interested in philosophy of
mind again yeah I think that I look I think it's it's kind of inescapable of well two things
one is that if we're going to do science at all it is inescapable to to to make that first leap
of faith to to the to assume that there is an underlying order to all of this because if there
was no if there's no underlying order then science would be impossible there would be no patterns
to understand you there would be no no way to make sense of the world right so so every scientist
starts out with the assumption that okay there is a we are going to be able to make some sort of
sense out of this why that's not guaranteed we assume it's because there is an underlying
order so I think I think that that we can we can we have to assume that now the next question is
is to what extent is this or to how much how much cognitive kind of qualities can we can we
ascribe to this order and this is something that this is a deep a deep question because you can
imagine the same way that pieces let's say cells come together to scale up to a larger scale
intelligence right so we can understand we we know how to decompose things now so we can look
at a brain of a human and say ah you're really made of pieces let's find out how these pieces
give rise to this okay but you can think about it in the opposite direction let's go upwards let's say
if I were if I were a cell would I be able to gather evidence that I was part of a larger system
right and if you were for example a neuron in a in a neural network being trained you might take
a hypothesis that says well I live in this sort of cold unfeeling universe that doesn't care what
I do and it's purely mechanical and the agency of my environment is zero I'm the only one with agency
so I learn and whatever you would be wrong right because because actually you are part of a larger
system that a is being trained with rewards and punishments for specific things so actually your
universe in fact does does care what you do and does have preferences in some degree of your part
of a system with some degree of intelligence and while I suspect because of girdle limitations
and other things you could never actually as a subunit you could never see the big picture that
the whole system has you may be able to gather evidence that you're part of such a system so
what we're really talking about here is am I learning or am I being trained right the difference is
how much agency right how much agency is in my in my environment as my partner when I when I work
with the environment am I the only agent and therefore I'm learning or in fact is the environment
also has some agency and in fact I'm being trained right that's an important thing I think in fact
I think evolution probably has some good incentive to make to make creatures good at this because
otherwise you have parasites and exploiters and various other things so my so so so of course I
don't know I don't know the answer to this but I but I do think that this question of how much
basic physics and and and the other things that describe the universe in which we live how mind
like all of that stuff is is very much an open question I do not believe that we can assume
at zero I think that's a very dangerous assumption I think we have to be open to experiments and
I like the work of people like Chris Fields and Carl Friston and various other people
that are trying to recast basic physics from basically let's let's put it this way to find
invariance in basic physics and cognition right and things like active inference right where
where some of the same formalism the same math can be used to describe physical objects including
quantum objects and decision-making and complex human behavior right now right now be active
inference for example is one and I'm not saying that's the only framework but that's one framework
that not by it's not the kind of panpsychism where you take basic physics exactly how it is and
then you sort of paint on this this thing and says oh and by the way they also have you know
feelings it's it's a different project the idea is to say no the actual the the basic physics the
free energy formulations of physics are actually the same thing that drives cognition so and and
consciousness so basically it's right there at the beginning not as a kind of you know a side
effect but but but we should reformulate physics to be clear that there's some level of of surprise
minimization and anticipation and these things so uh so yeah so so I don't know what the right
level is but I don't assume at all that it's going to be zero yeah beautiful because it makes sense
that if we have a quality of or a aspect of our being of which we are sure and if we go to the
cart and say you know we are more sure of being conscious than we are sure of the physical reality
that we have then it's easier in fact more logical to assign this kind of category of being to other
aspects than to deny other things uh from having a quality that is of the same so even though we
have to accept that it's not the same level of awareness the same kind of as we mentioned at
the beginning meta consciousness or consciousness of the self and consciousness of present past and
future but we can come to the conclusion that everything has somewhat this quality of existence
or if we extend it higher more than even what the panpsychists say we can go to the idealist
perspective and say it is possible to imagine that the ultimate reality is consciousness
and now try to find out how consciousness actually interacts with itself to lead to the dynamics
of what we see as the physical reality experience from different perspectives by different aspects
of itself so this is the work I am just you know working on and the basis that the ultimate
reality and that's a metaphysical of course question but if it can answer so many other
uh you know aspects of observation and goal and memory and information and communication and
all of that and even go into the field of ethics and epistemology and ontology then we might come
to a conclusion about the ultimate reality and the meaning and where goals emerge from and where
what is the meaning of all of this why is it happening which are all metaphysical questions
because in science you see the what and how but we don't see the why because it's an endless
regression of questions so it's very interesting that you see that it consciousness has a place
awareness has a place even on the collective level of cells or individual cells including
even you mentioned molecules and so we're going into under the right direction I'd like to ask you
about take this collective intelligence to another level and that is the collective intelligence of
society in the same way as we are a bunch of cells as you mentioned society is a bunch of
people who are a bunch of cells also and so maybe the collective intelligence and the collective
decision-making of society has something to learn from communication and information and accepting
each other's role and accepting the way the cells accept that I'll participate in the formation of
a new head but I'll be part of the eye or part of the space between the eyes and it's my function
and it's okay and it's fine and so maybe that can lead to a perception of even society and sociology
extending this beyond cellular function and collective cellular function and even artificial
intelligence to collective behavior in society do you think it's possible to extrapolate or have
you thought about this yeah I thought about it I should preface this by saying that I have I have no
sort of credentials in that area right so I'm you know I'm not trained really to I have no expertise
in thinking about the social issues so this is purely my you know kind of off the top of my head
what what I what I think I think that one has to be very it's on the one hand I think you're right
in that a lot of the kinds of dynamics that we're talking about are scale free in important ways
so it is not just about medium-sized organisms making being made up of cells a lot of these
principles work all the way up and all the way down there's no there's no particular special
scale to them so so I think it's completely reasonable to start to think about how these
principles would apply to larger scales at the same time I think we have to be really careful
for the following reason let's say that you go you go rock climbing and you go rock climbing and you
rub a bunch of skin cells off of your hands right you come home you're very happy you know you you
climb the new you know a new a new a mountain face great you know you're maybe you're now a
champion whatever whatever it is but you killed a bunch of yourselves now from the perspective of
the cells the fact that they that they were part of a system the fact that you now get certain
rewards from whatever where they're you know spiritually or or materially that you did whatever
you did to them that's neither here nor there this is you're operating in some space that they
can't possibly understand what they know is that they've been they've been killed off so my point
is simply that larger systems end up with goals that are often not in the best interest of the
members of that system sometimes but but sometimes not and the goals of larger systems can be
incredibly alien hard to understand and not necessarily aligned with the goals of the component
so I so I just think we have to be careful I have no doubt that humans form social structures
financial structures all these other kinds of large scale systems that have new new dynamical
and possibly a cognitive properties of which we're not aware that they are distinct individuals
in an important sense I think all of that all of that exists I just think it it it has the potential
to to to work out in ways that we are they're not going to make us happy so so I you know the only
thing I'm arguing against is the simple I feel people have said to me before oh it's so it's so
great that cells connect together to make this thing and they lose the right identity we should
be like that I'm saying eh actually you got to be really careful with that because it doesn't
always end up well for the cells so so so I do think we need to keep a very careful eye on what
systems we we become part of that this is this is beautifully said it also of course will depend
on what the ultimate goal is because if we find that there is a goal that is transcendental that
is beyond the simple goal of you know of creating a specific function but of evolving in a specific
direction and also the quality of consciousness and the the you know the losing of some cells that
have limited consciousness as sacrifice if you like on the way of climbing a mountain
is not so dramatic if the cells don't have such high level of awareness of themselves and their
existence and their importance and their telos their meaning in life and all of that because
they're not living on that level whereas when you grow in consciousness such as a human being
then there is a higher demand and the higher expectation of your meaningfulness you know
because we eat we eat we eat things you know we eat plants and some people eat animals and
animals eat each other and the and the in the jungle and that's part of nature so you say well
there is a sacrifice in order to create higher order lesser entropy so you you're eating order
in a sense from the environment to fight the anthropic forces that that lead to this integration
and to maintain this kind of growth and evolution but it all depends also on as we grow in consciousness
what is significant what is all right to sacrifice versus not all right to sacrifice
yeah yeah I mean that's the thing I'm not I'm not I think I think losing some cells is okay for
the reason that you laid out but you'll note that throughout history especially you know modern
history we've had a number of collectivist types of movements that have made exactly that claim that
in in service of a greater ideal which may or may not be clearly specified it's okay that you
know acceptable losses in terms of human lives right we've we've seen this in you know in in the
world and and we still see it and we still and we still and we still see it and this this this idea
that in the in the service of some kind of greater pattern it's it's okay that that there will be
acceptable acceptable casualty so so I think I think as cognitive units it's on us it's our
responsibility to do our best to figure out which systems are we being asked or pressured to be
parts of do we want to be part of those systems and if somebody says to me look you're going to be
part of this tremendous thing I can't explain what it is because you're not cognitively able
to comprehend it the way that you know the ants under your car wheel don't understand where you're
going in the morning when you go to you know when you go to work this is it's impossible for them to
cover yeah they say don't worry you know life's going to be really hard but don't worry there's a
greater design I for one am very suspicious of these things maybe maybe there's a great a great
design and maybe if I understood the great design I would be willing to to to go along with it or
maybe not and so that's why I think we have to be really careful about rolling up these biological
analogies because because systems will absolutely larger scales will absolutely bend the option
space for their parts to make it easier for them to do things in their space and the parts
usually have no idea what's what's going on at that space they just see local you know local
gradients of some to some level of competency so this is I think an existential challenge for
humanity going forward is to develop a science of of two things first when you do have a collective
of of competent parts coming together to be some sort of a larger intelligence can we predict
what is that intelligence going to want what are the goals going to be right we are terrible at this
we're and yet we're we're doing this all the time we make we make a swarm robotics and internet
of things and all kinds of financial structures and political structures we have we are very poor
at guessing what the final system is going to try to do we're just not good at that so we need we
need a science of that and we need a science of ask you of how to gather evidence if you
am I a component of a bigger thing and what is that bigger thing going to push me to do
how is it bending my option space right though those kinds of things are really critical for
for us to mature I think as a as a species yeah this also takes us to the world view what world
view one has in a sense if we want to summarize all of this it's when you talk about goals and
understanding meaning and meaning of life and responsibility and all of that that we can all
put of this in a kind of world view and that is why I feel from a personal perspective again
that raising consciousness is a very important factor because if consciousness is rising and so
we have a scale of consciousness a range of consciousness from lower meager consciousness
and the elementary particles and cells and growing into higher consciousness as we see in humans
even humans have different layers and levels of understanding of ability to to see the laws of
nature to express the you know the existence and the relationship with others and the importance
and priorities and what you sacrifice what you don't sacrifice and respect of the environment
for example respect of others you know going to solutions that are not sacrificing people and
sacrificing economy and sacrificing the environment and how do we do that and that is where the work
of consciousness itself is involved so how much are you conscious of which means the individual
collective intelligence to what extent it is conscious of what it's conscious of it's you
know making a head in a specific shape this is one level another level of consciousness can be
making a society that is holistic that is well integrated in which the individuals are allowed
to play their roles and allowed to grow and prosper and that is a wider consciousness than
just the consciousness of the collective intelligence of a bunch of cells that need to create a head
for example so the the issue and and this metaphysics and this perspective becomes raising
consciousness so that we as humans are able to take into consideration the largest number of factors
and variables that will allow us to have a better world a better environment a better
relationship with each other so in a similar way as a plan planarian or a flatworm takes into
consideration specific aspects of what it needs to build if we are able to take into consideration
the entire planet the entire human life the entire history and future and have this as part of
ourselves then we are likely to cooperate and work better now if we impose a solution let's say
let's sacrifice this for the basis of this it is not necessarily a best solution because we
don't know and in this case we are using lesser intelligence and lesser consciousness than what
is required to have a better better life so ultimately the solution would be raising consciousness
of the individuals particularly as we are facing artificial intelligence we didn't have time to
to look at that and also you know in a sense your work and its implication for curing disease for
example for regeneration for cancer etc where you want the cancer cell for example to start
communicating be part of the game play with us don't play on your own that's basically what it is
get it to play play along with the game and so those situations even on society societal level
that are not communicating that are not aware of each other that are not on a higher level of
consciousness then they have limited perspectives and they can lead to decisions that are not so
healthy for for evolution yeah yeah well well two two things to mention and I respect one is
it's you know what you said about the cancer cells so so so the other cells are constantly
trying to normalize incipient cancer cells by electrically trying to plug them into this
to this network now from the perspective now you can ask yourself from the perspective of that cell
uh is that a good deal or not because in the normal in the normal mammalian body the soma is
disposable so if that cell chooses to stay part of play play along with the tissue it's guaranteed
to be disposed of in some short number of years whereas for example there are transmissible cancers
in in dogs and Tasmanian devils that live for thousands of years these cells are as individual
as if they were amoebas living on but instead of the you know lakes they live in these mammals
they sort of hop from animal to animal and they have this much lengthier life now they have a
lengthier life as a single cell or maybe as a tumor that doesn't necessarily that maybe you
know they have some structure so maybe maybe a little more than than a single cell but you know
it's it's an interesting trade-off because the other cells are giving it a are trying to push it
into a deal that actually gives it a shorter term survival but perhaps in the context of a
greater thing which we like whole bodies are better than tumors but these are all these are
all tricky but but but i i i really like uh what you were saying before about expanding expanding
awareness because uh this is we have a paper recently um five of us um by myself and a few
folks who are buddhist scholars we we sort of thought about these kinds of things from from the
buddhist perspective and one interesting place of intersection here is that you can so i've put
forward this this model of of the self in terms of how can we how can we compare truly diverse
intelligences so we're talking about animal you know normal animals uh synthetic synthetically
created animals um a software ai's aliens you know you name it like oh how can we compare
them all to each other and i i propose that one way that we can have a rubric for every possible
mind is to focus on the one thing they all have in common what do they have in common
is uh the scope of the goals that they can pursue the size of the goals so literally you know if if
all you can if if all you care about in the sense of being able to expend energy to manage
if all you care about is your current local sugar concentration then you're probably a yeast
or a bacteria if you can manage to care about right if you can manage to care about something
that is going to happen in the next couple of days or maybe some memory going backwards and you sort
of track an area of of hundreds of feet you might be a dog or a cat you know you have that but but
you're never going to if that's if that's what you are you are never going to be able to right you
will never be able to have goals that are three months later in the next town over right it's
impossible you can't you can't get a dog to care about that and if you care about the state of
the financial markets a hundred years from now you're probably a human right and if you are literally
able to care about all of the beings on the planet in the um in the linear range the way that we
can't right we can't we're we're not capable of linearly caring about that that many individuals
but if you're able to then you're some sort of uh you know more than human you know some sort of
you know buddha like creature that has this like massive massive cognitive light cone that's actually
able to have goals that are that big right so so so one thing about that continuum of goal size is
that if you have a certain level of sophistication there's a new level that you reach to which is
which is kind of an interesting meta level where you can say my goal is to expand the size of my
goal right whereas before you you know before that you were just a creature that could pursue
certain size goals but but but if you but if you take if you make that um commitment to
expanding your own consciousness you might make a goal of expanding your own and then and then
there's a kind of feedback loop and you and it's interesting to ask okay what happens then right
once you've gotten to that point where you can actually uh commit to expanding your own goal
space then then what happens right and and that doesn't necessarily uh guaranteed benevolence
because uh because uh bad you know negative goals can be very large as well but but there's
there's a lot to say so about that so so I think so I think it's it's it's this idea of committing
to expand um your own cognitive uh light cone is um is is probably powerful and in this in this whole
framework it's fabulous it's exactly actually where I was trying to go and I call it the expansion of
the sense of self so as you said if yourself is you know your sugar it's then you're a yeast or
you're a bacterium or whatever if yourself expands to include everything including the environment
then you are a higher being and I see this as even the purpose of evolution the ultimate goal
that is a hidden goal that we actually expand our self and when we expand our self to include
everything uh everyone and every aspect of uh reality which in essence is true it's not just um
an imagination or a goal to put and or a utilitarian kind of uh philosophy in order to
make life better but the paradigm that I present uh that comes also from ancient knowledge
including buddhism vedanta and other values is that actually the ultimate reality which is the
field of pure being is the self of everything and everyone and that is something we don't know
that we experience only uh only uh minimally in certain stages of evolution for as you
beautifully explained for the for the bacterium for the dog for the human for the higher human
and the higher being then when the self expands and knows itself to be everything
then the goal is so universal then ultimately uh the performance the achievements the decision
making the activity is on the highest possible level which accommodates everything uh that is
existing and so uh your beautiful examples of cooperation and collective intelligence
has an application even in our program because uh we teach transcendental meditation and there
is a program for what we call collective consciousness and to raise collective consciousness
so that there is a unifying factor that brings uh society at the higher level of consciousness
and understanding of the self as being uh the self of everything and everyone and ultimately
leading to reduction in crime and uh reduction in accidents of the road this is another topic
which is our experiments and people who practice these technologies of consciousness so when we
raise individual consciousness we are raising collective consciousness and what we have seen
experientially experimentally is the transformation and decision making in society but that's of
course a topic that is uh you know um something to think about but from my perspective it's also
very empirical and it really applies very well to your findings on the level of cells
and collection of cells but extending it to collection of humans that have
certain level of consciousness of who they are and what is important for them but that we can
raise to include more and more and more and more and that could be the solution or to my
perspective is this solution and is the only solution to solve the problems of society and life
on earth and conflict between nations and the climate and also you know artificial intelligence
which we don't talk about which would be what would be the self of the artificial intelligence
that is being created and the general artificial intelligence is it going to be their own machine
or is it going to include humans is it going to include the environment
and so we are at a time where we have to discuss these and make sure when we create
intelligent machines that learn and grow that they have a sense of self that is as expanded as possible
yeah yeah i i agree i think i think this is one of the reasons that it's really important
to do work both in synthetic morphology in terms of cells and artificial intelligence
is to really understand this this the scaling dynamics and to really understand how new minds
can be made in a way that allows them to to expand towards life positive goals i think that's a
that's a very important of research direction wonderful it was very enriching most interesting
scientifically empirically and great intelligence displayed in your work and your ability to see
all of this would you like to say something at the end of this conversation of which we are all
will be all delighted all those the listeners i'm sure yeah i just uh i just wanted to thank you
for for for raising some really profound questions i very much appreciate what you do
thanks for having me on and for having this conversation it's a great pleasure we look
forward to meeting you and congratulate you again on your wonderful work thank you so much be well
