Welcome to Topcast and to the long-awaited, or at least often mentioned, Episode 100.
This here is finally my interview with David in full, unabridged form.
It contains all my questions for David and multiple more questions.
This is basically an audio-only podcast, there are no visuals today.
My friend recently told me that he doesn't like it when I say to audio-only listeners
that the YouTube version is sometimes better because I put lots of pretty visuals in it.
He says that he listens while he's out walking or jogging and can't look at a screen.
Well today, Adam, you don't need to worry about that.
To all the other Adams out there who I think outnumber the YouTube viewers by about a 10-to-1 ratio,
I'll keep in mind, moving forward as we say, that so many of you only listen and don't watch screens.
Perhaps it would be more fair if it was a 10-to-1 ratio of audio-only to visually important podcast from now on.
We'll see.
So this episode is, I have to say up front, rather an astonishing personal accomplishment for me.
Everyone has people they admire growing up.
Among my peer group, like any group of school kids I guess, the common thing was looking up to famous sports stars
or music idols or movie stars.
I know I idolized Arnold Schwarzenegger.
This was back in his early days of doing movies, not his more recent political stuff.
Back then he was quite the optimist and his personal story was easily as heroic as any of his on-screen characters.
Nevertheless, I was never under any illusions.
I'd ever get to meet Arnold, much less have a conversation with him.
I lived in Australia in the southwestern suburbs of Sydney.
It's not the place to come across movie stars, sports celebrities, singers or accomplished scientists for the most part.
But, happily for me, some intellectual heroes of mine were accessible by pure chance and circumstance in some cases.
I've mentioned before on this podcast that Professor Paul Davies, author of The Mind of God and many other books,
produced a couple of physics documentary series here in Australia called The Big Questions.
He also used to write articles for local news outlets and he appeared on TV here rather regularly when he did live here in Australia for a time.
I read, listened to and watched anything and everything Professor Davies ever put out there that I could find and early on he was the guy,
my scientific hero so to speak.
He seemed to know everything for some reason.
So it was an amazing stroke of luck when one day he just happened to turn up, unannounced.
At an event I was helping to host at university.
I got his autograph, I actually got his autograph on my philosophy uni notes as it turned out.
Not one of his books.
The name of the subject in which the uni notes were compiled was called God, Life, the Universe and everything which was right up his alley.
And the lecture notes actually had excerpts from one of his books that I proudly showed him.
I was literally studying his stuff at the time.
So I ended up having a brief conversation with Paul Davies, winner of the Templeton Prize and I kind of thought that in my early 20s this was a pretty good accomplishment for an undergrad physics student
still living with their parents in an exceedingly typical home on a typical street and a typical suburb one among hundreds in Greater Sydney, Australia.
I guess to put it in perspective it would have been rather like an aspiring pop singer just happening to bump into Michael Jackson or Madonna or for younger listeners Justin Bieber.
So that was the late 90s by which time I'd already read The Fabric of Reality by David Deutsch multiple times.
And the remarkable thing about having read that book was that I just had to talk about it with someone.
I think many people who read the book end up feeling that way.
It's kind of unique in that respect, it doesn't happen often.
As much as I loved Paul Davies books I never really felt a need to discuss them with groups of people but David's book was different.
But sadly there was no one to really talk to about it.
At university the people around me even in my physics lectures just didn't seem to get the significance of it.
Well of course they hadn't read it to begin with.
At the same time I was reformulating my own thoughts from decades of schooling and some years of tertiary education
in light of what The Fabric of Reality was saying about the nature of knowledge and so on.
I was converted by that book to the many worlds interpretation of quantum theory.
In other words, realism.
I was converted to popurian epistemology.
In other words, I had some insight into what knowledge actually was and how it was created.
But whenever I mentioned either of those things, let's say many worlds to a physics tutor or professor
or popper to a philosophy tutor or professor,
I barely ever got more than a shrug or maybe a hint that I should go and read about Bohmian mechanics
or maybe take more seriously what Feynman had to say about understanding quantum theory
or in the case of popper to look more deeply into the Vienna circle
and what Wittgenstein had to say on the matters that popper was writing about.
In other words, in both cases, there were not many sympathetic ears.
Now I cannot remember exactly how it happened and this is in the era before Google
but some search engine or other allowed me to eventually find myself online in the late 90s and the early 2000s
able to, now and again, fire a question to David Deutsch himself via e-mail about The Fabric of Reality.
I was astonished that he was the guy, the inventor of quantum computation
that seemingly no one much knew about but seemed to know a heck of a lot more
and make considerably more sense than anyone else I'd ever encountered in academia or intellectual circles.
I was one of the privileged few in retrospect who knew a second book was on the way
though we never knew what it would be called nor when it would arrive
but the anticipation grew over the decade until finally it was published.
I think perhaps only Star Wars fans waiting for the next canonic film to drop
know exactly that same feeling.
Well even in that case they don't really. Films are a transient thing
but a book like The Beginning of Infinity is kind of bottomless
in a way that no other consumable content quite is.
So I've been a fan of David Deutsch for decades now
so it still blows my mind that I could be in a position to actually just have a chat with him as we do here
albeit from the other side of the world.
And on that, me being far closer to Antarctica than most of the population of the planet
and most people who are listening to this will be far closer to the Arctic,
the finiteness of the speed of light did catch David and I out on more than one occasion
making this episode in some places a little bit disjointed
so editing was required for listenability in some places
but hopefully I've done a good enough job that you don't notice.
I'm not a polished interviewer of course.
This seemed to be half conversation, half interview
and I have learned now on putting this together
to not speak over the person I'm talking to
or try to fill pauses with noises of agreement.
I have learned those lessons now but I did not know them beforehand
which means there are some places where I do seem to forget I am being recorded.
As this is episode 100 a sort of announcement is in order
that being that Topcast will continue to go from strength to strength
in a space of podcast that seems to expand continuously
but I think there is a nice little niche here that needs to be filled
so I'll continue doing what I do
but with more energy thanks to the support of Patreons
and especially of course to Naval Ravikant
whose own worldview and wisdom aligns so closely with the optimism,
view of progress and wealth of David Deutsch
and what I am trying to promote here.
So I'll continue doing what I do which is long form podcasts
especially on Deutsch's The Fabric of Reality,
Marletto's The Science of Can and Can't
and Pinker's Rationality for now.
But I'll also be broadening out and refining things
making lots more stand alone episodes
and really tightening things up on some of the ideas
we like to talk about here and making far more brief podcasts as well.
And maybe now and again I'll do the odd recorded conversation once in a while.
So look forward to that in the coming weeks and months and years if you're a fan.
Now this introduction is already longer than I hoped for
but I actually haven't done a job of introduction
which I should do in an episode like this.
I need to introduce my guests
but of course David needs no introduction
especially if you're listening to this as a subscriber of Topcast
because Topcast is largely a podcast
devoted to the work and worldview of David Deutsch,
the inventor of the theory of quantum computation,
author of the first quantum algorithm,
intellectual successor to the epistemology and philosophy of Karl Popper,
author of The Fabric of Reality and The Beginning of Infinity,
creator of Constructor Theory.
David is a Fellow of the Royal Society,
winner of the Dirac Prize in 1998 for quote,
pioneering work in quantum computation
leading to the concept of a quantum computer
and for contributing to the understanding of how such devices
might be constructed from quantum gates in quantum networks.
And he was also the co-winner of the Dirac Medal in 2017
for quote, building the foundations of quantum information science.
His books have won prizes and he has won other prizes as well.
Go to his website and the about me section to find out more about all that.
But as I record this, I've just learned that this week,
the final week of November 2021,
David has won the Isaac Newton Medal from the Institute of Physics
in the United Kingdom for quote,
founding the discipline named quantum computation
and establishing quantum computations fundamental idea now known as the qubit
or quantum bit end quote.
He has now also been elected a Fellow of that Institute of Physics
Prizes, accolades and accomplishments aside,
the impact of David Deutsch on the world is yet to be fully realized,
but it is going to become perhaps something like that
of an Einstein or a Newton or a Darwin in my opinion,
which is why we're so lucky to be able to interrogate him once in a while.
Once the first fully functional universal quantum computer is built,
the landscape of the world will change.
When the average person understands and appreciates
that its function can only be explained by recourse to a multiverse,
the intellectual world will change.
When people look back in retrospect and realize
he was right all along in what he said about quantum computation
and therefore about explanations and hence Popper,
the world will be changed.
We can only hope that that change goes deeper still
into how the education of young people is handled,
how we deal with problems both known and unknown,
why progress, optimism and wealth need to motivate us all individually
and as a civilization.
The world will be changed and we will see that what I've just said
about putting David alongside the biggest names in science and philosophy
is neither hyperbole or hubris.
It is a serious claim.
I just wish it would all happen far sooner,
but that's enough of an introduction.
I'll have a few brief remarks at the end of this,
but for now I present to you my interview,
my discussion, my conversation with David Deutsch.
Okay, well thanks very much anyway for doing this, David.
It's a real honor to talk to you and be able to record this conversation.
And this book that I've spent the last few years exploring now
is unlike just about any other to my mind.
And I've said this a few times that it's unlike other popular science books
because it's not really a popular science book.
One thing that it contains within it that is different to other science books
is what I might say are sort of discoveries in philosophy and physics
or at the very least new ways of refining and explaining material
you've put out there elsewhere in other forms perhaps.
The first time this seems to crop up actually is in chapter one,
The Reach of Explanations, and there we get the concept of good explanations,
good explanations being,
actual explanations that account for what is out there in the world
and how it works that are hard to vary, these hard to vary explanations.
Now I'm convinced and most people who hear about it become convinced over time
but I think there's a lot of people who think,
well science isn't just about testable theories,
why isn't testable theories enough?
So there was a lot about explanations even in my first book.
Yes.
And some careful readers pointed out
that I'd never actually explained what an explanation is in Fabrica reality.
In fact, I seem to have taken a bit of a cop-out path
by saying, just saying about explanations
that there isn't any closed list of attributes that an explanation must have.
And that's because it seemed to me that,
and I think it does seem to many people
that the difference between an explanation and a prediction is obvious.
But to most people it was quite opaque.
So I thought about it and this is indeed one of the few things
that I will acknowledge is kind of a bit of an innovation in the beginning of infinity.
I thought about what exactly makes the difference.
And I thought of some examples such as the explanation of the seasons
as opposed to predicting them.
And then I think that the example that I like best,
although again not everyone does,
is the example of the conjurer where you go in
and you go in to see this conjuring performance
and you see some cups and balls
and the conjurer puts the ball under the cup
and after a while you begin to predict
that the cup where he puts the ball under
is not going to be the one where it ends up.
But that doesn't mean you can explain what's going on in the trick.
Yeah, exactly.
So you can predict quite confidently that the ball isn't there
and there you are, it's vindicated.
But that's not what you mean by how is the trick done.
What you mean is what has happened to bring about the thing you saw.
And so you're not asking for an account of the thing you saw,
even a perfect prediction of the thing you saw,
you're asking about the thing you didn't see.
Yes, yes.
And this comes up so often throughout the book really
that I think it's a subtle point easily missed.
And of course the other example that you use
and that you often go to is this idea of dinosaurs.
The one thing that you actually can't observe
is indeed the one thing that you're invoking
as actually existing and causing the phenomena that you do observe.
And in all these cases,
that unobserved thing is the thing that you're really interested in.
It's the only reason you're interested in any kind of prediction at all.
Yes.
Now, this concept of then hard to vary,
where all the parts of the explanation have some functional role,
and this is really what makes the explanation a good explanation
as opposed to any arbitrary account that could be easily varied,
mythological accounts and so on, magical accounts.
Did that come to you?
Did you have that in mind during the fabric of reality, writing it then?
Or did it only come later in light of people saying,
can you sharpen up what you mean by explanation?
It's the latter.
Like I said, while I was writing the fabric of reality,
I kind of thought that these were rather foolishly.
I thought that these were words that had an uncontroversial meaning.
And it didn't occur to me that most people would not have this meaning in mind,
although many people did.
So in that sense, it wasn't something I invented.
It was something that I realized needs to be elaborated,
to be written down more clearly.
And then I started to think about things that are explanations
and things that aren't explanations,
like the ancient myths and so on.
And then I thought with the conjurer,
there are circumstances where the conjurer did it.
Is the explanation that the person wants?
Yes.
Can you imagine a person who believes in magic
and is sort of slowly coming out of that state of mind?
Like James Randi's family,
when he was a teenager and when he first exposed a fake psychic
and was horrified to find that most of the people in the audience
didn't want to know the truth.
That happened more than once.
I don't know if you know the famous story
that he was on Australian television.
He did the same to the Spoonbender, Yuri Geller,
on one of our daytime, lunchtime, talkback television shows.
And the audience was very upset with him.
And indeed, the host was as well and stormed off the set.
He did the same thing to Randi.
Wow.
Right.
So there you have it.
That anger would happen, I suppose,
whether or not he revealed how he did it.
It was the fact that he was revealing that he did do it
that was the thing that angered them.
And that was the relevant explanation in context.
So that's why I have to say it's an explanation is hard to vary
while still solving the problem that it purports to solve.
Yes.
Which might be different for different people as well
in the same situation.
OK.
So you mentioned that piece of sort of prosaic terminology
explanation that we all use,
but I think that you've put a spin on it that is quite helpful.
But turning to another word,
a word that you, in fact, don't use.
And it brings me to chapter two.
And don't worry, I'm not going to go through
every single chapter chronologically,
but then just a few of them.
But chapter two is titled, Closer to Reality.
But Karl Popper had this term,
varicillimitude, which means something like closer to truth.
And it seems to me you've deliberately avoided that word.
But why?
Is it because it contains a misconception?
It's misleading or it's a needless neologism?
What would be the reason to avoid such a word?
I think all of those things.
And I think even Popper, I don't know the history of this very well,
but I think even Popper went off it.
Popper in general was very into logic.
This is, I think, partly a sign of the times
that the people who were doing the prevailing philosophy of science
at the time and positivism and logical positivism,
many of them were logicians and mathematical logicians even.
Popper originally didn't want to mention truth at all.
And then he got converted by Tarski
and he tells a story about how they were sitting on a park bench
in Vienna and Tarski explained the correspondence theory of truth to him.
And he realized that this is, in fact, a useful concept after all.
But I wonder what logical scientific discovery would have looked like
if he had, in fact, written the whole of it without ever mentioning truth.
I think it would have been worse in some ways
and that it's difficult to make the case for realism
if you don't have a concept of truth.
And Popper was very keen to formulate a realistic philosophy of science.
But on the other hand, when you do introduce truth
and especially verisimilitude,
then the idea is that somehow we can utter truth
or at least we can utter something that's 90% true or something like that.
And we'd have it there by a method of measuring that 90%.
And I think verisimilitude was not intended to be something you could measure.
But if you can't measure it,
then its only use is a sort of philosophical regulating principle.
And I think knowledge and problems are much better concepts.
Probably Popper's fundamental concept,
the way it turned out after all these experiments
with different conceptual frameworks or whatever,
is the idea of a problem.
Because that comes up not only in his philosophy of science,
but in his political philosophy as well.
And more generally, he generalizes it to even the problem situation of a gene.
I'm not sure even I would go that far,
but it's a very unifying concept.
And on the other hand, I don't think verisimilitude is useful at all.
And as I said, even truth, one has to be very careful to use the concept of truth
only as a property of abstractions.
Never as something you can actually measure or have a direct access to.
So therefore, would you avoid even saying that scientific explanations
or indeed explanations in any domain that we happen to be interested in
would even be approximately true,
because that would also entail some kind of quantitative claim about how close we are.
Or can we still use that word?
Of course, it's approximately true.
There's some degree of accuracy in this claim about reality.
I think we can use it, because again, depending on the problem situation,
if one is speaking informally, then one can use imprecise terminology.
I just caught myself just a moment ago saying probably.
I'm generally opposed to the whole concept of probability.
I think it's a scam.
But that doesn't mean that in everyday life, we don't know what we mean
when we're saying that Popper probably meant so and so.
I don't mean that there was a stochastic process
where he could have meant something else with probability 0.15.
I often find myself catching myself precisely the same way that you said.
Generally, it kind of has left my vocabulary
in just in day-to-day life using the word probably.
But at the same time, I don't chastise myself too much
because in order to communicate normally, people are going to use this word.
They understand, I think, what we mean.
There isn't a such thing as a perfectly precise language.
We want to use terms and ways of understanding things that are suitable to the problem.
That would bring me to my next question.
Describing people, for example, as chemical scum might be
a very loose way of understanding what people are, but Hawking did it
and you have an excellent refutation of this claim that Stephen Hawking did make,
which seems to be the reasonably scientific way of understanding our place in the universe.
He said that we are just a chemical scum on the surface of a typical planet,
orbiting a typical star, and so on.
But you say this place is not typical, is it?
In what sense isn't it typical?
I think the description of humans as a chemical scum on Earth
is not accurate in the problem situation in which Hawking used that term.
We are certainly made of chemicals, but so is the rest of the Earth
and so is all other matter in the universe.
So to single us out as a scum, if you're going to take these terms
in the context of trying to describe something purely in terms, in reductionist terms,
of their constituents, then it is simply false to add a pejorative term.
That pejorative term comes from a different problem situation
and a different vocabulary is needed.
It would be enough to say we are chemicals like everything else in the universe.
And then you see that it would be silly to call the Earth a chemical scum
or the Sun or the Solar System or the Milky Way Galaxy as a chemical scum,
though in the sense in which we are, it is too.
So we are a special, a very special kind of chemical.
But then would that entail that the Earth is special by virtue of the fact
that it is uniquely suited to ensuring that this set of chemicals called us
is able to survive off into some future,
that we are only sustained by the existence of this planet
and will only continue to be sustained by this planet.
So therefore we better look after the environment or else we are going to go extinct.
Yes, so you are putting that in a deliberately exaggerated way
that makes it much more wrong.
You could have said that with one tenth the emphasis and it would still be wrong.
Now it is true that the Earth is that living things can exist on Earth
only by virtue of the fact that the Earth provides by astronomical standards
a very unusual set of circumstances which if they were to vary by astronomical standards
by only a few percent then without a lot of technology we would die
and living things in general would die without technological help.
That does not at all mean that the Earth is adapted to human existence
or even to life but especially to human existence very accurately.
It would be more true to say that the Earth is barely suitable for life.
It provides a relatively stable temperature and sunlight
and living things manage to use that even though it is not very conveniently provided
and that took it hundreds of millions of years to work out
and the rest was provided by life itself
and most of the rest as far as humans go was provided by humans.
There are very very few places on Earth that humans can live comfortably without technology
that is without ideas provided by them and not provided by the Earth.
So I don't know maybe some South Sea Islands with suitable coconuts or whatever they have there
and even that would be a trap because we are so constituted
that if we did live in such an environment for some generations
our numbers would increase to the point where we were living in misery again.
So living on Earth what has been provided is really just the bare necessities
for us to live somewhere originally the Great Lift Valley or something
and the rest has to be provided by us.
Yes so the Earth is not adapted to life but life can adapt itself to the Earth
but the only thing that is going to survive in the long run in terms of regular life
not intelligent life like ourselves are the genes.
The genes are going to want to try and make themselves survive
and the animals won't care or the other species don't have this concept of caring
into the infinite future about their own survival.
However we do so we want to adapt ourselves to the Earth in some way
or if not the Earth then something far larger
we want to adapt ourselves to the universe in which we find ourselves
and the one thing that enables us to do that is of course
solving our problems continually to create the knowledge in order to enable us to do so
and you have the great dichotomy of saying problems are inevitable
but problems are soluble and here I have heard over the years
people push back against this especially the second part that problems are soluble.
For example they argue we can't know everything
and they will invoke that it's provably the case
that given Goethe's result there are true statements we cannot prove are true
so there is some and there are some mathematics it's not decidable
so some problems are not soluble isn't that correct?
What's the argument against that line of reasoning?
I think that this line of reasoning is reaching for a standard of knowing
that is impossible for anything it's not possible to know even provable things
by the standard that they're asking to know unprovable things.
When we say that something is provable we mean that it's provable from certain axioms
and Goethe's theorem is about provability which means provability from axioms
Now if you have an undecidable statement in some formal system
and if it was true you could always add that as another axiom
and then it would be provable.
So you might ask yeah but how do we know that that statement you're adding is true
if we can't prove it?
Well unfortunately that objection applies to any set of axioms
and it applies to the original set of axioms as well
and this is a mistake that has been made by many mathematicians
even after Goethe.
I think it was made by virtually all mathematicians before Goethe
but even after mathematicians tend to think that there is a class of axioms
that don't need proof or something that they are self-proving or self-evident
or they come from mathematical intuition which is infallible or something like that
but in fact the axioms, the rules of inference in logic
that for example if the proposition A and B is true
then it is necessarily the case that B is also true.
Now it seems self-evident but it is not provable
so what are you going to do?
Now you're going to say that this is a problem that is insoluble
and therefore it's not true that problems are soluble.
No, people don't bother saying it with axioms
because they have this misconception that axioms are somehow enshrined by God
or something and we can know for sure that they are true
but that's not what knowledge is about.
We are trying to solve problems, we're not trying to establish truths
and Goedl's theorem is not about establishing truths either
it's about deriving things from other things.
Yes, yes and one line of discussion I often pursue here
and correct me if I'm wrong but this vast class of undecidable unprovable statements
which must vastly outnumber the number that are provable statements
they're in a sense uninteresting
because that's not what the claims of science, physics for example, consist of
and so they don't have and again I would appeal to your better knowledge on this
they can't possibly have any effects on our world
they're not going to help us to solve problems as we would say
we know they exist but beyond that are they interesting in any way?
Well they're certainly interesting because mathematics is interesting
and we're interested in abstractions as well as in physical problems
and the reason that it seems implausible at the moment
that undecidable propositions might be relevant to some practical problem
like how to feed the world or how to eliminate viruses and so on
is that the undecidable propositions are all about infinite sets
infinite sets of things like the set of all numbers and that kind of thing
and physics as we currently conceive of it
the infinite sets that appear in physics are very tame
and don't have these problems in them
I can conceive that maybe one day somebody invents a different physical theory
where the undecidability of certain propositions about the real numbers
would tell you something about how to do and how not to do certain things that you want
I think Roger Penrose once pointed out that certain theories of quantum gravity
do depend on turing undecidable propositions
basically it's like if you're working out a Feynman diagram
to work out what the probability is that a certain gravitational wave
will interact with another gravitational wave you know this is very far from ordinary experience
then if you want to work that out accurately you have to do a sum
the amplitudes for all possible processes over all geometries
and for all possible topologies
and to enumerate all possible topologies in the relevant sense
I mean I'm not a mathematician I don't know about this stuff
but apparently that's an undecidable task
and therefore you couldn't work out this probability amplitude
for the gravitational wave doing something or other
because you would have to have a mathematical expression for all topologies in a given sense
so that's an example of how in principle
laws of physics might have undecidable consequences
yes and therefore the undecidable consequences are actually interesting
well it would be physically interesting yes
in principle something that you wanted to do might depend on working out this thing
but I don't see any particular reason for making a
as long as we have the necessities of life and comfort
I don't see any reason for making a distinction between problems in engineering
and in physics and in pure mathematics
I mean they're all problems they're all conflicts between theories that interest people
people want to know what the resolution is
one thing I say in the book about pure mathematical problems
is that sometimes discovering that something is undecidable
is the solution to the problem
in the sense that it's what you wanted to know
because you have in mind some prima facie argument
that certain proposition is true
and another prima facie argument that it's false
and then you discover that it's actually undecidable
and that explains why you could have these two conflicting intuitions about it
and then you can go and criticize your intuitions in other ways
because you know that you're not going to be able to resolve it by proving one of them true
or false
now you mentioned in that answer there the concept of abstractions
and you actually invoked abstractions in talking about it
of course pure mathematics is about abstractions
and I don't know what might be the most controversial chapter in the book
but I think among intellectual types to at least some extent
it would be chapter 5 if it's not going to be the white flowers are beautiful chapter
it's going to be the one that claims there is a reality to abstractions
because to some people this seems weirdly enough
you know not to me I think not to most people listening to this
but it can sound like an appeal to the supernatural or some sort of woo
because some people are physicalists
they think that everything just has to come down to the behavior of atoms
but I wanted to ask you if you distinguish between kinds of abstractions
rather than defending the thesis that abstractions are real
I know this is not necessarily a well-defined area
but for example something like numbers their abstractions
are they different in kind to let's say knowledge
because after all there may be infinitely well there are infinitely many prime numbers
and not all of those prime numbers ever need to be instantiated in a physical substrate anywhere
nevertheless they still exist
but knowledge to be knowledge has to be instantiated in a physical substrate
it's also abstract but well I might pull the brakes there
can you explain if there are these different species of abstractions
and if so how do we understand the differences in their existence
yes there are different species of abstractions
I mean maybe it's better to say there is a classification of abstractions
and some classifications are quite useful
because abstractions within the same category of classification
have similar properties and can be understood with similar explanations
or the same explanation
but then with the different problem situations you might want to classify things differently
like you know just like in biology we may wish to
sometimes we want to classify things as mammals and birds and reptiles and so on
and on other occasions we may want to classify them as aquatic creatures
and terrestrial creatures and aerial creatures and so on
so classifications are useful relative to the problems that you want to talk about
and it's the same with abstractions
it's definitely true that some abstractions as you say like knowledge
and information more generally don't exist unless they're instantiated
so they have to have this extra element of being instantiated
but that's also true of there are more classifications than that
even among pure abstractions
there are abstractions that it seems to be important in mathematics to
like I said to distinguish between abstractions that involve infinite sets
and abstractions that don't
and then the whole idea of a set is not universally applicable
so the set of all sets it famously turned out even before Goethe
it turned out that this from Russell that it turned out that the set of all sets isn't a set
so then you have to invoke a class it's just a class of things
or the set of all sets that don't contain itself
so that's right
but it doesn't help because it doesn't help with everything
because there's no such thing as the class of all classes either
so yes there are different kinds of things
and another thing which I think is still slightly mysterious
is what kind of an abstraction the laws of physics are
some people think precisely by arguments such as you've mentioned
that there really are no laws of physics
all there are are physical events and physical processes
and laws are just a kind of way of summarizing physical events and processes
they just are
so because I see that looking out of the window
I can see that the sky is cloudless at the moment
that is some kind of emergent consequence of the laws of physics
but if it's true then people who deny that there are laws of physics
will say well that's just a fact about the universe
and you could summarize it and say that on three of the four days of this week
the sky was clear and that's not a law of nature
so why should there be anything special about the statement that
nothing can exceed the speed of light
well it's because the statement that nothing exceeds the speed of light
is not just a prediction
it is an explanation it's an explanation of how the universe is
that the universe is a four-dimensional pseudo-Riemannian manifold
with a metric and so on and so on
and the fact that the speed of light is finite
emerges from that explanation
and you could write down all the predictions that follow from that
in a sort of infinitely long list of things
like this dog can't run faster than light
and this car can't travel faster than light
and once you've made that infinitely long list
or maybe just very very long list
you would have written down everything that can be deduced
about what happens in nature
but you wouldn't have ever listed that law
and you wouldn't have ever mentioned manifolds
and four-dimensional or anything like that
Well you'd have some significant explaining to do wouldn't you?
Well if you wanted explanations you'd have a lot of explaining to do
you would in fact have all the explaining to do
at the end of that huge process that you had at the beginning
you wouldn't have explained anything
We were just talking about the nature of physical laws
and whether or not and to what extent they might be
pure abstractions or a kind of abstraction of some kind
and I was just thinking to myself that for anyone who denies
the existence of physical laws in their own right, laws of physics
and to just say well there are just facts of matter about the universe
for example the orbits of planets going around stars
are approximately circular or elliptical
then those facts of the matter, those regularities in nature
seem to be crying out for an explanation
so to deny that there would be really existing physical laws
behind those regularities in nature
seems to me to be going to a lot of work to avoid
what might otherwise be called Occam's razor
well isn't a simple explanation there are physical laws out there governing these things
Yes, of course if somebody insists on the non-existence of explanations
like exactly like insistence on the non-existence of anything
you can't be proved wrong
but I think the motivation for denying the existence of laws
is the old mistake of empiricism
it is the assumption that raw facts or raw sensory impressions
have a privileged status in that we can access them directly
and this people contrast this with things like laws
and explanations in general
which they say we can't access directly
so they have some kind of a lesser reality
and we can in principle not insist on there being real
one can insist on there not being real and it doesn't make any difference
the trouble with that is that exactly the same is true of sense impressions as well
and so this argument that abstractions don't really exist
or that laws don't really exist and so on
hidden in there is the assumption that sense impressions
or that kind of thing do really exist in some sense of really
which is itself a mistake that all knowledge is conjectural
all observations are theory laden
there is nothing that is an authoritative source of knowledge
everything is conjecture
and so once you've realized that everything is conjecture
but that knowledge can still exist
then the reason for making a distinction between different kinds of existence
well no there is a distinction between different kinds of existence
but the justification, the motivation for denying that certain things exist
even if we need them in our explanations goes away
and this once one becomes at least somewhat familiar
with the worldview that you've presented in your books
and with Popper's worldview
it's very difficult to try and reimagine what people mean by
directly observe
I struggle now to try and conceive of what one really means
when they say well there are certain things you can just observe
you can just see
but on explaining to them well let's think about what that whole process of seeing
actually consists of
of photons being absorbed and then re-emitted back towards the eye
and then being converted into electrical signals which then go into your brain
this whole concept of direct observation
actually itself vanishes into a cloud of explanation
not so much a cloud but a kind of way of understanding the world
that denies the possibility of direct observation
I don't even know what someone really intends by this terminology
this way of denying the reality of things
which we don't have direct access to
when we don't have direct access to anything
even I would tentatively argue that even the contents of our own minds
I agree in a way the contents of our own minds
are quite a highly sophisticated kind of knowledge
that we only know through an extensive chain of interpretations
some of which are notoriously unreliable
even in everyday language we know what we mean when we say
you're just fooling yourself
or the content of those ideas
is incompatible with empiricism
with the idea that reliable knowledge comes from the senses
and I think people regard that as just one of those things
it's one of the mysteries of nature
it's the problem of induction or something like that
and you say it's hard to imagine what people mean
when they talk about direct observation
it's interesting that that concept of direct observation
also had to be invented at one time
and in fact it was quite a liberation when it was first invented
like in various stages
there was empiricism in the John Locke sense
is relatively recent
but the idea that we can gain knowledge
by looking at the world which is false
was these concepts of knowledge and looking and reliable
and that kind of thing
they're not built into our genes
somebody invented those concepts
and at the time when they invented them
they were an improvement
on something that was more vague and more false than that
trust the authority or something similar
for example
but there was a time when you didn't even have to say trust the authorities
when trusting the authorities was just the way the world was
and nobody bothered to put that into words
that reminds me of the divine right of kings
which is a concept that was invented
only after the authority of kings was questioned
well this all raises the fact that there is this creativity going on
this creation of concepts
in order to try and come to better understand the world
that is the uniquely creative capacity of the human mind
and mind itself
how do you understand the nature of mind?
I sometimes think of it as this abstraction
I think you've said this to me
it's a funny kind of abstraction
it's an abstraction that itself needs to be instantiated in matter
but also needs to be running
it can't just be like any other piece of knowledge
which you can transmit
from one place to another in different physical forms
and that's one way of understanding what knowledge is
it allows itself to continue to persist over time
and to get itself copied, to get itself replicated
but a mind, a human mind
this thing that is enabling the creation of this knowledge
it itself is an unusual kind of abstraction
how do you think of it at the moment?
yes, it's an unusual kind of knowledge
so we have yet another classification
a mind is a kind of knowledge
you might say
but it's a kind of knowledge that doesn't only have to be instantiated
but as you have just said
it has to be running
now what does that mean?
running how fast?
running in what?
because running in the wrong kind of computer
would make it gibberish
or in a kind of computer that has the wrong mapping to reality
we don't know how it works
so the mind is characterised by creativity
I think we can go that far
at least the human mind is characterised by creativity
but we don't know what creativity is
we don't know what the distinction is
between a computer programme that is running creatively
and one that is not running creatively
one day we will know
but we don't know yet
I think also there are
and again minds
that minds exist is common sense
even though we don't know how they work
or what specifically they are
so more recent ideas that maybe minds don't exist
that had to be invented too
it is not at all common sense
and it doesn't at all follow from any good philosophy
but we don't know
and one of the things I think that
is a misconception
that dates from a very long time ago
is that a mind is like mostly consistent
that it consists of the ideas in the mind
are mostly consistent
and when they are inconsistent
that's a kind of emergency
and we have to fix that
because we have
that means that it's not a proper mind really
it contains inconsistencies
and therefore that's no different
from a load of propositions
written down on a piece of paper
I don't think that's true at all
I think a better way to think of the mind
is as a set of problems
and a problem consists of conflicting theories
or rather a problem is more like
some conflicting theories that we have noticed
because we don't really think of something as a problem
unless it's giving rise to some thought
but there must be ideas that are conflicting with each other
before we have noticed it
so the mind I think of it as sort of
massive tangled ideas
which are largely inconsistent
the parts of it which we have sorted out
into a kind of consistency
are a minority
that are currently not giving rise to any thought
they might be invoked in some thought
that's about some other inconsistency
but the part of the mind that is thinking
is full of inconsistency
and so therefore a model of the mind
thinks of the mind as a set of consistent propositions
with occasional inconsistencies that we then fix
it is I think very far from the truth
it's not a set of consistent ideas
and it's not a set of propositions
because propositions have a definite truth value
each proposition is either true or false
and it has a perfectly definite meaning
if it has a meaning
whereas the ideas in minds
don't have a definite meaning
and they're not precisely true or false
we can make them have as sharp a meaning
as our current problem situation requires
that's what we should be aiming for
and we can make them as consistent
as the current problem situation requires
and we're striving
you talked earlier about truth
we're striving to make them as true
as the current problem situation requires
yes so it sounds that
whatever the nature of the mind is
in a computational sense
has to be radically different
to any other kind of program
that we've hitherto encountered
because all those other programs
are written in such a way
that it's proposition after proposition
perhaps one following from another
the algorithm of a kind
and these statements need to be
consistent all the computer program
itself isn't going to run
but you're saying that it's possibly the case
that underlying this uniquely creative capacity
of the human mind is something that is
quite the mirror image of that
in at least some respects
and maybe this is what is needed
in order to go some way
to explaining what's going on here
with creativity
another way that you've put that
in the beginning of infinity is of course
explanatory universality
this idea that
even if there were other kinds
of creativity prior to us
what we have
is a kind of creativity
which allows us to create
knowledge which is going to be
able to solve problems in principle
about anything that exists in the
physical universe which brings me
to one of my little hobby horses
this concept that
people sometimes raise that
well there might be snalions out there
the super advanced aliens who are going to
have some successor
to the successor to the successor of
the unification of quantum theory and general relativity
and even if they could bring it to us
we wouldn't understand it
it would be written in a mathematics
that's too complicated for us
or consists of
concepts that are beyond our puny
human minds to understand either that
or the super intelligence
is going to come along at some point in the future
and it too is going to recognize
that it's so much smarter than us
and we probably all deserve to be exterminated
something like that
what's wrong with these I think
quite commonly held views
about other kinds of minds
super advanced alien minds
or super intelligent artificial intelligences
again of course
we can't prove that such things don't exist
there's a very famous one
called God
which there have been disputes
about
for many centuries
they have
yes I mean
even the bible
speaks of unbelievers so they
must have existed at that time
right yes
and to be a believer
in that kind of entity
means that you're
believing in an entity whose
mind whose mental processes
are first of all
not embedded in physics
not instantiated in physics
in the same way that ours are
and also that they can
reach further they can understand
things that
things embedded in mere physics
can never understand and you can't prove
that's false but
it is a bad explanation
as I point out in
the beginning of infinity and so
one thing is that
there are many such theories
and there are many theories
about such entities
whether they be snalians
or gods or devils
or demons
or artificial general intelligences
those theories
since they're bad explanations
they have the property that
if two such believers
in different ones come to
guide me of their view
then there's nothing
I can do to choose between them
it's like
they are invoking some non-understandable
thing and the two of them
are invoking some two
non-understandable things
with a non-understandable difference between them
so
I would like to put both those people
into a sack and tie it
shot and then only
have to debate with the survivor
for efficiency
very good
so that's related to
this idea that again
problems are soluble and what I would suggest
is that a kind of a special case
of that almost is that
the all evils are due to lack of knowledge
principle of optimism that you have
but here it's really interesting
the principle of optimism
this claim that all evils are due to
a lack of knowledge seems to be
linking quite strongly
to cosmology stuff about knowledge
to evil stuff about morality
isn't that a big leap
surely people who
do evil things are doing evil things
because of their ideas which is to say
what they know
it's not a lack of knowledge is it
it is the presence of some knowledge
oh well that's the same thing
they are doing it
because their knowledge is
inadequate is false
in some relevant way
even the good guys
their knowledge is
better than the bad guys
but it's still not true
it's not perfect it can be improved
in fact the good guys are
characterized to a large extent
by the fact that they are open
to correcting their existing knowledge
and to adopting
better ideas that they previously
didn't know I think
it's the natural thing
it should be one's first
guess that moral
knowledge is included in
the same epistemology
as physical or mathematical knowledge
because as I've said
the arguments that there are
different kinds of knowledge
depending on some kind of privilege
access to one or the other
is just a mistake
it's empiricism
or something of the kind
that is just
not understanding
the conjectural nature of all
ideas
must include moral ones
and mathematical ones
and physical ones and so on
uniformly the way
to get better ideas is to try to get
better explanations in the light of
the problems that one has with those ideas
there might be
I think there's even another way
that the beginning of infinity
does create a strong link
in one's mind between
epistemology and morality
and that would be in the moral injunction
do not destroy the means of error correction
so there we have
error correction, epistemology
and do not do this thing
so there's a moral claim
now I wanted to focus on this for a minute
because this might
raise an issue within
constructor theory and this is
your new physics along with
your new theory of physics along with
the physics of the possible
and the impossible
or the possible and impossible transformations
I think is one way it might be described
and among many things to be excited
about with this approach is to link
it seems to me between physics
and epistemology and we already know
some of this story
we know that what can be proven
in mathematics depends on what we know
about what the laws of physics are
and how the laws of physics operate and because
we know that proofs in mathematics are a kind of
computation, computation requires a computer
the computer has to be made out of something
made out of matter, the matter obeys laws of physics
so we can only prove things that the laws
of physics say it is possible to prove
but constructor theory seems to be
generalizing this further
I'm not sure if that would be fair to say
so we're going beyond mathematics now
and perhaps into realms where we are
saying look some things are not possible
to know and some things are possible
to know even outside of mathematics
but there may be things impossible
to know in history for example or in science
because there will be no transformation
allowing us to actually construct
the knowledge that solves the problem
there but this if I've
just gone way off the rails in my reasoning
here would seem to contradict
the problems a soluble claim
in the beginning infinity
the one example I want to
call on, I think you might have mentioned this in the fabric
reality I can't remember
but it's something to the effect of
let's say you wanted to know what
Augustus sees at 8 on his 13th
birthday that's a reasonable
scientific question
but it might also be unknowable
but it's not going to be a problem
for our understanding
because it's going to be inherently uninteresting
it's not going to solve any actual historical
problems but is this
way of thinking about how
constructor theory comes to bear on
morality and
epistemology at all valid
I think that
one can address that issue
without using
constructor theory directly
if constructor theory works
then there will be a theory of knowledge
within constructor theory just like
there will be a theory of quantum mechanics
within constructor theory
we don't know how these
subsidiary theories
whether these subsidiary theories will be changed
or if they have to be changed
to what extent they have to be
our theory of knowledge is nowhere near
as precise and accurate
as the theory of theories about physics
I don't quite understand
your question because
suppose we had a problem
about Caesar's
what Caesar 8 on his 13th
birthday I think the example I usually
use is Julius Caesar's
last meal
never mind Augustus Caesar's 13th
birthday meal is just as good
if
some problem
depended on knowing that
solution then
it's not accurate
to cast this
problem in terms of
having to have evidence of what
it was you know this is
not necessarily a question of which
observables can be
observed in physics we know
that most of the observables
the detailed observables
of the past
have been randomized to such an
extent that it would require an
infeasible amount of
collection of knowledge
an infeasible amount of measurement
shall we say
to reconstitute it
and that might well be true
I mean if it isn't true of these
Caesar meal events
it'll be true of some lots of events
it'll be true of most events
at the time so assume
that
it is infeasible
because of the laws of physics
and this could be expressed precisely
in constructive theory to measure
Julius Caesar's last meal
that doesn't mean that we can't solve
the problem that gave rise to this question
because it can't be a question
about physics
from the point of view of physics
this is a very uninteresting question
so it would be
a question about history
or about sociology
or about some subject that hasn't been
invented yet in which there would be
explanations that
rival explanations
both of which had reasonable
arguments in their favor and which somebody
decided could be resolved by
making this measurement and then it turns out
this measurement is impossible
well that doesn't mean that it can't be resolved
in other ways
we know
that last meal
was not a cheeseburger
and
that is not because
of the measurements to that effect
it's because we have high level theories
about the development
of human culture
and the problem about what he ate
etc would have come
out of that kind
of field
and the solution
may well come out of that kind of field as well
I can only imagine that the question would arise
if there was
a problem about how and why
he died so if it was Julius Caesar
and there was some concern that maybe he'd
been poisoned just before he
died well then there would presumably
be theories about
existing
historical documents about how various other
people living with him
at the time didn't particularly like him and then
presumably although we might not be able to tell
what his final meal was
some very smart forensic scientist
might be able to detect some kind of
toxin in where his stomach used
to be so I imagine that even a problem
like this it wouldn't be
framed in exactly those
words what was his last meal but it might
be
some other kind of historical question
it would arise out of some
problem that wasn't a physics problem
for sure
by the way there is this problem with Napoleon
did he die of wall
paper
because
it's controversial how Napoleon
died he wasn't that old
and
he had some symptoms
which are consistent with arsenic
poisoning and
there were people
who would have preferred to see him
dead and then other people
have said well yes it was arsenic poisoning
but it was
because of the wall paper
the colour of the wall paper
was caused by arsenic
paint and other people
said yes so there was arsenic
in the wall paper but not enough to kill him
and so on and so on
and this problem is eminently
addressable
not by going and finding
video evidence of the poisoner
okay so the following
Popper and like myself and I was in that tradition
we don't place any real currency
on the source of an idea
because any idea can be evaluated utterly
independent of its source or its author
and I can take all that on board
and go even further in this
that you're not even interested much in the origin of ideas
or the history of ideas
and this is actually encapsulated in what
Naval has been at pains
to point out in his podcast with me anyway
but he's not much interested in names
who said what and so on
it's basically about the ideas and I think that's quite right
nevertheless personally
and I guess there's a point of indulgence for
than anything else I am interested in the history of ideas
to some extent so you know I like to know
the fact that Einstein really was
the prime originator of general relativity
but it's interesting to know that Marcel Grausman
for example helped him
and you know I think one or more of his wives
might have helped him as well with the mathematics
on general relativity
so it's interesting historically about
how these great theories
kind of came to us what the lineage is
now that brings me to
this question about quantum
computation I'm interested in this
because you were inspired obviously
by Turing
and your paper as of
I think it was last week anyway it's now been
cited 6122
times which is no
small feat that paper being
titled quantum theory the church Turing
principle in the universal quantum computer
what I wanted to ask you about that is
as you wrote it
because I think when Turing wrote his paper
on the Turing machine he was thinking
well to abstract mathematical object
this isn't going to have
much I don't know did he think
it was going to have much in the way of
a huge
industry of engineering these things
was going to follow I don't know if that was in his mind
but did you have any sense
in writing the paper about quantum computation
that it would have spawned
an industry a multi-billion
dollar at the moment industry of
racing to build these things did that
enter your mind at the time?
No
I was entirely
concerned
with the laws of physics
and that this
was a hitherto
unsuspected facet
of quantum theory
that it had this intimate
relationship with computation
so I
had in the back of my mind that
maybe this could be built
a quantum computer could be built for
the purpose of
demonstrating or testing
properties of the laws of physics of quantum
but I wasn't concerned
with
practical uses of it at all
and not even other
laboratory uses of it and by the way
I think
I'm not a historian of science
I don't know much about
the history of ideas in general
yes
only certain very narrow facets
but I think that
history in general
is an extremely important worthwhile
subject and the history of ideas
in particular is
I think the most important aspect
of history it's just that
I happen to
have studied
other things mostly
but I think
that Turing was also
not interested at the time when he wrote
that paper in
making anything
useful. Babbage
interestingly was
and the
for him
again
I'm going by TV documentaries
rather than any real research
of my own but it seems that
that he was
initially concerned with
a very practical application
of computers namely the
automation of
the printing of mathematical tables
which had to do with navigation
and so on
and that he
even when he conceived
of the universal version
of this machine which was then called
the analytical engine he still
wasn't
then what he saw was this was
a universal machine for arithmetic
and for algebra but
or not even for algebra I'm not sure
for arithmetic at least and
it was Lovelace
who saw that this machine
would be universal in the sense that
he was the one who came in today.
Yes, yes
and so that then that leads me to
the question that
I don't want it to be too uncomfortable
but there is this question about
was it church was it Turing and now
of course you bring in Babbage as well
and Lovelace says with the first to figure out
that these machines could be universal
well to what extent do you think
Feynman understood
the universality
of quantum computation
and was there a conception of it
at all around the time when
you were writing this paper or
was it only in light of
you telling him about the proof that he then
sort of
got what you were going on about.
I don't know I only met him once
and we had a long conversation
only part of which was
about quantum computation
and I was not at all focused
on
figuring out what he knows.
So I don't know
but I know that in his
published work there is no
real hint of
the thing that is now called
a universal quantum computer
or actually it's now more often
called the universal quantum Turing
machine which is a very bad
bad terminology
but there's
although he again he
was aware that quantum computation
could be more powerful than classical
computation
and he was aware of a certain level
of universality
but his idea for how
to make
one of these
was itself
to put on some kind of circuit board
a quantum system
that had specially tuned
Hamiltonians
whereas in the real quantum computer
the special tuning
is itself a quantum program
there is a single machine
you don't have to change the hardware
to make
to compute
a new quantum computation
there is a single machine
that can be programmed
to enact any quantum computation
and I don't think
there's any hint of that
in Feynman's published work
although the speed
with which he cottoned on to
the algorithm that I explained to him
suggests that he
was on the verge of that
either before I spoke to him
or just after
okay, two
final, just purely for fun
questions
as you said, who cares?
this is true
except for historians of science
I'm sure in the years
and decades to come this will be
certainly a point of interest
in the future they'll analyze the wallpaper
and find out things
yes
okay, this question is just purely for fun
do you have any opinion
on tic-tacs?
that's a big thing going on at the moment
and do you know what I'm talking about?
no, I don't know what it is
so this is the American military
specifically I think the navy
who've released these videos
of what they say
are unidentified objects
of some kind
and I know this is ridiculous
they say things like
they're violating laws of physics
or at least they are
evidence of technology
which is not explicable
given the current state of technology
you haven't heard about these things
seen anything about these things
nor have any opinion on these things?
now that you mention it, I've seen things on twitter
which are now
explicable in the light of
is it the American military
or something
having said something about UFOs
is that what happened?
I see
the opportunities for
error
are enormous
and to perform a scientific experiment
that
is a crucial test
of sophisticated scientific
theories
is very very difficult
universally, almost universally
underestimated
it's sort of taken for granted
that Einstein did a very difficult thing
but it's not so much understood
that Stern and Gerlach
who did experiments
on quantum superpositions of particles
in different positions
but they did an amazing thing as well
good experiments
are
rare and
they require usually
a great deal of skill and creativity
and it's not the kind of
thing that
military pilots
or
policemen
are typically
cognizant of
so I think
when people like that report a thing
that quote violates the laws of physics
I would
consider it unreasonable
to go for
any explanation of that other than
human error
and of course when you do look at the footage
there is no
apparent violation of laws of physics
even if you grant that this thing is
moving at a high velocity beyond anything
that we might be capable of
that's still sub light speeds
it hasn't violated relativity on the one hand
and by the way
even if you don't have an answer
for what's going on there well that's kind of
where you might have to stop
immediately to its
aliens from the other side of the galaxy
my last question is from my father
and I'll just ask you this before I go
it's about dark energy
and we know
the universe is accelerating in its expansion
it's behaving
as if
there is negative pressure on the outside of
the observable universe
isn't this evidence that the observable universe
is actually
inside of a much larger
region
itself
of lower density but magnificently greater size
perhaps infinite in size
and perhaps it's actually got zero density
perhaps this void beyond our universe
is the thing into which the universe is
necessarily expanding because we've got
positive pressure inside of our universe
and outside of that
outside of our universe that's negative pressure
could this be a solution
so first of all dark energy is just
the name given to this anomalous
yes so I think the reason
that dark energy was chosen as a name
is because of dark matter
where the
all reasonable theories of it so far
have
postulated that it's a kind of matter
and it's dark because it doesn't
interact with photons and so on
with dark energy we don't
have such a thing we don't
know that there is a source of pressure
or that these observations
are caused by something pushing on the universe
and so on but
with the prevailing theories
of what dark energy does
never mind what it is
but what it does
the universe is not expanding
into anything
the universe is
the length scales in the universe
are increasing
intrinsically
and this is the same
as was the case with
the prevailing theories before
dark energy
the universe initially
had well at any rate very
near to the big bang it was very
small there was a time when it was
only the size of an atom there was a time
when it was only the size of a neutron
and so on and at that
time and now it's much bigger
the difference between then and now is not
that it has expanded
to fill a void it has just
expanded intrinsically
yes and some of
the present theories say that
it is in fact infinitely large
and that it is
infinitely large and homogeneous
so that the total
amount of matter in it
is infinite I don't
think that there are any theories
I mean one could easily write down
a theory in
which the universe was inhomogeneous
and we are in the only
place in it that has matter
that wouldn't help in any way
any of the existing theories and
more generally by the way
theories of inhomogeneity
in the universe
as far as I know I'm not an expert
on this but I think they've only been invoked
by people who want to say
that there is no dark energy that it's just
a coincidence caused by
inhomogeneities
Excellent okay I think that
absolutely answered the question I think that will do
for now but I hope not for the last time
I make my way through the fabric of reality after all
now at the moment so perhaps
at the end of that we can speak again
if not sooner
so thank you very much for
writing the books I think they've been
well the explanations
are transforming the world I think they've been
life transforming for many people
so it's been wonderful to talk to you
very gratifying today to have this
conversation so have a wonderful
remainder of the day yourself
Same to you it's always fun chatting
So there we go
I hope you enjoyed that I certainly
did as I say I'm working on
what might be called interview technique
it's a steep learning curve
the content of Deutsch and Poppers
is deep and subtle enough
but adding to that how to run
a podcast and being surrounded by
new upgraded podcast
hardware and software that I'm struggling
to learn to use is a whole other thing
but hopefully will improve rapidly
over the coming weeks and months
if you're a new listener I'd encourage you to
go out and to listen to all of the
David Deutsch content that is out there
here's Ted Talks and other interviews
of course by his books
subscribe to my podcast here wherever you're listening
there is a YouTube version as I say
if you are on audio only
which sometimes has those pretty visuals
subscribe to the Naval podcast
where we are exploring all the major
themes in the fabric of reality
and the beginning of infinity
and Naval is broadening all
that content out into the realms
of wealth, wisdom and life
and finally if you're so inclined
go to www.bretthall.org
and follow the links there to support this
podcast there are lots of great podcasts
out there all about science and philosophy
and even thinking but I think
here we have a small
community uniquely devoted to a
particularly special kind
of clear thinking about life
informed by the best
that science and philosophy can teach us
we'd like to grow so the ideas
can reach into places where the errors
need correcting so I'll keep doing my
bit until next time let me still
align from Naval and say
stay optimistic
bye bye
you
you
