Geometria from the Greek Earth Measurement, Geometria.
We derived the word geometry.
To the Greeks, this was something sacred.
We always have it that on top of Plato's Athenian Academy, we're inscribed these words.
A geometritos mides yisito.
Let no one ignorant of geometry enter.
I hope by the end of this talk, we don't have to kick anybody we are, because you all love
geometry.
Why is that?
Why was geometry so sacred to the Greeks?
We humans as a species, we evolved as geometric beings.
We perceived the world around us through geometry.
We have eyes that translate the perceptions of the world into our brain.
Every major civilization, the Chinese, the Egyptians, the Babylonians, the Indians, so
on and so forth, had some notion of geometrical understanding of the world around us.
This is the first perception that we ever get, and then formalizing this geometry in
some way or another.
For example, if I tell you something travels at a constant speed, now over a passage of
time, the distance traversed by that object is measured by the area of this rectangle.
That's totally cool.
After all, geometry is about Earth measurement.
It's a very practical thing.
But the Greeks did something different from the other civilizations because they had Euclid.
This guy here wrote 13 books called The Elements, nine of which are about geometry.
There's a little bit of number theory and a little bit of something else.
Here is the Oxyrhynchus papyrus in National Museum in Oxford, one of the only surviving
fragments of inframantipity of this remarkable book.
I will tell you a little bit more about why there's only a little bit of this book left.
In this book, this is a remarkable book.
There are two most read books in human history.
Try to guess what they are.
The Bible and The Elements.
Up to the Victorian times, everybody, any learned person would have to read The Elements.
This is the first textbook of mathematics, and in some sense, it's still the greatest
textbook of mathematics.
In this 13 volumes, nine of which are devoted to geometry, Euclid is not entirely all him,
but he gathered what was known to the ancient world, all of that knowledge into these volumes
and formulated something.
Now, that something is very, very special.
The axioms.
Now the Greeks did something different.
Again, axiom from the word axioma, that which is worthy.
What a beautiful word.
What does that mean?
What is an axiom?
What Euclid did was to axiomatize mathematics.
Let's try to work out what that means.
When you play a game, you have to start laying out some rules.
If your game has 5,000 rules, it's just not going to be very interesting.
You have to memorize 5,000 rules, it's not too good.
Chess won't be so interesting if there are so many pieces and very simple set of rules,
and then you're done.
Like football.
I'm not a big football fan myself, but apparently football is called the, or Jogo Bonito, the
beautiful game.
So hopefully by the end of this talk, you will walk away saying, no, the beautiful game
is not football.
The beautiful game is mathematics.
And why is that?
Because mathematics starts using this tradition of Euclid with as few axioms, axioma as possible,
from which we derive, using the rules of logic, everything else.
So in other words, I'm going to tell you these axioms shortly, and every fact about
geometries of a plane of shapes and sizes, if you cannot reason them out through these
five axioms, then mathematics is pointless.
So let's go through these five axioms.
Axiom number one.
So this is kind of interesting.
My American friends would appreciate this.
The Declaration of Independence in America, we hold these truths self-evident, all people
created equal, et cetera, et cetera, self-evident.
If these five axioms are not self-evident to you, then it's not so good.
So we're going to start with something that is self-evident.
So let's start.
Let's have a go.
But first one, axiom number one.
A straight line may be drawn between any two points.
Da.
Well, I'm hoping that at every one of the end of these, you're going to say da, right?
Well, yeah.
Fine.
That seems pretty self-evident.
Right?
Fine.
Axiom number two.
Any terminated line, an interval, can be stretched infinitely on both sides.
Da.
Axiom number three.
Given any point, the center, and radius of any length, you can draw a circle.
Axiom number four.
All right angles are equal.
You're given this commensurate measurement of what a right angle means.
Now, some of you may have object.
Just because most of my life I spend in six to 10 dimensions, I have not forgotten how
to count.
There are four of these.
Right?
Yeah.
Fair enough.
Right?
There is the fifth.
Now, there's a reason why I have separated out the fifth, and I'm going to go back to
this.
Just bear in the back of your mind, you have these four obvious ones, which is, you know,
that, that, that, and that, right?
And then this fifth one.
This is a very special one.
We're going to go back to this in a minute.
Well, we're going to go back to this over and over again.
So this says, I'm going to read out, this is a pretty, pretty lengthy one.
Well, partially I'm, you know, I'm, I'm subverting this one out because it's a very, very mouthy.
Lots of words here.
For any given point, not on a given line, there exists one line, a unique line, through
that point that does not meet that line.
Da.
Okay.
That's right.
Um, so this is called the parallel axiom.
This line is called the unique parallel line to a given line and a given point, not on
the line.
It's very important that this point is not on the line, otherwise your parallel will,
will coincide with this line.
Okay.
This is all fine.
Now the point is, if I cannot derive every single statement of geometry from these five
words, using only logic, then mathematics is pointless.
That's why it's a beautiful game.
So let's play a game.
I will give you a theorem from the Greek theorem, that which is looked at, it's beautiful words,
you know, because you've got to look at this from that which is worthy and then derive
that which is looked at.
And we're going to look at this.
We're looking at it right now, right?
This is a theorem which is told, I think, I believe there's not a single person in this
room who does not know this theorem, right?
That the internal angles of a triangle sum up to 180 degrees, right?
What is surprising is that I've met first year undergraduates who do not know the fact
that this is derived from the five axioms.
I think somehow in high school education in this country and elsewhere, I think, increasingly
so, we're just told to memorize this fact.
That's why mathematics becomes so boring.
You're told to memorize this fact, you don't memorize this fact.
This is a theorem, this is not an axiom.
So I must be able to play this game and derive this theorem, right?
So that's where it gets really exciting and fun.
So first of all, let me get rid of this 180, because why is the revolution 360 degrees?
Why is the full revolution 360 degrees?
That is a complete Babylonian artifact.
The Babylonians counted in base 60, so their full revolution was 360 degrees, and to them
it kind of coincided with 360 days of a year, so 365 years a year, so it's kind of a cosmological
reason.
But that's a complete arbitrary choice.
You could have called a full revolution 100 degrees if you wanted, because it's base 10.
So let's restate that theorem in a more universal language.
The internal angles of a triangle sum up to one half of a full revolution, a full revolution,
whatever it is, whatever units you want, Babylonian, Chinese, Egyptian, half of it,
and you've got to show that this angle, I'm going to call A, plus this angle I'm going
to call B, plus this angle I'm going to call C, needs to sum up exactly to that one half
of a revolution.
All right.
And we're going to prove this now.
You're like, oh, my God, I did not come on a Friday evening to go through some math
proofs, but I promise there's only proof I'm going to give you.
And it's going to be fun, because that's what math is.
It's fun.
It's a fun game.
It's the beautiful game.
So let's start with, I'm not going to give you the full details of this proof, but let's
start.
Let's start.
Step number one, I'm going to invoke the fifth.
I think my American friends would appreciate this.
You see my American roots.
I was like, oh, plead the fifth.
For geometers like us, when you plead the fifth, you're invoking something quite sacred.
You're asking for the parallel axiom of Euclid.
So let's go with the parallel axiom of Euclid.
I've given you this random triangle of drawn for you, right?
To every line and a point not on that line, there exists a unique line which never meets
it.
So I'm going to draw that line.
So that's the plead in the fifth.
I will use this in the court of law.
Step number two, you notice that when you have two lines that never meet, any line that
goes through it will have the property that the blue angles are equal and the yellow angles
are equal.
That's pretty cool, right?
Because if they were equal, the two lines would meet somehow.
So by definition of not meeting, this angle is equal to this angle, this angle, this angle,
this angle, this angle, and this angle, this angle, this angle, this angle, they're all
equal.
So what does that imply about step number one?
It implies that this yellow bit must be the same as this yellow bit because I have drawn
for you this parallel.
So two, this blue bit were equal to this blue bit because I have drawn for you this parallel.
If they weren't equal, those two lines would not be parallel lines.
I'm done.
Step number three, because this is also called B and this is also called A, A plus B plus
C forms one straight line.
Now you can go and tell your students in high school, don't memorize this fact.
You've just derived this from the five axioms of Euclid and that is the point of mathematics.
If you cannot do that, then mathematics is pointless.
And this is just one baby theorem, right?
Think about the thousands of theorems that you can say about geometry, Pythagoras, right?
You can deduce Pythagoras from these five axioms, of course you can.
You must be able to.
I won't do it today.
It's going to take, I don't know, catch me outside, I'm going to explain that to you
in a piece of paper.
It's a bit funky.
It's actually a really, really, really beautiful proof.
The proof even has a name called the saddle of the bride.
It's very poetic and if you constructed a saddle of a bride, it doesn't look like a
saddle bride to me at all.
But first of all, I don't even know what a saddle of a bride is, but it sounds cool.
It's a totally romantic way of saying that, but you can construct a triangle and draw this
thing and then use only the axioms of Euclid to deduce the fact that everybody knows again
the sum of the square of one side of a right-hand triangle with the other one is the square
of the third side.
That's a theorem.
Don't memorize that.
You must be able to deduce that, right?
So so and so forth.
So I've given you a baby one.
This is a really nice one, which is the fact, no, you can go home and be, like, satisfied.
You know, I now know the proof that the internal angle of a triangle must sum up to 180 degrees.
It's wonderful.
It's a very, I'll get a fuzzy warm feeling inside.
And then tragedy happens, right?
Around about a first century AD, the great library of Laxandria was burnt down.
700,000 volumes of the entirety of knowledge of antiquity just gone up in flames.
There are theories as to who did it.
I don't know.
I'm not a historian, but the fact is that it's gone.
Euclid, everything.
All of the classical Greek writings is all gone.
And very, very little fragments are left.
So the oxy-rankus papyrus that you saw, it's one of the last bit that survived from this
around about this time.
So this is the first major destruction of human civilization.
But we humans are resilient.
Just because one civilization has fallen, you could pick it up somewhere else.
And this was done.
And the great center of mathematics shifted from the ancient Greek world, the world of
Euclid and Plato to the Arabic world.
Around about by the ninth century, what is now Iraq, was a seat of great learning and
great mathematics.
And I must emphasize this gentleman, Mohammed Ibn Musaar Qarazmi, who wrote this wonderful
book.
The Compendious Book on Calculation by Completion and Balancing.
It's so awesome.
Back in the day, books have beautiful titles.
Always try to get away with, like, beautiful titles.
I always get rejected by editors.
But I try.
And I'm very proud that recently I wrote a paper with Thomas Fink, the director of the
London Institute, on a paper entitled The Flowers of Immortality.
So far, it's still the title, so we're still working on it.
And so this gentleman is truly remarkable, because guess where, with this name, Al Qarazmi,
we get the word algorithm from his name.
But Al Qarazmi gave us something much more than just an algorithm, you know, like a method
in which today's world would be completely dysfunctional without algorithms, of course.
But in my view, Al Qarazmi gave us something much greater.
Now, my Arabic is kind of rusty, actually it's non-existent.
But oh, by the way, I'm very grateful to my friend Mika and Tom Hodgkinson, the science
writer at LIMBS, for their Greek tutorials.
I can handle Latin, but not Greek.
But still, and of course, Roman, our designer for making this beautiful set of slides, I
would never be able to make these slides, you know, academics, we don't make slides
very well.
But going back to Al Qarazmi, this book, the book of completion and balancing, this word
here, the word balancing in Arabic is algebra, from which we get the word algebra.
And that is something different, right?
Somehow, you know, you get, the Greeks were masters at geometry, like that beautiful proof
by pictures, and somehow you needed to go east to see this abstraction of algebra.
So, and this is, of course, a, I think, a contemporary cover of this book.
Now, just to reassure you a little bit, I'm just, this is a slight digression that Europe
wasn't completely sunk into the Dark Ages.
So around about 14th, you know, you think about 14th century, while the great empires
of China and India and Persia were doing great things, you think about the Dark Ages in Europe,
people were like rolling in mud or something, it's not entirely true.
So, this, I put this slide on because I'm very proudly put on the crest of my own beloved
college, Merton College, Oxford, and I think some of my students are here in the audience,
because there was a small group of mathematicians in Europe, especially in Paris and Oxford,
doing the continuation of geometry.
So this is called the Oxford School or the, or the Merton Calculators, it's a great school,
they were doing this, this is actually a group of theologians, like we had like, let's think
about some crazy stuff.
So one of the crazy stuff they did was to think about this problem, to remember that
diagram that I drew for you, this, the rectangle, that if you moved in a constant speed, then
the distance traveled is the area of this rectangle.
So these guys, William Hatesbury, and there were Brad Woodeen, there were a bunch of them,
Brad Woodeen then became the Archbishop of Canterbury, interestingly, because these are
theologians.
They were thinking about, well, what happens if you don't have a constant speed, but if
you had a change in speed, but you change at a constant rate?
So this is something we'll call constant acceleration.
So the speed is not constant, but the rate of change of speed is a constant.
Why were they thinking about this?
I have absolutely no idea, like, hey, why not?
And they would see, see, look, look, this is beautiful.
This is a 1335 edition of Hatesbury's regulars or vendors of his tomatoes on rules of resolving
sophistry, another beautiful title, right?
The sophistry they were thinking about, one of them, is how to do this problem.
So in modern notation, this is the one half AT squared, which you may or may not remember
from school.
If you don't, don't worry about it.
We won't get into the details.
The point is, if you don't have constant speed, you don't have to compute the area of a rectangle,
which you need to compute instead, it's the area of a triangle, right?
That kind of makes sense.
You have speed that changes constantly.
So in this diagram, which is kind of interesting, 1335, these guys were drawing diagrams like
this to reason out what must be the area.
They were almost doing integral calculus, almost.
But of course, we had to wait a very long time before we get there, 300 more years.
So, Matonians in the audience, you can cheer.
So this is, but that's pretty much it.
It was pretty much dark ages except a few of these sporadic schools of mathematics.
And then we have to wait all the way to post renaissance for something dramatic to happen.
Because what have I talked about?
I've talked about the Greek geometry of Euclid and the algebra of the Arabic world.
Well, it's natural to like, let's put the two together, right?
Let's marry them.
And this gentleman did.
René Descartes, the guy of Cogito Egossum, his philosopher,
introduced this marriage of algebra with geometry.
Now, it was called analytic geometry.
You might wonder why it's not called algebraic geometry.
I don't know. That's a good answer.
That's a good question.
I work in the field of algebraic geometry, but that had to wait much, much, much later
for this field to mature.
But somehow this marriage of Greek geometry with Arabic algebra
became known as analytic geometry.
Because you're using sort of tools of analysis to understand what geometrical shape is.
So what did Descartes do to Euclid?
He put a grid on it.
It seems so trivial, right?
But all the great ideas seem trivial.
So, well, let's see, right?
So I told you about, you know, the five axioms that I keep on going back to, right?
But it's about the study of shapes of these Euclidean planes.
Well, Descartes put a grid system on it.
So, you know, this is a very distinguished point, the origin.
And there's a point here.
I mean, this is like, this is how we navigate.
Like, if you're, well, certainly not in this country,
because there's no straight lines in this country.
But like, if you go to New York, right?
All the streets are gridded like this, right?
That's fine.
Here you'll just be, I mean, the coordinate system of London is,
God knows what it is.
It's a very, I'll get there actually, I might get there.
But anyhow, so this point is five comma two,
because you've gone through five times here and two up, right?
So this point is minus three and minus four.
So that's all good, right?
Oh, by the way, I love these old names.
The x-axis used to be called the abscissa,
and the y-axis used to be called the ordinate.
I still use this, and I'll get away with the editors on that one.
But this is a tribute to Descartes.
So suddenly, the Euclidean plain becomes the Cartesian plain.
Why Cartesian?
Because the Latin for rene de cart is renatus descartes,
so the cartes, of the cards.
So cartes becomes Cartesian.
OK, if you say, OK, fine, I've just made a grid system.
What's the big deal?
OK.
So I've lied to you.
I'm going to give you a second proof.
Let's revisit our theorem, which says
that the internal angles of a triangle
sum to a half of a revolution.
So how are we going to prove this using the rules of algebra?
In particular, using the rules of analytic geometry of Descartes.
Well, first of all, I can draw a pretty random triangle.
I can put, without loss of generality,
I love this word, wallog, and put a q here, q0,
that's one of the vertices, 0s in one of these, and minus p0 here.
I can do that because Descartes taught us
we've made this grid system.
That's OK.
Now the proof of this fact is this one line.
Oh, OK.
This is a bit of a joke.
I mean, nobody's going to prove this theorem using this, right?
I mean, you can do it.
This is really like killing an ant with an elephant gun.
I mean, you can really use this very sophisticated.
So if you want to use the inverse cotangent
of the tangent function, I remember that this, this,
blah, blah, blah, blah, OK, whatever.
I'm not going to bore you with it.
I promise I'll give you one proof,
but I'm not going to go into the details.
Otherwise, we'll be here all day.
But the point is the following.
The geometry is gone, right?
I can now prove this statement using only symbols,
and that's the power of algebra, OK?
And in particular, that is the power of analytic geometry.
Because I've translated the properties
of the geometrical properties of triangles
and shapes of triangles to the analytic properties
of the function, which we call tangent and cotangents, OK?
This is extremely useful, because we evolved
as three-dimensional beings.
We can't visualize beyond three dimensions or two dimensions.
So if you want to go beyond anything more than three
dimensions, algebra will have to come in.
And this branch that I work in, which
is algebraic geometry, is exactly that.
I can use the rules of algebra, like this,
to derive statements about geometry.
Totally cool, right?
So that's why Descartes is so nice.
So that's where there we go.
So the proof isn't one line, because this is a joke.
You don't really need to make something this sophisticated
to prove this theorem.
But hey, theorems have multiple proofs.
That's not a problem.
OK, we go on, right?
So Descartes marries east and west
and creates this new analytic geometry.
About 100 years later, 50 to 100 years later,
come these two gentlemen who put something else
into this analytic geometry.
And that is calculus.
So what is calculus?
It's analytic geometry plus infinity, the idea
of the infinitesimal.
You guys should be very proud, because this guy is a Londoner.
Londoner's here.
But I must emphasize that calculus was not just
invented by Newton, but it was co-invented independently
by the German Gottfried Leibniz.
I'm very excited about Leibniz.
Because my PhD supervisor was, I think, in the audience,
my old PhD supervisors, PhD supervisors, PhD supervisors,
PhD supervisors, 23 generations back was Gottfried Leibniz.
So that makes it for 22.
Well, to Leibniz.
So I have no claim to Newton, sadly.
So I have no claim to Newton, sadly.
But Leibniz, hey, it's not too bad.
So it's like looking at a picture of my great, great,
great, great, great grandfather, intellectually.
So we mathematicians, we're completely obsessed
with genealogy.
There's actually, the only reason I know this
is because there's a website.
You type in your thesis and your dissertation year,
and it tracks every single one, all the way
to John of Constantinople in like 10.
So I think he's the earliest one.
But then you see, what's interesting,
you can trace it up to John of Constantinople.
Some dude, who is this guy?
And then before that, it's gone.
Because we don't have that tracking anymore.
But it would be a very, very interesting piece of history
to be able to track beyond John of Constantinople.
Oh, sorry, yeah, I'm back to Euclid impossible,
but we don't have that information.
So this is a piece of data that I beg people to provide me
with, and be fantastic.
In any case, grand-papa, Leibniz, and Newton
did something else to Descartes.
They added the concept of infinitesimal.
And that is truly remarkable.
So what is calculus?
It's the Cartesian analytic geometry, which
is itself a marriage of the algebra of the Arabic world
with geometry of the Euclidean world,
plus loads and loads and loads of coffee.
So just to illustrate a little bit of what calculus
is in this setting.
So here, if you consider a curve like this,
this some red curve that goes on like this,
you can maybe imagine this is a trajectory of some particle,
like this, or some planet, whatever.
I can pick a point here on the curve,
and I pick a point of here, and I draw the chord that
links these two points.
The slope of that chord will measure the average speed
that's taken for the dog or whatever
to travel from here along this curve all the way to here,
because the slope of this is the average speed.
That's fine.
That's still analytic geometry.
You can put this in a Cartesian system,
and you can just literally compute that slope.
That's fine.
Now it gets cool.
I shrink it from this triangle to this one.
Now I consider this chord.
This measures the average speed in a smaller interval.
That's also fine.
Calculus is about taking this process infinitely.
You imagine this triangle getting smaller and smaller
and smaller and smaller.
And the triangle, of course, obeying all of the laws of Euclid.
And then, until you can't see it anymore,
but the slope of this line, and now I'm
using the first postulate, can be extended,
any line interval can be extended infinitely.
I extend this, sorry, the second postulate.
I'm extending this.
And so imagine this yellow line to be the slope associated
to the infinitesimal triangle, which measures
the average speed of your dog.
That's calculus, because you've taken a limit,
an infinitesimal limit.
And then this chord, this yellow one,
is no longer called a chord.
It is called the tangent, from the Latin tengere
to touch, because it just touches this curve.
But what is this line?
What is it supposed to be?
Well, it measures the instantaneous rate of change.
That's something that the Greeks didn't have,
the Arabs didn't have, that even the Merton School almost
had it, but not quite.
But this instantaneous rate of change
is extremely important, because as far as we know,
in the world around us, we don't have ticks.
Our time, our passage of time, is not like in intervals.
You don't suddenly see me disappear here and here,
in these intervals.
Everything seems to change smoothly,
at least in the Newtonian world.
Everything changes smoothly and instantaneously.
So you need that notion of the instantaneous change.
That's why analytic geometry of Descartes
needed this extra kick by Newton and Leibniz.
Once you have that notion, you can write this book.
Again, you Londoners should be really proud of yourself,
because I would divide human civilization to two parts.
There's pre-1687 and post-1687.
And because in 1687 was published this great book,
Principia Mathematica Philosophy and Naturalis,
the mathematical principles of natural philosophy.
Printed, let's see, I'm just almost bad at this direction,
printed about 100 meters that way,
in the Burlington house where the old royal society is.
It's great.
This book, this book that changed humanity forever.
Why?
Because the marriage of all of that information,
plus this extra coffee kick espresso of the infinitesimal,
gave you a new tool, and that tool
is to understand the infinitesimal rate of change.
And with it, Newton was able to use his laws,
what we call Newton's laws, to derive everything.
Like, I mean everything.
The planets around the sun should follow elliptic orbits.
It takes about, I don't know, five pages of derivation
from all of these axioms of Euclid
and the analytic geometry of Descartes
and the principles of calculus.
So this is why this is so when we see here,
the royal society, tied by the royal society,
which the old house was just right over there.
Well, if you write a book like this,
you deserve a tomb like this, for sure.
And I encourage you again, Londoners,
to go, who hasn't seen this monument?
Be still, my heart.
It's just Westminster Abbey, it's like 20 minutes that way.
Just go in there, like, just pay your homage.
At the foot of this great monument are two plaques.
One is Paul Dirac, that I'm going to mention later.
And Stephen Hawking, the mathematician's corner
to Westminster Abbey.
And, I mean, it's huge, it's the size,
I mean, it's really the size of this wall,
and deservedly so, because for the first time, really,
we can explain all of the natural phenomenon
using the principles of mathematics.
So that's why it's such a wonderful book.
And on the bottom here, there's a great Latin oration,
but there's a little couplet by Alexander Pope,
which is very, very touchy.
Alexander Pope wrote of Newton, nature, how was it?
Nature and nature's laws lay hidden in the night,
and God said, let Newton be, and there was light.
Great, as good as it gets, right?
Even if I die, somebody will die and it will be awesome.
So try to write a book like that.
So in some sense, Newton answered Galileo's question.
Galileo made this beautiful remark
that mathematics is the alphabet
with which God had written the universe.
So that's the alphabet, and Principia was the first book
written with that alphabet.
Crystallizing all of, building upon all of that knowledge.
When Newton says I'm standing on the shoulders of giants,
he meant all the way from Euclid, Akarazmi, Galileo,
and all this Descartes, right?
To be able to build up this idea of calculus
to be able to write this book.
So, note that, oh, by the way,
Galileo died exactly the year that Newton was born.
Oh, I don't have his dates,
but Newton was born in 1642, died in 1727.
So that's kind of interesting.
This is perfect connection.
If you believe in reincarnation, I don't, but hey.
And of course, he didn't stop there, right?
I mean, Newton was, I mean, died in the 1720s,
and it didn't stop, right?
Because, as I said, the center of learning
shifted back from the Arabic world to Europe,
and then there was this continuation in mathematics.
So I can't give a talk about geometry
without mentioning, or analysis or calculus or anything,
without mentioning Euler.
So, this is what Pierre Simon de la Place,
one of the greatest French mathematicians
to the court of Napoleon said to Euler,
read Euler, read Euler, he's the master of us all.
How is, good praise.
So, Euler is the most prolific mathematician of all time.
He's written thousands and thousands of papers,
every one of them are jammed.
You probably know so many theorems of Euler.
But what Euler really did was to kick up one more notch
of this concept of calculus and analytic geometry.
In this wonderful book, Introduction
in Annihissing Infinitorum, Introduction
to the Analysis of the Infinite.
So this is the first analysis textbook.
So, again, Euler was standing,
I think we've got a whole stack of people standing
on each other's shoulders, but that's how mathematics works.
It's this universal enterprise throughout human history,
without borders, without anything,
just trying to build up from the axioms
and try to build up this beautiful language.
And it just so happens that this is the language of nature.
That didn't have to be the way, but somehow it is.
That's why Principia is so important.
Here's a bit of a trivia.
Now, Leonard Euler was born in Basel.
He's a Swiss-German mathematician.
Where did Euler spend the most of his life?
The answer is actually on this slide.
Yes.
Well done.
So he spent most of his life in Russia.
If you look at this, so he's the regious professor
of Berlin and here, Academia Imperialis
Schiantiagrom Petropolitane, St. Petersburg.
So this is very interesting and it's very fitting
and touching for me personally,
because I work for the London Institute
for Mathematical Sciences and we are based behind this wall.
We are the resident mathematicians at the Royal Institution
and Thomas is the director of this institute.
And this is an institute which just gets academics
to do just research.
And recently, of course, because of the tragedies
that's happening in Russia and Ukraine,
we've gotten funding to 10 fellowships,
we've just established 10 fellowships
to get all of the Russian, Ukrainian, Belarusian,
anybody, any mathematicians were affected
by the current conflict.
So we have many of them join us right now in this room.
So this is, it's kind of interesting that Euler
was hired by Peter and Catherine, the Empress
to Russia and it's come full circle
that we're now getting the talents from Russia
back into this very building.
So it's very touching.
So to summarize, with Euler,
and then of course there are loads of other names.
I mean, I can't possibly list all of them.
There's Euler, Lagrange, Laplace, Hamilton,
and so on and so forth.
What these guys have done is to build upon this pedestals
that's been established over the centuries
and establish what we call the Newtonian world,
the what's called the classical universe,
the Newtonian mechanical universe.
And that is pretty much, think about this tradition
as Principia Plus, right?
Principia, super Principia, this entire tradition
over Newton died in 1727
and Euler was late 1700s,
but then this tradition went on and on
to give this beautiful crystal clear vision
of the classical understanding of the world.
And that is what we call Newtonian,
the Newtonian geometric understanding of the world.
And this world is actually very simple.
If you really want to get to the heart of it,
this world of Newton, the classical world
that we see around us,
is the calculus and analytic geometry,
Cartesian geometry in R3 cross R.
I'm even giving you a cool symbol to play with.
So what does that mean?
R3, R is the real numbers.
So R3 is this coordinate system.
Okay, that seems pretty reasonable.
But we have a Cartesian system, remember, right?
We've gone a little bit beyond Euclid
over the past thousand years or so.
So this is called R3 because each axis is a real axis.
And that is what we are.
I mean, you know, in this room,
I can, I can, suppose I'm at the origin,
I can pinpoint any one of you
with a triplet of coordinates, coordinates, right?
That's right.
So that's the R3 bit.
And here's the interesting bit.
And there is this R, which is time.
And this cross is a direct product.
Meaning, so what does this,
what does this symbol mean in mathematics?
Is that Newtonian physics is about the motion of R3,
which pinpoints every single one of us
in this constant flow of time, right?
So that's, that's what this symbol means.
R3 cross R.
If you do analytic Cartesian calculus in R3,
going in this constant backflow of R,
not discretized because we have this infinitesimal,
then you can explain everything
in a classical Newtonian world.
Okay, happy?
Happy?
Right, happy?
So that is actually quite,
I mean, it's a powerful statement, right?
That, that analytic geometry in this space,
this Euclidean space, explains everything.
From the tides of oceans to the motions of the stars
and to the apple that never fell on Newton's head, right?
And you can, I mean, of course it's,
I'm not gonna bore you with the details
of such calculation,
but that is what our world that we see is.
It is the analytic geometry in R3 cross R.
This is a totally cool way to say it.
I mean, you can, I know you can go home
and tell your kids about this,
and your kids can like tell their teachers,
we're just doing R3 cross R, this is so awesome.
All right.
Meanwhile, geometers be like,
I'm getting this lingo for my kids.
I have an eight year old who surprisingly speaks like this.
So what were the pure geometers doing?
So that was a lot of physics that I've gone with.
It's not a tangent, I promise you, no puns intended.
What were the geometers doing?
Wow, this beautiful formulation of classical physics
was done by people like Euler, Hamilton, Lagrange, Laplace.
What were the pure geometers doing?
Well, let's drop the fifth.
That's why I isolated the fifth axiom from the other four.
This is kind of interesting.
It's a frightening thing to do, right?
Because, you know, the fifth, remember, remember,
well, let's go over again.
Axiom number one, axiom number two, axiom number three,
axiom number four, axiom number five is, hmm,
given a line and a point not on the line,
they use this as a unique parallel, right?
Is it possible to derive this one from the other four?
That's the first question,
because this seems like kind of unnatural, right?
People thought about this, right?
And indeed, the Arabic scientists
weren't even thinking about this.
Were you, so, Alhazan, the polymath,
and then Omakayam, the poet,
the poet of Rubaiqan was working on this problem.
Is it possible that Euclid missed something?
Is it possible to derive the fifth one from the four?
Isn't it great?
Wouldn't mathematics be even a more beautiful game
if you had four rules, not five, right?
And that troubled people for hundreds and hundreds of years.
Some of the brilliant minds were trying to derive
this fifth axiom.
Is it possible that he followed from the other four
by rules of logic?
Like bucket loads of tears were shed and sweat,
and they just couldn't do it.
I'm gonna wait for these guys to say you can't do it
because it is impossible.
And note the name, Likolai Lobachevsky,
from the school of St. Peter,
because St. Petersburg, because Euler went there
and founded this entire school of mathematics.
So it's kind of, you need to go east again.
And Janusz Bojaj, who is a Hungarian mathematician,
these two gentlemen showed that no,
you cannot derive the fifth axiom from the other four.
In fact, not only can you not do that,
you can even create a system of geometry
in which the fifth can be dropped.
That was an intended silence.
I'm good.
I'm like, people are like, it's almost sacred, right?
You're messing around with Euclid.
Why not?
Right, why not?
So let's mess around with Euclid and drop the fifth.
Well, here's a picture that already violates Euclid.
Well, we know what this is.
This is the globe, you know, is where we live on.
We know where the North Pole is,
and we know where the equator is.
You may not have appreciated the fact
that every one of these longitudinal lines
is at right angles to the equator.
Fine?
But they all pass through the North Pole.
Therefore, the fifth axiom
is just simply violated in this picture, right?
We have an infinite number of lines
which are parallel to each other through a given point.
But it's okay, it's okay, it's okay.
We're not doing an Euclidean plane.
We're doing it on this really funky shape called a bowl, right?
But it's kind of amazing, right?
So you really have to redefine
what a line even means now in this new geometry.
A line here, you know, a line in the plane
is pretty obvious, right, it's a line in the plane.
But if you do a line on the surface of a bowl,
a line, the constant of a line is quite different.
You can't go through the bowl
because you're only working on the surface of the bowl.
So you have to stay on the surface
and still obey some kind of a definition of what a line is.
So these lines are called geodesics.
And these are what we call longitudinal lines.
They are actually called lines, right?
Longitudinal lines.
But these lines are all parallel to each other
and they pass through a single point, okay?
So we have violated the fifth, right?
You can't plead the fifth anymore.
Nobody pleads the fifth.
So we only start with four axioms
and construct this new axiomatic theory of geometry.
And now it's like totally crazy things start to happen.
For example, this theorem is just not true anymore.
The theorem that we spend so much time proving again
and again using geometry and then algebra.
This is just not true.
Here's an example of a triangle.
Like you fly to the north pole,
you fly down somewhere else.
I don't know, here is, I don't know.
This is like, I don't know, London
and then this is probably somewhere in, I don't know,
India, maybe, I don't know.
And you look at it, the internal sum was 90 degrees here,
90 degrees here, 90 degrees here.
This triangle in this new geometry
has internal angle sum 90 plus 90 plus 90, which is 270,
which is not half of a revolution.
But you see the consequences.
That's why mathematics is so fun.
You drop one of the axioms, you drop one of the rules,
then some crazy stuff starts to happen, right?
This is a crazy, here's a triangle,
which is called a spherical triangle,
which doesn't obey something so simple
that you would take for granted.
So now we're in the world of non-nuclidean geometry.
And these two guys, Kafeutik Gauss,
who is, by the way, he's called the Prince of Mathematics.
So after Euler, so basically,
I mean, if you think about all the grades, right?
You know, think about like Euclide, Al-Quarazmi,
Newton, Euler, Gauss, and then Riemann.
I'm pretty much it.
And everyone else is just like, you know, footnote.
Ah, in an extremist way.
Gauss and Riemann axiomatized this properly,
what Lobachevsky and Bollywood were doing,
this non-nuclidean geometry,
into this new geometry, which is called differential geometry.
Okay, so this is, it's called differential
because of its attribute really to calculus.
So this is like analytic geometry plus coffee
plus coffee squared, because you have this notion
of redefining what a line is,
and redefine what the infinitesimal means on such shapes.
And that's something I work on.
Interestingly, by the way,
this is an entirely apocryphal story,
but it's so fun, I have to say it.
Gauss killed Riemann.
Well, at least this is what my differential geometry professor
as an undergraduate told us.
And he said with such convincing gusto,
I took it for granted.
I think it's true, it's a great story.
So what happened was,
Gauss learned of Lobachevsky and Bollywood's things.
I was thinking, oh my goodness,
let's start to reformulate geometry, right?
This is, after all, this discourse is on geometry.
How far can I go?
And at around about the time,
you see that he's much older, right?
So Bernhard Riemann was up for his habilitation.
So this in the German, in the ancient German system,
you gotta, when you become a full chair professor,
you have to go through another Viva
in front of a committee, okay?
So Riemann, as the tradition goes,
you propose three topics,
and the committee will select one,
and they will examine you on that.
So Riemann selected three topics.
The first one he selected is actually the zeta function,
which led to the Riemann hypothesis theme.
The greatest open challenge in all of mathematics.
That's a different discourse than the whole different time.
I'll tell you all about it.
But the second one is something else.
And as I sort of, oh my goodness,
I'm kind of running out of ideas.
What should I talk about?
I don't know, the foundations of geometry.
So he just wrote that as a, why not?
He's never gonna ask me that.
But Gauss, because he was paying attention
to Lobachevsky and Bollywood,
and saw the third one, he says,
I want this guy to tell me about this.
And Riemann said, holy crap.
And Riemann was like, okay,
so this is a typical undergraduate feeling, right?
You got your exam tomorrow,
I haven't even started reading yet, this course.
So that's what basically Riemann did.
So to prepare for his habilitation,
he took,
but it's an incredible document.
It's called On the Great, On the Foundations of Geometry.
Re-examining Euclid in this new way,
inspired by Lobachevsky and Franz.
And he worked so hard,
he unfortunately got tuberculosis and died.
Shortly after he got the chair,
of course he got the chair, but then he died.
But at least that's the story.
So he did die of TB, sadly, as many people did at the time.
But so in a way, in a very twisted way,
Gauss killed Riemann.
One of the great mathematicians killed another one.
What's all this got to do with physics?
Got to go back to, right?
I mean, we've taken a bit of a tangent, right?
So I've told you about how the triumph
of the classical world,
building upon the shoulders of Principia Mathematica,
through Euler and Hamilton and Lagrangelo plus,
in this understanding of the classical world
of R3 cross R, right?
And in parallel, pure geometries were just thinking about,
what if you start messing around with Euclid?
How far can you get?
This is the beautiful story.
This could have been two completely different
lines of thought, right?
That's fine, you know, there.
I'm related parts of mathematics.
But that's the magic of mathematics,
and especially with mathematical physics.
No theorems in mathematics is ever wasted.
Something beautiful must show up in this world.
You can probably tell I'm a complete Platonist, but anyhow.
So this being the raw institution,
we cannot not mention Faraday, right?
So while all of that's happening, you know,
the classical world was done to perfection
on this analytic geometry of R3 cross R.
Micro Faraday, who is the greatest experimentalist
of the time, probably of all time,
in the basement right here,
were mucking around with light.
So he was mucking around with magnets and electricity.
He was generating electricity.
He just learned about electricity from Volta,
who visited here in 1799.
Early, shortly after 1799, and he learned
how to generate electricity.
So he was mucking around with electric magnets.
He's an experimentalist, but he didn't know any math.
So he got his friend, the Scottish mathematician,
James Clark Maxwell, and they kind of meet up,
bouncing up great minds.
They met right behind this wall in the rooms
where the London Institute now occupies.
So it's a very humbling thing for me to go to work every day.
Like, you know, the flood of tears every day is like,
oh my God, it's like I see the ghost of Faraday
and Maxwell and all these people right behind this wall.
So in this great, great space.
So, what Faraday and Maxwell realized
was light, that there's an electromagnetic phenomenon
called light, where that light is the propagation
of electromagnetic waves.
I'm not gonna bore you with writing down
the equations of Maxwell, which Faraday did not understand
because he didn't take calculus.
He's apparently already some historical bit
that his knowledge of mathematics was up to algebra,
but not beyond.
But so you needed this input of this mathematician
to make sense of what's happening.
Oh, by the way, you can buy t-shirts on this.
Have you seen t-shirts like this?
And God said, and then there's this Maxwell's equations
of light, and then, let there be light.
You can buy, it's totally cool t-shirt you can all buy.
I think the R.I. should sell some of these, right?
Why not?
You know, this is Faraday and Maxwell, right?
But this is what's so bizarre,
and of course, I'm condensing a huge story here,
is light does not obey Galilean physics.
Light is not Galilean.
So by Galilean, I mean this Newtonian world.
Somehow light is very special.
Light is the absolute limit speed.
There exists in our cosmos an absolute speed limit.
Why?
I don't know, but it just so happens.
You cannot exceed this speed limit,
but by putting this speed limit on,
this gentleman, Einstein, realized that the entirety
of Newtonian classical physics needs to be abandoned.
I need to be abandoned in this very beautiful way, twice.
Special relativity.
Remember, I told you what the classical world
Newtonian world is.
That's the world of R3 cross R.
In this world, you need the concept
of the space-time continuum.
And in fact, special relativity is the study
of R3 comma one, and not R3 cross R1.
I'm not gonna get into the details of what this means,
but this comma is, this is Escher's painting, of course,
is exactly with the hyperbolic geometry.
Distances are no longer measured by signs and cosines,
but by hyperbolic cosines and hyperbolic signs.
So somebody once said to Oscar Wilde,
how was your day?
Oscar Wilde said, oh, I did a lot of work.
This morning, I put in a comma,
and in the afternoon, I removed it.
So in mathematics, a single comma
could mean the whole world as well.
And of course, this is the first time,
and in the second time, Einstein's genius realized,
not only is space and time is the study
of a new type of geometry, of hyperbolic geometry,
but matter and gravity and everything there is
is in this non-neuclidean geometry,
and that is the geometry, the differential geometry
of Gauss and Riemann.
But that's what general relativity is.
So if you wanna know more about this,
what modern physics is, in terms of a search for everything,
I was very honored to be standing in this very spot,
talking about this history of how to find
this theory of everything.
And that was in collaboration of Limbs with the RI.
So what modern physics is, then,
is a geometrization program of translating everything
that we know into this differential geometry
of Euler, Gauss, and Riemann.
And loads and loads of names,
I'm not gonna read them all out to you.
But what these guys are doing
is to establish a dictionary for the universe.
And I feel very honored and privileged
to be part of this community.
What do I do all day?
I try to write a dictionary for the universe.
So everything on the left is what we see,
and everything else on the right
is the geometrical understanding,
the axiomatic geometrical understanding
where the things are.
So I'm not gonna bore you with a lot of these,
but everything that you're familiar with, what is light?
Well, light is a connection of a flat U1 bundle.
And then you can talk to geometries,
and that has very precise geometrical meaning.
And this dictionary goes on,
and this is what modern physics has become.
Modern physics has become the answer
to Johannes Kepler's great comment,
where there is matter, there is geometry.
So don't listen to me babble on
about geometry in this dialogue.
I was very privileged to first write,
edit this book with and then for
the oldest living Nobel laureate in theoretical physics,
Professor Sien Yang,
in which we collected all of the fields medalists
and all the Nobel prizes we can get.
There was like, yeah, I'm totally happy, he's a hundred.
Let's write it.
And what these guys are talking about
in terms of this dialogue,
in this geometrization program
of translating the physical reality
to the language of geometry.
So, I end exactly on this slide, on the spot.
Thank you.
