First of all, I'll briefly introduce how I got interested in this question of Occam's
razor and William of Occam himself. And it actually arose because I talk at my institute
at the University of Surrey by colleague and friend Hans Vesterhof, who's one of the founders
of the Science of Systems Biology, both of our both Hans and I work in this area, which is
about using models, mathematical models of biological systems to predict how they're going
to behave. Hans gave a talk about a decade ago, which was entitled No Occam's razor for Systems
Biology. And this was a decade ago, I was vaguely aware of Occam's razor, it was a principle of
simplicity, that you should choose a simpler solution, but I knew very little else about it.
But I did know that I pass a village of Occam on my drive into work along the A3s.
And that prompted me to think, okay, well, I have to find out a little bit more this
to see if there was a connection and there was. William of Occam was born in the Surrey village,
which made me think how to try to rush to the defense of William and his razor. So I found out
a little bit more about William of Occam and his razor. And the more I found out,
the more intrigued I became. And it provoked me to write this book. So let's tell you first
a little bit about William of Occam. For instance, he's been born in the village of Occam,
not far from Guildford where I work. It's a pretty little village, quite a village.
This on the left is a portrait of William of Occam later in his life. And he's most famous for
oh, and on the bottom, on the bottom right, you can see where Occam is and just south of London
and the Guildford. And William of Occam is famous for entities should not be multiplied
beyond necessity, which is Occam's razor. And, but there's a lot more to William of Occam than his
razor, as I found out. So when Hans gave his talk and made this case for, for Occam's razor not being
appropriate in biology generally really, because he claimed biology was irreducibly complex.
In other words, he shouldn't try to simplify it at all. So I thought I'd find out a little bit more.
That's technically most of 10 years to dig out. I needed to know. So a little bit more about William.
He was studying theologies of little, we know very little of his origin. He doesn't,
we don't know who the parents are. So they're probably fairly unremarkable.
It's often the sons or sons of nobles were given to the Franciscan order.
But because we don't know his family, that probably didn't happen to him.
To him, he may have been an orphan or a family, a child left on the doors of the of the friary.
Anyway, we don't know much about his early education, but we do know
he was sent to study theology at Oxford around 1320. And theology at the time, this is why
this is of interest, I think, to the Royal Institute and people who were interested in science,
theology at that time was known as the Queen of Sciences. And I want to explore that a little,
why and how it could be called the Queen of Sciences. First off, they studied a rather
broad range of topics in theology. And their standard textbook was something called Lombard
Sentences. And it had a lot of questions and answers by the great church fathers.
These were the kind of questions that they examined. In what manner is free will accepted in
God's. These were stupid people, the medieval, they were worrying about deep issues,
that we still worry about free will. What is free will? We can't decide on having agreed on that
today. So another question, whether it been fitting that God would assume the womanly gender.
So gender politics was also something that was discussed in relation to theology.
But then there comes questions that are kind of sticking a toe at least in science, whether the
angels were composed of matter and form. This was the Aristotle idea that everything was composed
of matter and form. And did the angels also, were they made of the same materials as rocks and stones
and people? Whether the Firmament is the same as the element of fire. Firmament is of course the
sky. And the sky of course plays a huge role in the early development of science. So we'll take
a look at it and ask you to think for his beautiful picture of the night sky. And you can see all
the stars and view shooting stars going by. And the first question, just consider for a moment,
you can't answer the question in this talk. Normally if it's a live talk I'll ask, who knows.
How you tell the difference between stars and planets? That's one question. I want you to
think about, many of you will probably know the answer. And then the second question I want you
to think about is what happens to stars when you're not looking at them? So in other words,
if you leave stars alone and don't look at them, what do they do? Where do they stay in the same
place? Do they move? So we'll answer the first question. The second question first. It's a question
that wouldn't have occurred to anyone in the medieval world because they saw this every day.
They saw what was happening to the stars every day. Because at night it was so dark they could see
the stars in the summer, they wouldn't have slept outside. So they knew what the stars do every day.
They rotate in perfect circles around the North Star. So that's the first thing that if you were
wanting to find a science, you might want to account for. What is it that makes the stars
rotate in perfect circles? So that's our question. And the answer that came up with
ancient Greeks came up with is that they attached these stars to a crystal sphere.
So here's a plan of the medieval universe, which is basically inherited mostly from the
ancient Greeks. And you can see at the center, the sphere at the center is the Earth. And
beneath the Earth was hell. So although we call it a geocentric universe, it's actually a
Diablo-centric universe with a heliated center. And beyond the Earth was the moon and the sun.
You can see the sun sign on the rings of crystals, or crystal spheres. Why they had to be crystal?
Because you couldn't see them in the sky. So they must be transparent. So we reckon they
were made of crystal. And then we have a planet. So we're still thinking about how you identify
some of the stars as planets. And then you have the outer sphere, which contains all of the stars.
And it rotates once a day entirely around the Earth. And that was a kind of scientific step
forward. It accounted for that observation that the stars are rotating around the Earth seemingly.
And outside of that was God. So that's another staggeringly different thing that the medieval
thought when they looked up at the sky. They didn't see a sky full of stars, which we know
to be burning like our sun, a furnace, a huge furnace of nuclear energy. They thought they
were looking at the gates of heaven. The walls of heaven, really. It's decorated with stars.
And if they could, oh, planets, planets. Okay. So how do you tell the difference between a star
and a planet? I'll tell you at this slide, and we'll come back to the question I was
rambling towards. Planets don't move in perfect circles. They also don't twinkle. You can work
out why or find out why they didn't twinkle. But the key property of planets for our purpose
is that they don't move in perfect circles. They wander across the sky through the
zodiac constellations. And this is how astrology, and this is what astrology does, tracks their
motion. And not only are they wandering in these kind of curvy wanderings, but they sometimes
reverse and go backwards instead of going from east to west. They go west to east, and then they
go east to west again. So they have this rather peculiar motion. So remember that we
accounted for the stars on a crystal sphere. How do you count for the planets? Well, in the
ancient world, you pinned the planets to gods, and gods could do what they like. They could
roam the heavens, do what they like. So there wasn't really a problem in counting for the
erratic motion of the planets. The gods were erratic, unpredictable, and there wasn't a problem
with that. Of course, then once you try to stick them onto crystals' fears, then you do have a
problem with accounting for that erratic motion and the prists of turns. But the thing I want to
get across to you, as I said, was that when the Medi was looked at the sky, they didn't think they
were looking at a universe. They thought they were looking at the walls of heaven, decorated with
stars. And God was sending his messages to mortals by moving the stars and the planets. Those were
messages to us mortals. And if a Medieval could, as in this illustration, climb up to
the starry sphere and pull it open or thrust their head through the starry sphere, they would
look into heaven. So it's a very different view of the world and the universe, and also theology,
because theology wasn't some, the gods weren't in some kind of different place, a heaven in a sphere,
a place completely separated from the world. They were upstairs in the sky. There were other
supernatural beings, there's devil and his demons below the earth. There was only one sphere,
so they expected it to be counted for by a single set of laws. And one of the people who
really had made the most impact on turning theology into science was Thomas Aquinas,
the Italian theologian, who did a lot to reintroduce Aristotle into Western philosophy,
Aristotle and the other Greek philosophers, famously being lost and then rediscovered by the
or coinciding with the Crusades. And when Aquinas discovered Aristotle, he found Aristotle's
science and was completely bowled over by it. And he thought, this is the way that I can turn
theology into a science by, for example, providing five proofs of God. I'm going to those briefly
into those in a moment. But really his mission was to fuse theology and science. So science would
become the kind of, the kind of system that would include both gods, but also the scientific stuff
around us, explaining the motion of the stars and the planets, also the motion of the stuff
around us. There was only one science. So that's what William of Ockham went to Oxford to study.
And so yes, so one of the ways that Aquinas
tried to convince the world that theology was a science and succeeded and pretty well
was his five proofs of God. So they were based largely on Aristotle's philosophy, for example,
and Aristotle's science. So Aristotle said that everything that moves is moved by another.
Aquinas said, well, if you take that backwards in time, you've got to have a first mover who's
obviously God. Aristotle said that everything has a number of causes, including a first cause.
And the first course, again, it's something located in time. So if you go backwards, you've got to
you've got to have a first course. And there was another argument,
contingency in the argument from degree, which we might go into. But the other important argument
that is extremely important for science was the teleological argument.
Aristotle also claimed that everything in the world had a purpose. So for example, the purpose
of acorns was to feed pigs. The purpose of pigs was to feed humans. And some philosophers even
argued that the purpose of life for pigs was to keep the meat fresh. So everything had a purpose.
And all of those purpose eventually led to God. So within these five ways, the five ways of proving
that God exists, that Aquinas had come up with, at least two of them were passed to God. Three of
them really were passed to God. The first mover, if you follow movements backwards, you find God.
The first cause, you follow them backwards, you find God. The teleological argument,
if you find the final cause of everything, the telos, the final cause, then you find God.
So for every object in the world, it had a teleological connection. It had a theological
connection. So if you consider a teleology, for example, every object, every animal and plant
had a purpose in the world, but God had designed for mankind. And for mankind, the purpose of
mankind, of course, was to worship God. So that was the final purpose of humanity in the world,
to worship God. The purpose of lions was to provide an example of nobility. And the purpose of foxes
was to provide a contrary example of slainess and dishonesty. And the purpose of pelicans
was rather peculiar. They were thought to pierce their breasts with their beak in order to feed
their chicks. And this was meant to be an example of Christ's suffering. So the purpose of pelicans
in this world was to give us an example of Christ's suffering. So for the medieval, the world was
saturated with theology. It was everywhere. And this is what William of Rockham came into. Oh,
another hugely important aspect of Aristotle's philosophy that was imported into the medieval's
philosophy was universals. And this goes to the idea, or a problem that goes back to, say,
Plato. And Plato was concerned about how we identify, for example, round objects,
like the ring you see here, as being round. None of them are perfectly round. They're all different
sizes, but we still recognize them as being round. How do we identify boxes as being boxes?
Cherries as being cherries when they're coming so many, at least for boxes that come in so many
shapes and sizes. And we still identify them. Plato came up with the idea that every object
is made up of forms. And these were kind of invisible essences of objects. So a ring, for
example, would be made up of a number of different forms. The form of circularity, the form of gold,
a box would have the form of wood, the form of a rectangle, a cherry would have the form of a circle,
the form of twoness, the form of redness, and the form of sweetness. By the time this got
imported into the medieval world, they became Aristotle's universals. And this was what most
of the scholastics as they were called, people who studied the science in the medieval world, the
theologians, they studied, they dissected objects into their universals. And this was a lot of what
they did, which they considered to be part of the science of theology, dissecting objects and trying
to work out what objects are really made of in terms of their forms. And again, that led to God,
because the universals were thought to be ideas in God's mind. So again, this is the unity of the
real world around us, and the theological world. It was all one, and it all led to God.
So back to William. So he studied theology, he didn't complete his degree. That was because
he was accused of heresy. You'll find out why. Summoned to Avignon to answer charges before the
pope. His trial took two years, but was never completed because he got involved in another
conflict at this time between the pope and the Franciscans on the holiness of poverty,
not time to go into that today, but it is very interesting. He ended up accusing the pope of
being a heretic, which caused him and his fellow Franciscans to flee Avignon, chase by a posse of
soldiers and escape to the protection of the Holy Roman Emperor. So he has an interesting story,
should be much better known than he is. It turns up in Berto Ego's name of the Rose, at least he's
mentioned in his great novel. And Robert William of Baskerville is vaguely based on William
of Ockham, but apart from that, people really don't know much about this extraordinary character.
So what did he do first with Aquinas, his proofs of God? He disproves them all. He, for example,
pointed out that the unmovable argument doesn't provide a God because there could be,
there doesn't need to be a single first mover that could be 10, 100, a thousand, a trillion
first movers. So none of those leads to a deity necessarily. Simulat, the first cause argument,
he pointed out that in the Christian world at the time, there were objects that didn't have causes.
For example, God didn't have a cause. Free will didn't have a cause. We mentioned about free will
being discussed in that medieval world. Free will was considered to be free in the sense that it
didn't have a cause. And that's important because people were sent to heaven or hell. So it was
thought on the basis of the actions of their free will. So if free will didn't have a cause, why
does everything need a cause? So William of Ockham dismissed causes, as I said, they just didn't
exist. And similarly, he, I won't go through them all, but he dismissed all of them, including
the theological argument. So William of Ockham dismissed the theological argument that everything
has a cause. I'll just let you read the whole slide if you like. But I will just read the last
couple of lines. You might ask, why does the fire heat the wood rather than cool it? I replied that
such is its nature. Now a natural agent is determined by its nature, not by an end. So although
William of Ockham accepted that things like houses may have a purpose, he didn't accept that objects
in the world really have a purpose. And so he removed, he used his razor, if you like, to eliminate
teleology and say there were no causes. There were no final causes. There were no first causes.
And there's just how things happen in the world. So add on to universals. Remember,
these were these invisible essences of objects. And William of Ockham argued, for example,
if we look at the final cherries here, there was the universal of tunas. William of Ockham used the
argument, well, if you have two chairs in a room and a third chair in an adjacent room,
and then somehow the universal of tunas would have to be converted to the universal of threeness
if you knocked down the wall between the two rooms. And that just didn't make sense. So he
argued that universals themselves do not exist at all. That all there are are objects. So he
removed universals from the anything existing. There are only ideas in the mind.
And that left what for science? It left the study of real objects. So instead of dissecting
objects into the universals of tunas and threeness and redness and sweetness, you just studied the
object. And that became modern science. Also, it effectively cut the link between study of the
world and God. There was no link through teleology. There was no link through the first course. There
was no link through universals. So William went on to say that the article of Christian faith
should be accepted as such. He was a Franciscan friar. As far as we know, he remained devout
throughout his life. They cannot be proved by reason, nor can they be made the basis of knowledge.
Science and theology are essentially different and must not be confused.
As far as I know, and if anyone can point out anyone who said anything like this earlier,
I would be interested to hear. As far as I know, William of Rockham is the first person in the
history of the world to clearly separate science from theology and religion. And let me know if
I'm wrong, but I've not encountered anyone so far. So that was extraordinarily important, I think.
In this little corner, this is an ancient map of the world. You can see Anglia in the bottom left
hand corner where William of Rockham was, but he had an influence throughout Europe. And his influence,
I think, was one of the stimuli that led to the growth of science in the West. So in the medieval
world, Europe was just a small part of the world, and really the center was in the East.
That has changed, and it changed because of science. And I think William of Rockham played an
unappreciated role in that. So the role of Rockham's razor in science. So we've already seen that the
motion of the stars gave rise to the idea that they were carried on spheres, not only the
celestial sphere, which carries the stars, but the planets. That created a problem, of course,
because of the erratic motion. Remember, they move erratically across the sky, and they even
twist and turn. The astronomer to attempt to make sense of that, at least provide a geometric
representation, was the last great astronomer of antiquity, Claudius Ptolemy. And he came up with
the Ptolemaic astronomy system. And basically, it was a geometrical system for predicting the
motion of the heavens. It has the Earth in the center, the geocentric system. And then the planets
are those, the planets, the moon and the sun, are the rings around the center. And the erratic
motion of the planets are those whirly bits in the diagram. So from this, he could predict very
accurately the motion of the planets. And the Ptolemy system was used right through to middle
ages. People like Columbus used the Ptolemaic systems to predict the motion of the stars.
So it was an extraordinarily successful system, despite being wrong, which is interesting. So
being good at making predictions doesn't necessarily mean you're right. Wrong, because of
course it's geocentric, well, geocentric. Now, William of Ockham made a statement, and I think
is in 1323, there is pretty astounding. It appears to me that the matter in the heavens is of the
same kind as the matter down below. And this is because, using this razor, plurality should never
be posited beyond necessity. He's saying that it's much easier, much more, makes much more sense to
say that the stuff in the sky is the same as the stuff down below, and made up of rocks and stones,
I guess, like everything else. Now, what was his influence? So he was around in 13,
he said that statement, I just read out, or wrote that statement around about 1323.
He had an influence that spread right across Europe. It became known as the
via Moderna, the new way, as opposed to the old scholastic way of looking for simple solutions,
getting rid of universals and other elements of metaphysics from philosophy.
The movement that I ultimately, I think, became science. For example, one of the
Occamist scholars in Paris, who coincided with William Ockham and picked up a lot of his ideas,
was someone called Gene Burden. And he said this, just as it's better to save the appearance
through fewer causes than many, essentially, Occam's razor, it is better to say that the earth,
which is very small, is moved most rapidly in the highest sphere, the one carrying the stars,
is at rest. In other words, as far as I can see, the first person to propose that the stars are
still and the earth is spinning on the basis of simplicity. That was the only grounds. He's
saying that this makes more sense because it's simple. Now, and that was in 1340, well before,
Copernicus, who took up the idea, of course. And Copernicus' motivation for trying to find a better
solution in the heavens was that he found the Ptolemaic system, which I illustrated earlier,
as rather gross and monstrous he called it. He couldn't believe that the heaven was so
ugly, if you like, made up of such a complex collection of motions. So when he studied and
when he went to try to make sense of it in a better way, he said, after I addressed myself to this,
very difficult and almost insoluble problem, the suggestion that led to me how it could be
solved with fewer and much simpler constructions that were formally used. So again, Copernicus'
motivation, I believe, and there's evidence for this, his motivation was inspired by the Via
Moderna that had been founded by William Rockham's work, taken forward by Jean Buridan and other
philosophers in the medieval world, to influence the great scientists of the Renaissance and the
and the Enlightenment, such as Copernicus. So he famously found a much simpler solution to all
those Wiggles' Netherlands, and that was by putting a sun at the center rather than the earth.
And to show how much simpler it is, of course, this is a program you can do online,
is to model the solar system. Actually, this is just one planet. Venus model with the sun at the
center, as you can see, it makes sense, a nice simple system, and then model with the earth at
the center on the right. You can see how much more complex it is. And essentially, the medieval
was trying to make sense of what was going on in the right. Whereas Copernicus says, look,
it makes much more sense if we do this and have this simple system with the sun rather than the
earth at the center. And then you can do science, you can work out laws. And this is, of course,
what Johannes Kepler did. Johannes Kepler, again, was inspired by simplicity, nature of simplicity
and unity, and often a single cause will produce many effects. Now, in fact, this model of Copernicus
had a problem. It looks like it's a perfect circle, but it's not. It's got little wiggle
with it. And that was because Copernicus insisted that the circles had to be, circles he put in
the heavens, had to be perfect circles, because only they could fit on the spheres, the crystal
spheres, that he still believed were in the heavens. Kepler famously bent those circles into
ellipses. And again, the only, actually not the only, his motivation for doing this was simplicity,
but he also discovered that the system that he then came up with the heliocentric system
with elliptical orbits was much more accurate in making predictions in the heavens.
I got rid of the crystal. The crystals, once you have ellipses, they won't fit on the surface of
spheres anymore. So the crystal had to go. So he removed the crystal from the heavens.
But he also came up with laws. And laws are extremely important in science, because they
provide the simplest expression of complex systems, such as the solar system. What Kepler
discovered is that he could account for the motion of all of the planets that he could see,
it's fewer than those that we can see today, but he could account for all of those motions with
just three laws. And we'll go into them, but there they are in front of you. And those accounted
for all of the motions in the heavens, including the motion of even comets, you could model with
his laws. So nature loves simplicity and unity, and often a single cause will produce many effects.
So again, his motivation was to try to find a simpler way of accounting for the world.
But his laws only applied in the heavens. The person who found laws to work on earth was,
of course, Galileo. He discovered the universal acceleration and the gravity in contrast to
what Aristotle had proposed, and Galileo's relativity. So that, I think, was his greatest
contribution. Earlier than Galileo, laws were searched for in the heavens, like the Ptolemaic
system and Kepler's laws. But the terrestrial world looked like it was too messy to be governed by
laws. But Galileo, by performing very careful experiments, showed that he could find laws
also in the terrestrial world. Of course, that was taken forward by Isaac Newton, who found his
three laws of motion and his universal gravitational law that applied both in the heavens and on earth.
So this was the first real unification of the world, the universe, finding a single set of laws
that accounted for both heaven and earth. And that was an extraordinarily powerful unification.
And of course, unifications are simplifications. Instead of two sets of laws, you have a single
set of laws, a single law. And again, Newton was inspired by simplicity. Truth is evident
to be found in simplicity and not in the multiplicity and confusion of things.
So, and this slide is just to remind me to say that so the great contribution of Newton was to
find that the sky and the terrestrial world were governed by a single set of laws.
But I also wanted to use Newton's law to also point out that laws are the simplest expression
of a complicated world. For example, if we take one of his laws, his third law,
that every action has an equal and opposite reaction, and it's stated here by this man pushing a box.
Well, actually, that's not, that is the simplest law, but there are an infinite number of more
complex laws that could account for the same observation, as well as every action and reaction,
every action, for every action, there is an equal and opposite reaction. You could have,
for every action, there is an equal and opposite reaction, reaction plus a demon who's also pushing
on the other side. Or you maybe have two demons or three demons or four or five demons, you can
have as many as you like. And the law would still account for every observation that we see.
But what Newton did, and what all sides does is search for the simplest expression, get rid of
the demons, and find the simplest laws. And this is what science does. So, and again, truth is
evidently found as an implicit and not in the multiplicity confusion of things. And one of
Newton's colleagues, Robert Boyle, discovered that the first gas law, pressure, Boyle's law,
pressure times volume, is always equal to a constant. So if you take a volume of air and you
compress it, you make the volume smaller, so the pressure goes up. So again, what this illustrates
is once you have laws, simple laws that you can make predictions from, then you can build technologies.
Does that diagram there remind you of anything? It's how steam engines work, and the internal
combustion engines work. And they work because they obey the gas laws and other laws, of course,
that Boyle and others discovered. And this is what laws allow you to do, because they give you a
simple expression of many different phenomena. They allow you to make predictions of how it
works. And if you can make predictions of how things work, then you can work out how to harness
the work, the energy of steam, for example, to power the industrial revolution. So these, finding
these simple laws, it wasn't just an exercise in philosophy, it drove technologies without the
simple laws. We wouldn't have technologies. And again, this is inspired by simplicity.
And the words of Robert Boyle, a great part of the work of the true philosophers has been to reduce
the true principles of things to the smallest number they can without making them insufficient.
So all of the great scientists of the Enlightenment of the age of scientific revolution
were all inspired by simplicity. And then going further, we've all already said that Newton unified
the laws in the heavens with the laws in the terrestrial world. Statistical mechanics unified
the microscopic world with Newton's laws by finding a lot of Boltzmann, Maxwell and Gibbs
applied Newton's laws essentially in the terrestrial world to account for that, to
provide us with the laws and science of thermodynamics, which drives those steam trains. So again,
it's a unification instead of having another law that's operating in a microscopic world,
it was the same laws. Another great unification, of course, space and time in the universe and
the unification of gravity and acceleration provided by Einstein and his special and general
relativity. And again, Einstein was inspired by simplicity. Nature is the realization of
the simplest conceivable mathematical ideas. Natural selection unified all of biology into
a single explanation of natural selection. And as Alfred Russell Wallace, one of the co-discoverers
of the law of natural selection, said the theory itself is exceedingly simple and the
facts on which it rests come under a few simple and easily understood classes. So again, now in
biology simplifications took place in which instead of a million separate creations, which was the
only explanation for biology prior to natural selection, you had a single origin of life and
diversification by natural selection speciation. So that was a huge simplification in the natural
world. And where we're going to go to now is towards particle physics and very briefly. And
that's to look at symmetry and the role of symmetry as a simplification. And
it isn't immediately obvious that symmetry involves a simplification. But if we look at this
butterfly, you might think that you know what the other half of this butterfly is. But in fact,
you don't because it's not symmetrical. But if you look at another butterfly, if you know half of
the butterfly, you also know the other half. So if you compare the two, this is not symmetrical,
it contains more information. You see one half, you can't predict the other, you don't have predictability
across the house. With a symmetrical butterfly, you see half of it, you see the whole of it. So
this is simpler. Symmetry gives you simplicity. And of course, symmetry is fundamental to particle
physics. I mean, Notha discovered that this was that the laws of physics could be predicted
through principles of simplicity. Those were picked up by particle physics and particle
physicists in the 20th century. And they're fundamental to particle physics and help to,
for example, predict the Higgs boson. So simplicity remains crucial to physics. And indeed, all of
science. Okay, now I want to pause for a moment and ask the question, how opens razor works?
So there are two aspects to it. One of it, one part of it is, well, actually, there are many
Occam's razors. And Sobo wrote a book recently about Occam's razors. And he pointed out there
are many forms of Occam's razor, many ways which you can look for simple solutions. But the one I
want to highlight today is in Bayesian inference. And Bayesian inference goes to Thomas Bayes, of
course, and his famous equation. And in Bayesian inference, you have a model, and you update the
model based essentially on the likelihood. And the likelihood is what you use to analyze the data.
And it's the probability of the data given the model. Now, that sounds a little bit complicated.
It actually is very easy. And I'm going to illustrate it by mentioning I have two dice
in my hands. In my left hand, I have a normal six-sided dice. And in my right hand, I have a
60-sided dice, as you can see on the slide. Now, secretly, I throw one of the dice. Now,
you think about two hands, two dice, I throw one of the dice. The prior should be that it's a 50%
chance that I'm throwing the six-sided dice or the 60-sided dice. Now, I tell you I've thrown
the same 29. And I ask you to guess what dice have I thrown. It's obvious I've thrown the
60-sided dice. That's the only one compatible with the data. So you have to have a complex model.
People often attack Occam's razor by saying, well, the world isn't simple. It's complicated.
That isn't what this form of Occam's razor is about, at least. It doesn't care about how complex the
world is. It's asked you to reason about the world using Occam's razor and pick the simplest
solution. In this case, it's a 60-sided dice. Now, I throw a five. So, again, I take both
dice in my hand, throw one of them, and I throw a five. Now, I ask you to guess which dice have I
thrown. It's not so easy now, is it? Taking the prior, I could have thrown either dice by a 50-50
chance. It could be either dice, but is it both equally likely? Hopefully, you've come to the
conclusion, no, they're not equally likely, because a six-sided dice can throw a five every six
throws approximately. Whereas a 60-sided dice throws a five only one out of 16 throws. So the
likelihood of the data given the model, the likelihood of both models, a six-sided dice,
or a 60-sided dice, is very different. The likelihood of the six-sided dice is one in six,
throwing a five, and the likelihood of the 60-sided dice is one in 60. So when you plug those values
into the Bayesian equation, you get that it's 10 fold more likely that I've thrown the six-sided dice,
even though the prior on it, the prior probability was 50%. Now I've thrown a five,
it's now 10 times more likely than six-sided dice. It could still be the 60-sided dice, of course,
but it's less likely. If I threw them again, and I've got a five, or a four, or a three,
then it would make the 60-sided dice less and less probable. But at the moment, it's just
as 10 fold less probable. But this is how Occam's razor works. Complex models have many different
facets to them, and they make looser predictions. Instead of just a number between one and six,
the 60-sided dice can come up with a number between one and 60. Similarly, the Ptolemaic system,
because it was so complex, it could account for pretty much any motion in the heavens.
Once you've had a heliocentric system with only the planets that you see, the five planets that
they saw in the sky, and you had simple circles or ellipses, it was a much simpler system.
And because it fitted the data, the chances of that fitting the data, it gives you a much
higher likelihood, because the number of parameters in the system are much lower
than in the Ptolemaic system on the right. So the likelihood of having fitted the data
for the heliocentric system being true is much higher than the Ptolemaic system,
even though both can fit the data. So this is how Occam's razor works. It looks at
a likelihood of the data given the model. Okay, so that's how Occam's razor works. And remember,
this Occam's razor is a rule of inference. It's not an ontological claim amount of
world. It doesn't say that entities are simple. It says that when you reason about them,
choose the models that have the smallest number of entities. Entities should not be multiplied
beyond necessity. So that's one reason why Occam's razor works, because it allows, it chooses,
it prefers simple models and simple models of a higher probability of being the source of your
data if they fit the data. And this is true for not only astronomy, it's true for the data of
looking at motion in Newtonian laws. It's true for biology. It's true for everything. If you
find a simple model that fits your data, and a more complex model that also fits your data,
your simple model is more likely on the basis of Bayesian inference. So that is a really important
part of Occam's razor. In this form, it's an argument about reason, not about how complex
the world is. We know there are now, for example, eight or nine planets out there, not one,
because we know the data tells us there's more to be seen. But there is another form of Occam's
razor. And it is ontological. It's about what exists in the world. And it is a claim that the
world is simple. And Einstein was convinced by this. He thought that the world, the universe,
was built on simple laws, such as his equals mc squared, the Schrodinger equation, very simple
equation. And other people have said, other scientists have also made statements that
suggest that the universe is made up of simple parts. This is Neil Turrick, the cosmologist,
who said that the universe has turned out to be stunningly simple. It's simpler than any of our
models can explain what he meant. There was actually the early universe. This is the cosmic
microwave background, of course. And he was saying that the universe started from a very,
very simple beginning. That's so simple, that's hard for us to account for how it turned into
the complex object that it is today. So the other question I want to come to at this point
is that, what is science? What is science? And we've got a few minutes more. What is science?
So this is what Wiki says about what science is. A systematic enterprise that builds and
organizes knowledge in the form of testable explanations and predictions about the world.
That's, yeah, that's what science is, really. It also is what cookery is. That's what cookstone
is. What plumbers do. It's what carpenters do. It's what gardeners do. It doesn't really tell you
anything about what science does, because it's pretty much how we deal with everything in the
world. We systemize it. We make predictions about what's going to taste nice. And we test them by
asking our guests to tell us whether it was nice or not. So it's not peculiar to science,
making predictions and experiments. None of those are peculiar to science.
For example, experiment, the optimists were very keen on experiment, and they didn't get anywhere.
So experiments on peculiar science, gardener will experiment with trying out different
plants in their garden. So experiment is universal. It's not peculiar to science.
Mathematics often thought, okay, well, that's science. Actually, astrologers use
mathematics a lot. Economists, everyone, everyone uses mathematics. Another one, which I don't think
I've got a slide for, but I'll point out falsifiability. This is Karl Popper's
criterion for science. It doesn't work because anyone who's a practicing scientist knows that
it's hard. It's just as hard to falsify hypothesis and to prove one. I mean, I many a time look at
the results of my experiment and I see that they don't agree with my theory. I don't
immediately say it's false. I kind of think an excuse why I could account for it. And this is
what scientists do all the time. It takes a lot to disprove a theory. And anyway,
disproveability is also not peculiar to science. It's found in many other, in law, for example.
It's very important. And this is what I would say sciences. This is ultimately all sciences.
Science is only about finding the simple solutions. A systematic enterprise that uses logic,
mathematics, and experiment to identify the simplest models of the world that provide the
most accurate and general predictions. If you tell me anything in science that goes outside of that
and any other field of thought, any other philosophical system, any other way of making
reasons, making sense of the world that uses the same principle, then let me know. Because as far
as I can see, this science is the only way of making sense of the world that sticks to Watkins
Razor. It always accepts only the simplest solutions. Actually, I won't read that one out.
But I also want to go back to looking at something and how simple is our world.
This is the law of least action. And it tells us that, as Jenny Coppersmith said,
we live in a lazy universe, that instead of complicated motions, say when an arrow is fired
at a target, it takes a very simple path rather than complex path. So we do seem to have
evidence that the universe may be simpler than we think it is. And as I said,
the particle physics model is also quite simple. But is it really all that simple?
For example, neutrinos. Why are they there? Because millions of them are passing through
your body this second. Trillions of neutrinos. Aren't they dispensable? Aren't they entities
beyond necessity? In fact, they're not. Because the sun couldn't shine without them. It's to do with
something to do with the symmetry of nuclear fission. But without neutrinos, the sun couldn't
shine. So we wouldn't be here without neutrinos. So neutrinos aren't entities beyond necessity.
Dark matter. Is that an entity beyond necessity? In fact, it isn't because dark matter seems to
be involved in the early universe when it was needed to coalesce the stars and planets all
or coalesce the matter into making stars and planets. So it does seem to be, this is really
a claim that I think is a reasonable claim, that actually the universe may be about as
simple as it could be in order to generate us. This is nearly the last thing I'm going to say,
that actually the ontological claim may have some substance, that there may be some truth
in the idea that the universe is about as simple as it could be. And in my go-kart,
you're going to have a possible reason for that. Lastly, I want to leave you with
a kind of pocket-Ockens' razor. I think Ockens' razor is extraordinarily important in the history
of science. Simplicity is embedded in science. And scientists have kind of forgotten it because
it's become part of their mindset. And they don't realise they use it when they use it all the time.
But it's not used in many aspects of life. And fake news, pseudoscience, conspiracy theories,
et cetera, are exploding the world into complexities that we never imagined before,
where individual chat rooms have their own philosophies and their own ideas about
objects and the way the world works. So here is a simple way, a simple Ockens' razor,
the difficulty often with Ockens' razor is to find out which is the simplest model.
There's an easy way of giving you a kind of rule of thumb is choose the explanation,
the model, the theory that has the fewest words. If you can say it simply, then it is simple.
If it's a complicated model theory explanation, it's going to take more words. So simply count
the number of words and choose the simplest explanation for phenomena such as or for,
for example, COVID-19. You can say that COVID-19 is a virus that came from a bat or a similar animal
and transmitted to a human, possibly through a lab, who knows. But that's a simple explanation.
Or you can take a more complex explanation. No, it's a conspiracy that was headed by
Bill Gates and many other leading and very wealthy people who want to control the world
by injecting us with microchips that they're inserting into vaccines involving doctors
and they release the COVID-19 and persuade us to take vaccines. That takes a lot of words.
But if they use enough words, they can account for everything. But the only argument against
all of this, the only ground that we can stand on really isn't logic in terms of saying they're wrong
because they'll always, everything you throw at them, they'll always have an explanation for it.
It's that their explanations are so complex that on the Bayesian Occam's razor, the likelihood of
being true is tiny because if you have all of these factors into your model of the world,
then almost anything can be accounted for. So that's how to use Occam's razor in your life.
Use Occam's pocket razor to find the simplest solution to the problems of life. And that's
the end of my talk. Thank you very much.
