Hello. It's so great to be here. It's a huge honor to talk at the Royal Institution,
which I've long been a fan of, and I'm so glad that you could join me this evening.
I'm the author of The Star Builders, and tonight I'm going to take you with me on a journey of
discovery, the same journey of discovery that I went on while I was writing the book.
Now The Star Builders is about a quest to do no less than recreate the energy source of the sun.
That energy source is a reaction called nuclear fusion, and if it can be recreated on Earth,
it has the potential to provide humanity with a new clean source of energy that could last for
millions of years. So this evening I'm going to relay the tales of the people, the machines,
and the motivations behind an amazing attempt to, in effect, build a star on Earth.
Now recreating the power source of the stars on Earth might seem like a fairly unhinged thing to
do. Stars have temperatures of millions of degrees and pressures hundreds of billions of times those
found on Earth. To control the stuff of stars requires the construction of contraptions that
test our inventiveness to the breaking point. But despite all that, since the 1940s people have been
trying to do it. Scientists, engineers, governments, and more recently entrepreneurs too. Controlling
the power source of the stars is perhaps the greatest technological challenge humanity has ever
attempted, but they are taking on and with verve too. They are The Star Builders. Now I'm particularly
excited to be telling you about this today because having quested for so many decades,
a number of big fusion breakthroughs have happened as recently as in the last couple of months.
We are in many ways living in the most thrilling time for fusion in decades and perhaps ever.
So this evening it is going to be a journey of discovery and it's going to take us to some
fairly exotic locations. We're going to go to space, one of the coldest places in the universe,
but also we're going to go to the hottest place in the solar system and we'll even
visit the start of time as well. But our journey is going to start in what is perhaps a less
exciting location. So this is downtown Livermore, California, USA, a small city on the opposite
side of the San Francisco Bay to San Francisco. And I want to start here because this town hosts
a very special experiment. I would say that it's the most exciting experiment anywhere in the world
today. That's what I think anyway. So let's move from Livermore the place to Lawrence Livermore
National Laboratory where this experiment is based. So this is the National Ignition Facility based
at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory. Now I haven't put a scale on here, but it's the length
of three football pitches, American football pitches of course. And what you are looking at here
is the world's most energetic laser system. You can get a sense of the scale because I've labeled
some people in one of the pitches there and one of the two main laser bays. Now this laser system
is used for lots of experiments, not just those on nuclear fusion for energy. Actually a lot of
the experiments are about maintaining the USA's nuclear arsenal. And some of the other ones are
about how materials can survive extreme radiation. So about 100 of the 400 or so shots as scientists
call them a year, that's a single firing of the laser are dedicated to research on fusion. And I
want to start our journey this evening by relaying to you what happens when this amazing laser fires.
So it all begins with a single nanodule of infrared laser light. Now infrared laser light
is on the red end of the spectrum, but you can't actually see it with the naked eye.
But what I've got here is a tiny laser that's in the red colour for comparison. And now look,
it's never safe to point a laser at anyone, but fortunately, you're all quite far away from me.
And tonight, special treat for being virtual, I can point this laser at you so you can get an idea
of it. So this is a red one you can see. And the amazing things about lasers is that they can take
energy and focus it in a very small space. And if you just do a single pulse of light energy,
you can also focus the light energy in a very small amount of time as well. And that's exactly
what this machine does. Now a single nanodule is a very, very small amount of energy. In fact,
if I get this apple, it's a billion times smaller than the energy it takes to lift this apple just
one meter up in the air. So it's a tiny amount of energy. But what happens next is going to change
all that. So we're going to watch a shot unfold on the National Ignition Facility now.
So what happens is the laser beam gets generated and it's just tiny. In fact, it's just 20 nanoseconds
long. But because the speed of light is fixed, this creates a pulse of laser light that's about
six meters long. And the first thing that happens is the fledging laser beam gets split into two
sets of 24 smaller beams and then heads to some laser amplifiers that boost the energy 10 billion
times. And this is just a start. Next, the laser light gets split again into 192 different beams
and it then goes through several extra rounds of amplification. And what happens is the special
type of glass called laser glass and flash lamps fire and they dump millions of hundreds of millions
of joules of energy into the laser glass where these beams can pick it up. And all told, the
boost in energy that these laser beams get is 4 million billion times over from that starting
tiny amount. Now what's happening is the beams are going back and forth and they're getting
amplified and eventually they're going to have their last amplification and they're going to
head towards a target chamber. And on the way to the target chamber, they're going to pass through
some crystals and those crystals are going to change this red infrared light to ultraviolet
light. Again, a light we can't see, but it's packed with high energy packets of light called
photons. And as the beams approach the target chamber, they're going to go in mirrored paths
all around it and head towards a tiny little gold box, a tiny little gold cylinder where they are
going to enter the sides and heat up the insides of the gold. And that gold is going to absorb the
ultraviolet light and re-emit it as x-rays. And by the way, this tiny target is only a few millimeters
long and it's cooled to 19 degrees above absolute zero, which is colder than the surface of Neptune.
So these are really crazy conditions. When those x-rays are generated, they go towards a tiny
capsule of fuel about the size of the pupil in your eye right at the center of the gold box.
And when they hit the outside layer, I think we're about to get the conversion to ultraviolet light
here, here it goes. When they hit that outside layer of fuel, they create a rocket effect. They
ablate off the outside of the fuel capsule and cause the rest of the capsule to start to collapse
at 350 kilometers per second. And right at the center of this capsule of fusion fuel,
the pressure reaches 300 billion times Earth, temperatures of tens of millions degrees,
conditions similar to in stars, atoms ripped apart, smashing into each other and doing
nuclear fusion reactions around a billion, billion of them. For a brief moment in this experiment,
a tiny star has been lit and energy from fusion reactions released. Now, we're going to come
back to this amazing experiment later. But first, I want to talk about what just happened. That is,
what is a nuclear fusion reaction? Well, first of all, it's not like the chemical reactions you're
used to when you say, you know, set off a wood fire or burn coal or anything like that, or wine
turning into vinegar with oxidation. It's a nuclear reaction. And that means it changes the nucleus
of atoms. And if you don't remember what's inside an atom, this is a helium atom. And right in the
center, really, really small is a nucleus with some positively charged particles, in this case,
two protons positively charged and two neutral particles, neutrons, and then the electrons
are all around the outside. And nuclear fusion and nuclear reactions in general change what's in
that nucleus. And that's why they're called nuclear. And actually, fusion is not the only
nuclear reaction around. It has a much more famous cousin, nuclear fission. So fission is the reaction
that powers the nuclear plants you hear about today. It takes very large atoms, very large
unstable atoms like uranium, and it gives them a bit of a kick from a neutron so they split and
fall apart, releasing huge amounts of energy in the process, huge quantities of energy in the process.
Now, nuclear fusion is different. It's it takes smaller atoms, lighter atoms, and combines them
to make larger atoms. Plus, in some cases, a huge amount of energy too. And fusions are really
important reaction for the universe, because it kind of turns the universe into this Lego set,
where if I take enough small atoms, I can build up bigger and bigger atoms.
And, of course, we're all made out of atoms. So fusion is kind of behind all of the stuff that
we're constructed out of. Well, let's meet the specific fusion reaction that starbuilders are
trying to do on earth. So these are the two types of two special types of hydrogen that
starbuilders are trying to use in earthbound experiments. So we've got deuterium and tritium.
So deuterium is about twice as massive as ordinary hydrogen because of its extra neutron.
And it's actually really common on earth. In fact, in every briny bathtub of seawater,
there's about five grams of deuterium. The second ingredient that starbuilders want to
use to do fusion on earth is a type of hydrogen called tritium, which is about three times as
massive as ordinary hydrogen. Now, the thing with tritium is it doesn't actually exist on earth,
certainly not in any large quantities, because it decays over time. So instead, what starbuilders do
is get some lithium and strafe it with neutrons to turn it into tritium. And lithium is widely
available on earth. So the starbuilders recipe is really to take these two, combine them in a
nuclear fusion reaction to produce energy. And what comes out is a neutron, a neutral particle,
and a nucleus of helium. Now, the amazing thing about nuclear fusion compared to perhaps the
other reactions that you know about is you don't need to do very much of it to generate a whole
load of energy. So if I was to take just a single milligram of the fuel for fusion, the kind of
fusion that starbuilders are trying to do, it releases the same energy as burning 19 kilograms
of wood, 10 kilograms of coal, or seven kilograms of crude oil. So that's a difference, an energy
difference, mass for that for mass of 10 million between coal and fusion fuel. And in fact, fusion
even releases more energy kilogram per kilogram than nuclear fission does by about a factor of four.
So it's actually the most energetic reaction that we can lay our hands on on earth with the materials
available here. Now fusion isn't just something that starbuilders are trying to do that doesn't
happen anywhere else. It's actually really prevalent in the universe. So fusion happens
all the time in the heavens. They're what make the sky at night breathtaking. All of those stars
are actually many fusion reactors, well actually not many at all, very big fusion reactors, much
bigger than anything anyone's doing on earth, thankfully. And of course, our own sun is no
different, it's a star like any other. Fusion is a reaction that makes the sun shine.
And although the sun, the reaction that the sun is doing in fusion is not the same as the one
starbuilders are trying to do on earth, it is still using up hydrogen and fusion reactions. In fact,
every single second, 600 billion kilograms of hydrogen react, yielding four billion kilograms
worth of pure energy. I think that's absolutely extraordinary. Kind of puts attempts to do fusion
on earth into perspective. But it's not just stars where fusion is happening in the universe.
It's actually, it actually happens not just when stars are alive, but also when they die
and in dramatic fashion. So what I've got on the left hand side here is a false color image
of the remnants of a supernova. And a supernova is when a star explodes, it's kind of the dying gas
of a star. And they're really dramatic events in our universe. They can outshine in entire galaxies.
Now, the energy of a supernova isn't actually provided by nuclear fusion, but they do trigger
lots of nuclear fusion reactions. And actually, that's our main source of some of the larger elements.
And it's not just fusion that's happening in space. If we turn the clock back as well to the
beginning of time, fusion was there too. In the first 1000 seconds after the Big Bang,
fusion created elements like helium, lithium and beryllium. And as I said, most of the elements
were made out of are actually created by fusion, either in stars, in the Big Bang, or in supernova.
So fusion happens all the time in the universe and has done since the dawn of time. But why are
star builders so interested in reproducing it on Earth?
So star builders are interested in fusion on Earth because right now, today, we're in an energy crisis.
And fusion promises to be a new and clean energy source that we can add to the energy sources
we already have available. Now, you might say, why do we need more energy? Or, you know, what's
important about energy? Well, you know, energy makes life good in all kinds of ways.
Right now, you wouldn't be able to listen to me if you didn't have electricity powering your
computer or your phone to join this call. And, you know, it's definitely true that some countries
could cut back on the amount of energy each individual person uses. But there are many
other countries where more energy would improve people's quality of life substantially.
Or where the population is growing. And, you know, those new people who are coming into the
world and doing exciting things in art and science are going to need energy for their lives too.
So we're going to probably need more energy in the future for the planet.
But to get a better picture of the problem and why I call it an energy crisis,
let's look at how we're powering the planet today. So this is the energy consumption of the entire
planet. And let me talk you through what's going on here. So first of all, on the bottom there,
on the x-axis, we've got the year up to almost the present day. And at the y-axis there, so going
upwards, we've got world energy consumption in something called exajoules. Now, I mentioned
nanojoules before and they're really small, but exajoules are mind-blowingly big. So an exajoule
is a million, million, million joules. So it's an absolutely phenomenal number. And actually,
the USA uses about 95 exajoules a year. The whole world, about 620. So what I've done is I've broken
down the world's consumption of energy into the different energy sources here. So right at the
bottom there, you can see oil and then coal and then gas. And those are all fossil fuels.
And the next one that you can see there is biomass, and that includes things like burning wood.
And then above that, you can make out there's a sliver, which is due to hydroelectricity.
And fusion's cousin, nuclear fission, appears to. That's in the sliver above that.
Now, in the present day, renewables are only responsible for a tiny sliver of our total
energy consumption, which you can just see at the top there. And actually, the majority of our energy
today, 80%, even though we talk about things like climate change over time, 80% of our energy
is still coming from fossil fuels. And this is a big problem. First, fossil fuels create air
pollution, and that's estimated to kill around 7 million people a year. But second, burning
fossil fuels produces carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases. And well, let's see, I'm going
to show you a chart now. And I'm going to, I want you to see if you can guess where we started
burning fossil fuels on this chart. Yeah. So the world went through an industrial revolution,
and we started burning fossil fuels. And that's that brought many benefits to the world, you know,
we're healthy and welfare in ways that would have been really hard to imagine in say 1600.
People from that time wouldn't even recognize life today. But our burning of fossil fuels has done
extraordinary things to Earth's climate. And the concentration of carbon dioxide has
zoomed upwards. And the carbon dioxide we've released has had a pernicious effect on the planet.
One of the main consequences is that it has warmed it considerably. So this chart shows
how temperatures on planet Earth have changed over time as a distribution. And what it's essentially
saying is that the average day to day is much hotter than it was in say 1900. In fact, the
average warming since that time is about 1.2 degrees Celsius. Now that might not sound like much,
but even small increases in average global temperature are synonymous with quite dramatic
changes. So already today, with the effects of climate change we have, it's estimated to be
contributing to the deaths of 150,000 people per year. And if we go much further, if, for example,
we breach two degrees, we would expect to see life threatening heat waves become even more
common. Coral reefs to be completely wiped out, crop failures, flooding, lots of bad things that
we don't really want to happen. And in fact, really recently, we've had a taste of some of those
things just this summer, the Californian wildfires, the flooding in Germany. Both of those scientists
think would have been much less likely to happen were it not for human-caused climate change.
So because of the harms and because of the harms burning fossil fuels will continue to do unless
we control it, we really need to throw the kitchen sink at climate change. And that means
renewables, absolutely. It means nuclear fission like we have today. And it's striking that the
countries that have really managed to get our fossil fuels are using a lot of fission. And it
means trying out things that, as yet, haven't been demonstrated at scale, but might be able to
contribute to a clean energy portfolio. And the star builders really believe that nuclear fusion
could be one of those energy sources. Why they're so excited about fusion and why you might have
heard fusion talked about as the holy grail of energy is that fusion reactions don't produce
carbon dioxide or other greenhouse gases. They create small amounts of helium, really small
amounts. But that's an element that's expensive and actually in short supply. But another reason
is that the fuel for fusion could last us a really long time, at least 2000 years, which is a lot
longer than fossil fuels, but potentially as long as 30 million years if we can recover the raw
ingredients for the most popular type of fusion reaction from seawater. Now, importantly as well,
because you say the word nuclear, it can make some people worried. For me, nuclear is a tool
like any other. It has good points and it has bad points. If you use it carefully, you can take
advantage of those good points. But some people are legitimately concerned about nuclear fusion and
some of the risks that it can have. But unlike nuclear fission, fusion reactors can't melt down
and they don't produce that really long live radioactive waste. They do produce some radioactive
waste of the target chamber or the chamber, because it gets irradiated by neutrons over time in
operation. But how long that radioactivity lasts is much, much shorter than the kind of radioactive
waste that's produced from fission. Now, I think our biggest problem right now is climate change.
So I think fission is great. But fusion promises to be really good on that dimension too.
And in fact, fusion, one of the reasons why Star Builders is so excited about fusion is that it's
a real complement to our other likely major source of power, which is renewables. Renewables are
absolutely fantastic. They're never going to run out. They also work today, which the Star Builders
would be first to admit fusion isn't ready to plug into the grid just yet. They're also really
cheap. So solar and wind are actually the cheapest forms of power now and that's unlikely to change.
But like any energy source, renewables do have some downsides. They can be a bit unpredictable
and maybe will invent advanced forms of batteries that can help with that.
But another downside is that they do need to be in the right place.
And because the energy that they tap into is very diffuse, you do need large amounts of area
to power even a modest number of hopes. So for example, to power the UK solely using onshore
wind turbines would mean covering 17% of the country with wind turbines, which is a huge
amount. It would change how the country looks. Solar is a lot better. You would only need 3%
for that. So you know, all energy sources have pros and cons. And what the Star Builders say
is that for a sustainable energy future, which really gives humanity space to grow,
we need a portfolio of energy sources that includes renewables. Yes, absolutely.
Probably includes fishing too, actually, especially in the short run, and eventually one day fusion.
And many of the people I spoke to while I was writing the Star Builders were adamant that fusion
power is going to be in ready in time to help with reaching net zero carbon emissions, which most
countries are aiming to do by 2050 or even 2030. But even the ones who think fusion energy might
not be into the grid in time for that say that fusion could still have a big role to play in
climate change by providing a big source of energy to extract some of the CO2 we've already emitted.
So when I showed you that chart of CO2 rising, that means not just leveling off,
but actually reducing it as well. And even after we hit net zero, that's still going to
be something that we would want to do. So fusion has a lot of advantages, plus some really cool
machines. And that's a big part of why scientists have been drawn to working on it. Now, talking
about scientists and being really cool, I think it's time to meet someone who's working in this
field. And I'm absolutely delighted that we're joined today by a previous star of the Royal
Institution, Dr. Kate Lancaster, lecturer and plasma physicist from the University of York.
And Kate, we're delighted to have you here today. And so thank you for coming along. And people
don't just want to hear from me for an hour. They want to hear about someone who's actually
working on these topics and writing papers and in the nuts and bolts of it. So perhaps you
could start by just telling us a little bit about yourself and what you do all day.
Sure. Well, it kind of depends on the day. But so my job is as a lecturer, which is kind of like
three jobs for the price of one, essentially, where part of my job is researching in this area
of laser driven fusion. Part of it is imparting my knowledge to the next generation. So undergraduates
and post graduates and so teaching. And then there's part of it that is what we call citizenship. So
it's kind of like I run the Fusion Masters program, for example. But I also spend a lot of time talking
to lovely people like you in the audience here about why we are doing this, because frankly,
it's very important to engage with everyone on this topic, because it's so important for the world
and for energy generation. So that's kind of what I do day to day, really, essentially.
Brilliant. And I think this is a field that's so filled with extremes and kind of exciting
things. Do you know, because you work in it every day, are you ever kind of like, oh, not fusion
again? Or is it more that, you know, it's a job? Of course, it's a job. But you sometimes stop and
think, actually, this is pretty neat. Yeah. So I mean, I guess you can get bogged down with the
minutiae, right, you know, of day to day life. But it's funny. And I was down at the Cullum
Laboratory, which is one of the major fusion experiments is a magnetically confined, which
I'm sure you'll hear about later on in this talk. And they have a summer school,
Plasma Physics summer school. And I was giving my annual lecture on inertial confinement fusion.
And I happened to be staying on the Rutherford Appleton site. Now, I worked at the Rutherford
Appleton laboratories for 10 years before coming to York on big lasers there doing my research,
which I still do. And I started work at 20 years ago. And I was walking around site at dusk as the
sun was setting. And I'm honestly still just as excited to be there and to see that stuff now,
as I was 20 years ago, at age 22, you know, as a new walking, walking on site for the first time.
I think if you stop enjoying it, if you're excited by it, then you have to give up because,
you know, science and physics in general, like nine times out of 10 is failure, right?
It's that one time out of 10 weight, it goes right. So something has to keep you there day to
day. Otherwise, otherwise, it can get bogged down. For me, it's that, you know, being in a laser lab,
discovering things, but it's also the people that I get to work with, you know, scientists all
around the world, I've got friends all around the world, I get to travel around the world and,
you know, just be a very, very small cog in a very big wheel. I know that, right? I'm not important
in the grand scheme of things, but just being part of it is very exciting.
I'm sure that's not true. Okay. Maybe you could tell us a little bit about what it's like to work
on one of these big, big lasers. And I know you're at York now and spending less time kind of perhaps
on the experiment. But, you know, when I was in infusion, I was doing theory. So I had no idea
what you were doing. And I was always very impressed by experimentalists, having to know the theory
as well, really, and doing the experimental stuff. So I think you always had it a more challenging job.
So, yeah, what would a typical day working in one of these big laser experiments look like?
Yeah. So first thing to remember, there is a typical day in one of these places. So,
I mean, it's so it's worth saying maybe winding it back a little bit in the sense that these
facilities are very large scale. Some people do their research in their university laboratories.
We are unable to do that, right? So what we have to do six months in advance is write a proposal
to say we want to do this sort of experiment. Here's the evidence which said we might get
something interesting. Please, sir, or lady, give us this experiment. Then you're lucky enough to
get given the time. And then you design this experiment, you know, over time for a few months.
And then you go down to these big laboratories. And often you're there for five weeks at a time
away from your loved ones and all of that that entails. And you have to build your experiment
from scratch. Sometimes, if you're on a big facility like the ones you're talking about,
you don't do that. But I certainly, my experience is building them up from scratch like Giant
McKarno, essentially. So you're spending hours of the day in a darkened laser lab with these love,
you know, putting optics around. So it's essentially what we do with laser experiments.
You fire a laser into something. And then you have to surround it with a bunch of instruments,
looking at it to peer in to the conditions you've created to try and understand what's going on,
to tell you something about the physics. Honestly, that is my happy place. Honestly,
if I could die in a place, it would be in a darkened laser lab. Because I'm not sure that would
be very good for the laser. No, but it's just such a, and you know, there's ups and downs,
there's stresses and strains over getting this, you know, stuff to work within a constrained time,
right? You have to deliver. Otherwise, what's the point? So there's always that level of stress
over it. But just, you know, that first shot of the experiment where you have to go out of the
laser lab, it's too dangerous to be in there, you lock up the area, you request the shot,
and you hear this alarm go off. And you don't know what it sounds like inside, because it's all
under vacuum, but you can hear this all. And then you look at all the data, like streaming onto the
screens, and you think, have we done it? Have we done it? What have we done? You know, and then
you realise, ah, nothing's working. Right, go back in, you know, and it goes over and over. So,
so, you know, you're working long days. But one of my major things is making sure people remember
to drink and eat, because you can stand on one leg for four hours, you know, twiddling a mirror
and forget having had a drink for four hours. And I'm largely ruled by my stomach, my top
priority is where my next meal is coming from. So I'm sort of like the mother hen to a certain
extent, making sure I'm getting food and stuff as well, because that's very important. So,
but yeah, so there's a lot of excitement, there's a lot of frustration. And by the time those five
weeks are over, you're an empty shell, but it's worth it. It's worth it every single time, you know,
and I've done, I've done many, many, many experiments now in that period of 20 years. So
and what about when it goes well? Do you ever have you had those moments where, you know,
the expect you've really nailed it with a shot on one of these places?
And you've known straight away? It's quite hard to tell at the time. I think you're probably
aware of that is that you will have to go away and do some data analysis. But they've, they've,
they've certainly been times where the data sure looks interesting. And I think, you know,
you can't really make too many assumptions until you go and look at it. But yeah, they're
exciting. And honestly, it doesn't happen that much. And actually quite often, what actually
happens is you go away and you scratch your head for a bit with a data set that looked initially
unremarkable. And then you go, hang on a minute. And that is really exciting because you're sitting
at the desk kind of scratching your head. And then suddenly it sort of unveils itself. And,
and, you know, that's also really exciting. So there are many ways to have that moment,
if you know what I mean. No, I believe it. Well, maybe you could tell us a little bit about the
research that you've worked on or are working on at the moment and how it relates to fusion.
Sure. So, so I would call myself a laser plasma interactions person, right? So
firing the world's most powerful laser bits material. How is that relevant to fusion? Well,
I mean, you're going to be discussing this amazing experiment at the Lawrence Livermore
National Laboratory on a place in the National Ignition City, we've just seen the video of,
right? They do what's called conventional hotspot ignition. So they can, it's kind of like a
diesel engine, they compress the fuel and take kind of self ignites out a lot more complicated
than that, as you well know. But the problem is with, with central hotspot ignition is you can't
get high energy gains. In order to make a power station, you need something like 100 times the
energy that you put in, which this machine is not capable of doing all this method anyways.
So what I've been working on for basically my whole career is what we call advanced schemes,
which you might think, well, you haven't even got this one to work yet. So,
but yeah, yeah, bear with me. So what I've been working on is what we call a sort of petrol
engine version of this, where you compress the fuel and then you ignite it with a spark plug.
Now, the reason why you get more energy gain out of that way, you hope to get more energy gain out
of that is you can assemble more mass to a sort of more moderate density. And if you assemble
more mass, you can burn more mass, which means you get a higher energy yield. So as spark plug
in this case is a super intense laser. So once you compress the fuel, you fire a super intense
laser at it. And when that super intense laser interacts with the fuel, it produces mega amp
currents. Right. So if you think about lightning, lightning is some hundreds of kilo amps. So
mega currents in the space of, well, something smaller than a ball bearing, right. In fact,
probably you're delivering that energy in a space that's smaller than a human hair.
And that then basically that energy that's contained in that current then raises the fuel
to, you know, the 150 million degrees that need for fusion to occur. And then you start getting
what we call fusion burn wave propagating out. And I don't know if you touch on that yet Arthur
or not, but that's what happens. So I'm interested in the bits where you interact the laser with
with a solid density or many times solid density piece of material. How does the laser manifest
itself as this mega amp current? And then what happens to that mega amp current? And I've honestly
spent all my career thinking about that. It's been difficult up until now actually, because
hopefully this amazing result that has come out of NIF recently, which is that they've got
really rather a lot of energy out may reignite everyone's passion for advanced schemes because
at the moment, you know, at the moment, nobody really cares about that because we can't even do
conventional ICF yet. So hopefully that'll make people more excited about what I'm doing or rather
what I'm pretending I wasn't doing. Because ultimately what I'm doing is fundamental physics,
but actually it will help for advanced schemes in fusion. So that's kind of what I'm doing,
essentially. Fascinating, Kate. Really interesting research area and one that I think you're right
is going to get a lot more interest in the near future. Well, Kate, thank you so much for answering
my questions now. Now, Kate has really kindly agreed to stick around for the Q&A at the end.
So if you've got any really difficult questions, just please save them for Kate.
Thank you, Arthur. Fantastic. Okay, so we've heard from Kate who's doing amazing work on
laser fusion or related to laser fusion, laser interactions. I want to talk a bit more now
about progress to demonstrate fusion, exactly the kind of progress that the work of people
like Kate and others is bringing the world closer to. Now, although people have been working on and
thinking about fusion since the 1940s, there's been a real step change in the last five years or so,
and it's an enormously exciting time. So right now across the world, there are over 100 experimental
nuclear fusion reactors planned or under construction. And they're not just public bodies
who are building these experimental reactors. We're now seeing an explosion of private sector
fusion firms too, which is a bit of a change actually from how fusion was done historically.
And that's not even the end of the excitement. It's not just that there are more machines and
that there's public and that there's private. It's also that people are trying out more different
ways of doing fusion than before. We heard about one of the advanced schemes from Kate just then.
And because we don't know exactly what's going to work in the long run,
it's really a good idea to try out lots of things. That's part of the nature of kind of
scientific discovery and research. When you don't know what's going to work best,
try out lots of options and see. And as well as all of that, there's a strong feeling that people
are really close to demonstrating the first stage of fusion. So before we get too carried away with
that, I should say what I really mean by the first stage of fusion and what star builders are actually
trying to achieve. Well, let's start out with what it doesn't mean. It doesn't mean just doing some
fusion reactions because the star builders are interested in fusion for energy. So the first
thing it means is demonstrating more energy out from an experiment than you put in. This is a
pretty fundamental necessity for an energy source. And the problem is that fusion reactions require
such extreme conditions, conditions similar to those found in stars, that they need a big push in
energy to start. So it's a bit like lighting a big fire. You know, you've got some energy in the
match and you hold it to the fire. And at the moment with the experiments that have happened,
it's a bit like the flame isn't catching. So scientists are currently trying to demonstrate
this proof of principle that you can get more energy out than you put in in an experiment.
Now, the next kind of phase that you might think about is demonstrating more energy out than you
put in to a whole fusion facility. So that's kind of like running the stuff that isn't the experiment,
keeping the lights on, keeping the computers on, the instruments, the diagnostics. And that's an
important next step. And in fact, in the case of the National Ignition Facility that we saw earlier,
that includes charging up the batteries or capacitor banks that dump all of the energy
into the laser glass. And then finally, the final stage where people are heading towards is showing
that fusion can be a bona fide source of electricity that can power the planet.
So right now, the star builders are focused on demonstrating that you can get more energy out
from in a fusion experiment. And they have different names for this, sometimes break even,
sometimes ignition. But it's all about demonstrating that for every unit of energy you put in, you
get at least one unit of energy out or more than 100%. And as Kate told us, that's not actually
good enough for a fusion power plant. You probably need to get at least 30 times as much energy out
as you put in, but ideally more like 100 times. But as I said, scientists are currently focused on
this first goal. And despite decades of trying, no one has yet reached that immediate goal of one
time's energy out for energy in, not even in a single experiment. And it's not for one to try.
But the machines that people have built have brought us extremely close. So I want to talk
a little bit now about how to build a fusion reactor. So how are scientists going about doing
this? And this, I think, is where some of the most exciting science and engineering comes in.
You've had a peek at some of the machines already, and they seem like something out of
science fiction, which might strike you as a bit odd. You know, I said that fusions ubiquitous
in the universe, we see it everywhere we look, basically. So why is it so tricky to do it on
Earth? Well, it turns out it is. And if you're going to build a fusion reactor, your first thought
might be, well, let's just smash some particles together. And it's not a bad idea. But the problem
is that if you're just smashing particles together, you're never going to get net energy gain.
It's actually, it's not possible to get net energy gain in this method. And the reason
for that is that the nuclei that you're smashing together are positively charged. And because
they're positively charged and like charges repel, they actually mostly just repel each other.
They need to get really, really close for a fusion reaction to happen. So if I imagine that I'm
a nucleus of, say, deuterium, and I've got a tritium nucleus coming towards me,
what that tritium nucleus sees is kind of a big hill, a big hill of electromagnetic
repulsion pushing it away. And most of the time, if the particles don't have enough energy,
what happens is the tritium nucleus gets partway up the hill and then gets repelled
and pushed away again. What needs to happen is there needs to be enough energy to overcome
that electromagnetic repulsion and get into this deep, attractive valley where another force,
the nuclear force, takes over. But the problem is that even with the right energy, this reaction
is not very likely. So just firing two particles at each other, the likelihood is very low.
What you need is a way of rolling the dice multiple times again and again and again,
so it doesn't matter if one collision doesn't work, the next one's on the way.
So how can we do that? Well, if only we had a working fusion reactor that we could take some
inspiration from. Aha! Hello. Here's one. It's the sun, our nearest and friendliest fusion reactor.
So what makes the sun so good at fusion? Well, I think it has three really important properties.
The first is density. So if you've ever been on a crowded tube train or a crowded bus and you've
been jolted around, you'll know that you're bumped into other people. And it's not very pleasant.
But if you're on an empty train or an empty bus, you know that you can get jolted around and you
weren't bumped into other people. Well, density and the sun is extremely dense makes lots of
collisions happen, as you'll know from your trips on busy transport. But for fusion, this is a really
good thing because it means there's lots of collisions going on all the time. And that's
one of the reasons why the sun is a good fusion reactor. Another reason why the sun is a great
fusion reactor is it's incredibly hot. The core of the sun is about 15 million degrees Celsius.
And what this means is when things are very hot, it means they've got a high average energy. And
when they've got a high average energy, that means they're also traveling quite fast. And what that
means is that when there are collisions between two particles or some of the collisions between
two particles happen at high energy. And there's enough energy to get over that electromagnetic
repulsion and for the particles to come together. And the third reason why the sun is such a great
fusion reactor, in some ways at least, is that it can find the fuel for fusion. It's fuel very well.
It's got gravity on its side pulling everything in. And the reason why this is good is because
imagine if you had a fusion reactor, but as soon as the first reactions happened,
all of the energy escaped. Well, that would stop further fusion reactions happening. Whereas if
you can confine that energy, you can help divert that energy to heating up the fuel more and getting
more fusion reactions because temperatures help. So confining the plasma is the third ingredient.
Now, the sun is obviously on a scale we can't hope to recreate on Earth and I hope no one wants to.
But because it's got such scale and because it's got gravity on its side and it confines energy
really well. And in fact, if you could follow individual packets of light called photons,
you would find that it takes the average photon hundreds of thousands of years to escape from
the sun. So we can't do the sun, but what we can do is recreate some of the conditions of the sun
here on Earth. And in fact, like a DJ mixing tracks on a deck, you can take those three
ingredients of a good fusion reactor, density, temperature, confinement, and we can mix them
up in different ways. So we can't perhaps get as dense as the sun, or perhaps we can't get as
well confined as the sun, but we can increase the temperature to compensate.
But there's an important part of the sun that I haven't really talked about, which is, and this
is, you know, quite a question that I had when I started getting interested in fusion and stars,
which is, have you ever thought what's the sun actually made out of? What are we actually
looking at here? What is this stuff? Well, you're going to help me answer because we've got a pole.
And I want to see what you think. So A is going to be fire. B is going to be charged particles.
C is going to be plasma, whatever that is, or D, all of the above.
We've got an incredibly smart audience this evening. In some ways, I think all of the above
is kind of the right answer in the sense that these are all describing somewhat the same thing.
But what we call that state of matter that's in the sun that has its atoms dissociated into
positively charged nuclei and negatively charged electrons is a plasma. That's what we call it.
And it's actually the fourth state of matter, plasmas, after solids, liquids, and gases.
And you might not have heard much about plasmas because they have a much worse PR team
than the other three states. But they're actually pretty common when you start looking for them.
So on Earth, lightning, which Kate mentioned earlier, is a type of plasma.
The aurora at the north and south pole, also known as the northern and southern lights,
is a type of plasma. And actually flames are a kind of, they're not a brilliant plasma,
but they are kind of a plasma too. They have some of their atoms being dissociated
into charged particles. The glowing stuff inside fluorescent bulbs, that's the plasma,
and neon lights are too. And our first plasmas are even more common than on Earth. In fact,
99% of the visible universe is actually plasma, including every star in the night sky. Well,
I'm excited that I can show you a real plasma in real time here, but I'm just going to have to do
some mood lighting. Otherwise, you're not going to be able to see anything. So excuse me for one
moment. What I've got here is something called a plasma globe. So what this is doing is generating
an electric field that tears apart atoms inside this low density gas here. And plasmas are quite
strange. And imagine if we had a solid or a liquid or gas in here, and I put my hand on this,
they wouldn't really care, to be honest, that my hand was there at all. Maybe it would warm up a
little bit. It wouldn't be very exciting, that's for sure. But the amazing thing about plasmas is
because they have these charged particles flying around and electric fields and magnetic fields,
if I touch my hand on here, it will sense that my hand is there and completely change behavior.
And plasmas are actually pretty badly behaved. And that's one of the reasons why fusion is so
difficult. Because as soon as you try and do something with this, it's pushing and pulling
on itself and behaving in all kinds of chaotic and unexpected ways. And I'll give you a kind
of example of that. And for this, I'm going to turn the lights down even more low.
There we go. You can hardly see me now. Whoa, that was lower than intended.
And what I've got here is my plasma globe, but also one of those fluorescent bulbs. And it's
not lit up or anything. So it's just a normal bulb, no wires here. And what I'm going to do is
I'm going to bring it in close to this plasma globe. And you can see there that it's lighting up.
And the reason it's doing that is because this is creating an electromagnetic field.
And it's just about powerful enough to turn the gas in this fluorescent bulb into a plasma as well
and light it up. So there you go. Plasma is an electric field. Now,
that's probably enough mood lighting for the evening. So let me just turn the lights back up
so that you can see me again. Okay, so plasmas are amazing things, the fourth state of matter.
But they're quite badly behaved, as I said. So how can the star builders control them?
And it gets worse than just the plasma you saw then because plasmas for fusion have to be at
least 60 million degrees and ideally more like 150 million. So we can't just put them in a glass
bulb. In fact, there's no material that can contain them. They just dump all of their energy
straight away, losing their temperature, losing confinement. So without a star, scientists have
had to resort to other means of trapping plasmas. And there are actually three ways, three main
ways of doing this. So we've seen gravitational confinement before. Inertial confinement is
another approach and it's something that Kate mentioned earlier. And it's kind of crazy. But
the answer to what's confining the plasma in this case is basically nothing. The idea is you just
throw it together with the right conditions for the briefest of moments until it shakes itself
apart because of a sound wave crossing it. So you just bring it together and let the fusion
reactions happen and it will take the time it takes a sound wave to cross it for it to fall apart.
Now that's a brief moment, but a brief moment is a really long time in nuclear fusion. And the chart
that I put up here is quite complicated. But the thing to take away is that the time scale here is
nanosecond. So really short. And you can see how long that really short laser pulse is. Well,
the power from fusion is even shorter. So the fusion reactions happen really quickly.
There's another way of confining plasmas and it's called magnetic confinement fusion.
And because plasmas are made out of these charged particles that feel the electromagnetic force,
they respond to magnetic fields. And the way that they respond is they get stuck
on magnetic fields. So what you can do is you can create a trap out of magnetic fields and get
charged particles stuck on them. And that's another way of confining plasma. So those are
the real three ways. And what we're going to see now are some of the machines that are trying to
implement these ways to trap plasma and recreate star power on Earth. And the first one I want to
show you is the world's most successful tokamak. And a tokamak is a particular type of magnetic
confinement fusion machine. And this one is called JET or the Joint European Taurus. And it's based
at the UK Atomic Energy Authority. Now JET holds the world record for the total fusion energy released
and the record for magnetic fusion power at 67% of net energy gain. So not 100% but not too far
off. Now that record was set some time ago back in 1997. And it was only done for a very brief
moment but it was still an impressive feat. And what's exciting is as Professor Ian Chapman will
tell you, they're about to gear up for another round of experiments with Deuterium and Tritium.
And he's hoping that they can smash their record for the total amount of fusion
energy generated. So that's a really exciting one to watch. And this thing called the tokamak,
it's a weird device and it's essentially designed to enable magnetic fields to trap plasma. So it
has this shape kind of like a chord apple or a donut. And essentially it has two magnetic fields
that combine to make this kind of helical magnetic field. But the really interesting thing about
how tokamaks work is that actually they have very low density. It's only about a millionth of the
density of air inside jet. And because they have such low density, they have to make up with it
with really high temperatures and quite good confinement too. And they certainly do well
on the temperatures. And in fact, the hottest place in the solar system is not in the centre of the sun,
but it's inside tokamaks when they're running for those brief moments when they run. And tokamaks
can reach as high as 150 million degrees, which is astounding. The other thing you need to know
about tokamaks is they're aiming to run continuously as well. So unlike laser fusion, which is a batch
process, tokamaks need to eventually run for hours or even longer. Now there are different
types of tokamaks around. And this is a private sector firm called tokamak energy, which is headed
up by Jonathan Carling. And they're looking at a really interesting type of tokamak design called
a spherical tokamak. Because magnetic fields are used to trap plasmas in fusion machines,
the more compact you can make your device, the stronger the overall magnetic field that the
plasma fields and the better confinement you get. And one of the really interesting things that
tokamak energy are doing are using these spherical tokamaks, which are more compact,
to better trap the plasma. And a more compact reactor is probably going to be cheaper to build
as well. And that's one of the things that's definitely on Jonathan Carling's mind when he
thinks about how to take fusion into a commercial reality. And they're based in Oxfordshire.
Now we've already met the National Ignition Facility, which back in 2018 set what was then
the world record laser fusion or inertial confinement fusion of 3% of the energy game,
which doesn't sound very impressive, but wait. And what Mark Herman, Dr Mark Herman has said,
who's the director of that facility, is that by the end of the 2020s, they'll have reached that
100%, one way or another. Now, again, inertial fusion is a bit different to magnetic confinement
fusion. It obviously doesn't confine the plasma for very long at all on the order of nanoseconds.
So instead, it has to keep the temperature moderately high, not as high as in a tokamak.
But the place where it really wins out is in density. And actually that tiny fuel capsule,
even though it's very small, gets compressed by a factor of 30 during an implosion. And
what happens is you've got an amount of stuff, and then you squeeze it down by a factor of 30,
you've then got the same amount of stuff in a tiny, tiny area. And that means the particles
are very, very close, which allows lots of fusion reactions to happen. But lasers aren't the only
way to trigger fusion. There's other approaches out there. And this was one of the firms and one
of the leaders of one of the firms I went to talk to for the book. This is Nick Hawker.
He's the CEO and CTO of a company called First Light Fusion. And they're using an electromagnetic
rail gun to fire a projectile into a target instead of using lasers, but again, for inertial
confinement fusion. And as he said, this physics problem of getting more energy out than in an
experiment he believes is going to be solved pretty soon. And the final machine I want to
introduce you to is an amazing machine that fell out of favor, actually, when Tokamaks became a
big thing. But I've just come roaring back up the charts of everyone's favorite fusion machines.
And it's something called a Stellarator. And this is Professor Dr. Sybil Gunter,
who's a scientific director of the facility, which hosts this new, well, it's quite new,
Stellarator called Wendelstein 7X. And it's really amazing because Stellarators were
thought to be too difficult to build at one point in the past. But now with modern computing and
with superconducting magnets, they're possible. And the magnetic fields on this device are so
precise that they're good to one part in 100,000. And not only that, but the experimental results
they've got so far have already been able to show that they've got confinement almost as good
as Tokamaks. So I really think Stellarators want to watch. Now, with all of this activity,
you're probably thinking, how close are we to fusion? Are we actually going to do this? And
you've probably heard the old joke. In fact, it's so old that it's actually been banned by editors
at The Economist that fusion is 30 years away and always has been. So again, it depends what you
mean by fusion. But if we're talking about a gain in energy, a big gain in energy from an experiment,
I think it's worth looking at what's happened not just over the last 30 years, but even further
back to 1958, shortly after real efforts to do fusion began, to think about how far fusion has
come and how close it is to that goal. So what I've done here is I've created a plot that's going to
take us through the history of fusion in time. And what you need to know here is the fusion
conditions are on the left hand side going upwards. So that's the temperature density and
confinement. And on the bottom, we've got temperature in millions of degrees. Right up in
that top corner, that's where the star builders want to get to. So we've got a line for magnetic
fusion and a line for inertial fusion. And when experiments get up there, that means they're
getting a lot more energy out than they put in. And what we're going to see as this goes forward
in time is different experiments, blue for magnetic and red for inertial. And the first
experiment on there is one called Zeta. And then you've got the first Tokamak T3. And in the 80s,
lots of experiments appeared. We've got Jet appearing with its record there. Nova,
one of the inertial fusion devices, Omega, and ultimately NIF as well, which is actually pretty
close in terms of the conditions you need for fusion already. So this data goes up to 2019.
And we've been in the midst of a pandemic for most of the subsequent time.
But even despite that, huge progress has been made on fusion just recently. So one of the big
developments is that the world's biggest Tokamak is under construction. It's almost complete now,
75% complete in the south of France. It's called Eta. And it is almost certainly on a scale big
enough to get net energy gain when it is complete. It's going to have 10 times the plasma volume
of the joint European tourists, which holds the current record for magnetic fusion. So really
excited about that coming. Another big thing that's happening in Tokamaks at the moment is
some experimental results on a Tokamak called the experimental advanced superconducting Tokamak
based in China. So this picture here just shows five seconds of a run. And on most Tokamaks,
a five second run would be quite a good thing because plasmas are so badly behaved that they
often tear themselves apart after a few seconds. But in May, East smashed previous records for
sustained high temperatures in Tokamaks by running at 120 million degrees for 101 seconds,
which is really huge progress. And finally, there's been an even more exciting breakthrough
in laser fusion recently. And this happened just last month. On the 8th of August, 2021,
the National Ignition Facility, the device we saw right at the start did a shot that
smashed its 2018 record 23 times over. And it reached 70% of net energy gain. So 70%
of the laser energy put in to the experiment was released as nuclear energy. And the team
have actually managed a 1000 fold improvement in energy release over the last decade. Those
improvements coming in big multiples. So it's not 3%, 4%, it's 3% to 70%. It now seems almost
inevitable that this experiment is going to be the first to reach net energy gain.
So that's going to be an amazing moment in the history of fusion. But it's worth saying that
this is still a long way away from producing energy that can be plugged into the grid. This
is an experimental facility. It only does 400 shots a year. If it's going to produce energy,
something like this would have to run 10 times a second. So let's just imagine for a moment that
near for another experiment gets net energy gain tomorrow. What next? What do the star builders
have to do to finish their journey? Well, there are some big challenges to go. And the first of
those is actually just capturing the heat from the reaction and using it to create electricity.
Of course, we've done that in lots of power stations before. So I'm sure they'll nail that.
The second is that, as I mentioned earlier in the talk, tritium doesn't exist on Earth,
and they need to generate tritium to put in the reactor. Now, you can generate it from lithium,
like I said, but no one has ever been able to try out generating large amounts of tritium from
lithium. The lithium has to go around the reactor in a kind of blanket. And no one's been able to
do that because they haven't had a working fusion reactor. But making reactor self-sufficient in
tritium is going to be one of the big engineering challenges to come. The other thing is operating
continuously in the case of magnetic fusion or 10 times a second for laser fusion,
some big engineering challenges there, but some big improvements too.
Another issue that star builders are going to have to grapple with is that when fusion is really
successful, it creates lots of neutrons. And if you choose the wrong materials to build your
reactor chamber out of, those neutrons can make the reactor materials brittle. And if you choose
the wrong materials, it can make them radioactive over time, more radioactive than in a best case
scenario. So they need to do a lot of work on the materials science as well. And finally, and
you know, one of the most important in many ways is they need to make fusion commercially viable.
It needs to be cheap enough. If fusion exists, fusion energy exists, but it's 10 times more
expensive than the next cheapest power source, that's going to be a problem. Now, some of these
challenges can't really be addressed until there are net energy gain experimental reactors.
But people, even so, people are starting to work on them and advanced facilities,
trying out some of the physics and engineering behind these are popping up all over the place.
Many of the star builders, especially in the private sector, are looking beyond net energy
gain towards commercialization. And that makes it a really exciting time for fusion.
So there are big challenges and they could seem daunting. But even so, look how far we've come
in what I would definitely describe as, you know, the greatest scientific and technical
challenge humanity has ever undertaken. You know, densities and pressures similar to those
found in stars, temperatures even hotter than those found in stars. And, you know, if we should
learn anything from the pandemic, it's how even apparently long shot technologies like vaccines
based on mRNA can actually pay off big time with enough investment and support. And actually,
you know, people joke about fusion being a long way away. It really depends on us and how badly
we want this, how far fusion progresses and how quickly is going to depend on how badly
society needs and wants it. Now, I want to finish by just saying there's one final reason that I
think fusion is worth doing. And it's kind of one last stop on our journey, really. And it's about
thinking far into the future. If we as humans ever want to explore the universe beyond our own
backyard, we're not going to be doing it on a cold powered fusion rocket, sorry, a cold powered
rocket. That's not going to work cold powered spaceships. But it turns out that nuclear fusion
would be a very effective source of energy for spaceships, because it uses only a little fuel
for a given amount of energy. So on top of everything else I've said about why fusion might be
an interesting thing for us to do as a species, fusion is the only reaction that can take us to
the stars. Thank you for listening.
