Imagine we're traveling toward a black hole, like the one in this image, so the image behind
me.
Imagine we actually are going there, if you like it, we're in a starship.
If you are so inclined, a small starship going there, if you're so inclined, we're in a
broom flying in the interstellar space.
And we, I've chosen to travel toward this black hole here, which is Sagittarius A star,
because we have a picture of it.
This is a picture that was on all the front pages of the newspapers a few years ago.
Plenty of black holes, there are millions of black holes, billions in fact of black holes.
And I would say that this is a, that's a both surprising and most beautiful discovery of
the last years, that the universe is actually filled with black holes.
We didn't know that, when I was a student nobody even imagined that.
In fact, people didn't believe that black holes could actually exist in the sky.
So I could have chosen a much closer black hole.
There are much closer black holes to go to, but this one is big, is big and we have a
picture, we have a picture because it is big.
It's far in the center of the galaxy, so it's a long way to go there.
But I want to take you there and I want to take you next to it and then into it.
So what we are going to see if we get close, of course, is something like this image that
you see and you have seen in newspapers.
This image was taken by radio telescopes.
In fact, some of you may know that, by having a number of radio telescopes on Earth working
together all around the Earth, half a dozen or more telescopes working as a single radio
telescope.
So like a radio telescope as large as the Earth and combining all the data and the more
is large the antenna, the more you can focus on a small angle so we could see something like that.
So if you go there, if you are going there, we are going to see something like that, of course,
without the need of a huge radio telescope because we are going closer and closer and
closer, but when we go closer we see it better and that's what we're going to see.
That is exactly the same images as the previous one except that this one, the one we actually
have seen, is out of focus because so far the radio telescope cannot focus better.
If you use more on focus or what we expect to see with a technique for getting images gets better
is this one.
In fact, this one, this image was computed, was what was expected,
was theoretically predicted before the observation and this is why when we saw this one it was so
spectacular that, you know, this is clearly something like that out of focus.
So why a circle?
The reason is a circle, it's far from obvious. First of all, just to make it clear, it would be a
circle from whatever direction you would look at it. So it's not really a circle, it's an optical
effect due to the funny way light moves around the black hole. Light around the black hole bends
because that's what light does next to masses and that's how
Einstein's theory that predicts all that, that tell us how all this works was first confirmed
by measuring the bending of the light by the star. And it bends in such a way that
a ray of light could actually bend so much to be on an orbit around the black hole
in any possible angle, whatever angle. So around the hole, the hole is actually
smaller than the ring. The ring roughly is only a magnitude, there's one and a half time,
the radius of the ring is one and a half time the radius of black hole inside.
So you imagine, black hole imagine for a moment like a black sphere and around there's actually
a sort of sphere of light which is all the light that come from all over that start making some
rotation around. So if you have around this thing, there's a lot of matter attracted by
black holes, spiraling, doing funny things and becoming very hot just because there is friction,
this thing clashing against one another. And imagine you have some light coming from here,
this is black hole, you get the light directly but you also get the light that bends around the
black hole roughly at one radius and a half and then gets to our eyes. And light from here,
you get the direct one and the one come here. So you get a little bit of light from all over
and a lot of light from tangentially to that sphere, wherever you are. So wherever you are,
you see this ring which is a sort of meridian or equator of this sphere from which tangentially
the light comes to you from wherever. So this is the optical effect that we see when we go there.
So we get closer and we start seeing more clear this beautiful ring. We also approach
this, all this matter moving around but you know let's imagine that our starship or whatever
sufficiently solid that we're not going to be disturbed by that and we get closer.
We get closer and let's do it slowly. We have rockets, we can hold, okay, there's a pool of
the black hole but we can hover at certain distance from it by keeping the rocket firing.
So we're keeping height and we can look down and down there is the hole and this is big. This one
say the actual dark thing is the size of the orbit of the moon. It's a huge thing, okay,
it's big, big things, it's bigger than the sun. And we keep at the distance, we look down,
we see mostly black and we see things falling. Now more precisely, imagine we are in our starship,
we open a window sort of, we let a stone fall down, we close it rapidly because
the stone falls down, we see what it goes down, what do we see? We don't see the fall
entering the black hole, right? We see the stone slowing, slowing, slowing down
and never getting to the bottom, slower, slower, slower, slower, slower, slower, slower, slower,
slower, okay? Not only that, the light that comes from the stone, it's light there because
it's all just burning things, so it's not dark. It becomes dimmer and dimmer and dimmer and more
red, more red. So like the wavelength that light gets to us is more and more long,
which means the frequency, it's slower and slower. It's like not only the stone is slowing down,
but even its atoms are vibrating more slowly. And in fact, if you throw a clock down,
never throw my father's clock, but watch, but if you throw a clock down, we would see the clock
slow down, slow, slow down, slow and slow and slow, we're almost stopping at some point when it goes
there. Now we are there, since it's slow, now suppose we look back, we look up from Earth,
from where we came. And imagine for instance that from Earth we're getting messages,
say every day we get a message from our friend's home, how is it going, is it beautiful there,
okay? Once every day, okay? We get a message once every day, but when we're a distance from the
black hole, we start getting messages every 20 hours. Then we come down a little bit
toward the black hole and we get messages every few hours. And then we come closer and we get
messages every minute. And then we get closer again and we get one message every second,
but from Earth it was sent once a day. So we see the future, okay? We come closer and closer,
we get all these messages, these messages from 100 years in the future, 1,000 years in the future.
American pie is finished, I mean Congo is dominant, it's the most prosperous,
it's peace on Earth, everybody's loving everybody, it's the future, maybe. So
that's time dilation. That's exactly the same phenomenon that on Earth we can measure in a
laboratory when we take two clocks, we move one half, wait a bit, come down, and the clock up
measure a little bit more time, the clock down measure a little bit less time, okay? That's,
it's done in the laboratory, except that on Earth it's just a teeny, teeny, teeny fraction difference,
a fraction, a fraction, a fraction, so a millisecond that can be measured, near a black hole, which is a
huge mass, this is enormous. But time dilation doesn't mean, of course, we're in the rocket,
hovering there. For us everything is normal, time goes normal, clock beats normally, my
heart beats normally, but what we see closer to a black hole, we see it slower, what we see far
away, we see it faster, okay? Fine, but I didn't take you all the way down just to stay outside,
we want to go in, take you down, because I'm going soon, into the side of the black hole. So let's
decrease our rockets and start getting inside the black hole. Now, wait a minute,
in the textbook, all the textbook of physics today is written that if you enter a black hole,
that's it, you can never come out forever. So we still want to get down, if we're gonna die,
we're gonna die, we're also gonna die if we stay out, because we're gonna die anyway, but
we have less time to leave if we go in. I'm Italian and the greatest Italian poet, Dante,
Dante Ligieri has written this marvelous sort of mind travel book, which is a divine comedy,
in which he goes into the hell, and then actually this incredible story, and when he gets to the dark
portal of hell, it's written there, perdete ogni speranza, voi che entrate, which means give up any hope
you who come in, thou who come in, but he goes nevertheless, okay? So let's go in nevertheless,
and he's gonna come out, so let's go down, we entered the black hole. Good, so we're in, we're
inside the black hole now, and we're in, and let's look around, okay? First, nothing particular
has happened, right? Crossing the horizon, going into the black hole is the same, we are the same
as before, our starship is the same as before. If we look back at the stars, there's still the stars,
all sort of out of position, because light goes funny turns, but the lights come in and we see the
star, but something is different. When we were outside, sort of hovering around, there was a
sphere around the black hole, another sphere, another sphere, and everything was there static,
okay? And in the center of this field, there was this black hole, big, but certain size. Now we're
inside, imagine we can look around and see what is the geometry there. What we see is still,
there are spheres and spheres, but below us is not just the volume we would expect,
it's an immensely big volume. So spheres and spheres and spheres and spheres and spheres,
down, down, down, down, down very far. The black hole, it's a, you know these fairy tales, that,
you know, the two brothers, the sister brother walking the wood, and then there's this little hut,
and there's a door, they go in, and inside is a huge, huge room, and another huge room,
and then a garden, fountains, and so on. A black hole is something similar. It has a size outside,
but inside there's much more volume of what we are talked at school, you know, the sphere of
this radius, what is the volume inside, you can compute it. Okay, I never believe what they tell
you at school, it's not true. There is a sphere in which the volume is much more than what they
tell you it's inside the series. Why? Because space is distorted, that's what generativity
described. The distortion of space is enormous. So inside is sort of,
you see, imagine that this is a, whoops, that this is a, this is a two-dimensional model.
Imagine that this is the sphere around the black hole, the actual black hole. We were before,
we were here. Now we move inside, we're in, and inside there's much more than you would expect
if this was flat. Okay, it's longer, longer, longer, longer, longer. There's this long, long tube,
enormously, enormously long. The more the black hole is old, the more the tube is long. Okay.
If there's some person here in the public here, or watching through a camera, who is
who knows generativity very, very well, might ask what I'm talking about. I'm describing a black hole
in a peculiar affiliation, which is the one I think is best to understand what's inside of the
black hole, which is the affiliation that maximizes the volume and that covers the entire black hole.
So the first surprise is that there is this pit, this well, very, very profound, but that's not
the biggest surprise. The biggest surprise, what we see there, is that it's moving. While outside,
nothing was happening, we could have been hovering there forever, inside is changing.
The geometry of space is changing. Space around us is changing. And two things are happening. One is
that it's becoming longer and longer and longer and longer with time. So that's why a black hole
is bigger, because with time this becomes longer and longer and longer. It keeps growing, growing,
growing, growing. We're not talking of kilometers. We're talking about millions of light
years. There's a huge, huge immense space inside an old black hole. Sagittarius A star, presumably,
is at least 10 billion years old. It's very old. So this is total cosmological age. So this is
immense thing. But the other thing is that it's shrinking. It's becoming longer and shrinking.
Now, the fantastic people here at the R.A. build this beautiful thing, which actually
becomes longer, but I didn't know how to make it shrink at the same time. Maybe the next time
I'll get it shrink. So if you are here, we are getting this sphere on us closing up on us, okay?
At speed, which is pretty worrying. I mean, we don't have much time. This is closing around us.
So here is a picture of an idea of this inside a black hole. And by the way, at the end,
in this picture, you see a little dark spot at the end. So down here, I said it's very long,
but it says infinite. It's not infinite. It's finite. And at the very bottom here, if some of you
think there's a singularity, forget about it. There's no singularity out here. What is here? Here is a
star that initially collapsed to form the black hole. So if there is some matter that at some
point, most black holes we see, probably not this one. Sagittarius A star, but most stellar
black holes that we see, the smaller one, are big stars that when they burn all the hydrogen,
they cool down because they stop burning. They don't have fuel anymore. And by cooling down,
the pressure of the heat that was sort of keeping the star open diminished. So the weight is very
big. The weight is so strong that they crush everything and no rock would resist that weight
and they crush, crush, crush and form the hole. So create this hole, goes down the horizon,
create the horizon, goes down and the star is still there. Remarkably, millions of years later,
the star is still there. Okay? But remember, times depend on what you are. Star is just...
So this is us falling down. Okay? We don't fall down all the way. We're not going to get to the
star. It's far, far away. We've got to fall down and everything is closing around us,
slower and slower and slower. And we're going to be crushed. But remember, we're mind traveling.
We're not doing this for you. So imagine that we're so strong that we resist this pressure.
The space is closing around us. We've been pulled in this direction,
crashing this direction. At some point, the space around us becomes very, very, very small.
What's going to happen next?
That's where I wanted to get it. Because everything I've said so far is...
Things we know very well. We have very high confidence in it. All this follows from
the theory of Einstein's general relativity, written in 1915, which has predicted these
black holes. And we have seen the black holes exactly as it was predicted. It has predicted
gravitational waves. And we have seen the gravitational waves. It has predicted the
expansion of the universe. And we have seen the expansion of the universe. It has predicted the
mercury to behave in that way that contradicts the Newton equation and mercury behaves. So
we have enormous confidence in this theory. And the theory tells us not only that black holes
exist, but also what happened inside and also what happened to the very moment in which everything
is going to get squeezed, but not next. Why? Because the more we are squeezed, the more we are
pressured, the more there is a curvature because the space is curved. And we know that when we are
in that conditions, we cannot disregard quantum mechanics anymore. Quantum phenomena become
crucial. And quantum phenomena... Right here. Oh, I don't have it. Sorry. I thought I have it.
Quantum phenomena... I thought I had a copy of a paragraph in a paper by Einstein in 1916.
In 1915, Einstein writes this theory, which is our best theory, the most beautiful theory
for physics, said Leven Landau, the theory of generativity space and time. In 1916, Einstein
writes a paper in which he says, of course, my theory, it's wrong because it does regard quantum
phenomena. And the last line says in German, dear Neue gravitation theory must be corrected
because of quantum phenomena. So he knew and we know that the theory is incomplete. It doesn't
describe what happened to space and time when curvature is so high. So there, we don't have
Einstein theory anymore, which means that we lost our guide. We don't know anymore what's going to
happen. Dante, when he goes down into hell, goes all the way through and then all through his path
is guided by Virgil in his poem. And he's very much attached to Virgil because Virgil explained
him how to do, what everything happened. Dante's afraid of being in hell, all the devils and so on.
And Virgil tells him what to do. But at some point, Virgil says, I cannot accompany you more
because I don't have the right to go to paradise. And so Dante's alone, not in an easy place in the
other side of the universe. And he's on his own. And we are on our own down there. We don't have a
theory anymore that tells us what to do. So how do we behave when we lose our stars that tell us
our masters? And I think that's beauty of life, perhaps. When we're on our own and we lose our
master, our guide, that's when Dante says, qui si parlera la tua nobilitate. Here's where you're
going to show what you're capable of doing. I've spent all my life, and that's why I wanted to
take you to the center of Black Hole, trying to construct a theory with other, with many
colleagues, of course, to understand what is the quantum, how are the quantum properties of gravity.
So to change the theory of Einstein, generativity, to keep into account the quantum phenomena.
And the theory of development with colleagues, it's a loop quantum gravity, which is a tentative
theory of quantum gravity. A tentative means that we haven't yet made measurement, observation,
to confirm that that's a good theory, like we have so much for generativity. And I think it's
crucial when scientists talk today to distinguish what we know with confidence from our speculations.
It's wonderful to speculate. That's what scientists are supposed to do. This is what
place like that it's meant to be for. To think and try to think where we don't know, and
walk a little bit outside the realm of our knowledge to learn something new. So to go through that
final passage, which is called the singularity, the singularity is not the center of the Black Hole,
singularity is what's going to happen when everything shrinks down, we need quantum gravity.
Okay, so what is quantum gravity telling us? What is loop quantum gravity telling us in particular?
Loop quantum gravity is a quantum theory. So like all quantum theories, it predicts two things,
which are going to be crucial here. One is that things are granular. Light, we can describe light
to some precision as a wave, continuous, but to a better precision,
light has a granular structure. It's made by photons, but it particles of line.
Line arrives on my hand, depositing energy continuously, but if I make precise measurement,
what really happens, I see little dots one after the other one coming. In fact, if we deem the light,
if we deem the light, and we have a precise screen, that is exactly what we see. We see one
dot forming, another dot forming, another dot forming. This is the grain, the photons,
one by one arriving. So this is granularity and all things. That's all over quantum mechanics.
The energy of harmonic oscillators is granular. One, two, three, the orbits around the atoms
are discrete. One orbit, another orbit, another orbit, and so on. So the main result of loop
quantum gravity is that space is granular. Space itself is granular. So between my hands,
again, at school, they tell us there's continuous space. So again, don't believe what they tell
at school. The space, if you keep into account the quantum property of gravity, and if you
believe this tentative theory, it can be divided in half, in half, in half, but not forever.
At some point, you get to the bottom. You get to the individual grains of space.
So this granularity of space, that's a calculation that one does in loop quantum gravity,
have a certain size, very small, extremely small, but finite. Which means, if we go back to the
black hole, that this thing cannot shrink forever because at some point the granularity is going
to hold it. You finish. You cannot continue shrinking forever. You cannot go to the singularity
before something might happen. What is going to happen? Now, second input from quantum mechanics
jumps, the quantum jumps, the quantum lips. Jumps were at the very beginning of quantum
mechanics. They're core in quantum mechanics. Tunnel effect is a jump. Quantum jumps, quantum
lips. Quantum mechanics was born when, in Copenhagen, Niels Bohr made his first model of atom and
understood that the electron on an atom could only be in orbit on certain discreet, quantized
orbit. So an electron could go roughly this way or this way, but it could jump from one to the other.
And when it jumps, it emits one photon, one grain of a jump down or can jump up. If you
put some energies and photon arrive, jump up. And in between, that's the magic of quantum mechanics.
It's not really like a particle. It's something funny. We don't have a good intuition of what
happened from one quantum value to another quantum value. That is quantum jumps. And these quantum
jumps can take you from one orbit to a different orbit. So you can view them from one classical
solution to another classical solution. So the shrinking black hole is like one classical solution.
So we go there, become narrower and narrower and narrower, and maybe it can jump. But to which
classical solution? Maybe it can jump to something else. But what could happen next?
Now,
the black hole was formed by a star falling into itself. We went to the black hole by falling,
the turning off the engine and letting ourselves fall down. The shrinking of space itself is like
falling. So these are all solution, nice equation, classical, and are falling. What happens if something
falls typically at the end of a fall? It bounces. Okay? And what is the, what is the trajectory
after the fall? Well, this is going down. If you film it going up, it's like filming going down
and reversing the film. It's the same, but sort of time-reversed, with the velocity reversed.
Careful, the acceleration is always down, right? Because it goes faster and faster and faster and
faster, velocity down, acceleration down. When it jumps up, the velocity is up now, reversed,
but the acceleration is still down because it goes slower and slower and slower. Okay? So you
change the velocity. Now, the black hole was become longer and longer and narrower and narrower. If
you change the velocity and make it bounce, what does it do? Okay? It becomes longer and longer
and then it becomes shorter and shorter and shorter. And it opens up.
Now, is there, is there a classical solution of the Einstein equation that described that?
Is there a solution of Newton equation that described this moving up? Is there a solution
of the Einstein equation, classical, that described this peculiar geometry, something very, very long,
and narrow, that becomes shorter and larger? And instead of things going up, things going out?
Yes. It's white holes. White holes is a solution of Einstein equations, sort of like black holes,
a solution of Einstein equations. So it's a possible happening, compatible with Einstein
equation, predicted with Einstein equation, where you have an horizon, but not this horizon where
you can only enter. It's an horizon from which you can only come out. And we're inside, you have
this enormous tube, but instead of becoming longer and narrower, it's becoming shorter and opening
up. Okay? And that's predicted by Einstein equation. So that's, we are back in the terrain
which we're confident that could exist. It's okay for what we know about nature.
Okay? The difficult part was a jump. Only the jump, only that particular moment.
That's where the Einstein equation do not hold, but that's quantum mechanics. That's what
Einstein knew the Einstein equation would not hold there. And that's quantum mechanics tell us
it is possible. So here is the hypothesis of what would happen. Every line here, it's one possible
moment of time, some slicing of time. The black hole forms, becomes longer and longer. There is
this quantum jump, this quantum tunneling effect also, and then you come back. And what is next
is a white hole. From the outside, what do you see? Well, you see the outside of a black hole,
and then you see the outside of a white hole. And this is the magic of just classical Einstein
theory. The outside of a black hole, that's what, this was actually the technical key
that allowed us to realize that this is possible, which is stronger counterintuitive,
but it's mathematically correct. The outside of black hole is the same thing as the outside
of a white hole. From the outside, you don't distinguish. You always see the surface.
Remember that I told you that if I look from the outside, I throw a stone, I don't see it falling
down. I just see it, you know, slowing, slowing, slowing, slowing, slowing, slowing. And if it's
a white hole, I throw a stone, I just see it slowing, slowing, slowing, slowing, slowing.
Exactly the same. Okay? The difference is actually on the surface itself. If I am falling
into a black hole, I go through. If there's a white hole, I don't go through. Okay? What happened?
Well, I mean, time slows down for me. So I go very, very fast to the future until the white hole
is finished. It's not there anymore, or until something come out of the black hole and clashed
against me. So outside is the same. Nothing happens in the same. Nothing outside. Inside,
there is this, okay? That's the magic is in the jump. In the jump, and this is quantum
gravity. See, in the moment in which Einstein, in which Dante is left alone by Virgil, it's alone,
it's a moment of, he says, oh, Padre Mio, my father, because he's of this respectful thing with his
great point of antiquity. His kid, it's alone, he knows his own, but in that moment, he sees
Berkleyche, which is his great love. Dante hasn't been in love with this woman all through his life,
and he sees there, and he knows joy, light, colors, fantastic. This is a beautiful moment of the
poem. So there, in the moment of his light and desperation, he finds his great love. For me,
it's been the same. Going there, in the moment in which we lose Einstein's theory, that's what
quantum gravity is. It's what I've been looking all my life to. And I think the beauty and the hard
part also to understand is this jump, because this jump is not a movement of space or evolution
in time, and it's not a jump of an electron from here to here, space remains space, time remains
time, it's just a funny electron that does funny things. It's time itself and space itself, a jump
from one to another trajectory. So we have to conceive a way of thinking about physics, where you
can describe a phenomenon, a normal phenomenon of the universe, not as happening in space time,
but space time itself does something funny. That's it. So here's a picture, here's a complete picture.
Star collapses, walk-off homes become very long, and
quantum jump, white hole, and slowly it comes out, everything comes out,
and the entire process is finished. Now, first question. How long does it take?
I think you're quite on board in the fact that how much time is a funny question here? It's a
tricky question. How long does it take? If we're outside, it might take very long. In fact, it
might take extremely long. When we started doing these calculations of the quantum jump, because
the classical part is just Einstein's question, it's just technical. We use quantum gravity to
the calculation. We realized that the probability jumps happen with certain probability, quantum
mechanics about probabilities. The probability for jump to happen, seen from the outside,
is completely negligible if the black hole is big. It's only possible if the horizon is small.
Now, this seems to be a big problem, because oh my god, but most black holes we see in the sky,
they're big. They're not going to have happened there. But black holes become smaller with time.
That's a big discovery of Stephen Hawking, that black holes evaporate. If you keep feeding it,
it becomes bigger. But at some point, they eat whatever they used to eat. At some point,
they're there isolated, and slowly they emit energy, and they become smaller and smaller and
smaller and smaller. So if you wait long enough, even in such a star, you say star, which is a
gigantic black hole, even the biggest one, the billion solar masses black hole are going to shrink,
shrink, shrink, shrink, shrink, can become very small. Once they're small, the probability of
jumping is very high. In fact, it becomes the order one, and it jumps. So the correct story,
to cosmologically or astrophysically, the likely story is that whatever black hole you have,
it's going to take some time, and the time was computed by Hawking, to become small,
then it jumps, and then becomes a white hole. The white hole is teeny, teeny, teeny,
because it's at the end of the apparition. But careful, it's teeny, the bottleneck. The inside
is big, and takes a long time to come out the inside. That's the full story. Now,
question is, how long does it take? Well, a black hole, you have to wait for it to become small,
and this was computed by Hawking's. For a black hole of the size of Sagittarius, it takes much
longer than the life of the universe. Long, long, long, long. So this happens, and there's billions
and billions of years. But remember, I said we went inside, inside the black hole, it goes through
these things, we're in the white hole, the time it takes in Sagittarius, a star, from the moment
we cross the horizon. For us, for us, we're inside the starship, we're going down, again, assuming
that we're not squeezed and squashed. Okay, we have a super powerful kryptonite starship
that is going through all quantum jumps. The time it takes for us to go to the jump is minutes
for a big black hole, for small black holes, seconds, even less. The jump is instantaneous,
and the time to get out from the white hole is very short, again, minutes. So outside, the time
is billions of years, inside is just seconds or minutes. Okay? Which means that the full process
is something that lasts billions of years for a clock outside, minutes for a clock inside.
Which means if you want to see what is the universe, billions for you in the future,
just jump to black hole and you'll get in a moment. Again, assuming you're not squeezed,
squashed, and destroyed. So when we're viewing what the black-white hole is,
is considering it as a shortcut to the future, you go in, you come out in the future. There,
in the same place, okay? You just go in, you come out from the same hole long, long away in the future.
That's this enormous time distortion. It's the same kind of time distortion of my clock,
except that it's gigantic, right? Another way of thinking about that is to think that what's
really going on is that you have a star, it goes down, collapses, bounces, come up,
but because it's time distortion, you're seeing this at a slow motion, unbelievable
slow motion. For billions of years, just wait, wait, wait. But it's you who are seeing it's
slow motion because it's time deletion. So that's a picture of, that's the likely picture of
what is going on.
Now, one question is,
do we believe this? Can we check this? How can we check this? How do we hope to
see if this is right or wrong? And as I often say, I've been working this for the last years,
sometimes I'm completely sure it's right. Usually on Mondays, I'm completely sure.
Usually on Fridays, I'm totally desperate. No, no, it's not going to work.
How do we check this? If this is right, what could we do to find out it's correct?
One thing is that we might see some indirect effect of that, and once we could actually
see these things directly. So the indirect effect, in fact, let me make a small parenthesis about
black holes. Black holes, the first evidence, the first time astronomers could see something
in the star and they thought, well, that's maybe a black hole, was in the 70s, but it was just a
few astronomers, nobody was taking them seriously. There were some stars that were wiggling. We could
see the Doppler effect, they're moving back and forth, like if we're rotating around something,
but there was nothing around which to rotate. And somebody says, maybe there, it's a double star,
and one of the two is a black hole. John Wheeler had a beautiful image. If you have a,
you know, John Wheeler is another generation, a couple dancing the waltzer, and he's dressed in
black and she's dressed in white, and there's very dim, you only see her moving around like that.
But you know, there should be somebody else because she's, so that's a, the white
dress girl is the star that you see, the black is the black hole. That was the 70s, and still
in the 80s, nobody would believe black holes. It's only really this century that people,
scientific community at large, start taking the idea black holes are real seriously.
I say in the book that when I moved from America back to Europe, the director of my
department in France, who's not a relativist, was a particle physicist, in 2000,
told me you don't really believe black holes exist. So still in 2000, many very serious,
very good scientists wouldn't take this seriously. Now, of course, it changes mind,
but that's not a criticism of him, not at all, because changing mind is what science is about.
I mean, that's exactly the best of science. Now, what I'm, why I'm saying all this, because in the
30s, much, much, much before, this guy constructed this antenna because he was working for the
Bell Laboratory for studying noise in communications, and he picked up a signal
from a point in the star, in the sky, which was in the center of the Sagittarius Galaxy,
in the center constellation, and was called at the time Sagittarius A star. He was seeing the
black hole. The signal, the radio signal of the black hole was received for the first time on
by somebody in 30s, much, much before anybody even thought that that could be a black hole.
It took half a century to recognize that that was a black hole. So it is not totally impossible
that white holes is something we have already seen. And in fact, imagine that in the early universe,
we know the universe is very hot, and very agitated, and there's a lot of speculation that
in the early universe a lot of black holes could be formed at the time. They're called primordial
black holes. Or imagine even there's a lot of speculation that Big Bang was not the beginning.
There was a big bounce. So a previous universe compressing and bouncing. And in fact, the bounce
of the universe is a phenomenon which is sort of vaguely similar to the bounce of black holes that
becomes white holes. So imagine that in either before or in the early universe, many black hole
formed, these already become white holes. Now, small white holes. Because as I said, the transition
happens only when they are small. So imagine there are a lot of these small white holes. The mass we
can compute it. The mass, the theory gives this. It's a plank mass. It's a fractured microgram,
which is the weight of my hair. So one hair, two hair. That's a plank mass. So a white hole is
something which has the weight of this, much, much smaller than my hair, but has the weight of that,
which means it's a gravitational attraction like this, teeny, which you couldn't see it because
it doesn't interact electromagnetic. You could not touch it because touch it is electromagnetism.
But you could, in principle, see it's a gravitational force. So imagine there was many of these teeny,
teeny, teeny things in the universe formed in the past and were floating around. They would behave
like matter because attractions have gravity, but they will be dark because they don't interact
with light. So they will be dark matter. Dark matter. Astronomers see around galaxies, halos,
of something that they call dark matter, which only interact gravitationally, doesn't interact
electromagnetically, and behaves exactly as it was many little teeny things with a plank mass
moving around. So could it be, and this is not something we know, it's a speculation, it's a
possibility. Could it be that perhaps we've already seen these things, these zillions of little
white holes, which are ancient black holes that have bounced, and now are these teeny things,
and they're detected by the astronomers, and that's what they call dark matter, which nobody
knows what it is. It's one of the greatest mysteries of contemporary astronomy and science,
that in the universe we see stars, we see galaxies, but then we have clear evidence,
very strong evidence that there is something else, because we see its gravitational effect,
these clouds, big clouds around galaxies, larger than the galaxy of this sort of powder
that only interact gravitationally. Okay, so maybe we've seen then, how do we
get convinced that this is the case? That's the way science works, slowly in a complicated
manner. We have to make a model that how they were formed before the universe, in the early
universe, how had they interact with the full story of the universe, cosmology, and so on and so
forth. Are there alternatives for dark matter? One alternative until short ago was supersymmetic
particles, but that was wrong, because supersymmetic particles don't exist of that kind, that particular
kind that was expected. One of the great, I shouldn't go late at the time, I just stay within one
hour, I shouldn't go. But let me say that some physicists, even in this room, have been talking
about the crisis of physics and recently, because what they expected didn't happen,
for instance, supersymmetry. But you know, crisis physics is like a big defeat in a
battle, in a war. The French talk about the big defeat of Waterloo, but the other side of the
channel is not big defeat of Waterloo. Crisis of somebody is good news for somebody else.
So when supersymmetry was not found, my part of the community was just jumping around, yeah.
It's a little bit more than that, because for many people, the next frontier of physics should be
a grand, the theory of everything. I think that the theory of everything is a bad idea.
We don't know what's out there. There's so much more about the universe which we don't know.
I don't think it's a good idea, it's a good scientific program to write the final theory of
everything. We should solve the problems one by one, like Faraday was doing, Maxwell or Einstein.
We don't have a quantum theory of gravity, we should find a quantum theory of gravity,
because we don't know what happened when gravity becomes quantum. That's a concrete problem.
So let's solve that. Let's put together quantum mechanics with general activities. It's
complicated enough because it's a quantum property of space-time, it's changing the way we think
about reality. I think we're in a spectacularly good positive moment in their physics. What we
have learned about the universe, black hole, gravitational waves, about gravity and cosmology,
is wonderful. Science is going very, very well. It's not in a crisis, not at all. It's a crisis
for those who ask the wrong questions. I think trying to figure out the quantum property of
gravity and what happened to black hole, what happened to the universe, these are the right
questions we should address. I said one possibility is to work out all the cosmology
and maybe convince ourselves we're not convinced at all. It's one possibility that this dark matter
is, in fact, this white hole. The other possibility is to make an actual detection. So could we see
one of them? Well, let's see. Imagine this is a really dark matter. We can compute how many
there are because we know how many dark matter are. Astronomers know exactly how much dark matter
there is. There's more dark matter than matter, sort of a few times more in a galaxy. So the
density should be comparable, a bit higher, but dark matter is more diffused. So we can compute
how many there. We know the weight of these little things. I just told you a fraction of
my graph so you know how many they are. And so it's a simple calculation to see how many of
these little things there are. And the result is that presumably in a room like this one,
every once in a while, I mean, one goes by. So maybe there's no one going by with this.
We couldn't see it. We couldn't touch it. The only interaction would be gravitational, the pool.
So we had something extremely sensitive. Imagine we build a machine, a detector,
where something goes by, so intuitively, a little pendulum, something goes by.
Pendulum mechanical is complicated. But maybe something electronic, something
quantum electronic that could detect very... That's one of the things I'm doing right now.
Trying to try to figure out what's best chance we have to build a detector that could detect
one thing flying by. Is this going to happen? I don't know. I'm working on that. What I know that
when I became a faculty at Pittsburgh in the 1990, and my friends were saying,
we're going to build a gravitational wave detector, that seemed really crazy.
And they did it. And they got a Nobel Prize. So it doesn't mean that all project is going to work.
Many projects don't work. Some do work. So in principle, yes, it's all possible to detect.
In principle, it's possible to detect one of these things. So in principle, it's
clearly possible to detect them. Practice, build a machine, and they're, as I said,
one particle flying by every once in a while. It's not a lot of them. So it's not easy to
detect. Now, let me go over the conclusion. I've asked you to follow me inside the black hole
all the way to the center in the sort of land we know, strange but known, through the jump,
hypothetical, but we don't know. And then out of the white hole, and then we're back to the stars,
like say Dante. We came back to see back the stars. What is this? This is mind traveling,
right? It's traveling with the mind. And it's what Dante does. Dante takes us to this incredible
trip into hell, purgatory, paradise, through all the forms of morality, through all the stage of
human psyche and mind. Beautiful. But I think it's also what science does, what the best science
does, the best theoretical science. Science is made of all sorts of things. There are mathematicians,
very good equations. There are the people who do experiments, there are people who find out
experiment, but then there are the people who think they knew, like Faraday, who invented the
fields, just created something completely new. And how do you do that? You mind travel.
Think for a moment. I'll give you just a few examples in my last minutes. Anaximander,
which one of my great passions, a great thinker in the 26th century ago, who figured out that
Earth is like a stone floating in the nothing, right? Before, people thought the sky is above us.
He understood that the sky is all around us. And Earth is just a thing, like there. How did he do that?
Mind travel outside it. He saw it from the outside. In fact, he, same Anaximander,
is credited in antiquity to be the one who invented the geographical maps,
which is funny, because people have been traveling and trading and traveling long
distance for centuries, millennia. Nobody thought of taking a piece of paper writing a map. Why?
Because it needs to be creative to change perspective, to imagine what is a map. A map
is how the land would look seen from an eagle super, super high. But take imagination to think
you're an eagle and go up there, or to think you're, you know, just like the astronauts on
moon looking at Earth from somewhere. He did that. So he was capable of mind traveling.
Iparkus, the greatest astronomer of antiquity, has a calculation of a distance of the moon,
which is, it's a subtle geometrical argument, very, very beautiful. But it starts by saying,
imagine the Earth, there's a sun there, and there's a shadow of the Earth, there's a cone,
and imagine to go to the tip of the shadow of the cone of the Earth and look back.
And then there's a geometrical eye of the angle you would see. I mean, I'm not
time to go into that. So again, his mind traveling to the interplanetary space,
this is two millennia ago, thinking how would sun and Earth and moon would look from the tip of the
space. And Copernicus imagined the solar system seen from the sun. That's what he did.
Change perspective on the solar system. And Kepler, Kepler has this fantastic book,
was published, he wrote his book all through his life. It's called The Dream, the title,
and was published after his death, in which he tells the story that he and his mother
are taken by a demon to the moon. And then he goes to the moon and describes the moon and
describes how the solar system looks from the moon. So what the hell is he doing? Well,
he's doing something fantastic. He's taking out a different perspective and see how Venus and
the Earth looks from a moving body, the moon, to convince us that what we see on Earth
is nothing else than something seen from a moving body. So it's an argument, it's a
profoundly rhetorical, powerful argument for Copernicanism based on changing perspective.
Because when you change perspective, what is it? I mean, who cares how the
solar system looks from the moon? That's not the point. When you change perspective,
you realize that your own perspective is partial. That's the point about change perspective. In
science, like in politics, like in economy, like in everything, you put yourself in other shoes
somewhere else, so you realize that what you usually think might be wrong because you have
a different point of view. And so on. Einstein famously traveled on a thought about traveling on
a ray of light, riding a ray of light or falling in an elevator. Maxwell also had a demon, right?
Maxwell thought of being small like a molecule. And this demon, seeing the individual molecules,
what Maxwell's demon is called, opening, closing the door, letting the molecules go
in his work, not on entomalities, his work on the kinetic field of gas on thermodynamics.
But how do we mind travel? How do we know what's going to see from a different perspective? I
think the answer is to stay on a subtle balance between what we keep with us, the Einstein equation
that tells us up to there. What we keep with us is the knowledge that tells us something and what
we leave home. Because to make a step ahead, we have to leave home something, right? Einstein
leave home simultaneity. Kepler leaves home the circles. Copernicus leaves home the idea that
the earth is the center of the universe. We left home the idea that you can always describe
things in space and time. It's something basic. How do we know? How do you know what to bring
yourself and what you leave home? That's, I think, there's no methods in science. There's no recipe
for that. Science is just trial and error. You keep walking on the boundary of what we know.
We know quantum mechanics. We know general relativity. We know what happens in the black hole up to
there. And you keep turning things around until you find the little hole that allows you to
put together a puzzle in a different manner in such a way that
it makes sense. And there's a possible step ahead. And then, you know, experiment tell you whether
is right or wrong. So I think this mind-traveling is science a bit better. And I think that science
is imagination, besides just being calculation and numbers. And in this science is very similar
to Dante, poetical imagination, and to the rest of our life, which is a rife of emotion,
of imagination. And I think this part of science is always, is often forgotten. Science has an
image of coldness. But this is science, I think.
