Donnie, what's up, man?
Welcome back.
How you doing?
Doing great.
How are you doing?
It's a question.
I'm better than ever, dude.
I'm actually 12 days clean off of fentanyl and I've got my family back.
My son's here today.
I'm just so positive, dude.
I can't even begin to explain.
I want to get into motivational speaking and I want everybody to know my story and how
far I've come and just how proud I am with that.
You should be.
You should be.
I mean, to take so much responsibility for everything that you've done.
I mean, I never thought in a million years I would even get clean.
I thought I was going to be a sad statistic.
I mean, I wind up dead in a public bathroom or something horrible like that.
I'm glad I get the second chance to be a better role model than my son and just get
that opportunity.
How old are you now?
I'm 33.
33?
Yes, sir.
You're still a young man?
Yeah.
I still got all the time in the world to make that change.
I was always told, if you want to succeed, I have to change the people I hang out with.
I have to change everything about myself.
I've been a pretty good failure up till now, so now I'd like to be a pretty big success
if I can.
Yeah, and your path might be a crooked one, but as long as you're helping some other
kids, I think it could be great.
Definitely.
I would say that's a fair assumption.
Yeah.
You know, my story is a little colorful to say the least, but you know what, if I could
reach anybody and help them to detour the horrible decisions I made, I'm all for that.
Do you see all your decisions or a lot of your decisions that you've made in your life,
as you see them that way, horrible?
Well, definitely drug-induced decisions were not a good idea.
It led to, I could say that addiction ruined a good part of my life, and now I'm just
trying to just mold it back together and keep my family together now and just try to not
be so petty like I was.
I used to just argue about dumb things, things that didn't matter until I got out of the
homeless by myself is one thing, but when I had my family out here with me, dude, that's
when the real responsibility set in.
You know what I mean?
I was like, oh my God, my son, he has to eat every day.
I can't have him around junky friends of mine.
I'm not talking bad about my friends, but we all know we're not the most suitable for
underage kids.
You know what I mean?
What you're willing to tolerate for yourself is one thing, but what you put your wife and
kids through is very different.
Absolutely.
Yeah.
Every little bit of money I get, dude, is now just to make sure that they're all right.
I had a bad falling out with my relatives, which was where we were staying, and it put
me out by myself.
I just realized how not ready I was.
If it, I for one owe a big thanks to my girlfriend who locked me in the room and held me down,
even threatened me with violence if I leave, you know what I mean?
Whatever it takes.
She did that for me, and I'm forever grateful for that.
So you're on Suboxone now?
Yes.
Yeah.
12 days now.
That's great.
That helps people.
Yeah, it really does.
It's a miracle.
I thought methadone was the way for me, and I realize now that that was just another means
to an end.
Suboxone was the way to go, you know what I mean?
Because now I can approach my days from the not sick standpoint.
You know what I mean?
I hated waking up every day, and before I even open my eyes, I'm already thinking about
my fix.
You know what I mean?
That's horrible.
My son's waking me up and wanting to play with me, and I'm thinking about just getting
high.
You know what I mean?
So what do you think helped you make the change?
Yeah.
Realizing that the ones that I have close to me, you know, that I hold dear to my heart
now are what was really important, and I kind of backburnered them, you know, for a long
time.
And I think Suboxone just opened my eyes, you know, like, realized how selfish I was
being and how, like, how just not good of a dad I was being, you know, like me and my
son have a great relationship, but I haven't been always the best role model, you know,
and I know that.
It's interesting to see someone who—here's someone who looks like you do, face tattoos
and, you know, all the other crap you've been through, to be speaking so clearly.
You're so clear-headed now, and you see things like—
Yeah.
Yeah, that's the craziest part for me is, like, I was just so clouded with, like, just
no thoughts of the future of any kind, you know what I mean, and just, just, like, wasting
away pretty much, you know what I mean, like, I was just, like, trudging along, I guess,
you know, until, like, something bad happened, but, you know, thank God I realized, you
know, ahead of time that, I mean, drugs weren't what was going to make me happy.
My family is what's making me happy, like—
So you're optimistic now for your future.
Absolutely.
The love I have for my son, you know, is something I want to, in some way, give back to, you
know, I want to get into motivational speaking and, like, on a big stature I would love to,
I would love for anybody to, you know, get in contact with me that could point me in
that direction of, you know, if anybody thought that I changed their lives in any way here
in my story the first time, I mean, I would, I would love to reach as many people as I
could.
What do you think the secrets are to walking a straighter path to living a better life
for you or for other people going through what you—similar things?
Well, I, like, first, I, I said, you know, I wrote down goals, you know, like, like,
six ones.
You know, like, what do I want, like, within the next six months?
You know, I wanted, I put, I put down an apartment, a vehicle, you know, a job, you
know, I put, like, four or five things down, but, you know, I mean, but they're all like
realistic goals that, I mean, now that I'm, now that I'm sober I can actually, I can
actually try to reach these goals, but I realized, dude, I don't know the first, I don't know
how to buy a house, you know, I mean, like, I don't, I don't, I, I don't know how to
be a grown-up.
Have you had a job?
Huh?
Have you ever had a job?
No.
No, I mean, I mean, like, under the table, like, like, you know, street positions, you
know, tattoo artists or something like that, you know, I mean, but, yeah, like, yeah, I've
never had a, you know, legitimate job, never, you know, worked the nine to five and, you
know, never earned a paycheck, basically.
So, I mean, all this is new to me, like.
But you see that you deserve something better than what you've been given yourself, right?
Absolutely.
Like, I can't believe I, God, dude, like, I'm actually embarrassed I let myself, you
know, like, that I've, you know, like, went as far as I did.
Was it, tell me about your childhood again, just you, you didn't come up from the best
circumstances?
Well, yeah, I mean, you know, my mom, my mom, you know, was an addict in the early years
of my life and my dad was always in prison, you know, my mom, she did the best she could,
you know what I mean?
And, you know, I mean, I just try not to have any, like, I have no hard feelings towards,
you know, like them not being there.
You know what I mean?
Like, like, there's no bad blood there.
It's just, we don't, we don't even speak really.
And not because I'm angry, I just, I don't know, I guess I'm just, you know, wrapped
up in, you know, in my life trying to figure it out as they were, I guess, you know.
And now that, now that I'm an adult myself, I try to, I try to put myself in their shoes.
And I realize now it's, it wasn't as easy as all that, you know, I probably made some
hasty decisions and like, you know, about my feelings towards my family.
But I mean, all in all, I mean, I, they did, they did the best they could.
Yeah.
I mean, after doing all these talks, I've learned that shame is a huge factor in all
of these stories.
Shame on your parents' part for what they did or didn't do.
Shame on your part for mistakes you've made.
But forgiveness is what erases it all.
Yeah.
I think.
It leaves a room for something good to happen.
Absolutely.
Yeah.
Forgiveness is the biggest thing for me.
Like, I don't want, I don't want to have any like, any like harshness of any kind in
my heart, you know, now, like I've, you know, grown up, grown up surrounded by, you know,
events in the streets, you know, fast, you know, fast paced living, you know, like the
drugs and, you know, quick money and all this, like, I used to think that that was
like the Hollywood, you know, like, like that's like the rock star, you know, lifestyle.
And I mean, like, it's all well and good if you're like actually the rock star, you
know what I mean?
Otherwise, you're just fuck up, you know, and I think I'm, I'm a pretty like good, like
poster child of like, you know, that up till now, you know, I like, I like that, like,
I've shown that I can be an A1, you know, fuck up, but I want to also show that there's
more to me than that, that I have, that I know I actually have something to say and
that, like, you know, like, I want to know that, like, my existence mattered in some way.
You know what I mean?
Yeah, that's great.
How important is your inner, like, deep belief in what you deserve in life, a factor
in all of this?
Because when you were getting all these face tattoos in prison, I assume you probably
didn't believe you deserved a whole lot better than what you were getting.
Right.
And now you seem to speak very differently.
Yeah, you know, in the beginning, I've, I kind of felt like when I first had my
accident and I went to prison, you know, doing my term and I felt like I was never
going to go home, I kind of felt like I was going to get wrapped up in the system
and wash myself up, you know, I mean, and never see the light of day again.
You had no hope.
Yeah, pretty much.
And then, I don't know, man, like the years went by, dude, and all of a sudden I'm
going to get released and I'm like, I'm a little looking in the mirror and I'm
like, oh my God, like, what did I do?
You know what I mean?
Like, and I never noticed it before.
Like, because when you're in prison, face tattoos and things that are common, I got
a rude awakening when I got out after five years, dude.
And I was the only tattooed face in the room, you know what I mean?
Like, I felt like everywhere I went that all eyes were on me.
Like, and, you know, in the good sense and the bad, you know what I mean?
Because like, it made me like, you know, like, oh God, like, you know, like, I feel
like people were already passing judgment on me.
And, you know what I mean?
Like, for the way I look, and I mean, I just realized that the way I look isn't going
to define me.
I want the message that I have and the things that I stand up for in my heart to, you know,
like, things of substance that matter.
You know, I want to be remembered for that and, you know, like, I think
that's why I could actually like help, you know, young and up and coming kids that are
just, you know, a little troubled and, you know, maybe because I think, I don't know,
I'd probably be a good help to them because I'm not the kind of person to sit there and
say, hey, don't do this, you know, don't do that and, you know, tell you why, you know,
I can just be like, you know, hey, do it.
But I did it and this is what I got for it.
You know, I got a wheelchair and a whole, you know, a whole bunch of tears and lost years.
Yeah.
No, but you're able to smile now.
You're able to see things better.
Yep.
I realize now that families, families forever and with, with my girl and my son in my life,
I feel like I could accomplish anything.
I really feel that, you know, that I could have the, you know, white picket fence lifestyle
and, you know, like that, you know, if my life is ever a book that, you know, it can
be like looked at as a success story, you know, like, you know, like we can all come
from turmoil and like, or just go through turmoil and, you know, come out on top.
Did talking on my channel help you see things different?
Yeah.
Ever since, ever since meeting you, dude, has changed my life and I can't even explain
to you how positive way.
Really?
Yeah.
Yeah.
I, when I first, when I first, you know, when I first met you and we did the first interview,
I, I had no idea, I, you know, I had, I had never even heard about it.
You know what I mean?
You know who you were and then like, I just, you know, like I seen on, you know, on YouTube
how like, you know, you talk about like how you created, you know, how you created soft
white underbelly and like just like, I don't know, dude, I was like, I was like fascinated
and like, I was like, man, like, I want to be like that too, you know what I mean?
Like.
No, but the talk helped you see things better or clearly?
Absolutely.
Absolutely.
I was hearing, hearing people's, you know, in the comments and the comments were very
positive too.
Oh yeah.
Man, like that, that, that changed my life, dude, like I, I read every single, you know,
every single comment and there's thousands of, you know, I read every single one and,
you know, I took in like every, every one of them, you know, I mean, like and thought
about it and like, you know, like how much I appreciate like the fact that somebody even
wanted to listen to my story and, you know, how grateful I am to you that I get to even
tell my story how grateful I am that people wanted to listen to it and wanted to hear
more that it touched them that, you know, like just that I could be just so that I could
be a positive anything to somebody is I'm, I'm really happy with that, you know, um,
getting, getting sober is a scary thing because it let me realize how empty my life was, like
how like, like meaningless my life, what like, you know, like to me, like all I cared about
was getting high and, and I didn't, I didn't see the damage that it was doing to me or
my family and, you know, I just, it's scary. I'm learning how to be a grown up for the
first time and that's, that's real brand new to me.
Can I bring your son in?
Absolutely.
Let me go grab.
I'm so proud of him. He's the top of his class, man. He's so smart.
So, baby, who's this?
This is my son, Eddie. Say hi, baby.
Hey, tell him your name.
My name is Edward.
Hey, Edward, how are you?
Good.
Are you happy that your dad's getting his life together?
Yeah.
Tell me about your life. Tell me about your dad.
My dad feeds me good food and he's, he's the best dad ever I had.
And...
You don't have to, like, you can tell him how dad really is.
Like, I mean, do you love dad? Is he your buddy?
Yeah.
Yeah?
You're your best friend?
Yeah.
Is he there for you?
Yeah.
Do you love him?
I love you, too.
Very cute.
Eddie, thank you so much for coming in, saying hi.
Donnie, I'm proud of you.
Thank you very much, man.
Stay on the right track.
Yes, sir.
Keep it up. We'll do another update down the road.
Absolutely.
Maybe, who knows, maybe you'll get some speaking engagement.
I would love it.
I welcome all the positive, you know, feedback I can get.
You're a pretty great example of somebody who's trying to transform their life.
I appreciate that.
I really appreciate you saying that, you know.
It feels really good to matter in anybody's life,
especially people I know and complete strangers.
It's awesome.
All right, you guys.
Thank you very much.
Say bye, buddy.
Bye.
Bye, Eddie.
Bye.
