My name is Gummo. I'm a hacker. I've been a hacker for the past 36 years and I'm here
to tell my story. My story started pretty young. I was born and raised in Jacksonville,
grew up absolutely dirt poor and I had an older brother. I had two older brothers,
one half brother and a natural sibling and all of us grew up in Jacksonville. Growing up in Jacksonville,
you know, we only had a mom or mother. She raised us by herself, all three of us, the best that
she could. She was an alcoholic and she did the best, raising three boys. My mom passed away
when I was 12 years old in 1985 and I actually woke up on December the 7th, 1985 and pulled the
covers back and there was my mom. Ever since then, I've been on my own. My brother and I,
we went to go live with my aunt but she failed at that miserably and my father was in prison so
there was no choice really but to live with friends of the family which we did for a little while.
And my brother, he was about a year and a half older than me so he was much more of a free spirit
and so he just went on his way, went on to do his thing at 16 years old. By that time,
I'm 14 and a half and, you know, really on my own. And that's when I discovered computers, right?
Actually, I discovered computers about three years earlier before my mother passed away. Never really
gave any consideration to it other than, you know, any other normal kid at the age of 8, 9, 10. So it
sat until my mother passed away and before she passed away, the night that, the night actually
that she passed away, she had come home from graduation. My brother, my half brother had
graduated basic training at Fort Benning and the thing she told me before she went to bed was
she asked me how my computer studies were coming along and I lied to her, right? And I said they
were going great. In actuality, I really wasn't doing anything. Then she passed, right? And then,
I, you know, you deal with what you can deal with when you're 12, 13 years old and my outlet was
computers. First, you know, I withdrew like any other kid does. I guess, I don't know. And second
of all, I, I began to master my computer. I had a TRS-80 model too. And I taught myself to, I taught
myself how to code, code basic. And for a couple years, that's where, that's where I was, right?
When, when people would ask me if I was fine, yeah, I'm fine. Yeah. But, you know, my grades were
really disastrous. You know, I had a couple friends that I really engaged with, but no one too in
particular. But I did withdraw, I did withdraw even more into my computer, right? That I got an
acoustical modem, connected that to a local bulletin board and begin to meet other people, begin to
meet other people like me. And then, you know, people ask about you, right? You know, they want to
know who you are. And, you know, back then, the internet was, the internet really wasn't what
people think it is now. It was more or less dial-up boards, ARPANET, closed loop systems, such
things of that such. And, but I set up a bulletin board on a local BBS system. And at the right
pole age of 14, I started to meet other, other hackers online. And I started to learn a lot of
cool things like, like telephone freaking, like how to make free phone calls. I discovered a
subculture of people who existed on the phone lines, on the telephone lines, where they, where you
could talk to someone, you know, in London or in Paris or in Georgia or LA. And you can meet these
people on, on the telephone, on the, these telephone party lines, so to speak. And so that
was, so, you know, 14 years old, I'm learning how to freak telephone systems. Freaking telephone
systems was a way to actually access the old telephone systems, the old bell systems, with
special instructions and codes and, and, and methods, which are, which have long since expired
since, you know, the telephone system has gone digital. But
so 14 years old, I'm learning, you know, I'm learning how to, you know, code myself. I've
set up a bulletin board. I'm meeting hackers and I'm getting advice. I'm learning how to do
things. I'm learning how to get the things that I need, right? Because I'm living with friends of
the family. And they really, you know, they, they, they too, themselves were barely able to support
me much, barely themselves as well. So everything that I had to do was for myself, right? Everything
from food to money for, money for clothes, for school, everything. My, my entire existence
depended on my willingness to make sure that I was taking care of myself. And so that's what I
learned how to do. I learned how to, at the age of 15 years old, I took a Bell and Howell language
master. And I learned how to reprogram credit cards to use them in stores and in ATMs back
before ATMs really had a dedicated ATM line to verify a transaction. And of course, I would
understand the batching process and all that. But those, that was, that was 32 years ago.
And I just learned how to manipulate things to get the things that I wanted, whether it was printing
a UPC code for food from the store, which I needed, or doing the, the, the magnetic gas handle flip
back in those days. When you need a gas for your car, there was a dial on the, on the gas pump,
and you would flip the dial on and off. Well, if you were to take, if you took a, an old-fashioned
speaker magnet and set it next to the handle that would flip it up and engage the pump,
the pump would begin to run to distribute gas in those, but it, the numbers went in turn.
And so that was, so I kept learning these tricks, right? I kept learning little tricks to survive,
survivability tricks, learning how to social engineer people to get what I wanted, whether it
was access to a specific computer that I wanted to dial in to steal some files from, or whether or
not it was to convince the supermarket manager that I'd actually, that I'd left some food behind
when in turn I actually hadn't, just so I could eat that night.
So, you know, just growing up, letting meeting hackers on the online, people, people giving
me what I felt like was worthwhile advice to survive, to, to be able to, you know, not,
not wind up in a bad situation. And that's, that's exactly how I, I kept by myself from
falling apart, from going under, living with, and all, all of the while, right? I'm still living
with friends of the family. 1989 comes around, I'm, I'm 16, 17 years old. The, the friends of the
family really had enough of me living there. So, the official parting of ways, right? So, there I am.
I just turned 17 years old, and I'm on my own. I have a, I had a Chevrolet Chevette, a 1984 Chevrolet
Chevette, no, a 1982 Chevrolet Chevette, powder blue, and all of my stuff was in there, and including,
including my TRS-80 model too. And I went, I lived in my car for, for, for the better part of the
entire year of 1989. And it was tough, right? It was, you know, I dropped out of school.
I began to lose focus. I began, began stealing cars, began using my skills in very, very unique
fashions to obtain money quickly. Because when you're living in your car, what, what choice do you have?
So, yeah, I did that for about a year. And then, then I met, then I met a girl. And she became a girlfriend.
And ultimately, she became a wife. And she helped me, she helped me realize what, what I was capable
of, of doing. And her family took me in. And I went and, I went and got a, I went and got a job, you know,
just bagging groceries and shit. And just kept doing that, right? You know, someone, someone
will leave it in me, you know. And still sticking to computers. Had a daughter, my daughter who turns
30 this December. My daughter, my wife and I had a daughter. And I realized that, you know, I needed to,
needed to do better, needed to do more, provide more for, for my wife and my daughter. And so,
there I am, bagging groceries, working, working in retail stores. And actually, working hard and
continuing my computer studies, teaching myself how to see COBOL, FORTRAN, all of the old languages,
teaching myself computer languages, and taking care of a wife and a kid, $5 an hour. And kept doing
that. And about, about two years into that, I got the opportunity, I saved up enough money to go
to the Chaos Congress in Germany, which is an annual conference of hackers from all around the
world. And I met some, some, some, some hackers like me who had, who had not only been through a
struggle, but were continuing to get to a struggle. And I met a, I met a good, I met a, I met a friend
of mine. His name was Boris Florick. He went by the hacker named Tron. And we became really good
friends. And Boris and I, we, we worked on a lot of smart card systems together. He taught me about
smart cards, the little chip card in your wallet that everyone carries around, you know, that thing,
what's in your wallet. And at the time, no one really knew what smart cards were. They were
only used extensively in Europe at the time. And so Boris taught me about smart cards, these
things that have a computer and microprocessor in them. And he taught me that these things control
many things from, from television access to telephone access to making and receiving long
distance calls. And so we worked on a crypto card scheme together to where we were able to actually
reverse engineer about five different providers who issued chip cards, smart cards for their
services. We successfully decrypted those services. And with that knowledge, you know, after we became
friends, after a couple of years, we, we began to converse back and forth. You know, at that,
at that point, this is 94. And now I'm attending the Chaos Congress each year. And meeting with
Boris and we're chatting back and forth on this, all kinds of technology, most specifically,
smart cards. About that time here in the United States, Hughes Space Systems
was ready to launch a system called Direct TV. Back then, actually, it was called
DSS, the digital satellite system. And, and Hughes built the system from the ground up.
And I was interested in that. The reason I was interested in that, because at, at this point,
it's 1995, my father has just been released from prison. And so I go to visit him and he's watching
television. I said, Oh, dad, what is that? And he's like, Oh, it's a satellite system called Direct
TV. And I was amazed by the picture quality and how, how great it looked. And it all came on a
little small 18 inch dish. So that was pretty fascinating. And I looked at the system and,
and I'd realized that was, it was, it was controlled, all of the authorizations were
controlled by, you know, you guessed it, a smart card. So it really took very little to no effort
between Boris and I to collaborate on the Direct TV F card, which basically was
a smart card that allowed authorization for customers to receive HBO, all of the channels,
right, pay per views, etc. And we successfully created a quite little humble system to reprogram
those cards. And, you know, laughed it off, really didn't think anything of the weirs after that.
And then several months past, right, busy, busy couple years, I'm going, I'm going to school,
and, and actually working at a, at a carpet cleaning company, and just really just surviving,
paying the bills and continuing to enhance my skills. And I'm like, Well, you know,
the hell with it, you know, let's, I really need some more money, you know, my daughter's,
you know, getting ready to go into school. And so I wanted to put her into school.
And so I decided to sell my wares for programming Direct TV satellite access cards. And so that's
what I did. I realized that it was very easy to make money doing, doing, providing a service for
people who did not wish to pay their bill. So I really, I really tried to, I really wanted to
one up my game, right? So Boris and I, we worked together on some extensible ideas. And
we created some software that we sold to the Canadians. And we, we made some money, right?
We made, we made, you know, $10 million each. And I was able to get everything that I wanted.
And so did Boris. And it was great. But there was, there were a lot more factors than just
Boris and I releasing code. There were other mitigating factors. You had an entire
battalion of hackers from Rupert Murdochs and trying to actually circumvent
other services and competitors out there to destroy them, which they ultimately did.
But that's a whole other story. So HAC Direct TV for a few years and made some money,
went to, got caught. And then after I got caught, I was, I was offered, offered an opportunity,
right? Rather than to go and sit in prison for a long time. I was asked to consult and helping
a company at that time called NDS to help them solve their conditional access problem,
which at that point, you know, their entire, the entire Direct TV system was completely compromised.
And NDS was looking for a way to close, stamp out piracy. So consulted with
some good minds in Haifa, Israel for a couple years and went on my way. Came back to Jacksonville
after hanging out consulting, securing the Direct TV period four card, helping, helping a lot
with that technology. Moving on, coming back home. My name sort of floated out in the wrong direction
this, this guy who was doing the Direct TV cards. His wife was a dispatcher and she had actually,
she had, she obtained my information and then my wife's information and then my family's information
and pretty much doxxed me at that point. And back then, doxxing someone was really a terrifying
thing. As such it is now, right? When someone doxxes you and posts your information on the
internet, it's a shitty thing to go through. And in my circumstance, I had a lot of, a lot more,
a lot more things that I was involved with, with the government. So
with, with a lot of help from the government and my own self, my self-motivation. Now it was,
I moved, I moved to Indiana, packed up the kids, packed everything and moved to Indiana.
It was just going to really kind of lay low for a while. You know, I just got back from Israel,
moved from Florida to Indiana and really just kind of, you know, chilled out. I got a little job,
I got a job at a newspaper and, you know, handled their websites and all of that. Real low-key,
real low-tech job, nothing fancy, living in the middle of a cornfield, so to speak. And,
enjoyed it, enjoyed the life for a couple years. And then I was asked to,
and then a gentleman, I met in Indiana, invited me up to Chicago to take a look at his business,
to see what sort of technical advice I could give him for his business. And so,
traveled to Chicago, sort of, you know, got to know him within several days. He got to know
who I really was, about my background. And I went to work for him. And at this point, right,
you know, now I have a job and I'm doing, I'm setting up, you know, IT infrastructure for
his company and making sure that all of his offices connect. And not only that, but securely,
right? Cybersecurity really wasn't a thing then. It was barely even mentioned. But, you know,
but cybersecurity, to me, right, to what exists now or what people realize as cybersecurity now,
to me, is just an afterthought, or was an afterthought. Still sort of is, mentally speaking,
because, you know, things that people are writing papers about, talking about,
creating solutions about, these are all things that are built on technologies that were built
when the internet was created, right? Everybody's, you know, talking about 1970s technology,
and no one's really trying to fix the problem. But, yeah, so I provided cybersecurity for him,
his company set up the whole deal, and then just started meeting new friends along the way in Chicago.
That's how it is in Chicago. And one thing led to another. I met a gentleman named Willard Harper,
Willard Buddy Harper. And he worked at the CME in Chicago. He was one of the largest
hog traders in the world, really. And he gave me an opportunity to create some special networks for
the CME to connect to the NYSE. And so with that, after doing several of those, you know,
they were really simple for me, but I created some ultra high-speed, private networks that only
the CME and the NYSE still use. And so he was impressed with that, and he's like,
what else can you do? And I'm like... Just so people know, the Chicago Mercantile Exchange
and the New York Stock Exchange. That is correct. Yes. Yes. So I set up two bi-directional,
unique fiber lines specifically for those two exchanges and secured them.
So yeah, he asked me what was next. So I'm like, hey, there's this thing called Bitcoin.
I'm kind of, it kind of piques my interest. And he asked me what I needed. I said, you know,
about a million bucks would work. And he literally opened up a file cabinet to add a million dollars.
And he's like, all right, go to it. And that's what I did at that point. I built a
supercomputer that was able to mine Bitcoin. I mined about 5,000 Bitcoin. And at that point,
I believe they were... Bitcoin was trading at $200 to $300 a coin. And so he was impressed.
And so was I, actually. And so we built three more over the next eight months. I built three more
and had them right there at 107 West Van Buren Street across from the CME
and just sucking up electricity. But at the end of that year and a half run,
we were able to mine close to 80,000 Bitcoin. So yeah, kind of after a couple of years of
doing that, I really felt a little sense of accomplishment. But I really didn't feel like
it was done. So I ran into a gentleman. So I'm just kind of squandering around Chicago, right?
I've made, you know, some Bitcoin, you know, I'm hanging out, you know, walking around the loop,
you know, hanging out in Millennial Park and just hanging out with my friends. And it kind of
kicking back. And I met a gentleman and he said, hey, you know, our company needs a webmaster,
right? And a webmaster is just basically someone who does just does web work for a company. I'm
like, okay, yeah, sure. Yeah, I'll come and be your webmaster, right? Because having a job,
having a legitimate job completes who I am, right? I can sit around and do whatever I want to make
money. But in the end, I think it's about working an honest nine to five. And so yeah, yeah, hey,
Jackson, I'll go and work, be a webmaster at your software company. And so I went to work there
as their webmaster. And it was hilarious, right? Their vice presidents, they're like,
well, this is a very important job. And you should blah, blah, blah. And I'm, yes, sir. And, you know,
and yes, ma'am. And I really kept the ruse up as long as I could. But I was outed by a friend of mine
that worked there. And he outed me to the marketing manager and the marketing manager,
she outed me to the entire staff. And eventually I became responsible for their cybersecurity
practice. And so I'm like, well, shit, I guess I'm doing cybersecurity. So here I am, doing cybersecurity
for a software company in Chicago, unintended, right? But honing my skills, right, figuring out
figuring out the best method for to stand up specific protocols and systems and things of
that nature from a cybersecurity perspective. And so that's what I did. And did it pretty well.
But then they fired me. Then they just, they fired me. And so
it was kind of a thing between the owner and myself. He didn't like me. And I surely didn't like him.
So now that that's public, I really didn't like him. So after that, right, I just took a couple
gigs as cybersecurity, you know, just kind of, you know, just did my thing, packed up my stuff
the entire time in Chicago, and came back to Jacksonville. And again, you know, doing consulting
with a company for cybersecurity, and I enjoy it. But that's what led me to where I am now,
right, from some of those angles. I've been responsible for putting some heavy hitters away.
I've worked with law enforcement in the past, some real heavy hitters. They, you know, I'm
really good at hunting hackers and finding people and finding and not finding, not finding just
people just by finding the real, the real, the real hacker, right, the real hacker that's really
causing me. I'm that guy that looks for that hacker. And I do that, I do that very seriously
and continue to do that because I provide my service not only for companies, right, but for
celebrities and stars, right, they consult with me. I work with them personally.
And to solve any cybersecurity questions or issues that they have, you know, some of the
some of the things that people don't understand is that everyone carries around a smartphone,
you know, watching, watching Edward Snowden, you know, do all of this ridiculousness, hiding
under covers and everything. Everyone should know that your smartphone is a PC, is a portable computer.
And the things that smartphones are capable of doing are very terrifying. There just recently
was an exploit that I had used for years for iOS that allowed me to actually listen in on your
phone conversations, to read your SMS messages, to read your email, to actually see everything that
you do on your iOS device. And those those those sort of those sort of exploits exist
everywhere in everything. Almost everything has a GPS chip in it. Almost every device has a chip
in it. And if it has a chip in it, it can be exploited. And when when things are exploited,
sometimes things devices, things, systems and people are exploited for one reason or another.
You know, there's there's a lot of things that are very scary out there. There there are right
now there's there are people selling your information. They are selling your they're
selling your Wi-Fi network. They're selling your Wi-Fi credentials. They're selling your
ancestry.com genealogy data. They're selling all of that. There's the thing that people don't
really understand is that there really is no more privacy in this world. Unless you go and live on
an island somewhere in the South Pacific with no electricity and no other people, there there are
things to be taken advantage of and systems and devices and and so on. You know, it takes it
takes a professional car thief about 30 seconds to steal a car now because you really don't need to
hotwire anything or use a screwdriver or even a laptop. You can use an RF intercept or
intercepting device which could do a man-in-the-middle attack with just a key fob and you can steal
someone's you know $150,000 car with that. There there the the technology stacks out there are
endless to that are being taken advantage of. Most most notably are the cellular systems the
the mobile systems what people carry around most are contain the most value and the most data.
Putting your information on putting your information on TikTok you know creating a TikTok
account and and filming from so many locations you don't realize what you're really doing is you're
really you're really giving everything that you you hold possessive and private out to the world
and that's where we see people being attacked people being there there are bank accounts being
compromised etc. Speaking of bank accounts a lot of people realize that you know when you log
into your bank and a lot of banks will really deny this but banks actually have back doors into
there and into your accounts into your system just think about it for a moment when you log in to
your bank account you know through such-and-such.com and you have to answer all of these ridiculous
questions and get a two-factor SMS message sent to you so you can enter in the code but people
really don't realize is that their banks also have backdoor access to where applications like
your TurboTax and your your your your money management software all of that how do you think
that connects to your banks and so with these backdoor connections into banks things continue to
be inherently insecure. We see data breaches every day where millions of people have their
information stolen and not only stolen but you know sold and used against them.
One of the one of the things that we also have to realize is that we have quantum computers coming
quantum computers will make all current and former encryption algorithms absolutely obsolete
so if you have something that you've encrypted in the past or you have some encrypted files
and they've been anywhere on the internet in a book wherever someone else can access your
encrypted files well very soon those files won't remain encrypted long and so hopefully
you know those those secrets were quite well encrypted.
Websites websites have so many flaws in them if you go everybody needs a website nowadays
everybody has a website to go to their favorite website.
Right now about 90% of the the web and the technologies that support them in your applications
and websites they're they're insecure they're inherently insecure whether or not it's a web
server running an open port or a misconfigured file on your server. There's something that
there's a little bit of something out there for everyone to take advantage of
and there's and now everyone is paying the price everyone now is becoming victims to these crimes
to where they thought they weren't a victim they where they never thought that they would actually
be potentially be a victim. The more mobile applications the more people that are using
the phones that we just you know the more people that use mobile devices require more mobile
applications require more more data centers require more servers for those applications to
connect to and those are all at risk you know it really all you have to do is you know do a DNS
query on anyone's web domain and you can begin to uncover the pieces of of how insecure most
organizations and individuals are. People don't realize that they are you know when they're at
home they put a password on their router and they think that's it that's you know I'm safe I'm secure
but no one no one really understands the context of you know using an additional layer of protection
like a VPN or some sort of ad blocking technology and and people don't realize that their IP address
is basically like a flag out there on the internet for them and for them to be discovered for them
to be stalked harassed intimidated swatted it doesn't matter and so it all come it all comes
with understanding you know these these technologies and understanding how to protect ourselves and
how to protect yourself against bad people wearing hoodies and cloaks as I said not all hackers are
bad people most hackers everyone is a hacker if it weren't for hackers we would not have wi-fi we
wouldn't have cameras we wouldn't have many things that we take for granted today criminals are the
ones that give hackers a bad name criminals are the ones who are breaking into systems and stealing
information and creating data breaches criminals are the ones who are stalking people and bad
contacts and stealing from others who don't who don't belong not hackers and so you know it's
been said before and here I am saying it too right hackers are not bad people criminals are bad people
but hackers no my thing now right is to to tell my story to tell people that you know hackers
really aren't bad people hackers really have a story to tell too you know I have a story to tell
and I'm telling it and I'm almost done telling it but you know we're just like anyone else we we
we live we breathe we we have feelings we we actually we actually overindulge in our feelings
because we wonder what people are always doing and what the next best thing is you know I am
you know I painted my my pinky pink back in 2006 because a friend of mine I was visiting a friend
of mine in Fort Myers and her daughter came and tugged on me she said hey why are you such a bad
hacker why don't you be a good hacker and do good things and ever since then man you know I've
advocated for doing good things with your skills helping people helping others you know not not
doing something for yourself doing something for others making sure that making sure that you know
your mom and dad wakes up in the morning without their shit being you know sold on a on a dark market
and to help and to help people right to help people achieve their goals to help people understand
who they are not just by where they've been or what they've seen in the shit that they've been through
but to under to help people understand how to get to where they're going by telling them what
I've been through the shit that I've been through you know I've been through some real serious
shit in my life but that that's never deterred me from becoming who I am and who I expect to be
and it really hasn't stopped me from helping others and and showing other people the way
you know with this pink with this pink pinky nail now you know that young lady just got married this
year and that's that's my goal right to help as many ladies as many women as as many females
getting get into cybersecurity dude it's not just a guys thing it's just not where a sausage
fest of guys walking around saying they hack something it's about people who are critical
thinkers who contribute who care and have empathy and share their knowledge that's what it's about
and that's what I'm here to help people understand and to help people and encourage people to do
with their skills yeah man um I've seen a lot I've been through a lot I have my jump bag right here
with with my bitcoin collection and I'll show mark after but the only thing that the only thing
that I can encourage people to do is never give up always hold your head high and never ever ever
ever consider giving up no matter how tough things may get because one way or another you'll
find a way you'll find a path and so hopefully what I've said hopefully my story helps I don't know
but um if it reaches one person and it gives someone that motivation to say hey you know
I can do that too you know I can get from living in cars to consulting with you know
celebrities and and governments you know well then you can do it too so
there's nothing that you can't do there's nothing that we can't do it's only it's only about what you
choose to do and the decisions that we all make and so I choose to do the right thing I choose to
make the right decisions and I choose to make uh the right call and so that's my story all right
thank you guys thanks
