Welcome to another Mathologer video. You all familiar with the diagram over there, right?
Yes, of course. It's a diagram powering the Mathologer logo. Yes, but that's not really it,
right? I'm sure for the majority of people watching this video, this diagram will scream
Pythagoras. If this is not the case, ask for your money back from your school and definitely keep on
watching for hopefully life-changing experience. And even for those of you who've treasured
this twisted square diagram since primary school, keep watching. Today will be about all the secrets
of this iconic diagram that not even most professional mathematicians will be familiar with.
But first, a bit of revision to get us all on the same page. a squared plus b squared equals c
squared. You all know the drill. Take any right angle triangle with short sides a and b and
hypotenuse c. And the area of the square on the hypotenuse c squared is equal to the combined
area of the squares on the two shorter sides a squared plus b squared. A stunning visual proof
of this fundamental theorem runs like this. Take four copies of the triangle and combine them
into a large square like this. Okay, this large square is partly covered by the four triangles.
The area that's not covered is what? Well, c squared of course. Now move one of the little
triangles just a little bit. How large is the blue area now? Well, still c squared of course.
How about now? Still c squared. And this will be true no matter how we position the triangles
inside the blue square as long as they don't overlap, right? Okay, ready for a big aha moment?
Move the triangles one more time. No overlaps. And so the area is still c squared. However,
this area is also a squared plus b squared. And so a squared plus b squared equals c squared.
What an amazingly simple and beautiful proof. What a killer punchline. Don't you think? All right.
Now how about this? The area of the large square is equal to the area of the little square plus the
area of the four triangles. Okay. The area of the large square is a plus b squared. The area of
the little square is c squared. And the area of one of the right angle triangles is one half
base thumbs height, one half a times b. Now simply go on algebra autopilot. There's two over there.
We expand and we cancel and a squared plus b squared equals c squared. Fantastic again. Well,
maybe not quite as fantastic as the first proof, but still fantastic. Just out of interest, can you
let me know in the comments which of these two twisted square proofs you were already familiar
with and when and where you first came across them will be interesting. Of course, most kids never
get to see either proof, which in my book is a crime which should entitle them to get their money
back from their schools. As well, most school textbooks that feature a proof only mention the
second less spectacular algebraic one. Go figure. Anyway, no matter how pretty these proofs are,
that's really all there is to this iconic diagram, right? Wrong. There's more, lots and lots more.
There's for mass four square theorem, the tri-thagorean theorem, the buck chasing vertex,
vortex and much more. Ready to be amazed? Here we go. The twisted square diagram has been around
for a couple thousand years and features in the earliest documented proof of Pythagoras theorem,
which is part of an ancient Chinese manuscript on astronomy and mathematics. Well, Pythagoras
neither discovered his theorem nor was he the first to prove it and so to have a theorem named
after him is really a bit of a scandal in mathematics. Anyway, let's have a look inside the manuscript.
What you find there is pages upon pages of this. Well, maybe not surprising, lots and lots of Chinese
characters. However, eventually we come across a page featuring our diagram. Well, that's definitely
our diagram, but there's a bit more to this drawing, isn't there? There, a second very
different twisted square diagram made up of the same four right angle triangles. There,
let's push them around a bit. In fact, the second diagram can also be used to prove Pythagoras
theorem in two different ways, one algebraic and one based on shuffling triangles. Just looking at
areas again, we have four times the area of the triangle plus the area of the little square is equal
to the area of the large square expressing this identity in terms of a, b and c and some algebra
autopilot spits out a squared plus b squared equals c squared in pretty much exactly the same way as
before. On the other hand, the c squared area of the large square stays unchanged when we move some
of the triangles and so c squared is equal to a squared plus b squared also very pretty and in a way
this proof is even slicker than the first triangle shuffle proof since we only have to shuffle two
of the triangles instead of all four. The Chinese drawing also features a grid. What's that grid for?
Well, it's clear that no matter what right angle triangle you start with everything we set so far
will stay true. Of course, this is very important. Otherwise, none of our proofs would actually count
as a general proof of Pythagoras theorem. On the other hand, the grid shows that in our example
we're dealing with a super famous right angle triangle. Can you see it? Yep, it's a three for
five right angle triangle. Three squared plus four squared equals five squared. Three for five the
prototype Pythagorean triple, a triple of integers that satisfies the equation a squared plus b squared
equals c squared. Since we've all been familiar with the three, four, five triples since kindergarten
we're taking the fact that such triples exist for granted that the existence of such integer
triples is in fact a little bit of a miracle is illustrated by Fermat's last theorem which says
that if you change the exponent to three, four or any other larger integer, the equation will not
have any positive integer solutions. But of course, the wonderful three for five Pythagorean triple
does exist and you get more of these wonderful integer triples by simply changing the number
of lines in the grid. There, doubling the number of grid lines gives this. Six squared plus eight
squared equals ten squared easy and tripling gives this. But there are also other essentially
different Pythagorean triples and many of you will be familiar with this particular one, right?
Five, twelve, thirteen. Five squared plus twelve squared equals thirteen squared. Anyway, there are
infinitely many essentially different Pythagorean triples and let me just mention that we know
how to construct all of them pretty easily. And of course, we can use any of these triples to
make up one of our diagrams. But let's stick with three, four, five. All right, let's have another
close look. How many squares are there? Well, there's this one and that one and one more.
The error of the little square is one squared. Okay, the error of this green square is five
squared. And what about the largest one? Well, three plus four is seven and so the area is seven
squared. Cool. Now, what is 25 minus one? 25 minus one, that's 24 of course. Okay, what about 49
minus 25? You got it? 49 minus 25. It's also 24. Interesting, both differences are the same.
Is that a coincidence? What do you think? Well, no, that we get the same difference is always true
and it's also really easy to see. Have a look. What's the difference between blue and green?
Well, that's just the area of four copies of our right-angled triangle. And how will the
difference between the green and the orange? Same thing, of course, right? Let's shuffle on the ground.
Very pretty, isn't it? So, what this means is that within the square numbers we can find
three equally spaced squares and that every Pythagorean triple translates into three such
special squares. Okay, so that's what we get for 345 and here is what we get if we double the number
of grid lines. There. Now, in maths, an arithmetic progression is a sequence of numbers in which
consecutive terms differ by a fixed amount like two, four, six, eight, ten, etc., with a common
difference of two or three, six, nine, twelve, etc., with a common difference of three. And so,
another way of expressing this equal difference business at hand is to say that there are
arithmetic progressions of lengths three within the squares. Okay, this fact was already known to
the great 17th century mathematician Pierre de Fermat, whose super famous last theorem I mentioned
just a moment ago, in this fact prompted Fermat to ask a very natural question. What do you think
that question was? Well, he asked, are there any longer arithmetic progressions hiding in the squares?
Right? Here, we've got four plus 96 is 100 plus 96 is 196. What if we add a,
what if we add another 96? Do we get another square? That would then be an arithmetic progression
of lengths four. Well, no, because 196 plus 96 is 292 and 292 is not a square. But in general,
are there arithmetic progressions of four squares or five squares? How long can such progressions
be? What do you think? Well, this is a tricky one. The minister tried to confuse you a little bit more.
In 2004, the mathematical superstars Ben Green and Terry Tower proved that there are in fact
arithmetic progressions of arbitrary lengths among the primes. Insane, right? Here's one of lengths
five that you've been staring at all your life without realizing it. There, five plus six is
11 plus six is 17 plus six is 23 plus six is 29 and arithmetic progression of five primes
was common difference six. Anyway, how long can arithmetic progressions of squares get? Well,
Fermat figured out that in fact three is the surprising answer. You cannot do any better
than the many sequences that our diagram produces from Pythagorean triples. Allegedly,
Fermat also had a proof, but nobody knows what that proof looked like exactly. A situation similar
to that with his famous last theorem, where he also claimed to have a proof, but none was found
in his writings. Here's a quote from the well known Australian number theorist, Alf van der
Porten. Here's what he writes, I looked this up in reference three and found at page 54,
the unhelpful footnote, Fermat could show by descent, one cannot have four squares in arithmetic
progression. Jerry Meissen has pointed me to a reference, but the argument there seems utterly
soulless. And I remain searching for a decent descent argument warranty report to you. Now,
that's really funny. I decided recently that such a proof was most readily found on a previously
blank page of my notebook. So he decided that everything seen so far is useless. He's going
to make up a proof himself. And here's what he ended up writing in his notebook. This is the
nicest and most natural proof of Fermat's four square theorem that I'm aware of. And it may very
well be similar to what Fermat came up with a couple hundred years ago. I won't go into the
nitty gritty details here. Let me just say that this proof features the kind of infinite descent
argument that we've already encountered a couple of times in mythology videos. At its core is a
well known construction of all known Pythagorean triples. And so it appears that this proof may
have had its origin in the little Pythagorean triple construction that I just talked about.
Now Pythagoras theorem has been around for thousands of years. And so you would think that
everything worth discovering about Pythagoras theorem was discovered a long time ago. Far from
it. What I'll talk about now was only discovered around 20 years ago. Okay so instead of twisting
squares we now twist equilateral triangles. Let's try to mimic as much as possible what we did before.
So instead of right angle triangles we start with a triangle that features a 60 degree angle.
Make three copies. Arrange them into a large equilateral triangle. Okay next we have to shuffle
the triangles around. Now after a bit of fiddling it turns out that for this to prove something
interesting we have to get rid of one of the red triangles first. There go away triangle go away go
away go away. Now shuffle. Not much of a shuffle but anyway looks promising as before side by side
or two diagrams amount to an equation. Cancel two triangles each on the left and right sides of this
equation. So what's left? Well we've got one equilateral triangle each for the three sides
a b and c of our original triangle. Let's name the areas of these triangles like this. Okay
using these names our identity looks like this. Watch it. It's coming. Oh fantastic. A
trithagorean theorem for 60 degree triangles. Note in the real tithagoras the a and b areas add up
exactly to the c area. That's almost also works in this trithagorean theorem right.
So here we've got a area plus b area equals c area plus well there's a little bit of a correction
term a really nice correction term the area of the original triangle t. Okay for the next surprise
let's make the 60 degree angle into a right angle but keep the equilateral triangles on the sides.
Experts what am I about to say? Well we can make the identity on top work by simply removing the t.
Really? Yes pithagoras not only works for squares but also for equilateral triangles.
a area plus b area equals c area exactly. In fact even better pithagoras works for three suitably
scaled copies of any shape glued to the sides of a right angle triangle. Semi-circles capital
with a m for mythology anything whatsoever. I already talked about this at length in a separate
video on pithagoras theorem a couple of years ago. Also check out that video. 60 is 90 minus 30.
On the other hand 90 plus 30 is 120 and it turns out that just like 60 degree triangles
120 degree triangles also have a nice trithagorean theorem. The only difference between these two
trithagorean theorems is that the plus correction term turns into a minus correction term.
Also nice isn't it? Anyway back to 60 degree triangles. Well our trithagorean theorem is
very cute. However it is definitely not as applicable as pithagoras theorem right? If you
give me the length of any two sides of a right angle triangle pithagoras immediately tells me
what the third length is. Not so with our trithagorean identity. However there's also a nice
a squared plus b squared equals c squared pithagoras counterpart for 60 degree triangles
that is just as applicable as its 90 degree original. Here it is.
a squared plus b squared is equal to c squared plus a times b. Super nice. And also very easy to
see why this is true if you know the cosine rule a generalization of pithagoras to general triangles
taught as part of trigonometry. Well that's all good but here's another nice way to conjure up
this identity which also shows that it's simply another way of writing our original
trithagorean identity. Let's call the area of the equilateral triangle with sides of lengths
one f. There f is that red area. Then the 60 degree triangle with sides a and b bound in the 60
degree angle has area really easy a times b times f. There that guy has area a times b times f.
Bit of a challenge. Can you see at a glance why this is the case? If you can let us know in the
comments. Anyway this means t is equal to a times b times f. What about the area of the a triangle?
Well this is an equilateral triangle and so all its sides are equal to a and so its area is
a times a times f a squared times f and similarly with b and c equilateral triangles.
Now what comes next? Can you see it? Of course we just divide by f and we're done.
It's like what about trithagorean triples counterparts to 345n company?
Are there 60 degree triangles with integer sides? What do you think? Well you should be able to
answer that one. Are there 60 degree triangles with integer sides? Of course there are. Any
equilateral triangle with integer lengths sides will work. 1 1 1, 2 2 2 and so on. Obvious.
What about other 60 degree triangles? Not so obvious but yes there are such triangles. In fact
our example over there is such a triangle. 387 works. Check for yourself that this triple really
satisfies the equation 3 squared plus 8 squared equals 7 squared plus 3 times 8. Well if I ever
changed the mythology logo from a twisted square to a twisted equilateral triangle I'll base it on
this special 387 triple of integers. Something like this. What do you think? Time for a change of
logo? Anyway the official name for our trithagorean integer triple is eisenstein triples named after
the 19th century genius mathematician gotthold eisenstein. Just like with pythagorean triples
there are infinitely many essentially different eisenstein triples. Okay well before I move on
here's something really really cute. Overlaying these two triangles immediately gives us second
eisenstein triple. Can you see that? No? Well let's just do it. Right? The sides of this blue
60 degree triangle are seven, eight and eight minus three equals five. There a new eisenstein triple
587. Nice huh? Here's something else that you like. I'm pretty sure you like this one.
Okay super imposing. These two triangles gives a red 120 degree triangle as integer sides.
This triangle has sides seven three and eight minus three is five. Also to get the abc identity
for 120 degree triangles just change the plus in front of the ab to a minus. Also super pretty.
Anyway, do these triangular twists to the original pythagorean theorem get your seal of approval? I
sure hope so. Okay so we have this pair of diagrams for equilateral triangles
and this very similar pair for squares. We can make these two pictures look even more similar
by relocating these two triangles there. Now a bit of a facelift. Very pretty don't you think?
Anyway while preparing for this mythology video I discovered a third type of diagram that nicely
complements this pair. What does this diagram show? Well the white triangles are all the same.
There are 12 of them on the left and six on the right so let's cancel six on both sides.
Do the usual thing here. Oh also beautiful the hexagorean theorem. Ready for another nice
aha moment? Okay divide by six. What's a regular hexagon divided by six? Well see
here the hexagorean theorem for 120 degree triangles divided by six is the trifagorean
theorem for 120 degree triangles. You saw it first on mythology. As Ari mentioned all the twisted
triangle shuffle stuff only seems to have been around for about 20 years. Over there is a painting
of amateur mathematician Wayne Roberts created in 2003 which is one of the possible origins of the
nice triangle shuffle proof of our trifagorean theorem. This painting was also the inspiration
for the way I purify the diagrams in this chapter. Back to the original twisted square diagram. Have
a look at this. What you've just witnessed is yet another really weird proof of pathway
based on the twisted square diagram right? It's another proof. The top two squares have the same
area as the bottom square because it's possible to chop the top squares into 10 pieces that can be
reassembled exactly into the large square at the bottom. There. Really wonderful and unexpected
isn't it? With an added bonus miracle being the overall shape at the top and bottom dissections
which mirror the two diagrams in our original proof. Of course with all these visual proofs
it's very important to chase around the angles and lengths in these diagrams to make sure that
looks are not deceiving. That things really fit together exactly as suggested by our pictures
for all possible choices of right angle triangles. Anyway I checked trust me and if you don't trust
me check for yourself. Here's another miraculous chop up proof based on the twisted square diagram.
There are a number of interesting properties of right angle triangles that appear to be very
mysterious at first sight but once you remember the twisted squares it all becomes crystal clear
in a flash. Here are three great examples. Okay take any right angle triangle and attach
the square on the hypotenuse. Next draw the line that cuts the right angle in two. Okay now no
matter what right triangle you started with this line will always pass through the center of the
square. Now if you encounter this property in the wild it will most likely come as quite a surprise
but then you remember your twisted squares. And now everything's clear draw in one of the
diagonals of the big square. Obviously this diagonal cuts the right angles in half and it is also
clear that it passes through the center of the square. Tada nice I hope you still experienced
a bit of an aha moment despite me advertising the twisted squares as the solution in advance.
Okay second property and here's how it's usually presented. Start with a square and insert a right
angle triangle like this. Make three copies and attach them to the remaining sides. Now what's
the special property? Pretty obvious right? All right angles are on a line. Very pretty again
very hard to see why this should be the case unless you remember our twisted squares.
One more. There are hundreds of different proofs of Pythagoras theorem. One of them is by the 20th
American president James Garfield. It runs like this. Start with a right angle triangle,
make a copy and complete the resulting figure into a trapezium. Now as usual calculate the area
for this trapezium in two different ways. First using the formula for the trapezium and then by
adding up the area of the three triangles. Then some algebra autopilot and outcomes a squared plus b
squared equals c squared. All by now a complete no-brainer I hope. But doesn't this trapezium
remind you of something? Yes of course it's just half our favorite diagram and really on close
inspection President Garfield's proof is exactly our original algebraic proof divided by two and
so really nothing new. But of course I can see why it's great to be able to tell kids that being
good at maths and becoming an American president can go together. And so for propaganda purposes
let's also say in the future that an American president came up with a new proof of Pythagoras
theorem. Having fun so far? Right let's start with this special case of our twisted square diagram
with the little blue square twisted 45 degrees. Let's squish the diagram a bit. Okay shuffling
the triangles as usual is still possible. There there there. Let's say the sides of the blue
rectangles are root a and root b. Why root a and not just a? Well don't worry about it.
Whatever the lengths are in the diagram we can certainly write them as square roots of some
numbers. Now the area of one of the two rectangles is root a times b. Okay now what about the diagram
on the right? Using Pythagoras we can see that one side of the blue rhombus is root a plus b.
Okay the blue area on the left is two times root a times b which is equal to the area of
the blue rhombus on the right as usual. But this area is definitely not larger than that of the
square with sides of exactly the same length. Right? Well the area of both the rhombus and the square
are based on height. Both shapes have the same base but the height of the square is larger and so
its area is also larger. Clear this way, right? What's the area of the square? Easy.
Now this is a very famous inequality between the two most useful types of averaging two positive
numbers. The geometric mean on the left and the arithmetic mean on the right. So what we've just
proved is that the geometric mean of two positive numbers is always less or equal to their arithmetic
mean. Okay let's modify what we just started with. First on the left then reshuffled on the right we
get this tilted parallelogram. Now if we do exactly the same as we just did with a different sort of
labeling we get another super famous inequality the so-called Cauchy-Schwarz inequality. We need a
bit more maths background to be able to appreciate that one and so I'll just do an animation of the
relevant bits at the end of this video for those of you in the know and interested. But I also would
like to show you one more surprising completely different application that everybody watching
will be able to appreciate. To set it up we modify things a bit more. First we swap the two diagrams
and now we adjust so that all the sides of the parallelogram are equal to one.
Then we'll write things change like this. Okay now pencil in some of the angles. Then the lengths
of the sides of our triangles will be the signs and cosines of these angles like this. There, there,
there and there. I'm pretty obvious that this is correct right? Then shuffle them over to the other
side. That's where we need them. Also we can find the two angles again inside the blue parallelogram.
Let's just do that too. Here so that comes around here. The better shows up here and so this angle
is just alphabet better. Okay in terms of areas of the blue regions what have we got? Well on the
right it's completely obvious. What about on the left? Let's have a look. Still animating around
almost there. The area of the parallelogram is equal to base times height. Base is one and height.
Well that's just the sign of alpha plus better right? And so the area base times height is this.
Very nice. And so in total we get the addition formula for a sign. How nice is that? Do you see
that one coming? Let's finish off with something totally different. Start with the square and
place some bugs on the corners of the square. Let's say that at some point in time each bug
will start running towards the bug it is facing right now that all four bugs will always be running
at the same constant speed towards each other. With a setup like this what are some natural
questions to ask? Well how about this? Will the bugs ever catch up to each other? If they do how
long will their journeys be? What are the equations of their journeys? Which way will they be facing
when they meet? How do things change if we use different starting configurations, numbers of
bugs, etc. Lots of mathematical fun to be had here. Some of these problems and their very surprising
answers were made popular by the famous mathematics popularizer Martin Gardner in his column in the
July 1965 column of the Scientific American. Let me show you a nice twisted square way to get a
feel for what's going on here and for how to come up with answers to some of our questions.
First ask the bugs to forget about Martin Gardner's instructions. Instead ask them to
run along one-fifths of the sides of the square and then stop like this. Now ask them to turn
towards each other like this. Whoa twisted squares and we've arrived back at the starting
configuration just with a slightly smaller rotated square. Now let's ask the bugs to repeat everything
they've done so far over and over. So cover one-fifths, turn towards each other, cover one-fifths,
turn towards each other and so on. Go again, go again and pretty spectacular isn't it?
Now two simple observations. First because of the symmetry of everything that's happening here the
bugs will form a square at all times, pretty clear, right? Second from the way we repeat the same
overall movement over and over it follows that from one square to the next we are rotating
the orientation of squares by the same angle and we scale the sides down by the same factor.
Also pretty easy, right? Conclusions from this. Since we scale down by a fixed factor the size
of the squares will decrease but we'll do so infinitely often. Hence there are infinitely
many squares and the sizes will shrink to zero and since the orientations of consecutive squares
differs by a fixed angle and there are infinitely many squares on their journey ideal bugs will
circle the center infinitely often, right? So there's one angle and we do this infinitely so
of course that's a bit unexpected isn't it? Now does this mean that the bug's path is infinitely
long? It's circling infinitely often so is it infinitely long? Actually no although these paths
wind infinitely often around the center they are of finite lengths. Let's figure out how long one
of these paths actually is. If the side of the square is one unit long a bug walks one-fifths
of one and one-fifths of one is 0.2. The remaining distance is 0.8, okay? We find the side lengths
of the smaller square with Pythagoras it's approximately 0.825. Since the outer side lengths
one shrinks to 0.825 in the second square we conclude that 0.825 is the factor by which the
square is shrink. This allows us to figure out the length of all the segments of one of the bug's
paths, right? Since the first segment is 0.2 long the second segment is 0.2 times 0.825 long.
To get the length of the next segment we just have to multiply by 0.825 again there
squared and so on there cubed power four. This means that the total length of the path is this.
All right now the infinite series in the brackets is a geometric series since you're still here
chances are you know the formula for the sum of a geometric series by heart. It's just one over
one minus the scale factor. With this the overall length of the path pens out to be this and this
is approximately 1.14 which is a little bit longer than one of the sides of the square. Interesting.
Now if we reduce the fraction of the sides covered by the bugs from 0.2 to 0.1 the numbers change
like this. The length of the path is even closer to 1. In fact if we let the fraction of the sides
covered by the bugs go to 0 the picture will turn into the picture that corresponds to the original
Martin Gardner problem and the length of the paths of the bugs in the original problem can be seen
to be exactly 1. How nice an answer is that. By the way this was the picture on the cover of
Martin Gardner's Scientific American article. Again the bugs path exactly as long as the sides of
the square. It's a pretty surprising answer yes but in hindsight is there maybe a simpler way to
see why the bugs path should be exactly as long as their original distance apart. Again leave your
thoughts in the comments. I could report on many more ingenious results as far as bugs chasing
bugs are concerned but let's call it a day for today. If you're interested in more neat details
about any of the topics touched upon today check out the links in the description of this video.
Okay one last nice insight. Early on we encountered two types of twisted square diagrams this one
and that one. There's actually a third one in this third diagram to triangle's overlap.
Here then is your final puzzle. Let's say a is equal to one half and b is equal to one as in this
example. What is the area of the square in the middle? Once again leave your hopefully
surprising answers in the comments. Okay and that's it from me for today. As promised I'll
leave you with an animation of the proof for the Cauchy Schwartz inequality in the case of two numbers a and b.
