My name is Roger Bissell, and I'm standing in here for our regular host,
Bunay Kohatkar. Today on The Savvy Street Show, we have a distinguished guest from the field of
philosophy, and also here again is my co-host, Marco Denoudin. Marco is a well-known libertarian
and publisher of the blog, The Jolly Libertarian, and he is going to introduce our special guest.
Welcome to the show, Marco.
Oh, thank you, Roger. Our special guest on the show today is Michael Hummer. Michael is the
professor of philosophy at the University of Colorado at Boulder, and his fields of expertise
include epistemology, ethics, metaethics, and political philosophy. Michael is the author or
co-author of a dozen books, one of them which is not yet published, and his books include
Ethical Intuitionism, The Problem of Political Authority, and his most recent book, Understanding
Knowledge. He's also the author of over 80 academic articles. Welcome to the show, Michael.
Thanks. It's great to be here. Thanks for having me.
Okay. I have a couple of questions to lead off with about your method of doing philosophy.
First, Michael, you call yourself an intuitionist. Now, I haven't read your book on intuitionism yet,
but I have read Jonathan Haidt's book, The Righteous Mind, in which he also explains
intuitionism and why he is an intuitionist. Now, Jonathan Haidt suggests that David Hume was
right, that the emotions set the course for our thinking and our conscious reasoning is often
just a rationalization for justifying our emotions. We're merely a slave to our passions.
Haidt refines Hume using intuition as a substitute for emotions, arguing that there are two different
kinds of cognition and reasoning, two different kinds of cognition, intuitionism and intuition and
reasoning. Do you agree, first of all, with Haidt's assessment of Hume and of how he defines
the concept of intuition? Oh, yeah. Well, so Jonathan Haidt's use of intuitionism is different
from the use in philosophy. It's not completely unrelated, but it is really not really the same
thing. So first, he's talking about a psychological issue, and the philosophers are usually not
talking about a psychological issue. So the philosophical use is the intuitionists are saying,
first of all, there are objective values. And second, the way that we know about them,
or the way that you're justified in believing a value to a proposition depends ultimately on
a mental state called an intuition. Now, that's different from what the psychologists are saying,
because the psychologists are never addressing a normative issue. They're just making a claim
about how people in fact form beliefs. So Jonathan Haidt is not making a claim that there are objective
values first, and he's also not making a claim about justification. He's not saying you're
justified in believing something, but also the other thing is, well, we're not exactly using
intuition in the same way. It's not totally unrelated, because we both agree that you need
to have some input that's non inferential. So some of your value judgments have to be starting
points that you didn't arrive at by reasoning. But these starting points in the usual philosophical
usage and in my usage, they are not emotions. They're things that when you think about them,
you can see to be true, obviously. So the shortest path between any two points is a straight line.
I would call that an intuition, and that's widely used terminology in epistemology.
They would say that's intuitive, meaning when you think about it, it's just obvious you don't
have to give an argument for that. And then the claim of the intuitionists in ethics is that there
are some ethical propositions that are intuitive in that sense. And now about David Hume, David Hume
is wrong, because it appears that David Hume, well, first of all, that he wasn't a realist,
so he didn't think that there were objective evaluative truths. And saying exactly what his
view is in modern terms is a little hard, because he's a little bit ambiguous. But he didn't think
there were objective values. So if there are objective values, and then we have cognitive
states that represent them, like, okay, well, then that goes against Hume's view about human
motivation. He thought that you could only be motivated by your desires, but I think we could
be motivated by our value judgments. So you could want to do one thing, but you could have
the judgment that you should do something else, and then you could be motivated to follow the
judgment. Well, I'm definitely going to have to read your book to find out more about that,
because that sounds like quite a different take than hate's take. And I like the philosophical
approach. In your book, The Problem of Political Authority, you derive an archo-capitalist position
not by relying on, quote, tentative or controversial intuitions, but on clear
mainstream intuitions, end quote. Now, this sounds like you would avoid the controversial
hard cases, such as abortion, capital punishment, intellectual property rights, or the state of
Israel. But wouldn't these be the very issues that would likely result in a clash between the
private defense agencies that you proposed? And so wouldn't it be advisable to dig into these
difficult questions rather than avoid them? Right. Well, so when I said that,
like I'm relying on common sense intuitions, that doesn't mean that I'm not addressing any
controversial issues. So I'm trying to address, well, I'm defending a highly controversial
position. Anarchism in the first place is highly controversial. But the idea is to try to address
a controversial issue by starting from intuitions or just in general, starting from premises
that are less controversial. Can this be done? Well, you know, read the book and see if I succeeded.
Right. But the idea is to try to, yeah, start from a case that people don't disagree about,
right, or there's minimal disagreement about, and then see whether you can somehow use that to
resolve more controversial cases. Okay. Having said that, in the book, I in fact did not address the
specific things that you mentioned. So I didn't address abortion, because in fact, I don't know
the answer to that. And you know, I didn't address the thing about Israel. Also, because I don't
know how to solve that, right? Although by the way, like anarchism wouldn't work for Israel in the
current situation, right? Basically, you have to solve that problem first, you have to solve that
conflict first before they could have anarchism, because right now they have to be protected from
the surrounding states. And then, see, there's a third thing that you mentioned. Oh, intellectual
property. Yeah. And I don't really know the answer to that either. But I think that I could tell you
what I think would happen in the anarchist society, which is I think they would not protect
intellectual property. And you know, roughly speaking, because I think that you have to get a
lot of agreement, like in order to have something be reliably protected, like there has to be
pretty good agreement about it, which there isn't about intellectual property. And so like,
you could have some communities that think it's legitimate and a bunch of other communities that
think it isn't. And just the nature of it, the nature of this particular issue is that
if half of the people are not recognizing it, then it's pointless. So like, yeah, right? Because
like, if half of the people can take your patents, and then the other half, the people can't, then
you might as well not have patents. That's a very good point. And I love this particular subject,
which unfortunately, we're not focusing on. I wanted to follow up on the starting from a
widely agreed point, and then basing arguments on that. I was going to tie my next question to
what Marco asked you. I was going to ask you if you see an advantage in using intuition rather
than formal argument to promote individual liberty. And I guess your answer would be,
well, no, that's not what I do. You would say that you would start with your groundwork
intuitions, and then you would build on that using arguments and facts and so on. And I was going to
ask you, well, there are always going to be sophists who are going to take, they're going to pluck
something out of what you said like, well, gee, I have an intuition that certain government
intervention programs control over the economy or private individual behavior.
My intuition says those are justified. So how do you deal with people who claim to be
being intuitionists, but they come up with some conclusion that's wildly different from yours?
Right. Well, so first, I want to say, and sort of clarify, like, I'm not doing some weird new
methodology that nobody ever tried before. As a matter of fact, I'm doing the same thing that
everyone else is doing, right? Because there aren't any people who present infinitely long
arguments. And in the history of the subject, there has never been anyone who presented an
infinite argument, everyone has starting points. And so and like, you're like, most objections
to intuitionism are apparently into objections to having any starting point, right? Which is kind
of like, if you think about it as an incoherent idea, okay, the difference is just that I recognize
that fact, I recognize I have starting points, I recognize what they are, and I defend what I'm
doing explicitly. Everyone else just does it. And they don't say that that's what they're doing.
But anyway, okay. But, you know, your main question is, okay, so suppose somebody says
that they have very different intuitions for me. What would I do? Okay, so, well, there's two
possibilities, right? Because it wasn't clear. Are they just lying about what their intuitions are?
So if the question is, how do I stop people from lying about their intuitions? I cannot.
Okay, but what if they actually do have very different intuitions?
Well, so like, this is why I said, well, we try to take very widely shared intuitions.
All right, so like, my intuitions are that I would start with would not be things like,
you know, libertarianism is true. You know, like welfare programs are unjust, it would not be that
or it'd be something that Democrats would agree with. Right. So it'd be something like, well,
it wouldn't okay, it wouldn't be okay for me, in reality, right now, to go over to my neighbor
next door and demand that he give me a bunch of money. And like pointing gun at him, tell him,
give me the money, because I need to send money to Oxfam to help the poor. Right. And like, you
agree, I can't do that. Right. Okay, so like, that would be the norm to starting point. And then I
started asking them, okay, you know, somebody disagrees with that, then I don't know what to do.
But almost everyone agrees with that. Okay, and then, then I can start asking them things like,
well, then why would it be okay for the state? What's special about those guys? Why do they get
to do that? Right. And my experience is, in fact, there, people do not have a good answer to that.
Right. And I've read the literature. So they're probably not going to come up with an answer
that I haven't, that I don't know about. Right. Losers have thought about this and there are
answers to it, but they just are not very good. So you're, you're, you're basically saying that
most people go in pretty much the same fashion that you do, but they might call them premises or
assumptions or axioms, but it's, it's whatever it just seems, it seems upon reflection, it just
seems to be obvious. It seems to be like, well, how could you question that? And so you find some,
some bedrock place to start, and then you can build a bridge to people who might have a different
policy idea, and then you show them, you show them how, well, if we agree on this, then gee,
doesn't it make sense that, that this really can't, you can't do this? I ran, I ran for a school board
one time here locally, and I was talking to a very liberal neighborhood group, and, and they,
they wanted a lot more money for the educational system. And I was trying to reason from the idea
that, well, we all want the best education for our children. Okay, so it's that kind of thing.
It's one of those, well, sure, who doesn't, you know, that's obvious. So you start with something
obvious, and then you try to show them another way of thinking about it. So I, I, I do see that
that's, that's very much how even somebody who, who thinks reason and syllogisms, you know, you
think, well, that, that seems to be a good way to go. I came from, as you may know, I came,
cut my teeth on, I ran philosophy many, many years ago, and a lot of our viewers did.
And you wrote a piece, which soon after I got online back in the 90s, whenever that was,
I saw your piece, I thought, okay, this is cool. And so I would, and it was why I am not an objectivist
or something like that. And if you could just tell us, it's a long piece, and I loved it,
but if you could briefly tell us what you think are the key shortcomings, even that you, at this
point today, the key shortcomings in Rand's philosophy. Oh, yeah. So it's, it's, it's really
hard. Like, I don't think that you can actually summarize that because there's like, there's
like dozens of objections or something. Okay. You know, I think like, so I'll say like, the most
distinctive thing about nine Rand as a philosopher is her theory of the nature of ethics, which
appears in that essay, the objectivist ethics. That's the most distinctive of her. And it's not
the only thing, and I don't know, might not even be the most important thing, but it's the thing
that she contributes to philosophy that's most different from what other people were saying.
Okay, but also like, it's just like, you know, it's just like a terrible argument.
All right. And then, you know, if I were like, I can't really summarize everything that's wrong
with it, because I just think like everything about it, there's just like, you know, mistakes
all over the place. Okay. You know what, like, okay, there's supposed to be an argument for
ethical egoism. But like, it's, it's hard to figure out what the argument and basically, I think,
when, when you figure out what's going on, what's going on is that ethical egoism actually
turns out to be a premise of the argument, right, or something really close to that. Right.
But it's just that she uses language in a way such that most people don't notice that that's
what's going on. You mean a circular? Yeah. Yeah, okay. Yeah, begging the question. Yeah.
Right. And, you know, so it's, like here, here's an analogy, I think it's sort of,
sort of like that. You know, you meet this Christian. And, you know, the Christian says,
you know, human beings are the only beings who are capable of properly worshiping God.
And so that's why we need ethics to tell us how to please God. And so now I've given you a theory
of ethics, and now I've shown you that you have to worship God. No, you just assumed that. Okay.
Now that is analogous to saying, well, you know, living things are the only things that can,
that have an alternative of existing or not existing. And so we need ethics to tell us,
you know, how to preserve our lives. No, you didn't give any argument for that. You just assumed
that. Right. You just assumed that life was the ultimate value. You didn't, you didn't show that.
Right. And like, just showing, like, just saying, you know, like, it could either happen or not
happen. And it depends upon your action doesn't show you what you should do. Right. Like, anything,
anything that you could take as a value, you could say that, well, we have the alternative of
having that thing or not having that. So we need ethics in order to make sure that we have that
value. Right. But that doesn't show that that's the value. Right. Well, yeah, I mean, it seems that
there are ambiguities that need to be teased out and analyzed and see if it all fits together,
or if it doesn't. And that's one of the chief challenges that I've had over the years in, in
figuring out, is it tight? It doesn't hold together? Is it coherent or not?
Now that's ethics. And, and I was just wondering, have you studied her concept theory such as it is
in the introduction to objective epistemology? Do you think there's anything original or helpful
in what she says there that you might not run into otherwise? Yeah, I mean, that is a very
interesting book, the introduction to objective epistemology. Like, I read that a long time ago
when I was in college. And, you know, I think, I think it's a good thing to read just because
it kind of stretches your mind, you know, makes you think about the issues. Now, is it, is it like
a great contribution to philosophy? Like, I thought it was quite similar to Locke's theory about concepts
that, you know, you sort of start, you start from experiences. And when you're forming an abstract
concept, you're sort of omitting something from it. Like, so that is Locke's view, that's also her view.
Although she says something a little more specific, which is she says you're omitting
measurements. Okay, but I think that I think it might be overly specific, unless you're using
the word measurement in such a broad way that it just means you're omitting some details.
Right, right. Now, is that a correct theory? I don't know exactly. I don't know if that's,
you know, exactly correct. But it's sort of, you know,
if you are hot, well, okay, so like, this is what people like Barkley would say, right, and the
other empiricists like, you know, what are you talking about? Because like, they thought that
sensory experiences are like images in the mind. So imagine taking an image, and there's like, you
know, a picture of a horse or something, because it's examples of Barkley, right? And somebody says,
take that thing, omit the color from it. What? So yeah, there's a picture of a horse, you take
away its color, what do you have left? Well, you just took away the whole image. Right, you can't,
you can't take away the specific color and have anything left. Right. So like, it's sort of,
if you, if you really just started from the image, it doesn't actually make sense that you
omit the details, because there's nothing that happened. So it, so it might be that actually
you're kind of assuming that you already had something abstract there in the first place.
Right. And then, okay, so like, so well, you can't really explain where you got the
abstract idea from. It just sort of had to already be there.
Well, there's one other tidbit here. I was wondering if you've read any of the material
she's written about art and aesthetics. And, and my question is, do you think that aesthetics
really properly begins in philosophy any more than say philosophy of law or philosophy of education?
Well, maybe those things also begin with philosophy. Maybe in order to think about the
law, you should first think about philosophy. You should think philosophically about why do
we have law and why does it matter if you're following the law? Actually, that does seem right
to me. Yeah. Okay, yeah, but what about aesthetics? It's not the case that in order to make good art,
you have to think about aesthetics. That's not true. But, but it might help. I don't know.
Actually, I'm not even sure if it does help. I don't know. I have to have to talk to some
artists. All right. But yeah, but she was she was very interesting on that subject.
Although, you know, like, ultimately, I guess I did not agree. I did not agree with her definition
of art. Because I think it only covers representational art. And, right, you know, like a selective
recreation of reality, according to the authors of metaphysical value judgments, okay, well,
so recreation of reality sounds like it has to be representational art.
Right. It does. It does sound like that. Yeah. Thank you. Yeah.
So, Michael, in your essay on Iran, you argue that ethics is a priori. Does this commit you to
holding that there's only one universal true ethics? And if so, what do you see as being that ethics?
Yeah, well, so, like, I think the answer is it doesn't commit me to that. But that thing is just
a trivial truth. So, yeah, that's one true ethics. As far as I understand what that means,
that's just a necessary truth. And you can put anything in for ethics, right? Is there one true
mathematics? Is there one true, whatever, is there one true physics, is there any subject? Yeah,
there's one true that. You know why? Because, like, well, every truth is part of that. So,
if you find an ethical truth, that's part of the true ethics, right? And then, you know, and then,
like, if there's an alternative ethical proposition, well, it can't be, you know, and it's
incompatible with the true one, then it's false. Because that's what incompatible means. Incompatible
means, you know, it can't both be true. So, there can't be two incompatible ethical truths.
So, there could be at most one, right? And if so, if there are any ethical truths at all,
then there's one true ethics, right? Okay, well, that's interesting because I've been
for quite a few years now, I've been interested in the philosophy of Isaiah Berlin, who, of course,
is well known for his value pluralism, as well as for phrasing the problem of political authority
very much like you do, that is a question of obedience and duty to obey.
Anyways, regarding value pluralism, he says that genuine values can often be in conflict.
And in any given situation, we have to make a choice. And as an example, for example,
are we going to be brave and risk death to save a stranger? Or are we going to be prudent and
void such a risk to preserve our own life? So, that's a case of two conflicting value judgments
there. So, how do you view Isaiah Berlin's value pluralism?
Yeah, well, so, I mean, I do have a pluralistic value system. So,
when you asked the previous question about, you know, the one true ethics, I was thinking like,
oh, well, can there be conflicting ethical systems? And so, yeah, the answer is no.
But, you know, maybe you just meant, well, is there a more than one thing that's good that
isn't reducible to other things? And then as far as I can tell, there is, right? So,
you know, there's, there's happiness, and there's loyalty, and there's honesty, and whatever,
you know, justice, it looks like there's more than one value. I don't see how to reduce them all.
There are people who give like unitary theories where there's only one value,
but they just wind up having to say very counterintuitive things, right? So, you know,
like the utilitarians, that's the most common unitary theory of ethics, where like everything
is just maximizing enjoyment and minimizing suffering, okay? But then, you know, then it winds
up that they have to say, you know, you have a healthy patient who's got organs that could be
transplanted into five other patients, you know, you can kill the healthy patient or just save
five other people like harvesting his organs, you know, because, yeah, that's going to prevent more
pain. And I think, and just like, that's just, that's obviously wrong, right? So, and just like
nobody's been able to come up with a theory that has only one value that also kind of gets the
right results, right? That sounds a bit like the example of the patient who has has five organs
that could save five lives, you kill them to save five lives, that sounds a bit like trolley
the trolley problem, maybe it's trolley problem. Yeah, yeah. Yeah, except that most people think
that you should turn the trolley, right? But almost everyone agrees that you should not kill the
healthy patient. Yeah. Well, it's interesting that you said that you don't know if there are any
unitary theories, but I immediately thought about Aristotle among other people said that
you're flourishing or you're living well, you're good life, there are subsidiary values that feed
into that and you can have a different way of slicing up the pie of health and friendship and
so on. But all of these are like necessary constituents of a good life. And if you're
missing some of them, it's like missing nutrients from your food intake. If you don't have an
vitamin C, you'll get scurvy. And so in a way, Aristotle saw these things as kind of in a
hierarchy, almost like of concepts, like you have lower level concepts and higher level and they
ultimately get up to the great categories of attribute or action or so on. And it all kind
comes up from your ground level observations. And so I think Aristotle might have said
something similar is true for your values, like you value a good wine or you value,
I don't know what they ate then, olives or whatever. So all together it'd be good food,
good drink, good nourishment. And so it all just kind of groups together under what you put in your
body, the ideas that you learn and so on. So I was wondering, when you say a unitary theory,
would you be ruling out something like that? Or would you say, well, that's not really a unitary
because it's so complex? Yeah, yeah, the latter. So, you know, yeah, you can have a single value
if you're allowed to characterize it in sort of vague, evaluative terms.
My value could be the good. That's all that matters to me. Okay. But then when I start
telling you what the good is, there's like 10 different things. Okay, right. So, and like you
described it as living well. Okay, so like, that's, it's evaluative and it's super vague. And so then
when you start telling me what constitutes living well, then there's multiple different things,
right? I do have a super vague standard of value. Yes, that's true. All right.
I don't want to mischaracterize what your position would be. I understand you to have said that
when Inran made statements about the choice to live, and I think she did that rather later in her
writings, this implied that what goals we should have and ends we should pursue are not dictated
by facts, but instead, we just value certain things. We want them. And so whatever is conducive to
getting those things we want, that's what we need to do. It's kind of a utilitarian or instrumental,
like, well, this will help me get that. So I should do this. And some people, and I've known for a
long time a friend, Douglas Rasmussen, has pointed out that this might imply not a rational
reason directed theory, but instead what is called volunteerism and the will is superior to the reason.
And morality doesn't hinge on the, on your reason, but on your will, whatever you want, whatever
you want, that's what you should do. Now, do you think that this suggestion by Rasmussen about
Rand's later writing is correct? Do you think that she really didn't realize that implication
and that it conflicted with what she had previously said about rational self-interest,
and maybe she was painting herself into a corner? To me, that is a, that is a big pivotal issue,
and I don't know that it's gotten successfully resolved. So what do you think about that?
Rasmussen is probably basically right. So when we talk about, like, famous philosophers of the past,
and then you try to fit their views into the taxonomy of views that we have,
frequently they're ambiguous, right? And so I think that Rand probably had, like,
different strands of thought, which, you know, she didn't realize are just conflicting strands of
thought or so didn't, yeah, didn't completely separate and decide what her view was, right?
But like, so she wants it to be that there are objective evaluative truths.
But if you wind up saying that, like, you know, such and such is only good conditional on your
choosing to value life, and, you know, and then, like, you didn't have a reason for that.
Okay, well, that's a subjectivist theory. That is what everyone else calls subjectivism.
Okay, but then, like, you know, maybe, maybe the better view was that life is objectively good,
right? So, like, you know, the other way of interpreting the whole thing is, well,
actually, it's a naturalist theory. It's that it's just that the good is just is that which promotes
life. And, you know, and so then, then if you if you don't choose to live, then you're just choosing
the bad, okay? So I like that a lot better than the theory that it's only good if you chose it.
Right. I mean, Plato, his youth afro was like, is it good because I desired or do I desire it
because it's good, you know, that whole conundrum. I agree with you. I agree with you. One of one of
her gambits in general was the nature will take its course gambit, you know, and and if you didn't
like the law of contradiction, well, you know, try to get along without it and see what happens,
buddy, you know, the same thing, the same thing. Well, you know, if you don't believe that you
should do what promotes your life and your well being, then, you know, nature will take its course,
you know. So that's, that's when you throw up your hands because you can't get anywhere in a
discussion with someone you say, okay, let's agree to disagree. And, and God bless you. I hope it
turns out better for you than I think it will. Well, yeah, I mean, that's sort of like departing
from the intellectual issue, right? Yeah, you know, like, if you if you found somebody who doesn't
value life, then they'll probably die soon. Yeah, okay. But that doesn't answer the issue of how we
in fact know. No, it's just giving up. Yeah. Yeah, Marco, go ahead. Okay, well, some philosophers
have argued that libertarianism encompasses more than just the non aggression principle,
for example, Robert Long and others promote what they call left wing market anarchism,
which embraces many of the concerns of the left as well as concern for the poor and the downtrodden.
And this is sometimes called thick libertarianism. On the other hand, people like Ayn Rand,
say, as she said in a letter from 1947 on subject that the only shared moral premise that is needed
is for the foundation of for the legal system of a free society as that as that people of
diverse moralities all agree that all humans are ends in themselves. Many many advocates of
thin libertarianism prefer this mental most foundation to the more expansive moral base for
liberty. You see anarcho capitalism that you argue for is compatible with either of these two views.
And if not, what do you think of is the necessary set of principles that we
need as a basis for a free society? Oh, yeah. So I guess, I guess, no, I don't agree with either
of those. Okay, so yeah, you know, what, what, so take the second thing first, like, okay,
the only thing we need is a principle that all individuals are ends in themselves. No, that's
not enough. Like, I agree that that's a good principle, but that's not enough to dislike.
Okay, so then do is their intellectual property, people are into themselves. So should there be
patent law? And what should be what should be the term for the patents? If there are,
obviously, you cannot answer that from that, right? Just not going to answer every question,
although it's a good idea. So, okay, and then the other, oh, yeah, and what's wrong with the
left libertarian, right? And so basically, you know, like I gave the the example earlier where
I decide that I'm going to go over to my neighbor, you know, and demand some money for charity,
right? Because there are poor people in the world. And I want to donate some money, and I don't have
enough money for the poor. So I just like, I demand that he give me money. Otherwise, I'm going to
kidnap him and lock him in a cage. Okay, that seems wrong. And so, um, and so if it's okay for the
state to do that, there's there better be some reason why that's okay. But basically, I don't,
I don't think there is a good answer to why it would be different for them. Right, like, basically,
you know, so this is why the book is called the problem of political authority, right? Because
you have to claim that the government has some kind of special authority that other people don't
have, which overrides the rights that that we normally recognize between individuals.
And so then you have to give an account of why they have authority. And right, and basically,
just there just isn't a good account, right? There isn't a good account of why we would have,
you know, like, the neighbor would have a right not to be robbed by me, but they wouldn't have
any right not to be robbed by the state. Now, well, in defense of Roderick Long and, and the
left, left libertarian manner, market anarchist view, I don't think that they actually advocate
using coercion or compulsion to achieve their ends, but they do believe that if you get rid of the
state, then, and you don't, then you get rid of crony capitalism or, or, you know, corporations and
other businesses and individuals getting an advantage from, from the coercion of the government
to their own positions. So I think their belief to some extent is that if you get rid of the state,
all these problems, including poverty and everything else will sort of just disappear
of their own. Oh, okay, good. Yeah. Yeah, good. So yes, I was sort of like,
maybe addressing a different view, right, where, where, you know, you're libertarian,
except that it's okay to have a welfare state or something. But yeah, what, you know, what went
wrong with the left anarchist view? Yeah, well, you know, you're wishfully thinking.
So, so like, I think it is true that the state is doing some, they're doing some bullshit that
promotes big businesses at the expense of small businesses. Like, that's all true. But
so if we get rid of them, like, there, there are,
like small businesses would prosper more. Okay. And then like, you know, and then like, maybe
there could be private charity to help the poor. But I don't think it's going to just like fix everything.
Right. Like, there's still going to be poor people. And by the way, there's going to be inequality.
Just because why? Because people differ from each other in ways that are relevant. So like,
some people are going to be more productive. And then they're just going to get more money. And like,
and in a modern society as likes, as technology advances and so on, like the inequality will
probably get greater. Because like, it's sort of like, the state of technology acts like an
amplifier, right? So, you know, it can, it can amplify the differences in people's
productivity. Somebody who's productive, the technology can help them be super productive.
And also like, just kind of the interconnectedness of the world, right?
It's like, you know, you have somebody like Jeff Bezos, and then, and he can see starts up this
Amazon thing, then he can extend it across the entire world, the 8 billion people. And that's
how we can become like a guy with $200 billion, which we didn't happen earlier times. And like,
that's not, it's not all just because the government is helping Amazon, right?
Right. I haven't figured out how to do that with my trombone yet. So
you know, like, if you care about inequality, then yeah, capitalism is a problem. Now, I myself
think inequality is okay. So, you know, so I'm okay with that, there's going to be inequality.
There was a discussion on Cato Unbound, maybe 14, 15 years ago, and you were part of the discussion.
And at that time, you said you thought things were probably getting better in the world.
And do you still think this is so? And if you do, then why? And if you don't, then why not? And
just give us a little hope or just tell us how hopeless things are, however you see it.
Yeah, you know, like, I'm really not sure what sure was going to happen in the future. You know,
predictions are difficult, especially with the future. Yeah. But, but just sort of like looking
over the past, you know, like the past history of civilization, things have gotten better, like,
you know, over time, just dramatically, right, on almost everything, almost every dimension
that's relevant to human welfare that you can measure, it turns out that it's been getting
better and a lot better. So like, you know, I think like throughout the history of the human
species, the average life expectancy is thought to be something like 24, 24 years. Okay, this is
not because people were dropping dead at 24, it's because a lot of children were dying.
Like a lot of people would lose their children in the first five years, which is kind of crappy.
There's a quotation from David Schmitz, the, you know, libertarian political philosopher
on a recent book where he's, you know, he's saying something like, we need to think about how we got
to the point where today being poor means wondering if you can afford a second car. From the point
where a few centuries ago being poor meant wondering whether you can afford to bury your first child
in his own shirt or whether you have to save that shirt for his younger brother.
That's like, you have to appreciate like how life used to be. Okay, when you get upset about
things that are happening today, just understand what things were like in the Middle Ages. Okay.
And then maybe be a little bit more appreciative. Right. Right. But having said that, by the way,
I don't know that we're not going to all kill ourselves. Like that, that remains a possibility
to me that's, it's not a far fetched possibility. Yeah. Okay, that's a good balanced answer. And I
appreciate that. This is the end of our show. And Michael, I want to thank you for your engaging
answers. And Marco Denout and my co-host for helping out. To those who've been listening or
watching. Thank you for tuning in to the Savvy Street show. And we encourage you to keep tuning
in. And we assure you that if you do so, you'll become more and more savvy. So goodbye for now.
