A skyrocketing cost of living.
I was skipping meals because I was struggling to afford my food and my rent.
Two million Canadians had to use the food bank in one month alone.
No wonder crime is rocketing after eight years of Justin Trudeau.
Canada is worse than you think.
Just two years ago, a simple two bedroom apartment in Toronto
cost on average 2400 Canadian dollars.
Today, that's 3300, an average increase of 25% per year.
And that's not an outlier.
I just found out my rent is going to be increased from $2,100 a month to $2,400 a month
for a one bedroom condo in Toronto.
In most Canadian cities, you would need to earn at least double the minimum wage
to afford a one bedroom apartment and you can forget about buying.
In major cities like Toronto and Vancouver,
the minimum income that's required to qualify for a mortgage
is double or triple the median household income.
This makes buying even unattainable for the tough 10% of earners.
There is a housing crisis, a cost of living crisis, and now even an immigration crisis.
This is a real change from the Canada I know and admire.
What has happened?
It's time for a change in this country, my friends.
A real change.
This is how living in Canada became impossible with hindsight.
Canadians from all across this great country sent a clear message tonight.
It's time for a change in this country, my friends.
A real change.
Justin Trudeau was first elected in 2015 with a message of positivity.
This is what positive politics can do.
He built his campaign on hope and the media often drew comparisons with Obama in the United States.
I want to say this.
Many of you have worried that Canada has lost its compassionate and constructive voice in the world.
Well, we're back.
On his first day in office, he entered a Montreal metro station to take selfies with commuters.
The exchange went viral.
The atmosphere was exuberant.
There was a feeling of hope and positivity.
Trudeau had the second highest approval rating of any new prime minister in Canada's history.
To understand how his approval ratings have turned around so dramatically,
why Canada is in a housing crisis, a cost of living crisis,
and most surprisingly is now struggling with immigration, we need to go back in history.
Canada is a nation of immigrants.
In the mid-1800s, the population of Canada was almost entirely concentrated on the east coast,
along the St. Lawrence River and the Great Lakes.
To its west and north lay a vast and sparsely populated area that they wanted to populate.
They used immigration as a tool to build their country.
They attracted new people with a comprehensive marketing campaign.
Build Your Nest in Western Canada was the message, calling it the New El Dorado.
Bold loads of prospective migrants arrived in Canada and were vetted by migration officers.
They were particularly eager to attract talented farmers.
They could help Canada's westward expansion by settling uninhabited areas.
They built villages and turned them into cities, attracting commerce and industry,
over time strengthening Canada's grip on the west.
By 1920, population centres had emerged all along Canada's southern border.
They grew from 3 million inhabitants to 9 million.
These immigrants were selected on merit, but also on race.
Canada wanted to maintain the status of a white man's country.
But after World War II, these discriminatory practices came under scrutiny.
Canada started to build its modern immigration system.
This was based on a point system.
Prospective immigrants were scored based on their age, education, training and language skills.
The basic philosophy is that immigrants are selected based on their merit
and what they can contribute to the country.
This system is still in place in Canada today,
making it the oldest immigration system of any country in the OECD.
An early challenge was that an increasingly large percentage of newcomers were family members.
In 1971, economic migrants made up 73 percent and family members 21 percent.
But a decade later, this had turned around.
Family members were seen as unproductive consumers of welfare benefits
and this prompted the government to make entry requirements stricter.
By 1995, the percentage had dropped to 36 percent.
Canada vested a lot of power in the federal executive branch of government,
which makes it possible to respond quickly to unwanted flows of migrants.
They kept identifying weak spots and making improvements.
And by the early 2000s, the system was hailed around the world as one of the best.
Even Donald Trump had good things to say about it.
Nations around the world, like Canada, have a merit-based immigration system.
But what was most impressive were Canada's exceptionally high levels of public acceptance.
Immigration, until recently, wasn't a controversial issue.
In 2018, two-thirds of Canadians believed that immigration was a good thing for their country,
the highest level of any country in the OECD.
But that wouldn't last.
Canadians are almost universally positively inclined towards immigration.
We know that immigration is a source of strength and resilience and growth for our communities.
And that's a wonderful thing we should be very, very proud of.
Public opinion on immigration has shifted dramatically during the last years,
from people feeling overwhelmingly supportive to most people feeling concerned.
During the first four years under Trudeau, the population drew at a record pace,
mostly because of immigration, and it slowed during the pandemic.
And that's where the problems started.
Canada was facing a host of challenges.
One of them was a shortage of workers.
There are difficulties in all major sectors, from construction to healthcare.
Companies were just unable to find people with the right skills.
It's simple to me.
Canada needs more people.
This was the new minister of immigration.
Canadians understand the need to continue to grow our population
if we're going to meet the needs of the labour force.
Fraser, like many before him, saw immigration as a tool to fix specific issues.
The worker shortage, but also demographics.
Immigration in Canada is not just something that we do.
It's who we are.
It's who we've always been.
All across the Western world, the population is aging.
And that is an issue.
But in Canada, it is extreme.
In 1971, there were seven people of working age for each senior.
In 2012, this was down to four.
The projection is that there will only be two workers for every retiree by 2036.
The number of Canadians that are over the age of 75 will double over the next two decades,
while fewer people are entering the workforce.
If we don't do something to correct this demographic trend,
the conversation we're going to have 10 or 15 years from now won't be about labour shortages.
It's going to be about whether we have the economic capacity to continue to fund schools
and hospitals and public services that I think we too often take for granted.
This inspired a radical new immigration plan.
In 2022, Canada has set a record population growth,
and they announced to welcome 465,000 permanent residents in 2023,
485,000 in 2024, and half a million in 2025.
They saw immigration as a race for global talent, and they had every intent on winning.
Their target was to have economic migrants make up 60% of newcomers,
an ambitious goal.
And they particularly targeted workers in sectors with the highest demand,
like healthcare, skilled trades, manufacturing, and technology.
But when these plans were announced,
immigration offices were already 2 million resident applications behind on their work.
And there was already a shortage of housing.
When you talk about the housing crisis that we're facing,
which we are facing,
one of the limits on creating more housing
is the challenges on having enough construction workers.
But Trudeau and his cabinet members saw immigration as the solution, not the problem.
And in 2023, Canada's population grew with the fastest rate in almost 70 years.
This was the fastest growing population of any country in the OECD.
More extreme voices like the Century Initiative,
lobby to grow Canada's population to 100 million by the end of the century.
The plan was endorsed by a former prime minister,
and lobbyists included several advisors to Justin Trudeau and his cabinet members.
We have a population that is aging.
We need people to arrive with their talents,
with their hopes, with their dreams,
with their capacities to work hard to build our communities, to build our future.
Public opinion was shifting.
Whereas in 2022, 27% of people believed that there was too much migration to Canada.
In 2023, this was up to 51%.
And in 2024, to 58%.
All right, well, behind me is the take back Canada march against mass immigration.
In July 2024, there were protests.
There's a lot of disaffected Canadians here
who feel like the government has not been listening to them.
This was an unusual sight in Canada.
And what happens to the election in 2025?
Is mass immigration going to become the main issue in the election?
Or are politicians going to try to run away from it like they seem to be doing right now?
In 2025, there are federal elections in Canada,
and Trudeau might lose his seat.
Two broccoli heads was $11.44.
$11.44 that save on foods in Langley.
Like, we have a serious problem here in Canada.
Just came to $218.
How? How?
The government likes to publish figures that show how the economy is growing.
This is technically true, but the growth is primarily fueled by a growing population.
Per capita growth is down, along with individual living standards.
This apartment is 750 square feet, and I pay $4,300 a month.
People are working three jobs just to live in this city.
It's actually crazy, and they're still struggling to pay their bills.
There is a clear mismatch between how fast Canada's population is growing,
and how long they need to supply housing and service infrastructures like health care and schools.
This affects all layers of society, but this is most acutely visible in the cost of housing.
Okay, we need to talk rent increases because this s*** is getting out of hand.
Would you pay $800 a month to share a bed with a stranger?
That's what this Vancouver listing is offering.
The most vulnerable people are people with little to spare, like students.
A story broke about 25 students that were living in one basement in Brampton, and it went viral.
The mayor of the city responded that they've seen cases like these on a regular basis.
Like this landlord who's renting out six beds on the floor with dividers between them for $325 each.
The number of temporary residents, which includes temporary workers,
but also international students, have increased dramatically.
In 2022, they numbered $1.4 million, and in 2024, this had doubled to $2.8 million.
Public opinion had now turned against Canadian immigration policies,
and for the first time, it had become a controversial topic.
Trudeau, with elections coming up, needed to act.
Prime Minister Justin Trudeau is promising a massive federal program to deal with the
housing crisis in Canada.
So today, we are releasing the most comprehensive and ambitious housing plan ever seen in Canada.
He put Sean Fraser, former Minister of Immigration, in charge of housing.
I know we're going to solve the housing crisis because I know what Canadians are capable of.
These decisions were vilified in a comment section on YouTube.
It's crazy that people believe the guy that got us into this mess is the guy that's going to get us out.
Too late or too late, you cannot be the solution to the problem you created.
The reality is different parts of the country have seen different challenges.
In addition to population growth, there have been supply chain constraints that have driven
up the cost of building.
We're trying to address a 30-year lack of investment in affordable housing,
and we're soon going to hit a bottleneck with the productive capacity of the Canadian workforce
to build the homes we need.
Fraser is in an awkward position, perhaps letting in 9 million new Canadians before
homes were built for them had a little to do with this problem.
A majority of people now disagreed with immigration policies.
They were angry and frustrated by the cost of living crisis,
and immigrants felt that they were unfairly portrayed as the cause of the problem.
They miscalculated how much immigrants they want,
they miscalculated how much housing they have, how much they could accommodate over here,
and now they are blaming all it on us.
Trudeau's approval rating dropped in September 2024 to just 33 percent,
and only 26 percent favored him as the prime minister.
He had to turn this around.
Bonjour tout le monde.
Good morning everyone.
In a moment, Minister Miller will be detailing our immigration plan.
Before he does, I want to say a few things.
Canadians are justifiably proud of our immigration system.
It has made our economy the envy of the world.
It's how we've built strong, diverse communities.
It's how we've demonstrated that differences can and must be a source of strength,
not a source of weakness for communities and society.
Today we're announcing that we will reduce the number of immigrants we bring in
over the next three years, which will result in a pause in the population growth
over the next two years.
Trudeau announced that they'll change course,
the lower the number of new arrivals to slow population growth.
He admitted he was wrong.
When he took office, there was already a three-decade-long
lack of investment in affordable housing.
There were building challenges and supply chain issues,
but as PM, he bears the burden of responsibility.
It was his choice to allow entry to such large numbers of immigrants,
growing the population and adding pressure to the housing market.
The affordability of housing and the cost of living in general
are very visible signs of a deteriorating living standard.
In 2019, 19% of Canadians felt that Canada was extremely unequal.
That is now up to 38%.
To the question whether the cost of living is now worse,
the number rose from 66% in 2019 to 84% in 2024.
And I'm still just scratching the surface.
Canada.
This was a real change.
Brand and to provide the best value for you as a viewer.
But one of the things that she told me is that 95% of regular viewers
on the channel are not subscribed.
And I hate to ask it and it's not really my style to ask for likes and subscribes,
but it would actually be very helpful if you would subscribe to the channel
to help push these videos into the algorithm.
