So hello, everybody. I am here with John Revekey. Many of you, most of you, pretty much everybody
who's watching this will have seen a video with me and John Revekey before. And also,
John had a discussion with Jordan Peterson a few months ago. And that discussion, in that
discussion, many things came up that were related to also John and I's discussion and then Jordan
and I's discussion. And so Jordan, someone in the group had the idea of doing something with me.
And then that added Bishop Barron on top. And so a few weeks ago, we had a discussion with
Bishop Barron, which is going to be online. I'll link it to the description. Many of you may even
have seen it. And it was a very interesting discussion, one which at first kind of tried
to find its way. And then suddenly, we really felt like it just kind of took off. And many
interesting things were said. So John and I thought it would be a good idea to kind of dive back into
the things that we talked about and explore them even more. So John, thanks for coming.
This is Jonathan Peugeot. Welcome to the symbolic world.
It's a great pleasure, Jonathan. And it was my idea, by the way, to include you.
That's very kind of you. Well, no, because, well, friendship was part of it. But the other part of
it was you were very much a ghostly presence in the conversation I had with Jordan. And I felt
it was unfair, ultimately, to not allow you to actually be present and be involved. So that's
why I suggested it to Jordan. And it's interesting because with adding Bishop Barron, the conversation
definitely morphed into something completely different. Yeah. Yeah, because he's not involved
in this kind of inner, the way that we've been talking about religion, let's say, for the past
several years, you and I and Jordan in our different ways, but kind of coming towards similar
ideas about phenomenology or in your sense, more kind of coccy and Jordan's evolutionary
approach. All of this is kind of coming towards something. And Bishop Barron is just dropping
out from outside with with a more kind of Catholic, Thomas and Augustinian way of thinking. So
for me, that was one of the most interesting things was to watch the discussion move towards
the direction where all of a sudden I could see in Bishop Barron's eyes that he was like, oh,
this is like there's something else going on here. There's another type of discussion.
Yeah, he just wrote. I just read it this morning. I didn't read it thoroughly. I just read parts of
it. He wrote a blog about and yet he was very clearly appreciative in all three senses of the
word of the discussion. And so I think your observation is accurate. And so I think that
this is, to me, it was exciting because I think that the discussion we're having and bringing
it back to the human experience in a way that a lot of the arguments that have been going on in
the past few hundred years, a lot of them have been arguing religion from a sociological perspective
or from a scientific perspective, even, which is that was always the worst, the worst one. But
you know, a lot of it from kind of a more philosophical metaphysical perspective.
But the way that we're trying to bring come towards it, although it does include metaphysics
and sociology and all of that, it brings it back to this just the way that we experience the world
and how it's coherent with those experiences. Yeah, I think that's right. I think and part
of what we're doing is trying to articulate and explicate and elucidate the relationship between
these things. So what I'm going to say isn't going to be terribly clear, but there's this,
not only is there a convergence between us, and I share that with you, by the way, that sense,
and I'm appreciative of it. I think, you know, there's this convergence around, you know, things,
these topics of meaning and wisdom and transformation and connectedness and the central roles of,
you know, intelligence in an ancient sense and the tension, the way they're bound,
that's what I want to say, the way intelligence and attention are bound up together.
Yeah. All of these things are coming together, I think, in a very powerful way.
And I think that convergence between us and between those terms and concepts and topics
is also resonant. It's not identical, but it's deeply analogous to some of the
convergence I see happening in sort of the broader culture, at least aspects of it,
or what Sevelikin calls this corner of the internet. It's getting to be a pretty big corner,
but yeah, I appreciate that. Yeah, it's interesting because this corner of the internet also,
it has its different branches and different emphases, but it definitely is this kind of convergence.
I would say the way that I see it is also an exciting opening, you could say it's like that.
There's an exciting opening where things that people before didn't, couldn't understand,
or didn't understand, all of a sudden, they're starting to get a sense of what it's about.
The basic idea that religion was superstitious, that religion is silly, that it's just added
on to our experience, this is was the common understanding, not for everyone, but it was
like a common understanding that was floating around in culture, but now that seems to be
breaking down, and people are excited to now be able to understand things that before just
didn't make any sense to them at all. Yeah, I agree with that very much. I mean,
I think there's a bifurcation. I think that that's happening. Way before COVID, even before I did
Awakening for the Meaning Crisis, I was reading about people talking about
the religious turn within phenomenology, that that was a broad movement happening.
I saw within the emergence of 4e cognitive science that these themes that were previously
considered woo-woo, mindfulness, and mystical experience, and wisdom, and meaning, and transformation,
and even the sense of the sacred, these are now coming into these are legitimate topics again,
and it's been a very rapid increase. On the other hand, I also see
the ramping up of the machinery of distraction in our culture, and the machinery of surrogacy,
where we're going to replace the real pursuit of meaning and wisdom with surrogates,
some rather innocuous, and others really, really toxic. So I see that both of those happening,
and that's not a contradiction. I think they're both happening for the same reason.
So yeah, that makes a lot of sense that there's a zeitgeist that's pulling things,
pulling apart the ancient, the ancient, well, not the ancient, the modern world,
who's pulling it apart, and now people are lost in there. The phenomena that is bringing us
this new understanding of religion is the same phenomena that brings about viral videos on YouTube.
All of a sudden, realizing how much attention is part of the way the world manifests itself,
but in that version, the viral video on YouTube is really the broken down version of it,
where all of a sudden things pop up, take up all the attention, and then vanish,
and then pop up, take up all the attention, and then vanish. This super rapid cycle of attention.
If you take those two phenomena together, it points us to people
understanding or becoming more aware of attention, the problem and the opportunities of attention.
Yeah, I think it's a case. I think this is consonant with what you're saying. It's a
case of one group of people, and I'm not trying to do an us them thing. I'm just trying, right,
of people who are becoming aware of the centrality of attention and what I call relevance
realization and connectedness, and the human need for both grounding and self-transcendence,
and both individuation and participation in the community. All of that, and COVID,
I think, highlighted all these themes, but then there's people who are not so much aware of it,
but embodying it almost like in a psychoanalytic sense. They're acting it out, the importance of
attention and salience and relevance, but they're acting it out in a way that's generally not
fruitful for their own flourishing or the flourishing of the people that they're living
with or living in connection with. Exactly, because the internet has afforded a space where
the relationship between attention and power has been increased thousands of times,
and so all of a sudden people understanding that how attention can be a weapon, and attention can be
a way to dominate and can be a way to seduce, and all these things are coming to the fore,
but instead of in a little village where you realize that you can do things to manipulate
others, now you have 100,000 people, 100,000 people under you that can act as your body
to act out in the world, and yeah, we see the results of that.
Yeah, the internet's like Tolkien's The One Ring. It's just this magnifier in some fashion,
and it can magnify, for the Hobbits, it magnifies their diminutive sneakiness,
and they can become invisible, but for Sauron, it magnifies his cruelty and his might,
so yeah, I think the internet is very much like The One Ring in that fashion,
and maybe that myth coming to mind isn't totally just ephemeral. I mean,
part of it is we are not doing one of the strongest recommendations of that whole fantasy series is
to step back and really reflect and think about what's our relationship to The One Ring,
and should we be picking it up, and should we be more wary of it, and things like that,
and I do worry that we are running this grand social experiment with social media and with phones
on ourselves and the next generation. There's already some preliminary evidence that's having
an impact, and we don't know what this is going to do. We're doing something that is 10 times
more powerful than the printing press, and the printing press unleashed forces that then turned
to bloody religious war in an unforeseen fashion, and so I do not think we are exercising proper
care around this. That's for sure. Nobody gets too big. When we talk about, when I look at the
internet and I look at social media, it's the closest thing I have to understanding a god
acting in the world, in the sense that like a pagan deity that is embodied in ritual and in
practice and in nodes of attention, because there's no one controlling it, but it still seems to have
a will and seems to be going towards a telos, and everybody sees it, and nobody can stop it,
and everybody says, well, at least I'm going to get what I can get as I watch this god move
towards its sacrifice or whatever is going on, but everybody's like, well, at least I can get
something out of it while it's happening. I think that's a very apropos way of thinking of it.
I often use Thomas Merton's idea of a hyper object, and Merton, Thomas Merton, I misspoke.
Yeah, I was surprised that you would have a term like that. It's weird whenever they're like hyper
sorry, and so Merton's idea in hyper objects is that there are things like the internet,
global warming, evolution, their realities, but they're not bodies, they're not spatially
temporarily located, they're distributed, and we can't actually conceive of them,
like we can have terms referring to them, but we can't sort of, if you allow me the science
fiction reference, we can't grok them, we can't sort of really get, but they're not abstract
things over there, right? They're insinuating themselves into the very fiber of our being.
Yeah, they have more subtle bodies to use or really disturb.
Yeah, and I'm fine with that, and you see a similar kind of move in later Neoplatonism,
we can wear Proclas and the elements of theology, and he's trying to work out
all of these principalities and powers and principles, and I think the relationship
that a lot of people have to the internet is properly understood as a religious relationship.
I mean, the internet serves as an oracle. Think about that, I mean, think about the devotion
people, they want to live in its world, and like you said, they have a sense of it having a life
and power of their own that people want to be in service to, but they also want to appropriate
that power, it's very much, it's almost like, you know, bald or something from the Old Testament
in that fashion. And so I think that's again, just to circle it back, I think that's again,
right? The reason why these things are coming together, and you talk about this better than I
do, right, is what we're talking about about the internet and what we're talking about about this
this meaning wisdom movement about religion, those again, they might seem like opposites
or in opposition, but there's a deep underlying common ground that they're both pointing to again,
right? This phenomena, I don't think it's a coincidence that the internet and, you know,
the shared universes of Marvel and all of this are also occurring at the same time as
this return to an understanding of the depth and importance of religion. I think those are
completely, they belong together in terms of a unified explanation. Yeah, there's an interesting
thing that I've been realizing recently is that one of the one of the aspects that seems to have
happened in Christianity, but probably has happened in Buddhism as well, because it seems similar,
is then the understanding that ultimately the sacrifice is a sacrifice of, we say a sacrifice
of worship, that's how the Christians were presented, like when we go to Vestru's service,
we talk about the evening sacrifice, and it's a sacrifice of worship, and it's to actually
understand that sacrifice is attention, that's what sacrifice is, right? And so it's this,
the way that you attend, when you attend, you kind of give your attention to the thing that
you're attending to, and at the same time, you're also sacrificing the things next to them, right?
You're focusing. Yes, yes, yes. And so, and that seems to be something which with the internet is
now accelerating so much that it's almost impossible not to notice that that's what it is, that the
internet is like a monster, or is a being that lives through attention, that requires our attention
to exist. Like Neil Gaiman, I don't know if you know a little bit about Neil Gaiman, he wrote a
lot about that, like in some of his series, even in American gods, he had this idea that
these gods exist through attention, and if you don't give them attention, then they weaken,
if you give them attention, then they become stronger, and for all my criticism of Neil Gaiman,
that's a really powerful understanding, and I think one that is actually very Christian, like
that we really do have this idea that, you know, as we move away from the physical,
sacrificial system in ancient times, we move towards a world where we understand sacrifice
as attention itself. I think that's, I think that is so consonant with the model that's emerging
by a wall and others who, on the cog side of attention, we're moving from a rather simple
model of attention as a filter to that what's actually happening in attention is prioritization.
The function of attention is to prioritize, and so, and that means, I think quite correctly,
like you said, that good attention is proper prioritization, if you think of it that way,
that you're prioritizing the things that should be given priority, and I don't know if this is
adequate, and I'm not claiming that it is, but I can see why notions of worship and sacrifice
are bound up together. There's two sides of the same coin of the idea of trying to give
proper priority, you know, to quote Aristotle, and people don't understand it, you know, first
things first, right, and people think that just means the first thing on your list is the first
thing you should do. That's not what Aristotle means. He means that the task is to realize what
the first principles are and to prioritize them over things that are less central to being
and to truth, et cetera. And so, and I think of that as the virtue of reverence, and I think
reverence is to properly realize the relevance of something that should be given a priority,
even over yourself, and that's where it starts, that's where you start to get the notions of
sacrifice and worship, which I, like I say, if you go away from sacrifices killing something,
right, which is usually focal in people's mind, to this idea of prioritization and a recognition
and acknowledgement of priority, then I think I'm in agreement with what you're talking about.
Yeah, and the idea of killing something is always the wrong way of understanding sacrifice,
at least at the first level. It often involves killing something, but not necessarily. There
are sacrifices of grain, sacrifices of oil, all these different sacrifices. It has to do with
offering up. You take something that's precious, and then you give it up towards something which
is above you, and that's exactly what attention is, and that's what prioritization is. One of the
interesting things I wanted to ask you about, because there's something that I've been thinking
about, and there are several priests that are thinking about this right now, is that in the
Jewish law, like in the Hebraic law, during Yom Kippur, which was the day of atonement,
the day of becoming one, there were two sacrifices, and I'm wondering what you think
about this in terms of attention. There was a sacrifice which was offered up and was used to
purify the space, and then there was a sacrifice which was cast away, a scapegoat, which was sent
out to Azazel, which is a demon out in the wilderness. This is what I've been thinking about
in terms of attention, which is attention seems to have two parts to it. One which is a concentration,
focus, prioritization, but another part which is a cutting off, a circumcision, a cutting off of
you have to be able to chop off the things that are pushing in or trying to take over, let's say,
and then so it's like a double movement, one of focusing and then one of pushing away. I don't
know if that's something that is consonant with. Yeah, I think it is, and I'll need a little bit
of space, but what I mean by that is, I think the prioritization function, so what I mean is give up
the old model of there's input and then there's processing and then there's output. The newer
model is there's a sensory motor loop. As I'm moving, I'm sensing, as I'm sensing, I'm moving,
and there really isn't anything, there isn't a homunculus willpower out there. Instead, there's
something more like character. There are sets of constraints on this, and then what we're doing,
and we remember, and attention is self-organizing like that because we both direct attention,
but attention also directs us, and so what we're trying to do is, what I'm trying to get you to
see is a new way of thinking of what decision is. Instead of thinking of decision as the
executor behind it all, like doing this, think of decision as exactly what you're saying.
A way of thinking about this is attention is both ruling in and ruling out. It's what's
ruled in and what's ruled out. This is analogous, one of my former students and now colleague,
Corey Lewis, talks about this in the philosophy of science. He talks about
that what laws do is they rule out. They say no, no, no. What models do is rule in. This is
what you have to bring in, and this is what you have to prioritize in order to do your thing.
And so in an analogous fashion, attention is making decisions of ruling in and ruling out.
Did that help? No, that makes a lot of sense, and it makes a lot of sense. Also, if you think of
things like ancient law, like ancient Roman law, the way that it worked, there were two aspects
of the system, one which was a tortoise and a patastase. And so patastase were the actual rules,
like the military or the embodiment of what you're not allowed to do, the police part of it.
And the other one was a tortoise, which was the model, like you said, the thing you follow,
the person you model your life on, someone who inspires you to be a certain way. It was like
a direct, non-explicit model. And then the other one is like an explicit set of rules
that is lacking the more direct part of it. So it ends up being kind of like a right hand and
a left hand of how the system works, let's say. And you can see that with like the idea of the
saints and then the canons of the church, for example, where you have models you're supposed
to follow, and then you have a bunch of things you're allowed to do or not allowed to do, like
all these rules that are more kind of, let's say, more precise and more kind of about, yeah,
what you're not allowed to do, let's say. Yeah, I mean, so one way of thinking about it is attention
has the function of constraining possibility, right? This is impossible, right? And so it's
structuring that, or at least this is highly improbable, and this is even an impredictive
processing models of attention. But you also need, attention is also aspirational, right?
Yeah, that's a nice word, love that. Yeah, so it's trying to disclose the affordances by which we
can more properly come into conformity or transformative relationship to what's real,
what's happening, what's relevant, what's pertinent, all the sort of stuff that I tend to obsess about.
But yeah, that, yeah, very much. And then the idea also that's happening with attention that goes
into this is to not have a humane model of attention. So the humane model of attention is
the static impersonal observer and Toad in his book on body and mind says, that's why hume can't
find causation of the world, because his model of attention is a pure passive
spectacle of observation, right? And not moving around engaging. And so the other thing is to,
this goes with Christopher Moll's work, that attention is adverbial. It's a way of modifying
other things you're doing. So let me quickly point out what I mean by that. We tend to think of
attention as a spotlight and we shine it. And there's truth to that, because light makes things
stand out, and that's what attention does, it makes things more salient. But the thing is,
and Moll points this out, but attention isn't like walking. I can say to you, walk, get up and walk.
Okay. And now if I say to you, start practicing, you'll say to me, practice what? Or if I say,
train, begin training, you'll go train what? The things we do that we do by modifying other
things. And if I say to you, you have to do this a little bit more subtly to bring it up. I say,
I want you to pay attention, but I don't want you to pay attention by changing how you're looking
or how you're listening or how you're remembering or how you're coordinating,
looking, listening and remembering. I just want you to pay attention. And you'll say to me,
I don't know what that means, right? Attention is a way in which, this is what I mean, it's more
adverbial. It's a way in which we're modifying our connectedness to reality. And it's not like,
it's not a beam coming out of our head. It's a shaping of our whole orientation and connectedness
to reality. It's a much more comprehensive thing. Does that make sense?
Oh, it makes a lot of sense. It makes a lot of sense, because at least in kind of the orthodox
perspective, theological perspective, there really is this idea of synergistic
relationship, like synergistic relationship with God, where like you said, there's a sense in which
you're kind of called, like you're called for, and then you kind of moved forward, but that also
affects the amount of calling or the direction of calling. So it's something that's very difficult
to fully separate and say something like, you know, like, that's God acting, that's you acting.
It's like, no, it's this constant moving between this call towards your own telos,
and then your capacity to embody it, and then it modifies the direction. So it's like you said,
it's a more kind of, it's a synergistic model in terms of how we took transformation.
It's synergistic this way, exactly. There's the calling and it's not action or passivity,
it's participation, but it's also synergistic this way. It's not sort of a Cartesian theater
or Lockean theater. It's the whole person. Like, if I would put it in a slogan and take it,
take caution around that because it's a slogan, but you attend with your whole body.
You don't just attend with sort of through... Yeah, with your brain.
Yeah, right. That's what I'm trying to get at. And then another dimension of that
is the fact that attention is often shared in it. Like distributed attention is a significant part
of distributed cognition. So weight, like children, if you watch babies, like the joint attention
in that loop that you're talking about, not like between people is what makes language learning
possible. Like, attention is there primordially, joint attention. And we take it for granted.
Like, when I point, you look, you try and trace out my attention. But if you point,
like for any other animal, they look at your finger because you hate it salient, right?
But, and notice how kids, when kids are at the one word stage, they supplement it with pointing.
So they use joint attention to make meaning, to make meaning clear. So again, it's more whole
person, it's more dynamic, and it's more shared and joint. I mean, it's funny, you'll like this.
There's a line in the Psalms that is sort of resonating with me as I get into this,
which there's a line where it says deep calling to deep, right? The deep calling to deep, right?
And so that, that's, that's sort of my, I don't know what to put it, I don't mean, I'm not trying
to be sacrilegious anymore. I'm trying to be say something that stands out for me. That's kind
of a biblical motto, I guess I have for this, for the way of thinking about this. And it is properly,
again, for me, because it again, it brings up this deep connection we're talking about
between all of this and religio, right? So here's a question in terms of study, because this is
something that I've been talking about and thinking about, but I'd like to know your opinion on it.
It seems that we have something also about common joint attention. We seem to search out
places and moments where we can all attend to similar things as a, as a group, right? So you go
to a concert, even just in terms of entertainment, why do you go to the movie theater, like we all
sit together? And then we watch, of course, there's the big screen, but there's something
more than the big screen, which is why we like watching movies with friends and with, with family.
And so it seems like there's also something in terms of that there's a transformation which occurs
through, to common attention. And that seems for the good and ill, right? And so you, I have the
image of Hitler, you know, with like 100,000 people all standing in front of him, and just giving him
all their attention and, and in acting as like a catalyst for something insane. So, so I don't
know if there's, if people have studied that or, or talk very much, very much. I mean, so first
of all, it goes directly to the point I just mentioned, and people like Tomasello and others
have made that apparent, how much of our cognitive development depends on is afforded by joint
attention, the capacity for joint attention. And you think about why this would matter
to hunter-gatherers, like joint attention is absolutely crucial for, for coordination,
social coordination. It goes towards the work that Dan Chiapia and I have published about
scientists, the NASA scientists, controlling the rovers on Mars. And how do they, how do they,
how do they get, how do they coordinate their attention? But it also goes towards this. And
think about how this works both internally and externally, and how they reinforce each other.
Notice, and we know this even for young children, and psychologists have the settings in of giving
multiple names to the same problem, or to the same phenomena, or calling two different phenomena
by the same name, it's called the jingle-jangle problem. So it's known by many different names,
intersensory hypothesis and blah, blah, blah, intermodal, blah, blah. Okay. But they all are
talking about the same thing, that a child will prefer to look at a stimulus that it can both
see and hear over a stimulus it can just see, or that it can see and hear and touch, right? And,
and, and then there's good reason for this. If you have just, I'll use some cybernetic language,
if you have just a single channel, the chances that what you're seeing are due to subjective
bias or distortion are quite high. But if I have two independent channels, the chances that the
result is due to bias are reduced precisely, right, because of the increase of that convergence.
That's what, by the way, and it's not just sort of fascism, the reason why we like numbers is
because numbers allow us to coordinate the senses. You can see three, you can hear three, you can
touch three, three allows us to bind the senses together. And what that does is, in using Resher's
term, that increases the trustworthiness, not certainty, but it increases the trustworthiness
of the information we're getting. Now, think about this and Plato brings this out in the dialogues.
When we can do that with each other, like, so it's not only within my senses, but between how
all of us are trying to make sense, think about how that massively increases the trustworthiness.
You know, Aristotle treated it as one of the three marks of realness. If, you know, if you
had rational, intersubjective agreement, then it must be real. We know that that's not right.
Things, we can get that agreement, like you said. Yeah. Right. And it can still be false. But, but,
so that's why you shouldn't confuse trustworthiness with certainty. But trustworthiness is valuable.
Right. Yeah. I mean, it's very valuable. And so it's, we want to share with other people what's
happening because it makes it more real for us in a deep sense. And therefore, and the way you
afford, right, that, what are you converging? You're converging attention. You're converging
attention. So that would be my explanation for that. Yeah. That's a really wonderful, I mean,
it, when you say it that way, it makes so much sense. Just, it's just completely reasonable to
understand that if you have a group of people and you're attending to something, it increases the
reality of the thing you're attending to, because you're constantly aware that, okay, so here's 100
people, they are all attending to the thing I'm attending to. So maybe I need to attend to it.
Like maybe there's something real about what's happening or more real than, than, you know,
a more idiosyncratic moment, let's say. But this says a lot about our situation right now, you know,
because I have children. And to imagine, you know, they spent months and months sitting alone on
Zoom watching their, their teacher or even in class with masks on where you don't see other
people's faces. Like this has a major effect, I imagine has a major effect on their capacity to
pay attention and to, to kind of make sense of what's going on. I think it has a, I mean, I, I
think our children are going to be especially sensitive to it, especially young children. But
I think it has an impact on everybody. I'd say, so one of the things, because I was, you know,
I was talking to people during, during COVID about this, and one of the adjectives that kept coming
up, one of these two adjectives, things seem unreal or they seem surreal. There's a sense of
losing touch with reality, because the capacities for joint attention were being truncated,
or they were being, they were being transferred to this weird kind of joint attention that we have
right here right now, which is very odd for us. It's a very odd kind of joint attention.
Yeah, and that, that gives me another layer of understanding of the, of the Floyd protest,
because, you know, for me, like, there's been something that I've been trying to understand
so much, but that all of a sudden puts another layer on it, which is that people for months had
been starved of joint attention in many ways, right? You know, whether it's going with, whether it
was sports or religion or whatever clubs that people participated in, whatever concerts people
went to, you know, and they, it wasn't necessarily a conscious thing, but they were just starved
for attention. And then all of a sudden, when this point of attention, very salient point of
attention appeared on their horizon, and the opportunity to kind of join together and celebrate,
or, I mean, it wasn't celebrate, but in the general sense of just kind of getting angry
about the same thing. And so it just, it has exploded into these, into these moments.
I think that's true. I mean, you and I talked about it, besides whatever, and I think there were
legitimate reasons about social justice and about, you know, inequity, and I think those are real.
But I think above and beyond that, there was something else that was being poured into this,
and it's still reverberated through. I think you see that in there's many instances of this
kind of hunger. One of the things we're discovering about attention is not only is it bottom up,
it grabs our attention, it goes from features to the Gestalt, and top down, we can direct it
from sort of larger Gestalts to specific details, right? But there's also what you might call a
historical dimension. So attention is not only organizing up down, it's organizing past, present.
So your sort of, your previous history of what you're paying attention to has an impact on what,
what, well, jump out for you as salient right now. And so we, with, with Tim Leathercraft and
Blake Richards and I, we tried to actually put that into our relevance realization model,
that there's these opposing tendencies to try and stay with something if it's sort of similar to
your past patterns of attention. But there's also good evidence for what's called inhibition on
return. We also want to move away from what we've paying a lot of attention to. And so these two
things are playing each other out. And I think if you push the attentional pendulum, if you'll allow
me that metaphor too far one way and starve people, there's going to be, there's going to be a rebound
the other way people are going to hunger for, like you said, something that can be
co-realized through joint attention.
Yeah. And that can also make you understand the problem of, let's say, ill practice asceticism,
right? Where that if you're not careful, asceticism can actually lead to, to excesses back and, you
know, like the idea of a diet, right? The idea of people dieting where they, they, they're able,
they try to just like not pay attention to the thing. And then all of a sudden it just cracks and,
you know, you're coming. Yeah, exactly. Exactly. That's a very good analogy. I mean, the thing is to
try to get the, the virtue, the golden mean of eschisis, right? Of, of discipline, of spiritual
exercises. I don't understand. Well, and eschisis in the traditional sense is always a redirecting of
attention. Yes, exactly. People say you don't just fast. If you fast and you don't pray, you're in
trouble. Like you're going to be in way more trouble than you were before you started fasting.
Like when you fast, you have to go to church, pray, you have to redirect your attention or else
it's not, not only is it not going to work, but it's going to be damaging to your soul.
That's why I argue that we shouldn't just practice in the mindfulness traditions,
and this is Western. It's not, it's, it's, it's not, it's not, you know, it's ethnocentric, right?
We shouldn't just practice meditation, right? Which is a kind of thought fast. We should also
practice contemplation, which is, and now once you've opened up that space through the thought fast,
what can you theoria? What can you contemplate that you couldn't see before? That's part of that
why Leo and I made that argument about the fact that we, we've, we've, we've reduced all this
whole ecology to this one practice, and then we've reduced that practice, like the definition of
mindfulness as, you know, paying attention to the present moment. That's, that's not what sati means,
right? And I understand that's good language of praying the cabbage in used, but that's not
good language of explaining what's going on when you're trying to meditate, for example.
All right. So here's going to be my, this is going to be my big push on you here. So get ready.
That's fine. You're not the person I'm here. All right. So,
so human beings have capacity for attention, and it seems like that capacity for attention has a
certain priority, and that priority seems to be personal. Like that is that we pay attention to
people first. Faces. Yes. We pay attention to faces, to people, and then, then we can't pay
attention to more abstract things, but those abstract things, even those abstract things often
end up concentrating in a person, right? So you, you, you want to train, but you can't. So you get
a coach and then all of a sudden you can train. Like, why is it that you can train because you
have a coach, but you can't train if you don't have a coach? It's because the coach is focusing
your desire for attention into something into a person that's, that's actually communicating
and directing and, and becoming like a node for, for even the, the more abstract hellos that you
have. And so this is, this is, I guess this is my big question in terms of the manner in which reality
exists, which is that I've been positing, like I've been really working towards positing that
reality has, even though I agree with you that you could say that the infinite is transpersonal,
but that as this infinite manifests itself in the world, then it tends to take
personal, it tends to culminate into personal beings. And so my question is always for you,
is always to think like the idea of transpersonal, not transpersonal in the sense of beyond humans,
but I mean, I mean transpersonal in the sense of beyond humans, but personal beings that are not
human, let's say, the idea of angels and the idea of bodhisattvas or the idea of, of God's little
G gods as being the manner in which reality presents itself to us and the manner in which we
encounter it, let's say. Well, and Paul's made us, Paul van der Klees made a similar argument.
Okay, all right. I didn't know that. He asked me to critique it. He invoked Pascal's difference
between the spirit of geometry and the spirit of finesse. And his argument of the spirit of finesse
is, is most appropriately afforded in personal relationships. And, and so let me try and first
of all strengthen your position for you. Before I demolish it. No, no. So we're talking about joint
attention. And I was talking about its development. And you can link this to Bogotsky and to a lot of
like, so let me give you another example of prioritizing and paying attention. This is an
experiment that's done. I've seen the video of this experiment. So give me a moment. And then
I'm going to go somewhere with this and you're going to see how it's going to strengthen your
point. And then, and then, and then I'll, I'll, I'll offer my cautions. I'm not trying to demolish.
I don't want to do that. So what you have is you have the, so what you have is there's two
participants in the experiment. There's a chimp, an adult chimp and a four year old girl.
Of course, this was replicated with lots of individuals. So I'm just using this for the
purposes of narrative, right? And you have this box, right? And you have the adult come in and
first of all, you show the chimp, the box has all these buttons and levers and, and the, the human
does this very complicated pattern of pushing buttons and levers. And at the end, a candy comes
out and eats it. And what's really fascinating is the chimp watches once and then replicates the
pattern and gets the, the, the chocolate or whatever the candy. And you go, wow, that's
impressive. And there's some, there's some evidence that their ability, their working memory
attention is stronger than ours because we sacrifice a lot for language. And then you bring in the
four year old girl and you sort of, I picture myself as cheering. I've got a little human
flag, go human, right? And they show the girls this and you know, she just takes one and she
replicates it and she gets the candy and you go, wow, that's cool. Now, and this is the experiment.
Now you bring in the box, now the box is plastic and completely transparent, all the same levers
and buttons. You bring the chimp in, the human adult goes through all of this and it's clear that
the only thing that releases the candy is the last action. All the other actions do nothing.
Right. So that you does this and then the chimp and the chimp sort of looks at the human being like
and just pushes, pulls the last thing and gets the candy and you go, oh, that's smart.
And you bring in the four year old girl and she watches and the adult does this and she can see
that only the last thing releases the candy. What does she do? She repeats everything the adult did
and you go, oh, are four year olds stupider than chins? And then you realize, no, no, no,
the human is playing the long game. The girl is thinking, the girl is thinking, obviously it's not
she's thinking, this adult probably sees things I cannot yet see. This adult probably knows things
that I do not yet know. I'm going to imitate them because that will allow me to transcend my own
perspective. It's very hard to transcend your perspective from within your perspective,
but if a child imitates an adult's perspective, they get the capacity to transcend their own
bias. And what in Bogotsky's series, and here's the joint attention and the looping,
we do this enough until I can do it without you being around. I do it imagineally. I imagine
in the sense that you're there. I don't mean an image, but my metacognition is basic. Well,
what do you think about all the imagistic language? What do you do in metacognition? All
you rise above your cognition and you look at it. There's no space there. So what we're doing is
we're imagineally augmenting our ability and that's what internalization is. I and you, we got a
capacity to become metacognitive, aware of ourselves and transcend ourselves by imitatively
internalizing other people. Did you see what that strengthens your argument deeply? Because it means
my capacity for self-transcendence, development transformation comes for how deeply I can
internalize you. And then you pair that with Polania's idea that I can internalize you better,
the more I can indwell you, the more I can see things from your perspective, the more I can,
right? So I want to indwell you as deeply as possible and that allows me to internalize you
and vice versa, hopefully too. Hopefully it's not one way and consumatory, right? And what that means
is that my capacity for self-transcendence is deeply dependent on a medic ability
in a profound way. And it's a two-way. It's this joint attention, this looping, the sensory motor,
this mind-site resonance. And so it's deeply within us that we transcend by internalizing
personifications. And I'll use that as a neutral term. Yeah. Is that, is that, is that, is that?
Now, I think that strength is your case tremendously. I think so. I think, I think definitely,
I think so. And I think that you can understand that as, if you think about it, bottom up as
scaling up, right? As scaling up in terms of personalities into, into kind of personalities
that, that are beyond just the person I meet, you know, during a meeting or whatever, but that,
that they would become figures of it, of personal attention that are communal, right? That are,
that can be something like a, like a God or like an angel or like a, you know,
or mother or mother, which binds our community together. And that's what we imitate Athena or
we imitate, you know, Aries. Very much. Sorry. I said very much. And if, right, if we have a
hyper-objects of persons, like people gathered into hyper-objects like Athens being, right, and
Athena is a way of, so George Herbert Mead had this idea of the generalized other, right? So
that, that thing that the little girl just did with the adult, imagine trying to do that on a
baseball team. This is George Herbert Mead's model, right? And trying to get that individual's
personally tailored to each person, that's very, very hard, right? And because you're constantly
shifting who you're. And so Mead argued that we create, we create what he called the generalized
other. We create kind of this model that is somehow the intersection of all these individual models.
And by relating to that, I can effectively coordinate with all these other people and they
with me, the generalized other. So you can think of Athena as, Athena is not just this.
Oh, yeah. Right. But she is a generalized other of Athens that people could internalize
to become an Athenian in a very profound sense. Yeah. So we're talking about a bottom up, like,
because it just, it just, it just, I think in our context is easier to talk about a bottom up also
to help understand its relationship to, to like, say something like cognitive science.
And so is there, this is also something that I'm interested in. Is there a way in which that
generalized other would find a head in a, in a, in an embodied person. So you take the,
take the baseball team, right? So the baseball team creates a generalized other through which to
act, but then that generalized other will be kind of embodied in the team captain. So it's like,
the team captain is kind of raised up and named. And then he, he's not the generalized other,
but he becomes something like the, it becomes something like the, like the, the, the place
through which we can attend. And then it'll, it'll kind of stream down into the, to the team. So
the team can go here. A way of thinking about it is the, the formal cause of the generalized
other gets transformed into an efficient cause that we can actually have joint attention upon
something like that. Is that, is that fair to what you're saying?
No, that, that makes sense. And you could explain all the traditions of the kind of the,
the God embodied in the King, let's say, that you find in Egypt and in all these different
cultures, you know, the idea of how the, you know, or the, the, the emperor, the idea of the
divine emperor, all of these ways in which, cause, you know, you know, like kind of a Christian,
I obviously don't agree with doing this, but when they worship the emperor, they didn't worship
the emperor, right? They worship the emperor's genius. Yes, exactly. Right. And so they worship
like a, like a transpersonal version of the emperor, which was embodied in the emperor
as a focal point for our attention. But we did, nobody thought that the physical emperor was,
let's say, a guy, he was a guy, right? There was something above him, which was calling us into,
into our communion, you could say. Yeah, there's the empire and the empire is a hyper object
and everybody's prosperity and peace depended on being in right relationship with that hyper
object. But hyper objects require, like we just, they require some, right? Something like a face or,
or they require a personal being that we can relate to. That we can relate to so that we can
properly do the internalization. So we can do the, we can imagineally, not imaginary, we can
imagineally enter into right relationship with the empire. We can be devoted to the empire and
internalize the empire's values and normativity by being devoted to the genius, the capacity of the
emperor to lead and be the voice of the empire. Yes, very much. And I, for me, I would say that
another great, this is how I've tried to understand. And again, I don't mean this disrespectfully.
However, I've tried to understand prophecy. I don't see prophecy as fortune telling. I don't
see it like that. I see prophecy is doing exactly what you're saying that the, the profit somehow
takes something and becomes right. The vehicle of the form. There's a, there's a, there's a tradition
and later Neoplatonism of distinguishing between the form and the vehicle by which the, the form
can come into efficient causation, right? And this is what, this was one of the origins of this,
the idea that's now become this new age idea of the astral body and all that, the Akama,
was this a rip that there's a part of us that, right? And the ontology is not important. The
point I'm trying to make is that there was this distinction between the form and the vehicle,
right? So the, you know, there's the form of the good, but it needs a particular vehicle by
which it instantiates itself in a human being. Yeah, that makes sense. Because then, then that
idea of prophecy is far closer to my own understanding, which is that prophecies don't just predict the
future. They predict the future to the extent that they manifest a pattern. Like they, they're
actually showing you a pattern of how reality manifests itself to you. And in that context,
then of course it predicts the future because it kind of is able to pull out of even of how a
society lays itself out and is able to understand that here's a, here are some inevitable patterns
in which, in how something will, like an identity will, will go to its end, let's say. So then it
imagistically embodies through, through these, these kind of very, very imagistic stories how,
you know, what that means. And that's very much like the platonic notion of a form is not some
sort of like, like the platonic notion of a triangle isn't like a perfect triangle.
It's much better. And this is happening. And I'm actually involved in this work to try and think
of the form, the platonic forms phenomenologically, like ideas from Arlo Ponti. Like I can show you
this, right? And you never see the object. You always see aspects of it. Yeah. Yeah. There's
multi, it's multi aspectual, but there's a through line. They're not fragmented. And that
through line also looks up to the through line of yourself, which is also a through line of
the multi aspects of you, right? But the through line of the multi aspectuality is not another
aspect. That's the mistake, right? It's not another aspect, the form. But what do we do?
What we do is we, you know, we usually draw things from a standard position because that's a vehicle
that's supposed to stand in for something that we can't actually capture in a picture.
So the form comes into a vehicle by which we can face it to some of our language. Is that
lining up with what? No, that makes, that makes a lot of sense. And I think the things you're
saying are going to be very useful for materialists to understand what it is that we're talking about.
I always have that fear that some people watch our videos and have no idea what we're even,
what we're even talking about. But I think what you're saying is really appropriate. And so
this is like, I think that even until now, like the way you're talking about it, and the way that
I'm talking about it, being cautious in the sense of, let's say, talk about imaginably interacting
with these, let's say, these beings that are, but the question is, like my proposition is something
like those beings exist as much as you do, right? The transpersonal, like the beings that bind the
community together and become, take up a face and become principalities for the world to exist,
they have as much existence as a person. They just exist at another level, let's say.
So first of all, that's the big, that's my big that that's that that maybe is the like, you can
say that that's what makes me as the explicitly religious person is something like that, you know.
Yeah. And first of all, let me let me try and give a lot of ground towards that position,
given what I've already said. So what I should therefore be relatively consistent with, I've
already admitted the existence of hyper objects. I've already, you know, the work I do on the
logos that, right, that there, there, there's, there's, you know, a dynamical system takes shape
that's something beyond all of the individual consciousnesses and personalities there.
When we were talking with Jordan and Bishop, I would use this language. I don't think it's
inappropriate. I'm using it in a Greek fashion. There was a logos that was present beyond all of
us. And we started getting caught up in it and following it. And I think that's completely
appropriate to say. And I, I've experienced that. I've seen people from religious and non-religious
experiences in circling and other things. They encounter that. I want to acknowledge all of that.
I also want to acknowledge, and this comes out of Corbin and Ibn Arabi and a whole bunch of work.
You know what a heads up display is like in a, in a cockpit for a pilot. So you,
the pilot, the pilot can't afford to look down, divert their attention. And so what you do is
you project onto the screen a bunch of things. And so they can actually look through the screen
and get the information at the same time. Or, you know, like Pokemon Go where you have
augmented reality. Here's a proposal to you to, now I'm doing it in good faith. I'm trying to move
towards what you said. So give me, give me, give me a bit of patience. If we properly distinguish
between the imaginal and the imaginary, that the imaginal is transjective and not subjective the
way the imaginary is in Corbin sense, right? The imaginal. I think it's very reasonable. And I see,
and Dan and I published on this, we see the scientists doing this for the imaginal augmentation
of reality. So for example, let me get, let me give me a concrete example. The scientists are
getting these flat black and white pictures from the rovers on Mars. What they're looking for in
the researchers are people who can get the sense of being on Mars, of being the rover, like seeing
as the rover does, right? And what do they do? They, by the way, what does the scientists do?
They do this loop. First of all, they, they, they identify with the rover. They don't say move the
rover there. They say, we should go there, right? The rover is we, right? Right? Or, and then, and
then they also, they, so they indwell the rover, but they also internalize it. So you'll get a,
a scientist saying, so say, oh, this is what we need to do. You put your phone front and she's
on a wheelchair and she's, we, and she does this. These are the, we need to do this and she enacts
and embodies the rover. The rover, right? Yeah. Right. And then you'll get these literal rocket
scientists saying stuff like this is almost a verbatim quote, Jonathan. You know, I was in my
gardening and my right wrist kept getting stuck. And then I came to the lab and spirit, that's
ironically one of the names of the rovers. It's right wheel kept getting stuck. And I don't know.
I don't believe in magic, but you know, there's some kind of sympathy. Ha, ha, ha. And they lack,
right? And that's what I mean. And what do they do with those pictures in order to do that?
You know, those wonderful panoramic pictures they send back, they're not for the science. They're
for us. Yeah. What they do is they take these pictures and they color them and they scribble on
them and they mark them all out. Britesi calls it drawing as, and all of that imaginal work
allows them to draw out so that they can be on Mars and be the rover. This is what we've recently
published on. This is not some, you know, airy fairy stuff. I think, right, I know what that's
like when I'm doing Tai Chi. When I'm trying, right, that Tai Chi, they'll say, like, you know,
right, imagine that you're pushing on a ball and you go, why? And then you do that, you go, oh,
that's why. And by doing the imaginal thing, you interact with the world in the right way.
So you see things you wouldn't otherwise see. Does that make sense? The imaginal augmentation?
Yeah, no, that makes sense. Okay, now let's go with what we talked about before, that we can have
distributed cognition and we can have shared attention and we can have shared imaginal augmentation
that puts us into reality with hyperobjects. I think that is, again, you might find this too
reductionist, but for me, I can see a lot of what I call the serious play of religion doing exactly
that, right? You got this shared joint attention and you're getting the distributed cognition
and you're allowing for that shared imaginal augmentation of reality perception, ontological
depth perception, so that people can see and realize hyperobjects that are otherwise invisible
to them. Like Mars is when all I give you is the flat photograph. If you'll allow me analogy,
religion is taking the flat photographs that were given and turning them into me being
present on Mars in a way that allows me to do the science. I can't do the science on Mars
unless I get that sense of presence. Okay, so then maybe that's not everything you want. No,
it's not everything I want, but so would you apply that process to you? That is, would you,
because I think my difficulty is that I'm not sure in your model, like if you have this idea
that we are, let's say, intelligent beings, and then these other beings that we're talking about,
right, they're kind of projections of our intelligence or whether or not those intelligent
beings exist as much as I do, as in the same process that is, like, let's say I also have
all these parts and all these thoughts and all these distraction and attentions and
and aspects of me that are coordinating and are being pulled into the same
attentions in order for me to exist as a unified being, let's say. That's exactly, by the way,
what Mohl says attention is, it's cognitive unison. And if you were to ask me, do I think,
and I think, I think this is a very platonic model, do I think that distributed cognition has
a collective intelligence that is more than the sum of the individual intelligences within it?
Yes, I think that's, this goes back to Hitchens back in, you know, cognition of the wild,
who navigates a ship? There's no person that navigates a ship. It's a crew and a bunch of
equipment and that system has the intelligence to grasp the hyper-object of the ocean and the
hyper-object of the ship and navigate and coordinate them together. And there's been some pretty gruesome
experiments showing that collective intelligence can do things that individual intelligence,
there's a person who literally, I don't know how this got through ethics, wired rats together so
that their brains were wired and that group of rats could solve problems that the individual rats
couldn't solve. Really? Yeah. That doesn't surprise us. Think about the power of the internet that is
given by distributed computation. No computer can do this, but the network can create this
hyper-object, you called it earlier, a God, right? That is like so powerful for us in so many ways.
So do I think that, and I think this is one of the great insights of the Platonic idea of
dialectic. It's not the Hegelian dialectic. The Platonic dialectic is we can learn an art,
and that's how it's taught, about coordinating individual cognition into distributed cognition
so we can access collective intelligence and perhaps transform it into, participate, better
way of putting it, participate in its transformation into collective wisdom.
Yeah. I mean, I think it's interesting because there are these, even like in the
Thomistic theories about the idea that every time two beings are in relation with each other,
they have an angel, right? So there's a, so like if I'm talking to you and I'm actually
in communion with you, then there's an angel which is acting as a principality and becoming
the intelligence into which our communion is kind of rising up into that intelligence.
And I would add one more thing to it, which also strengthens your case, right? And you've
heard me talking about this a lot, right? It's not just emergence up, right? There's also,
there's not only the ruling in of the modeling, there's the ruling out, the emanation that is
constraining how these things can take shape. They take certain shapes. That's why there are these
reliable persistent patterns for good and for ill, right? But there are these reliable,
like you mentioned it in prophecy, the prophet can say, like, there's reliable ways this can go.
This can go this way and it can go this way, right? And he's often addressing, right? He's
often addressing almost always, right? I'm sorry, sometimes the prophets were she, but mostly they
were he, right? Deborah was a prophet, I know that, but, right? But they are almost always
identifying like Israel in the collective, not just sometimes they address the king, but often
the king is just the representative for Israel, right? And there's a spirit that they're trying
to address, right? And so I would say all of that. Now, where you and I probably disagree,
and I'll just, right? So I'm trying to do genuine Deologos. I'm trying to-
Thank you. Yeah, yeah. It is, you know, whether or not I don't think, I have to be really careful.
I think there is a proper way of talking about something like God, you know, in Spinoza's sense
or in the nontheistic sense, your notion that there's something like the pattern of relevance
realization in reality realization that is analogous to the relevance realization and cognition.
I took, I think that seriously, I think that's right. But I'm, I, and this is where
I don't think there's a consciousness for that collective intelligence. And I don't,
and I don't think there's an agency to it in the same way we understand the agency of living
things. There might be something analogous. I'm open. And by the way, this is not just,
this is not just me. And you'll find this amusing given our, our, how we came to know each other.
Many people talk about the power of the collective intelligence of distributed
cognition as a zombie intelligence. Oh, really? Yeah, that's the term that's used.
So the idea is that, that consciousness, one of its properties might be that it only exists
within a determinate range, the things that you, so even within your own brain, within your own
body embodied brain, like you're not conscious of many levels, but you're not conscious of your
neurons, you're not confident, right? And there's lots of things at a higher level,
like these hyper objects, you can't be conscious of them, you can be conscious of
reference to them. But I can't, like there's no way in which I can be conscious of global warming.
Like I can't just, I can't do it, right? It doesn't make any sense. I can think about it,
and I can be, can be conscious of my thinking of it, but it's, I can't be conscious of global warming
the way I can be conscious of this object. So wouldn't, but wouldn't the fact that for thousands of
years and, and our, that they appeared being a complete exception to that for thousands of years,
communities encountered these, these transpersonal beings as being both conscious and having agency
and that they represented them as such and, and talked about them as such and worshiped them as
such and et cetera, et cetera. Like even without talking about God in the supreme kind of infinite
way, like I don't want to talk about that too much. I want to talk about the intermediary beings,
they're easier to, to, to keep, they're easier to talk about. I just wanted to be, I just wanted
to be clear that I wasn't sort of trying to deny a diviner sacred status to things above us. I wanted
to be clear about that. I wanted to be very clear about that. Okay. But we'll put that aside, as
long as you acknowledge that that's a point I wanted to make. Yeah. Yeah. And so it, but you
know, and you won't agree with it, but there's a, there's a brilliant anthropologist out there,
Lerman, and she wrote a book and she has a whole bunch of people on how God becomes real.
And she talks about how, right, how what you would call gods or spirits become real for people.
And, and she talks about the fact that we have this two different senses of real.
We may have three given that hyper objects are real for us. And maybe the, they all bleed
together in important ways. That's something the phenomenology I'm trying to work out right now
with other people. But she talks about that, you know, these beings are real, but not in the same
way that other things are real for us. She, so sorry, this might come off as disrespectful,
but I'm just quoting, and she's not being disrespectful either. But one of the groups she
was studying was a group of evangelical Christians, and for whom Jesus is real in the way you're
talking about. Now, I know that Jesus is also part of the Trinity, but I'm just trying to get,
like, call it the spirit of Christ or something like that, whatever. And she said, you know,
Jesus is real, but you don't ask him to do your homework. Right. That's what one evangelical
Christian said, which was like, Whoa, that's a really interesting thing to say. You can ask
him to help you do your homework. But you know, it's not going to do my homework. I'm going to
ask Jesus to do it. Now that there could be for moral or religious reasons, but it was clear in
that that what the person was trying to convey that, right, they were trying to convey this sense
that the way these beings interact with, for lack of a better word, physical reality is not the way
physical things interact with physical reality. Right. Yeah, but it's a hierarchy. So it's like,
you could say something like your finger doesn't ask you to clot the cut on it.
Right. Your finger doesn't ask you to clot the blood in your finger, but you're still doing it
through your body. That is, your body is the manner in which you manifest yourself. And so
that's why he's saying, Jesus doesn't do your homework. You do your homework, but you can do
that in a way that's participating in the body of Christ, you could say. Right. So, but notice
what's happening there. Right. That seems to mean that their realness as presence is always
vectored through us as participating in them. Right. Because we're like parts of the body,
like just like your finger, the part of you, then we are part of Christ, like Christ manifests
himself. That's why he's like a higher consciousness. Right. Totally. So what I would then say is,
right. For example, you don't think that because we've networked all of the computers together,
that the computer, the internet has consciousness, do you?
I'm pretty sure there's a God behind that. I'm sorry. I'm going to freak people out by saying
that. I've been pointing to it very closely. Actually, I do think the internet is acting as
a body for a God. I do think so. And I think that the fact that it's moving without anybody being
able to stop it or control it or direct it completely. I agree with you on that. So I agree
on that. And that's a tricky thing because Jung said that's the definition of spirit. If it acts on
its own, if it has a life of its own and a mind of its own, that's definitely when we are liable
to attribute spirit to it. But I would say, just again, people have also perennially done that with
forests and with oceans and rivers. And I don't think that rivers have consciousness or forests
have consciousness. Well, it's not the river that has consciousness. It's the angel that has
consciousness. Just like your hand doesn't have consciousness. It's the fullness of you in relationship
to your hand that has consciousness. Yeah, but see, and this is where we differ. I don't think
there's a way of separating my consciousness from my embodiment. No, I agree. Save you even for the
river, let's say. But look, you have a heart out now. I don't want to pull you. This is just getting
into the good stuff. So let's just plan for another discussion. We haven't talked about it.
No, I like this. I like this. I hope you see that I'm not some dullard about this. I'm trying to
JP is very sweet about this. He sees me as trying to go as far as I can. By the way,
thank you so much for introducing me to him and Paul did that too and your tutelage of him.
I hope this doesn't sound condescending. It's meant as complimentary. It's really wonderful
watching him flourish. It's really wonderful watching him flourish and thrive. JP is young,
so I see the future as being extremely... There are so many possibilities ahead of him,
so I'm excited to watch that too. So let's make it a part one and a part two then.
So let's pick it up around this because we're right on the cusp here. I'll ask you to consider a
possible tension between participation and independence, how we get those together,
because that's for me the nub of the issue. I participate in my body and I don't think that
John can be separable or independent from it, and I get that I'm not reducible to the descriptions
of the parts of my body. I concede all of that, and I think I've conceded on all of the examples
I've talked about. Yeah, let's definitely... I'll just write out saying it's love, but we can talk
about that and just open up that can and then finish the discussion. So thanks, John. Thank you
so much. That's a great thing to lay on the table. Thank you so much too. This has been a great
pleasure. Thanks, and everybody also don't forget to check out our conversation with Jordan Peterson
and Bishop Barron. It's bound to make some waves and so we're excited about that, and also looking
forward to a conversation with Bishop Barron that I will have. I don't know exactly when it's
going to happen, also pretty much very soon, and I hope John that you also might have the chance to
talk to him as well, because I could see that he was like, oh, there's something that he's saying
that is just... it was kind of popping up in his eyes, so hopefully you can have a conversation
with him as well. He was complimentary to me in the blog that I read, so I'll reach out to him
and have a conversation with him. I'm very much like that. So thank you very much. All right,
and so everybody, thank you, and we'll see you soon. Bye-bye. Take care. Bye-bye.
