Welcome, everyone, to Voices with Raveke.
I'm joined by and with my good friend, Jonathan Pajot, whose work on the symbolic world deeply
resonates with a lot of what I've been doing work on, and as many of you know, don't know,
and I find Jonathan brilliantly insightful and his reflections on the symbolic aspects
of existence and his ability to reshine and refurbish these stories so that they can shine
for us again is often, you know, it sort of catches you.
It's deeply impressive.
So thank you, Jonathan, for coming.
Oh, it's my pleasure.
I always enjoy talking with you, you know, ever since I discovered your work and kind
of discovered the language which you're developing also to talk about these subjects.
It's been really helpful to me.
I find myself thinking in the categories that you are bringing forth and especially speaking
to kind of a secular audience or also convincing Christians that the words they use have meaning,
you know, because sometimes we have this kind of internal language and it stops to actually
be meaningful in the world and it just becomes like a kind of magical language.
So I've been using your expressions on attention, the idea of relevant realization, all of these
expressions have been good to help people re-see things in a different frame so that
they understand them.
So I really appreciate our discussions for sure.
Well, thank you for saying that, Jonathan.
I aspire to this being true that above and beyond trying to, you know, convince or persuade
people about my specific claims, truth claims, theoretical claims, proposals, practical endeavors,
etc.
I aspire that I do afford, you know, a vocabulary and a grammar for people that helps them to
clarify and develop their thinking.
I mean, that's the, for me, that's the way in which I try to enact the Socratic ideal
of being the midwife, right, the midwife for other people.
So thank you for saying that, that means a lot to me.
So what I wanted to start off specifically talking about, you released two excellent
videos and I'll put the links to them in the description of this video.
One was on, I won't get the actual verbatim name, one was on sort of the religious nature
of a lot of the demonstrations that are happening around that were sort of galvanized into existence
by the death of George Floyd.
And then you did a follow-up, they were sort of like part one and part two, one on the
iconoclasm, the destruction of images, the pulling down of statues.
And one of the things you did was you put your finger on a huge important aspect of
this that is being completely ignored in the mainstream media, but I think is of vital
importance.
As has happened in the past between you and I, I, very convergent, I was coming to very
similar concerns and reflections.
And I had said some things early on about how COVID was going to accelerate the meaning
crisis and cause just a mental health tsunami and you'd see a proliferation of conspiracy
theory thinking, you'd see purity code behavior, human beings are going to respond in a fashion
to this invisible ubiquitous threat that's causing them to isolate.
And as you, I liked your invocation of the symbolic idea of fasting for most of their
connections.
And then I saw all of that.
And then when the protests began, I had, so I had a reaction that made me sort of recuse
myself from committing, commenting on that publicly.
Part of it was a concern that what you said in your first video of just, you know, saying
something that would be premature polarizing, it was difficult to say anything that was
going to be heard with, it had any kind of nuance or reflection to it.
So part of it was just that kind of caution.
But there was a deeper issue for me.
I was very concerned, and I talked to my close friend about this, that I would fall into
a kind of self-deceptive bias when I tried to talk about any of this.
So give me a moment, please, I don't mean to trespass on your patients, but I wanted,
in order to try and articulate this, and this has helped me upon reflection, I wanted to
invoke Weber's distinction between the manifest and the latent function.
So to give you a classic example, you know, Weber talked about the manifest, the manifest
function of the bureaucracy is to facilitate, you know, information traveling upward and
decisions traveling downward, and that's its manifest function.
But it has all kinds of latent functions.
It has the latent function of allowing people to diffuse responsibility and shift blame
on to others.
And Kafka, of course, brought this into high art.
He showed us how the latent function can, you know, put us into a tragic situation because
our commitment to the manifest function binds us in a tragic fashion to the latent function.
That can be antithetical to it in kind of a profound way.
And so I was looking, I'm watching this, and I'm saying, well, yeah, that's horrible,
racism is a horrible thing and what we're seeing happening here.
And there's definitely, I know this because, you know, what's happened since, you know,
9-11 in the Patriot Act, there's been the militarization of the police.
And that has been a very dangerous thing, right?
And I know there's, there's, there's nasty tricks happening.
There's voter suppression happening and all kinds of bad things, right?
And people are feeling, I think, legitimately manipulated and disenfranchised in powerful
ways.
And this, and this is meshing in ways that we're all finding it hard to understand with
a history that has disadvantaged certain groups of people.
And all of this is going on and I'm saying, yes, these are issues that all get addressed.
So my, I don't mean to sound Freudian here, but my sort of conscious explicit awareness
is going, yes, yes, yes, but I'm having this, ah, negative visceral reaction to all
of this.
And I'm trying to go, what's going on?
And at first I'm, oh, you know, I'm making all these things and I can feel like I'm in
the grip of something.
And so I'm talking about this with my friends and I'm reflecting on it and, you know, journaling
about it and everything.
And I'm coming to realize, oh, oh, and Jonathan, you know that I respect your allegiance to
Christianity.
I'm speaking about me here, okay?
So I said, oh, this reminds, I'm back in my fundamentalist church and I'm the 10 year
old again.
And I'm being traumatized by a puritanical form of Protestantism.
I'm being told that I have an original sin that I, not because of any act that I committed,
but that is just because of how I was born.
And that there's an aspect of this that is unforgivable, no matter what I do.
You know, everything I try to do to overcome this just makes it that much worse.
And that I need, I need to be absolutely contrite and guilty until some external obscure authority
will finally pronounce me, you know, you know, saved or whatever.
And that, and then what this, what this brings with it, you know, is bonfires.
And I mean, I'm not, I'm not being hyperbolic, Jonathan.
I'm talking about gathering behind the church and putting the rock and roll albums and the
books into a thing and lighting it on fire.
Like can you imagine?
Oh yeah, I've been through that too.
I grew up with that kind of stuff as well.
Okay.
And so, and, and, and so I'm realizing that the latent functionality of this is so reminiscent
of kind, of a kind of puritanical fundamentalist Protestantism and again, I was noticing the
same things you're noticing, you know, the acts of contrition, the throwing down of the
stones in the high places, like from the Old Testament, right, where the prophets are always
doing that, right, the kneeling and the confessions and the statement that there's nothing I can
do about it other than feel guilty.
I was noticing how this is was tremendously religious.
And that, that, as I said to others, that upbringing, like that upbringing traumatized
me.
I mean, I remember, I remember going to the minister and the church with my mother when
I, because I read the Bible regularly daily, and I came across the passage in the New Testament
about the unforgivable sin.
Oh yeah.
Oh, and this just, I fell into, I mean, Cartesian skepticism was nothing compared to the well
I fell into about, well, how do I know what it is and how do, and how, like, did I just
do it?
And, and if it's unforgivable, I'm now doomed, I'm doomed, right, and, and, and that feeling
of being doomed and trapped and, and, and, you know, and I went to him and I want, what
I wanted was a clear definition of what it was.
And, and, and I got, I just got, you know, the usual, you need to have faith and, and
it was very unhealthy.
And so, I, and so I was realizing, oh, John, you better keep your mouth closed about, because
even if you want to speak about this, this is just going to come flowing through you,
because, and it's good, and you're going to, it's a, because you have an incredible bias.
It's very hard for you to see this in a positive light, even though sort of intellectually you
can understand these important things that we've already mentioned, you know, the rate,
the, the racist history, you know, the, the, the, the subversive disenfranchisement of
people, right, the militarization of the police, all of these things are real and they need
to be addressed, but, but I realized if I try to say anything about this, my chances
of speaking in a way that I think is clear, but we're going to be seriously undermined.
So I just sort of held back, but then I saw your videos and I thought, well, maybe I,
maybe with Jonathan's help, I can talk about this.
Sorry, I don't intend this to be a therapy session.
That's not what's going on here.
I want to be really, I want to be really open with you about where I'm coming from.
And I think your video actually points out that this tension.
Well, let me, I might be too bold.
It suggested to me that this tension that I'm finding in myself is not exclusive to
me, that I sensed in you, not to the degree I'm talking about, but also a tension
between, you know, what this might be sort of at a manifest level and then this
unacknowledged latent function of religiousness.
And then you have some criticisms, at least implicit of this, you had towards the
end, you warned of danger in the first video, because the religion that does not
know that it's a religion is not oriented towards the ultimate.
And so there's like a critique coming via, or similar to what Tillich would
meant, it's ultimately, it's an idolatrous.
For all of its bringing down of images, it's ultimately an idolatrous religion.
And then I was thinking about this, I was thinking about how, you know,
that politics is, has in many ways taken over the domain of religion.
I don't think well, it's drenched the 20th century in blood.
But I know that, well, there's sort of two, religions are supposed to have,
like you said, there's supposed to be moments of communitized and transformation.
And I'm trying to think, well, what are the only rituals left to politics?
Well, there seem to be two.
And I was noted how they seem to split between the right and the left.
There's the demonstration of the protest or the rally.
And the right likes the rally, and the left likes the demonstration, the protest.
And then I'm thinking, and both of these, we have good historical evidence.
Don't bring about the new man, the new person, the transformation of human beings.
And, you know, and all of the revolutions left and right, the French
revolution, et cetera, onward, show that it doesn't bring about that, although
there is often a religious goal within the French Revolution.
And, you know, they worshiping the goddess of reason and all that stuff, right?
It doesn't actually bring about the promised transformation that it is groping towards.
And so I was thinking that is it possible to talk about this sort of in terms
that are kind of metapolitical about the latent functionality of the religion?
And at that level, legitimately criticize it, without thereby implying that we think,
well, I'll speak on my behalf, not yours, without thereby implying that I think
that we shouldn't do something about militarization of the police, the subversive
suppression of voting and disenfranchisement of people, and then how that has
often allied itself with historical factors that are ongoing of racism, et cetera.
That's what I'm proposing to.
Is it possible?
And I'd like to try and explore that with you.
But that's sort of the frame I want to set out.
Yeah, I think for sure there's, I think there are a lot of things to deal with,
and what you said, a lot of things to kind of unpack at different levels.
I think maybe we can kind of separate them in different parts so that we
don't get completely jumbled.
One is to look at the possible reinterpretation of your experience,
I'd say, or the notion of the original sin, then the idea of Adam or the fall
of Adam, what that can mean and how we can reinterpret that in a manner
which is more useful than your traumatized youth.
And I understand because I went through all the stuff you dealt with.
I went through the same.
And even the description of like the idea of blaspheming the Holy Spirit and
everybody wondering, like, did I blaspheme the Holy Spirit?
You know, all of that I understand.
But I think there are ways to to reappropriate the stories, those stories.
And I think we appropriate is I also believe one of the reasons why when
towards orthodoxy is because they have a different vision of the fall of Adam,
one which I think it has a healthier balance.
So that's one.
And then the other is then looking also at the way in which these protests or
covid and the protests together kind of just exploded into a kind of weird
catharsis and what that means and what it's kind of looking towards.
And so sadly, the third part, which would be like how to get out of this
kind of this bind that we're in is the one which I don't know.
Like I really, a lot of people ask me, so what should we do?
And I'm looking around and I think I don't know what to do, except
I don't know what to do socially.
Like I think I know what to do personally, but I don't think I know
what the societal solution is.
So so maybe that one will be harder.
Well, but I do want to talk about that because I've been talking about
that with other people as well.
So but I'm happy with your proposal.
But like I said, I'd like to put it like I said, into.
The way in which what's happening.
It has, you know, at the level of the latent functions, there's
well, you said it, I want to use your words.
There's something dangerous happening in this as well.
And I want to explicate and draw that out.
I'm happy to hear your revisions.
And so I don't know what to call it.
Let's say revisioning rather than revision.
Yeah.
Of these of these stories.
And then, but if you could put that into dialogue with because.
Okay, let me let me instead of making a statement.
Let me make ask a question.
It's kind of a request.
I see in.
You know, I see an analog to a strong analog in this movement to
that version of original sin that I was brought up with.
Yeah.
Let's remember that the word Protestant means those who protest.
I mean, right there.
And I was brought up in a church where, you know, protesting and constantly
declaring what was evil and what should be burned or.
You know, and that was like, that was daily.
The kind of practice.
So do you think that I'm incorrect in saying that the version of
original sin, whether or not it's the right version.
I'm going to give you space to talk about that.
But do you think that that, that, you know, maybe overly
Augustinian version of original sin is what's at play in this
movement right now.
Am I incorrect about that?
No, I think you're definitely right.
I think you're definitely right.
One of the, and I think it's something that we've seen before.
In the sense that maybe an inverted version of what we've seen
before in terms of like racialized vision of the world in the past,
which is that we've taken the notion of original sin.
And we've brought it down into biology,
which is the scariest thing that can happen because it,
it actually is inevitable.
Like it actually does become inevitable because it's, it's related.
It's linked in a, it not in a really scientific way at all,
but in a mythological way, it's,
it's still brought into a term which is using language of,
of kind of biological identity or categories,
which are material categories.
And so the idea of this racialized guilt or, you know,
was there in kind of 17th century racism,
like kind of neo Darwinism kind of social Darwinist racism,
this idea that,
that certain races were inferior by their own biology and therefore
were made to be slaves or were made to be the lower.
And now we're seeing a kind of weird reversal of that where we're
saying to be a certain race is in itself to be the oppressor,
like to be, to be white is to be guilty of the,
the sin of the revolutionary thinking. Like it's kind of like,
it's, it's not completely original sin.
It's, it's like the,
the end of the revolutionary trend in, in thinking, right?
The French revolution, the Marxist revolutions.
And now we've come to kind of the end of it where we're actually
bringing it into almost a biological reality where the guilt of
the oppressor is a racial guilt and it's,
and that's, that's so that.
So like you said,
it does relate to original sin because it means that as someone
who has that identity, whether it's actually legitimate scientifically
or not, it doesn't matter.
They're still framed in those categories.
As someone who has that identity, I have no way out.
Like I have no way out except for two things,
which your people are doing.
Which is to self-flagellate and to scapegoat.
That is to put myself on the,
to put myself on the side of find someone guiltier than me.
Yes.
And yell at him and tell him that he has to be canceled and he has to be
excluded from society.
Yes.
The only, the only two solutions.
Yeah. And that, that I, like I said, I, I,
I went through periods where the,
the church I was in would be driven to bits.
By exactly that process repeatedly in cycles again and again.
And when I sort of, when I sort of woke up to that,
I was like, whoa, this is like,
like it's what,
when I started reading some literature and I realized the literature
like showed me what human beings could be other than this.
That was like, so.
But you're right in the Protestant sense.
Like if you think of Protestant sex,
and you notice both the Puritanist kind of self-flagellation of,
of a complete depravity,
and then the schismatic notion that all of a sudden the group I'm in
is not pure enough.
They're not close enough to the truth.
They're not, and, and then removing myself with a little,
a smaller group,
and then condemning those on the outside as being as it's like an
acceleration.
It's always been there.
It's there in every, every structure.
Like we can talk about that,
but there's an acceleration of it in the kind of fragmentation of,
of Protestantism.
And we see it in intersectionality to an extent,
which becomes completely absurd where, you know,
at some point it's so obscure that most like regular people don't
even know what you're talking about when trans exclusive this and
then trans inclusive.
And we don't,
most people are like,
I don't understand what you're talking about.
And then it's smaller and smaller identities,
which are excommunicating other identities and you don't know what's
going on.
Yeah.
So I mean, to my mind,
that is the meaning crisis on steroids or methamphetamine or
something.
So, so what, and I think given the deeply deleterious effects,
which we're seeing,
you and I were talking just before we hit the record about, you know,
we're, we're, we're seeing, you know,
people are like they're, they're people that were normally sort of
very sane, like in our personal relationships are moving more
towards the fringe and they're filled with anxiety and they're
describing their experiences to real.
I think, you know,
the deleterious facts of the meeting crisis are being exacerbated by
COVID and then perhaps by certain latent aspects of this.
But I wanted to give you the opportunity to,
to, to make good on your promise that there's an alternative way.
There's an alternative way. And I mean,
I'm interested in this both philosophically.
And personally,
I typically try not to get too personal in these conversations,
but this one has to be different for the reasons I've already
articulated.
And I'm putting my trust in you about this.
So that there's an alternative way of giving you the opportunity to
understand it.
So that there's an alternative way of conceiving of the myth of
original sin. And you know,
I use that word and not in a pejorative fashion, but,
and so what do you,
what is that alternative understanding to your mind?
So the way to understand it is to clearly differentiate between
sin and death.
They're related, but they're, they're different.
And so in scripture, it says the wages of sin is death, right?
And there's an idea that even in the, in the scripture,
it never says that we inherit the sin of Adam.
It says that that we, because of Adam's sin, we are, we are in death.
Like we are in the, in the, in the, in.
We are living in a world of death and that's really the best way to,
to understand it, which is that sin causes death.
So you, you have a purpose.
You miss the mark.
And that's, that's what death is. And so there's a,
there's a brokenness that you break the system breaks down as you
miss the mark. And this is happens at every level of reality,
whether it's in your own life or in society or, or entirety of the
world. When, when something misses the mark,
then there's a breakdown which happens. Now we,
we inherit the breakdown of that, which is before us.
Right. We inherit death. So we are born in families that have missed
the mark. We are born of parents that have missed the mark.
We are born of systems that have missed the mark.
And so because of that, we,
we live in a world which has an aspect of it, which is broken.
We still have the aspiration of hitting the mark.
And that's,
that's what kind of guides us and makes us want to live,
but we have to live with the consequences of that, of that, of that
miss. Um, and the difficulty is that when you're in a world of death,
that is when you inherit the consequence of sin.
So when your parents miss the mark and they will, and we know they do,
you inherit that and it makes it more difficult for you to hit the
mark because you have all the baggage which comes and you have inherited
the, the, the patterns of being that will make that worse.
Right. Which will, which will increase the brokenness,
which will tend to fragment. Okay.
And so that's the manner in which we need to understand original sin.
That's what it is. It's the inheritance of brokenness.
So, so that, and I hope, but I hope you take this as a helpful thing.
That to me reminds me of, um, um,
you know, certain interpretations of the Buddhist notion of karma,
that there are these patterns at work and, and we, we,
and we inherit them. Um, and they affect our behavior and they,
they cause suffering. Um, and the way I sort of understood this,
at least psychologically and existentially is as you said, you know,
we, we pick up from others, our parents, our friends and our culture.
We pick up and that, you know, here's where historical racism does matter.
Right. We pick up patterns, um, that are shaping us and moving us.
Um, in ways that are detrimental to our aspirations.
Is that, is that a fair? Yeah, exactly. Yeah.
But the idea is the idea is, of course, the very desire,
the very aspiration that is the very possibility we have of conceiving
the good and of seeing the point that we're aiming at, right?
Of, of seeing it in our view and, and moving towards it, right?
Is, is the very, how can I say this?
Is the reminder that we are not,
that we don't fit in this broken world that we are, that we are,
we find dissatisfaction in the brokenness. So that's what causes our suffering,
but it's also what, what can ultimately cause our hope because we see,
we can see that we're not made. Like there's something in us which wants more
than this brokenness and this, this world of death.
There's something in us which is, which can see that,
which we can aim towards and which is the good, of course. Um,
and so that is really the, and so what, let's say,
what Christianity shows us and like what Christ shows us is that the manner
to reach the, the manner to reach the,
the aim in the brokenness is to a certain extent,
embrace death. And that's really the, that's the hardest thing is to embrace death
consciously, embrace the, the brokenness consciously.
And therefore we're, we don't become slaves of that brokenness, right?
It's to see your sins, to see the place where you missed the mark,
instead of just blaming your parents because that's what you will want to do,
right? You want to blame your parents.
You want to blame the system and you're right to, because the system is broken.
Your parents are broken. Everything,
there's an aspect of everything that's given to you, which is broken,
not fully, but there's an aspect of it, which is broken.
And the solution is to, is to actually rather see your own death,
the places in you that you're, that you're dead and recapture the,
the vision, right? Recapture the, the aim.
So this, this brings me to a central question that I have about this.
Thank you for that. I think that was very helpful.
So let's shift the discussion onto mortality then.
And the interesting thing, of course, and you're aware of this, I know,
in the Greek world is mortality has a, and Heidegger developed this a lot.
It has a much more encompassing notion to it.
And then that'll help lead me to my question to you.
You know, because one of the great sins,
and I think this is the right word in the Greek world is hubris, right?
Which is to, in some sense, forget your mortality, right?
And to think that you can, that, that you can be a God.
And, you know, and this is captured in great literature, you know,
Conrad's Heart of Darkness, which of course is now a contentious work,
but nevertheless, Kurtz's big sin is hubris, right? He forgets.
And Marlowe's, Marlowe's heroism is he commits himself to his humanity,
that he will preserve his mortality.
And I've been talking to my son about this, because, you know,
he lives with me now, partially because of COVID.
And, you know, I've been exposing him to certain ideas and he's going,
but, you know, but I want certainty. And I'm saying, well, yeah, but you can't.
Part of what being, you know, being, erasing your mortality is to realize
that no matter how good your idea might be, you're ultimately a fallible human being,
you're going to die tonight. And he was like, but I don't like this.
And I said, but your mortality isn't just, right?
And you'll see how this connects to what you said in a second.
Your mortality isn't the fact, you know, like in Tolstoy's Ivan Illich.
Ivan Illich knew he was going to die, right? It's not, it's not that.
Your mortality is that, like you said, in some fundamental way, you know,
we are finite, we are broken, we are not gods.
So, and I'm seeing this in my discussion with him.
How do you, how do you, because I'm trying to work this with him as a father,
getting people to embrace their mortality is good because it prevents inflation,
it prevents hubris, it prevents, I suppose it would prevent blasphemy too,
from a Christian perspective.
Now, and as you said, it helps people to not,
not to fall into the error of by criticizing others,
I implicitly remove myself from that criticism, right?
I see all of that. How do we do that without the,
without traumatizing them?
Sorry, sorry, that was a bit of a garden path.
No, no, I, I think there, I think there has to be, I'm sorry,
what I'm going to say, but I think that trauma is part of the experience.
Like I think that death is traumatic.
We don't want to be cruel, but we don't want to be cruel is what I'm saying.
No, no, right? No, I understand, but death is, death is, is traumatic.
Like there is a trauma in death.
And so we need, like the, the church fathers and the, the ascetics,
they always say two things. They say, remember God and remember death.
Those are the two things you need to remember.
I always kind of joke around and say, you know,
that's the Christian version of, of like mindfulness, you know,
it's like remember God, remember death.
And so the idea is that if you, if you are,
if you kind of remain in your death, like you said,
you avoid all the problems that you talked about.
And the strange paradox in Christianity is that by doing that,
you actually do become God.
Yes.
Like you, you actually do become deified ultimately if you do those two things,
right?
But it, but it's a non-inflationary.
Exactly.
And that's the kind of the paradox of, it's the,
it's the paradox of, of, of creation and the paradox of,
of the Garden of Eden, which is that if Adam had submitted to the will of God
and not eaten of the fruit of the tree,
then God would have given him the fruit of the tree.
That's the, that's the tradition, right?
That's what many saints have said.
And not only that, but that,
that would have been his access to the tree of life,
which would have been perfect communion with the divine.
And so it is in humility that we actually reach the highest.
It's interesting.
I just read this morning when I was doing my lecture to Vino,
a real cause passage where he talks about,
we throw a ball into the infinite and then it returns to us differently.
It returns to us heavier.
And it's only in that, in, in, in having done that,
that we actually get to feel the true weight of things.
And it sounds like you're saying something very analogous to that.
So what do we avoid the trauma?
All I can say is the idea is obviously to place the trauma ultimately to place
it in Christ.
Like the ultimate trauma, right?
Is, is communion.
Like that's the ultimate trauma.
If you really take communion seriously,
you are engaging in a traumatic experience.
You are eating the flesh and blood of the God man.
Like you are, you are at the foot of horror.
Like, you know,
you talk about horror a lot in your, in your, in your, um,
in your lectures.
And I, one of the things I do want to bring up to you is that that is why
communion,
one of the aspects of communion is to bring you into that horror in a
manner which will,
which will save you and not destroy you.
Right.
In a manner in which you can integrate it in that it's both a
participation in horror.
And a communion of love at the same time in a paradoxal way.
Yeah.
I mean, well, maybe we can talk about this at some point.
I mean, I do think the other sacred brings in simultaneously.
It's the symbol on, right?
Uh, the, the, the, the, the, the, the horrifying function and the
homing function, um, in a profound way.
Um, and that, that goes back to, so, I mean,
There's two things I want to say.
Uh, one is like, I'm trying to, but there's,
there's a notion of mortality and isn't it in the symbolism of carrying
your cross that's analogous to the Buddhist notion that mortality
isn't just death,
but that the idea that moment by moment, I, I, I, I, I'm dying.
There's, there's little deaths all the time and that if I try to
avoid that, if I try to, um, get some kind of permanent hold on
things, I'm, I'm, I'm, I'm just going to, I'm going to cut myself on
that and then I'm going to cut other people.
It's again, is that, um, is that, is that a correct analogy?
Yeah, of course.
Yeah.
Like if you look at,
if you look at the prayer of Jesus, the, the basic mystical prayer
of the church, it has two, it has two parts, right?
It says it has an invocation.
It says Lord Jesus Christ, son of God, have mercy on me as center.
And so it's like, there's this invocation and this remembrance
of my own brokenness, remembrance of my own incapacity.
And so those two movements simultaneously, they're the ones that
will, and it's, and it's, it's also, and because I think one of the
problems of the, of the trauma of the Protestant is to a certain
extent, the idea that it's weird, like the idea that you should be
pure, right?
That you should be, but you can't.
And so it's like, what, then what, what do you do?
Right?
You just remain in this strange broken, uh, broken self.
But if you rather see it as this, this necessary part of being a
human person and moving towards the good, then it, then it's not as
traumatic because you, you will then see that even the saints lived
in, you know, in the most difficult temptations that the saints
were struggling with their passions, you know, and those who
reached the highest had the same frustrations you did.
Like they, no one pretends to be, if you, there isn't like the
holier the person that's holier than now.
And that kind of just, if you read the lives of the saints, you
see the story of broken people who their whole life struggle with
thoughts and with temptations, you know, and are delivered by God,
but it's like, okay, if they struggled.
So for 30 years, you know, you read, you read crazy stories of the
saints where it's like, for 40 years, he struggled with the, the
thought of, of fornication.
And it's like, would he struggle with that for 40 years?
He actually struggled actively with that for 40 years.
Okay, so I need to stop complaining because seriously, I'm,
there's no way that I'm doing that.
So, do Hanan talks about this in connection with a Plato and
Socrates, he talks about it in terms of, he has a book called
finite transcendence, where he said that what Theta was always
trying to keep this tension alive between the relationship to
transcendence and the acceptance of our finitude, our mortality.
And so I'm wondering then if there is something like a feature
of wisdom.
I know you have your particular Christian commitments and I'm not
trying to trespass on those, but you're also not, you're not,
you're not being offended, which I thank you for when I make these
connections to other, other things, you find them, I think, valuable
at least in discussion.
But there seems to be a feature of wisdom, which is this kind of
tone us between like the aspiration in transcendence and then
the deep acceptance of our humanity and our mortality and keeping
them always together is, and there's a finesse to that.
There's a dynamic shift.
I can't give you a rule or a recipe for doing that.
It's an ongoing, ever-evolving capacity.
Would you, would you, would you think that?
Yeah, it's a motive, it's a motive being.
It's a way of being, which is what will kind of hold those two things
together.
And I think your image of wisdom is particularly good in the sense
that wisdom, at least in scripture, at least in the Bible, the way
that wisdom is described seems to really be the capacity for those
for, let's say, the, the, the principles or the ideals to be
united with the particular.
Like that seems to be, you know, it's like the wisdom always comes
like advice on how to, you know, how to find the good woman or how
to, how to live your life, how to deal with money.
Like that's how wisdom comes, but what it's, it's patterning
something which is, which is above, you know.
Yeah.
Aristotle has that with Sophia and fromesis being brought together,
right?
Sophia is your grasping of these universal and profound principles.
And then fromesis is how do you make them contextually relevant in
a contextually sensitive manner.
So this now brings me back around then.
It sounds like this, this deeper reflection on, well,
let's use the word sin for now.
This deeper reflection on sin, you know,
affords us what might be missing in what we're seeing in the
demonstrations that, that, and this, this is part of my concern.
That you talked about the, the, you know,
inclusion as the sole value.
I thought about something similar in that, that justice is the
sole virtue and a very truncated sense of justice.
The Greek sense of justice was always simultaneously external with
others and internal with oneself.
That's really clear.
And what we have is a completely, we get none,
we get a reduction of all the virtues to justice and then just the,
the social aspect of justice, hence the name, social justice.
Yeah.
We're not sure exactly what, what that justice entails in terms of
it's particular, like how it's going to manifest.
Well, and that goes to the point I want to make,
because I, I, I, I have a concern that we are losing the other virtues.
I mean, the Greeks had at least the cardinal four and then the Christians
had the next, the sacred three.
And so we at least had, we at least have seven we should be talking about.
Right.
We at least have seven we should be talking about.
And we were just talking about one,
one of the ones that's considered something like a meta virtue, which is wisdom.
You know, I shared the, what I think one interpretation of Socrates,
that Socrates saw that each virtue was a way of being wise in a particular
situation.
The virtues aren't separate things.
Yeah, of course.
Particular ways of enacting.
And so to me, if that argument is good, and I think it's a good argument,
talking about justice without having a concern for wisdom seems to me to be
really, really almost oxymoronic.
It seems to be self contradictory, self undermining.
And that's a very dangerous kind of thing to be for human beings to be embracing,
embracing, committing yourself deeply to something that is self undermining in
its foundations is a very problematic thing to do.
What do you think about that as a proposal?
No, I totally agree.
And that's why it's one of the reasons.
Because the idea of the idea of justice.
It seems to have something to do with equality.
Although it's ill defined as well.
Like what exactly do we mean by equality at what,
because obviously equality is a strange term because you need a,
you need a category to declare equality because you can't have equality in
everything.
Cause then everything would just be the same.
So the equality is a complicated term.
It seems like, you know, it's like the, what is it that the intersectional?
It's like the diversity, equity, inclusion, right?
That's the, those are the three kind of values that kind of mesh together in
this idea of justice.
And so the difficulty is of course that the,
like the revolutionary aspect of it is what you,
you also talk about in the sense of it undermining itself.
It ends up eating itself and it ends up eating itself by its very mechanism,
which is that I hate to say it this way,
but it's, it's, it's inevitable to come to the fact that there is no such thing
as equality, right?
In terms of actual, total equality, right? Cause it, what, what does it mean?
Like everybody's smarter, stupider than others.
Some are taller, some are shorter, you know,
and, and it's individually true and it's true in different categories and
different cities and it's like, there's difference.
You know, you can't have equality.
And so this like weird desire for equality.
Ends up being,
ends up being a kind of power play, it seems.
Not, not really a desire for equality, but a desire for power.
So, so I wonder if there's something going on here,
a kind of displacement because.
And this, this is going to be really,
you have to move through very carefully here.
So I think what people want to do.
Sorry, it sounds pompous, but it's hard to talk.
It seems, it seems plausible to me to propose that what people want to do
is reduce the suffering of pain and distress.
And then they, and then they,
they have clen, they're making a claim that most suffering or distress
or maybe all in, right, is caused by inequality.
And of course there is truth to that.
Yeah.
When resources are not being distributed as fairly as they can,
and fairness is not the same thing as equality.
This is part of the problem, right?
Because justice is also supposed to be about fairness,
not just about equality.
And so when we do cause, we cause unnecessary suffering.
So, so, so let me try and give you a bit of a,
a quite riff on this.
I see the, the, the left as really sensitive to the fact that human
beings are, I'll use a Greek term here,
but you'll, you'll find a Christian analog.
I'm sure that human beings are really subject to fate.
That there is just shitty things that happen to human beings because
they're finite and they're limited and the world is an overwhelming machine
and there's historical forces and material forces.
And so you might even say powers and principalities that work, right?
And people are just subject, right?
And that we have to do, and that people therefore deserve our aid,
even if they haven't earned it.
Because if we don't do that, we are, and this is like the aspect of
sin again, we're ignoring the fact that we are finite and we are
subject to forces beyond our control.
The left gets that.
And I think the right tends to forget that.
And that's why the right often comes off as cruel.
But what the left forgets is what the right is,
no matter how, you know, how haphazardly they do it and stupidly they do
it is the right tries to remind people that even though we are
subject to fate and people should be aided beyond what they deserve or
have earned, right?
Human beings are nevertheless also responsible.
They need to cultivate virtue because every human being is
beset by self-deception.
And the only person that can get out of self-deception,
I can't get you out of your own self-deception.
I can give you guides, but you have to go through it.
Like you have to go through it.
I can't do that for you, right?
So to put it in a slogan, you know,
the left remembers fate and forgets virtue and the right remembers
virtue and forgets fate.
And so what I'm trying to get at is how could we change this
discussion about justice so that we could put it back into what it
was supposed to be paired with, which was sofrasum, right?
We pursued the external justice of trying to reduce the suffering
of others that are caused by history and fate has to always be
counterbalanced by sofrasum, the cultivation of the inner justice
of virtue and that those, for the Greeks,
it was axiomatic that you had to talk about those two things
together.
Somehow we have gotten to the point where we only talk about one
side of this.
And I find that also a very lopsided thing.
Sorry, that was a long thing to say.
But, you know, you're a deep thinker.
I want to give you a lot to wrestle with.
Yeah.
Well, it seems like the way that, at least when I look at the way
that things happen in the Bible and kind of the way that emphasis
that Christianity has put on it is obviously Christianity is
obviously very, very preoccupied with the poor, preoccupied with
the poor in the broadest way you can interpret that.
And those that have less and those that have little, right?
Whether it's, you know, whether it's the poor in terms of their
own, let's say spiritual poor, or it's poor even physically in
terms of their material poor, or it's the sick, or it's those that
have no recourse like the widow and the orphan.
This is something that Christianity is extremely concerned about.
But the way that Christianity seems to have concerned itself about
it mostly is to ask those who have to give, right?
To put responsibility on those who have to care for those who need
to be cared for.
Sure.
Rather than tell those who are lacking to go get theirs, right?
Yeah.
To like, to take it from those who have it.
And that's really the difference between the revolutionary mindset
and the Christian mindset.
And some people might say, well, why, why can't it happen?
Like, why can't those that have less just take, right?
Take, take it back.
And the reason is because the reason is very practical reason.
It's because it's a self-defeating pattern.
Yes.
The pattern which will, which will destroy itself because there's
always someone who has less than you and there's always someone who
will be there to take from you, even though you think you are the one
who, you're the one who has less.
And so you take from that one above you, but then there's always
someone below you who has less than you and will take from you.
And as soon as you take from that one above you, the power,
especially, then you become the, the, you become the one who is now
in the, you know, who's, who's going to be shot.
Like the story of Robespierre is obviously the,
the most classic example of that happening.
And so that seems to be the way that Christianity deals with it.
And there are consequences if you don't.
And the consequences need to be kind of put in the right position.
The way I kind of say it is.
I don't excuse the peasants for killing the king.
Right.
But I still think it's partly the king's fault.
Right. It's still,
it's still because the king didn't care for the peasants that the
peasants ended up killing him.
And I'm not justifying the peasants actions,
but I am saying that if you don't care for the poor,
at some point it's going to happen.
Like the, the, the people will come and take theirs if you don't care
for them, but it's not morally justified that they do.
I don't know if that makes sense.
No, it does. I get what you're saying, but what I was, what I,
what I was trying to, well, maybe this is the way of bringing it back.
Yeah. Like, I'm trying to get to this notion that isn't just about
equality or even equity.
I'm trying, like, yeah, you know, you're right. Jesus does.
Jesus, you see Jesus and the Buddha, both.
And they, what's interesting is they both do this.
They both criticize equally something like cruelty and something like hypocrisy.
Right. And so what I'm saying is the, the,
what we're trying to bring in here as we're trying to encompass the,
the nature of human beings is that the notion of social justice,
especially if it becomes just the pursuit of equality,
does not have the machinery to deal with it.
I mean, Jesus and the Buddha are neither left nor right.
Like it doesn't make sense to talk. Right.
Yeah, exactly.
But you don't make sense at all.
Exactly. Right. And so the point is in a very profound way,
it's not that they're non-political, but they're, if you'll allow me,
they're meta-political.
Oh yeah. Right.
They're trying to get at what, what are the values or the virtues people
should be aspiring to that are the most responsible,
and I mean both senses of the word responsible, to human nature.
Right. That's what I see them doing.
And that's what I'm not seeing in this movement.
I'm not seeing the wisdom of, you know, like we said,
of trying to balance these things together of getting a deep understanding of human nature.
I'm, I'm hearing a very, very superficial theory about human nature and human history
and human culture.
And, and, and I don't think that the version of justice, justice is,
what really concerns me is this version of justice, it sounds so easy.
And that means that to me means it's got to be wrong because I mean,
what I get from all the great philosophers is justice, real justice.
I mean, John Rawls writes this huge book, right?
Like real justice is hard.
It's really hard because human beings are so incredibly complex and they have,
as we've been talking about here, these, you know,
these opposing forces and polls at work in them.
That was a point I was trying to make. Sorry.
You're totally right.
And I think that, like, if you look at this,
if you look at how Christ deals with it, it's interesting because,
you know, we talked about responsibility and you can see that in,
you can see the way that Christ talks about, like he talks to the Pharisees
and he says you're a bunch of hypocrites and he, he,
he talks to woe to the rich if you don't care for the poor and woe to, you know,
and, and blessed are those who are poor for they will receive and all of this,
like there's all this and is,
but he also has several parables where he talks about the poor who don't
care for what they have and the consequences of that.
Like he also has that.
He also has the parable of the talents where he talks about the servant who receives
something and doesn't make it fruitful and therefore has to face the consequences
of not making fruitful that's what she has.
And so Christ talks, talks at all levels at the same time.
You know, I always say, like you said, he's meta political.
He's a, he's a judge and a victim.
He's the king and the servant.
He's all these things at the same time in a very paradoxal way.
And so he kind of transcends politics and it's interesting to watch politicians,
the politically minded, because they see in Christ of the kind of weird mirror of
themselves.
So the people on the left see Christ as a kind of revolutionary.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Bigger and the people on the right see Christ as a get your act together type figure.
And it's like, well, you know what, he's neither of those really.
Yeah.
I think that was very well said, Jonathan.
Yeah.
So.
What to do with this, what to do with this, this weird, I, the way that,
I think the way to understand it and you know,
you talked a little bit in our,
before our conversation started about the inevitability of religio.
And I think that's really the way that's exactly where I wanted to go.
Yeah.
This whole discussion seems to be pointing, right?
It's making a very, I think plausible argument about the inevitability
of religio, the unavoidability of religio in human endeavor.
And you made, and human existence, and you made this point.
And I wanted to give you the opportunity to expand on it.
You made a point of criticizing the new atheists.
You know, in how they were sort of saying, if we could just get rid of
religion, you know, and what they did is, you know,
they identified religion with it, you know,
belief in the supernatural, et cetera, et cetera.
And if we just got rid of those false beliefs, then that would be it.
And then your point is, well, the people that are in these marches,
they're not advocating anything necessarily supernatural,
something perhaps transcendent, but not supernatural, et cetera.
They're not doing all, but nevertheless,
look at the religious behavior, look at how comprehensive and powerful it is.
And look at how much it's a response to the way the COVID crisis accelerated
the meaning crisis.
And so you, and you, you made that, and it was sort of a very brief thing.
It was about two or three minutes in the video, but I wanted to give you,
and I think this is a good context, you and I, in discussion.
I wanted to give you the opportunity to expand on that.
Yeah. Well, my criticism of the new atheists, you know,
and I would use Steven Pinker as the, as the main example,
just because of the kinds of books he's written and the kind of statements
he's made about enlightenment and this kind of progress and everything.
And I think that what you're doing is, is a much better,
like the COGSI approach and the cognitive science approach is a much better
approach to this because there is,
there is an understanding of what a human being is in a, in a deeper way.
And, and there's an understanding of the reasons why we have certain patterns
and the reason why certain things exist within us.
And what, what the new atheist team to want to do is to see the advantage
of reason and then want to kind of box the human being in reason and see
everything which is outside of reason as the thing to get rid of,
as the bad thing to get rid of.
But there's our original sentence.
Everything that's outside of reason needs to be eliminated,
but the problem is that you can't eliminate it.
You know, and, and there's a kind of weird utopian vision.
And the example I always use is the example of sleep.
You could say and reason and, and an awakeness, you know,
and the idea of kind of this more, this other aspect of us in sleep.
It's a good way to understand it.
It says, if I told you, you could be way more productive.
If you didn't sleep,
like you just have to not sleep and then you could be awake all the time.
And wouldn't that be amazing?
Like then you would imagine how much progress you would make,
like imagine how far you would go if you would just stay awake all the time.
But the reality is that you can't.
That's not just not part of being a human being.
And so these other patterns that we have are there and so,
and they're extremely important.
And if you try to get rid of them, what they do is they kind of,
they go down for a little while and then they come back like a monster
and then we'll swallow you.
And that's what we're, those are the kinds of things we saw in the,
in the French revolution, in the Russian revolution,
all the, the, the kind of end of atheist cycle where all of a sudden
the patterns come back like a big monster to devour you.
And now we're seeing very similar things as well.
We're seeing a secular religious manifestation and it's akin to the one
we saw in the French revolution.
And it's akin to the one we saw in the Russian revolution.
And so, and I, and I, and I always want to say it's like the,
the people who kind of made fun of Jordan Peterson talking about this.
It's like, it's happening right now.
It's happening right now. Look at what's going on.
And you can just poo poo it, you can toss it to the side,
but it's the same pattern happening again.
And the reason for the pattern is the same.
Like the denial of.
Sorry, I get excited and I throw myself.
Me too. Me too.
The denial of certain aspects of the human person is going to come back.
Yeah. And so the idea is, what do you do? Like, how do you deal with it?
And to me, that's why I think that.
That's why I think that having a conscious religious aspect to you.
That's why ritual,
conscious ritual is, is important because.
Ritual will be there. You can't avoid it.
Now the question is whether or not it's part of you integrated,
or whether or not you're a slave to ritualized behavior and kind of
scapegoat and identity forming behavior that, that is,
that is just part of existence.
I think that was very beautifully said. Yeah.
I agree. I think the first point you made it with the, you know,
the cog side and all the stuff on relevance,
realization and those aspects that are pre-rational and how,
how primordial they are and the importance of ritual.
Yeah. So for those of you, I mean, you're watching this video,
you know this work. And so there's arguments there.
And thank you, Jonathan, for gesturing to them.
And then as you, as you were building on that,
I thought of this scene and you'll probably be able to riff on this
because it's from mythology, it's from a science fiction classic,
you know, journey to the center of the earth.
And especially in the movie version,
Count Sacknessum, who's the villain.
They, they, you'll see how this connects in just a sec.
They say, well, well, don't you sleep? And he said, I never sleep.
I hate those little slices of death. And he represents exact,
and just, right?
So the journey to the center of the earth,
which of course has all kinds of mythic, you know,
meanings attached to that, right? But, and, but he's the villain.
And notice how he brings together like your analogy and how it connects
back to an unwillingness to accept his, his humanness, his mortality.
There's the hubris in here and his,
and that cycles us back again to this refusal to accept our humanity.
It's ultimately, it's again the same kind of,
it's a puritanical kind of refusal to accept our humanity
in a profound hubristic way.
And that, and that I think is what,
when I've talked to people, you know,
who have sort of come out of the New Atheist movement,
one of the things that they'll often say that started putting them off
was they got a sense of arrogance attached to these people.
And, you know, and I'm not talking about,
and part of it is no doubt personality. There's narcissism and,
but I think they might also have been putting out their finger on this,
this sense that, right?
These are aspects of our humanity that are not being given due.
And this is what I mean again about justice,
suffrage and justice. Plato had this sense that you had to give
all of the parts of the human their due.
They had to be given their due regard, their due role, their due place.
The attempt to eradicate was a deep mistake, right?
And so this, the softness and the inner justices,
we have to give due regard and due place and due role for all aspects of our humanity.
If you look at, if you look at the very first
commandment or the very first place in scripture where it talks about something,
which is holy, is in the description of creation.
And so you have six days, then you have the seventh day,
which is the day of rest. And it's the day which is set aside for God, right?
It's the holy day. And right there in Genesis, it says,
that's why we, we follow the Sabbath.
Now that there's a mystery in that, which is very profound.
And the mystery is that it's exactly the mystery that the new atheists are
and capable of seeing, which is that the way that the world is made
and the way that consciousness is made and the way that reason is made is
because it's a patterning system, it can never encompass everything, right?
It can be coherent, but it cannot be complete.
And you need to leave a bit out for completeness to manifest itself,
like in its, in its mystery.
So you need to leave a bit on the edge that is not closed, that isn't tied up,
that isn't accounted for.
There has to be some aspects which are not accounted for.
If you try to account for everything, that's the, you know,
that's the, that's the, the most dangerous thing, right?
It's the, and if you also try to see that, which is accounted for as totality,
which is the sin of Satan, which is the sin of pride, which is the sin of Adam,
that's the hubris. And then, then you fall because that aspect which you,
which you, which you, which is supposed to be unaccounted for,
which you're trying to ignore is still there, right?
And, and the, the fascinating aspect of that margin or the, the,
the, let's say the seventh day is that there are, it has two parts to it.
It has a part which is the unfathomable of creation, right?
The, the, the completeness of creation, but it also points to the infinite.
There's a secrecy in it, which also points to the infinite,
which is why it's both the day of rest,
but also the day set aside for God at the same time.
So it's both death and the source of life at the same time.
That's very interesting. Your invocation of Godel.
I mean, I take Godel's theorem that you can't have a both complete and consistent
example of what I meant earlier by mortality.
That's the mortality in the heart of any epistemological project or,
you know, Heisenberg's uncertainty.
That's the mortality in the, in the, in the heart of any empirical
observation or investigation and more and more of these, right?
And the, the, the, the history of philosophy of the last two centuries have been
in philosophy of science, at least the more philosophical aspects of science
have been the, been the discovery of this.
I'd like your invocation of it because it brings me back around.
And, you know, and you, I, you, you may,
I don't know if you're doing it deliver a little off, but you're invoking.
I heard Levinas when you were comparing totality to infinity because he has a
book around that, right?
And how infinity is not the same thing as totality.
Because totality is the pretense that you have both consistency and completeness.
That's my way of understanding it.
And, and therefore it, like, if you take the golden, golden,
Godel's argument seriously and you should, right?
That is always a dangerous pretense and that the problem with any,
any system that claims to be complete and consistent is that it is
actually a deep form of self deception.
Oh yeah.
That's for sure.
So.
I mean, and this is what, you know, this was, this is the great for all of the
criticisms I have over them.
This is the great thing that claims comes out of the whole pragmatism
movement of James and Pierce and Dewey and more recent people,
you know, like Quine and Davidson.
And they, they've had a deep influence on me.
I haven't had a chance to talk about them very much.
I will in another series.
But the point I'm trying to get to here is like there's a,
there's a shadow side of the utilitarianism.
There's a negative version of it, which is strategies of eradication.
Because eradication is an attempt to be completely consistent and complete.
So there's an argument and I'm not advocating for all of his ideas,
but I just want to give him due credit.
Coleman Hughes makes this argument about, look,
we all agree that murder is a deeply immoral act and I'm not playing around
with terms.
Well, sometimes you kill, but when we say killing, that's not immoral.
We don't call it murder.
Murder is the name for the killing we regard as immoral.
So let's not play that game.
So we guard murder as immoral,
but we don't pursue an eradication strategy in our society.
Because if we were to eradicate, try to eradicate murder,
we would so, we would so subject ourselves to a radically dehumanizing,
totalitarian state that, and that's why no, no,
that's why no culture anyway doesn't, right?
Every culture has prohibitions against murder.
There's variations on it, of course, but you don't see them saying,
and what we're going to do is we're going to set things up so that murder is impossible.
You know, Phillip, that's a Phillip K. Dick kind of situation.
It's a scary thing.
No, and you're right about the strategies of eradication.
These, these, these are extremely frightening because they do,
they tend towards exactly what you're talking about.
And, and I'm afraid that I see the same, you know,
and I'm afraid that I'm seeing that right now with COVID.
I'm seeing exactly a falling into a strategy of eradication where we think
that we cannot continue to live until this virus ceases to exist.
Yes.
This is not how the, this is not how it works.
This is a dangerous, because the method you will use to eradicate the virus,
the totalitarian method you will use will be extremely harmful.
They will be very, very harmful to, to, to our, our health, to our community,
all of these things.
And it's like the thing, the difficulty that you understand the desire to
eradicate, because it's a bad thing, right?
This virus is a bad thing.
You want it to go away.
But once you enter into that strategy of eradication,
especially with techno states where you are, you are develop the power to
push that capacity of eradication to its, you know, to,
to limit that or not seen before.
Yeah.
It's a very, very frightening situation.
A clear example of that is the proposal that we,
we start tracking everybody's movement, every movement.
Yeah.
I say people, do you really want the state to have that power?
Do you really want the state to have that power?
Do you really want the corporations to have that power?
They already have that power to some degree and they use it to manipulate you.
I look, I, and I can't believe it.
I saw a BBC article just a few days ago.
And it was just like a regular article where they're talking about what the
future of travel will look like.
And in their description of the future of travel, they talked about,
they talked about vaccines with identification in the vaccine that they
can scan your body so that, so that you, and this was a BBC article.
It wasn't a conspiracy article.
It wasn't like someone, it was like, this is what travel is going to look like.
They'll scan your body to know whether or not you have the vaccine and
they'll let you participate in social things depending on whether or not
they can track you.
It's like, my goodness.
Don't you watch science fiction movies?
I don't know.
Am I the only one who watches science fiction movies?
Well, I watch them too.
So, I mean, and we have to be careful here.
So COVID is very bad.
Oh yeah.
No, no, no, I want to make an analogy here.
COVID is very bad and you should try as much as we can ameliorate it,
but with wisdom, toggling against, against over empowering the state and
taking a dehumanized view or a simplistic view of human nature in,
in order to achieve it.
So we don't push for eradication.
We, we push for amelioration that doesn't cost us too much our humanity.
Isn't that the same attitude we should take for how to deal with the very real
evil abrasive that we should try which,
and we should continue to try to ameliorate it.
But we shouldn't, you know,
I talked a lot about how you frame the problem is way more important than the
method about, you know, about actually solving it.
Should we be adopting a mindset that is a totalitarian kind of eradication
about something like racism?
It strikes me that that, but that argument by analogy means there is a sense
in which we can go too far on this.
And that doesn't, I hope that doesn't make me a racist.
And what I've seen is like, I saw the interview with Don Lemon and I forget
the name of the actor and he was trying to say, he's a black guy.
And he's right.
He's trying to say, I'm just saying that, that, you know,
some of the leaders of the movement are going too far too extreme.
That's all he's proposing. And he was, he was treated with smugness and,
and dismiss and then this horrible argument by Lemon, you know,
well, people accuse Martin Luther King of being too extreme as if, well,
are you saying that because sometimes people have misused that word that
every time they use it, they're misusing it?
That's a really stupid argument.
Can we have a better argument please?
And it's like, if we can't even bring up the question that the,
that we might be framing the attempt to achieve a goal,
a laudable goal that I fully support, then I think we're,
we're in a very, very bad place.
I think we're getting into a very bad place. Yeah. And you're right.
Because what one of the things COVID did was awaken in us this,
this, this pattern of infection, right? Yes.
And it awakened in us the pattern of infection and the desire to exclude
and eradicate. Yeah. And now it's being politicized.
Like not, not the COVID, like it's weird because you can see that there's,
there's no like, there's no narrative connection between COVID and the,
and Floyd, but there is a pattern connection. Yeah.
And you can see that in the, that it's awakened the pattern.
And now it's playing out in the political sphere.
Well, I mean, isn't that a case? Again, I'm talking at the latent level,
not the manifest able, but that seems like a case, you know,
it's like a clear case of what a psychodynamic person would call displacement.
Right. That you're, you're being, it's like,
like you said, COVID puts you like you're suddenly in the Old Testament.
And I don't mean that pejoratively, right? But, you know,
you have this ubiquitous threatening things out there in the world and you
have to adopt this very, you know, very, you know,
insular purity code. And then you don't know what it's going to strike you.
And then, right. And there might be infected.
And, and, and you know, the adult and then,
but now what we can do is we can't,
we couldn't do anything about the COVID, but I think what your suggestions,
but I can do something about this over here. Can do something about, yeah.
And the danger about the danger of the racist thing is the,
the limit of it, because the limit is the problem with racism is that it's
an invisible thing in the sense that it ends up being thoughts and feelings and
people. And the idea that you can reprogram someone and that you can
move towards the eradication of thoughts and feelings.
I mean, we know where that leads. Like we know where that goes.
And because it can't happen, then like we said, like I said before,
but it's going to end up looking like a scapegoating where we're going to choose
some, we're going to find examples that we can drag out in public and,
you know, and have struggle session, watch struggle sessions and have them be
humiliated in public so that we can deal with the problem of eradicating
something which is, which is unconscious bias.
Like it's unconscious. So you can, how can you eradicate it?
Well, I think trying to eradicate that is,
I mean, given what we've argued, isn't that the same?
It's ultimately committing you at some level to eradicating the machinery of
humanity.
That's right.
Right.
And so.
And so the, let's say that this is, I've been more and more attracted to
Rene Girard in the past year, I would say, you know, just because of
everything that's happened and I've been seeing that his analysis of the
situation is, is really one of the wisest in terms of the way that he
interpreted what's happening and intersectionality.
I mean, he passed away, I think around 2010 or maybe a bit later.
You know, he talked about, I saw a quote of his in 2007 where he talked
about the machine of antichrist, which is ramping up and he saw exactly
what we're seeing.
He said, it'll be infinite victim hood looking for infinite scapegoat.
And so it's like this perpetual wheel of victim hood, which is looking
perpetually for more and more scapegoats that like almost like a self
devouring machine.
And so we're seeing it that the solution is like, I hate to, I know you
dislike when I put it too far, but the solution is the, the image of the
scapegoat being the murderer and this, and the victim at the same time,
like identifying with Christ and identifying with those that killed him,
identifying with the capacity to exclude and the reality of also being
excluded to a certain extent, like those two things together, if you can
kind of, you can integrate them properly and not in a weird disorderly
manner, can help you have compassion for those who are excluded, but can
help you also understand that you are one of those who do that all the time.
Yes.
You're always doing it.
But this, this is what I meant.
I, I, I, I think there's power under argument.
I've only read the one book and I'm not completely at the one I saw Satan fall
like lightning.
Yeah.
But the idea that you can explode the, if you'll allow me to use some of
my terms, you can explode the cultural cognitive grammar of scapegoating and
that the Christian mythos does that.
I thought that was one of the most powerful arguments.
And it's a new argument.
As far as I know, one of the most powerful apologetic arguments for Christianity
that I've heard in quite some time.
So I think that is a good point that you brought up.
But, but it does, I think it's, it's situated within this larger past again,
which we keep coming back to, of trying to get to a place where we can
simultaneously accept faith and virtue.
Because one of the ways in which you can, right?
One of the ways in which you can address people's thoughts and feelings is
by inspiring them to aspire to virtue rather than trying to eradicate.
You can try to inspire the aspiration to virtue.
And, and this has been, to my mind, you know, a very, very successful
strategy where I've been talking a lot recently in a cure of the dawn,
did the meaning wave about it, about stealing the culture.
And I actually use Christianity as a primary example of that,
that Christianity doesn't try and overthrow the political structure.
What it does is it steals the culture.
It creates an entirely different culture from the bottom up.
And then, because the problem, to my mind, what the French Revolution shows
is you can radically transform the state.
But if you don't transform the underlying cultural, cognitive,
grammar and normativity, nothing is fundamentally going to change.
Yeah, you just change the, you just change the ones who are holding the reins.
You circulate, you circulate the elites.
Exactly.
Right.
And so, whereas what Christianity does is, and is, is it, it builds a new civilization.
Buddhism does the same thing, right?
It builds a new civilization.
Islam does the same thing.
It builds a new civilization.
And, and so that brings us, and we don't have much time, I suppose,
but so that brings me towards the third point is you said, you, you know,
you sort of despair of knowing what to do.
And I'm wondering if you,
sorry, I realized I might be daring the pro-hostress thing with proposing
some sort of a, a Christian thing to a Christian, which is a ridiculous thing.
But I gave you all of those examples.
And to my mind of the idea of, well, isn't the response to do as much as we can
to engage in
Building the next culture and that sounds preposterous
But a commitment to that kind of thing seems to me to be the most responsible
Response to the depth of the situation we are in right now. Yeah
No, I think so I think I mean I would say on a personal level
It's it's just it's I mean love God love your neighbor is a pretty pretty good thing to live by and in the immediate
Reality and not abstract categories to deal
You know to to love the people that you that you encounter with to see in them the face of God is something that will
Transform at least your life. It's harder in terms of like a social
responsibility for sure myself the way that I
the way that I frame it
That's why I'm doing what I'm doing what you said
Yeah, is that I'm trying to help people see the the grammar of culture or see the pattern
And and of course one of the things I've been emphasizing the most is the importance of the margin and talking about the margin in a balanced way
So that you neither have the desire to because both sides want to eliminate the margin
Everybody wants to eliminate it. They want to eliminate the margin either by making it the same as the center by integrating
All the marginal aspects and making them equal to everything else or by eradication or by cutting it off
And that's those are that's the real problem with the like it's the question we had during the
The first wave of violence of the 20th century you had two sides
You had one side which wanted to create an equal
Utopia and one which wanted to create a hierarchical utopia that cut off the margin that burned it off
Yeah, and so and we're facing the same. It's like we didn't deal with it
We're facing the same problem now and we're seeing the one side now
We're seeing the we're seeing the the the side that wants everything to be equal, but I always tell people that
When the Nazis came to Germany, they were on the verge of a communist revolution
It's not think the pendulum doesn't move in one direction. No the pendulum swings and and and it's a scary thing to watch
Well, but this is part of the way in which again
the way in which this lack of the lack of
Of a dynamical nuance in thinking
so, you know, Leo Ferrara and I talk about this idea that you in
Living systems and right you you see opponent processing and I've argued right and that what an opponent processing means
This is the way you deal with trade-offs and we've been talking about trade-offs all the way through right
You have opponent processing you like your parasympathetic and sympathetic nervous system like the sympathetic nervous system is biased
It tries to interpret everything as a threat or an opportunity and it arouses you and the parasympathetic system is biased
And it tries to interpret everything as a signal that you should relax and calm down and and they're working
Their biases work in opposite direction, but they're functionally integrated together because that's how you get the most self-corrective system
mm-hmm and
What we were supposed to have and you can see this in Dewey, right?
Because we're supposed to have a point processing, but what it's devolved into is adversarial processing
But and this is the eradication idea the other it says zero now
It's a zero-sum game. I've given up the idea of self-correction
I've given up the idea of commitment to a process that you and I even though we disagree
We can we can commit to like you and I do in dialogue
We have disagreements, but we see the potential that we can correct each other in valuable ways that we mutually appreciate
right there was that commitment and
That commitment to that process has been lost
Like the fact that you most Americans are
More distrusting of the opposite party than they are a foreign threat. Like what the heck does that mean?
right what like what does that mean to you like like
And so the adversarial eradicate the other destroy the other zero-sum game mentality
I think has made the process. I
Think it's broken. Yeah, I think the process is broken
And so I don't I don't know I I don't see how I mean and layman Pascal and others
They just agree with me on this. I don't know how to work within that in a way
And so that's what I mean by steal the culture that I don't know if working within that machinery is a viable strategy
I think no strategy has to be
you know
Jonathan I was at a conference
two weeks ago
Called the movement summit and there's all these communities of practice springing up everywhere. We're trying to integrate mindfulness and
Movement practices and discourse practices
And and so many of them and you know these people and they're all and they all want to talk to each other and they want to network and
It felt very different. This is it felt very good. It was neither, you know, the revolution of
The of the left or the law in order of the right. It's it was orthogonal to that. It was these people signed it
seriously time and talent and money and energy and
commitment to the cultivation of wisdom and
And a deeply alternative way of being and to my mind, that's where
And I know you think it should be given a particular Christian slant
But I also think you're charitable enough to include other people of good faith who are willing to work with you
I think that's where the answer to the the more difficult problem lies
I think there is stuff actually happening right here right now culturally
symbolically
Existentially that is where the diff the difference that is needed is starting to be generated. Oh
But I I for sure agree. I think that the
Like a way to see it is like that that this is horrible because it has bad implications
Like the seeds of the next world will appear in the the current one, right?
Yes, like they they're just hard to see, you know
The little sprouts are hard to see because everything else is burning in the forest, right?
So it's it's difficult to see that the the seeds as this is kind of breaking apart and
And I mean, I'm curious to see how all of this will be integrated. I do I
Do again, like, you know, we talked about this before so we're not gonna come to a conclusion
but I do I do think that
there is a need for a narrative cohesion and and I and I do think that I'm until
Until something happens in the West. It's still it's still the Christian narrative
So I don't I don't see a way out of it for at least, you know, I don't see a way out of it
So but I I appreciate I do think that the questions that people are asking and that the desire for wisdom and the desire
for transformation is
One which will bear fruit. It won't it has to if it's done with sincerity and done, you know
And a desire for transformation. It will bear fruit. Yeah, the point I'm trying to make is thank you for saying that
And and you know from my part, I don't I don't ever claim to have a foreclosure argument against Christianity
Always say that I do not have such a fit
But what I was trying to emphasize is there's not only sincerity there's depth in like what's going on here
It has the appreciation for humanity and complexity
That's what I'm seeing in these people in this movement. Of course, we're all flawed human beings
I'm not I'm not painting some utopic vision, but I'm talking about, you know, a
Real a real possibility and the acknowledgement that I think it
It's in existence. I like your metaphor for all the ways it's fraught, but I do like your metaphor of the seeds
I do like putting the two together that the burning of the forest actually fertilizes the seeds in the way
They need to be fertilized and perhaps you were alluding to that with and your right smile. Yeah, but it's not it's not a fun
It's not fun. No, like it's not pleasurable. No, there's and it means it means death and suffering
Yep, and I have kids and I don't want this
But I want and what needs to happen are not always the same thing. Yeah
Jonathan, I think maybe this would be a good place to bring it to a close
So I proposed to you privately and you already agreed so I'm going to do it publicly
Yeah, I think that you and I and Paul should have a
Have a discussion like this at the alogo says I would call it at length for the three of us
And I'd like to invite you and then I've also invited Paul and let's let's try and work to make it happen
Because I think it would be a very beneficial for all of our respective listeners
Yeah, that'd be great. I would I would love that and we let's set it up. Okay, so I'll reach out to Paul and
I'll try and make it happen. So I found
Well, you could see I got passionate which means this was definitely
This is definitely the alogos for me
I always say that the difference between a deep the alogos and a monologue is both people fought find themselves adduced
They find themselves drawn to a place
They couldn't get to individually on the road and there's a kind of education in than that
That's very different from just sort of thinking in your own head
And so I always find that the case when I get into such a dialogue with you
I wanted to thank you for you had so many so many insightful
brilliant ways
Which so many insights and brilliant things you said and not only what you said the manner in which you said the imagery that you use
Was itself often
Deeply helpful. So thank you very much. Thank you very very much
Well, you know, I really I always enjoy talking to you and I and I really appreciate the insight
You're bringing to the conversation and I'm looking forward to seeing where this is going and a kind of how how this is slowly going to
To let's say play dance together is the best way to maybe to say it. Yeah. Yeah, I agree. I agree
Okay, so thank you very much. All right, John. It was good to talk to you. Good talk to you. All right. Bye. Bye. Bye
