40s. And the common people really don't have any idea what a telescope is,
but they are fascinated with the possibility of being able to see what's going on on other planets.
And so they write these, some of them completely insane letters,
but fascinatingly brilliant insane letters.
There's a series of letters from a woman who's surely psychotic that are just absolutely genius.
And similarly, there's a letter from a young man who wants to go to Mars at any cost,
like knows he may not come back. It doesn't matter. He wants to be the first guy there.
And then there's a long letter that I love that I've made some recordings from
about a man just raving that there's no such thing as gravity and the astronomers are just lying.
There's a bunch of lying astronomers making up this no one can prove that there's gravity.
This is ridiculous. It's just it's fabulous. I love it.
Does he have an alternative explanation for the way things are?
See, I think that's a really that's a beautiful problem because
we have this idea that that if you if you say that something is wrong,
then it's on you to show what is correct. But that's not true.
Those two things don't go together. You guys are just straight up lying about gravity.
And I don't have to tell you what it's actually going on. I'm just telling you this gravity
thing is bullshit, which is probably going to turn out to be true. This is the problem.
But it seems it almost seems like whatever we think is true and real given enough time
will be proven to be wrong. That seems to be kind of the way it goes from the perspective
of the whatever 53 years I've been here, you know, what what kind of bits I've picked up from
history, you know, and just experience leads me to believe that people don't ever know anything.
I mean, it's kind of like a, you know, we know what we what we're directly experiencing and
you know, we can make some predictions and they might come true a lot of the time,
but it's all very imprecise as far as I can tell.
I mean, I would argue that the concept of knowledge as we hold it today as modern
is completely bullshit. There's no possibility of that should be true. It's just a completely wrong
fucking minded way to think. There's things we can have simple knowledge about like this will
probably be here in a minute, but the idea that we know like what stuff is or what's going on
and that we know that kind of explicitly and in a single value way, complete fucking nonsense.
And probably prior to maybe, I don't know, three, four hundred years ago, there were zero humans
thinking this way. It's a weird product of what? Features of science, features of religion,
materialist philosophy, reductionist philosophy, things are mechanical, they're one value
we can know with certainty certain things, right? I mean, the idea of certainty itself
has a fairly narrow, useful scope, but it has somehow exploded all the way across the spectrum
of knowledge so that you're not certain you don't know. Or rather, yeah, there's this
really terrifying single-valued idea and there's a complex array, excuse me, of
sort of implementations of this problem. But yeah, what we think of as knowledge,
I think we're very confused generally. It's like a lot of it, I'm actually committing the problem
that I'm talking about. I'm saying knowledge means one thing, and that thing's wrong.
So it's so tempting that it's hard to escape. Go ahead. Well, it's the cultural water that we've
been swimming in, isn't it? This abstraction, this head thing. For me, my understanding is that
we've just gone so far into our heads and now beyond it, through our heads, out into this kind
of virtual space. That, I mean, that to me is the root of the problem. It's the disconnect from the
body and the heart, and therefore the living world. We're interfacing with the world through ideas
instead of direct experience, mostly. Most of us mostly seem to be doing that. And I think we've
just been on, we've been on this kind of trajectory for a while now. And what we're experiencing right
now, to me, looks like it's just crashing and starting to fall apart. And I feel like,
you know, some of this, some of these kind of, as it's cracking, some of this ancient stuff, and
we'll probably no doubt get on to Amon at some point. But, you know, what that signal that comes
through what he's doing, for me, is it's like this whole edifice of our culture has cracked so
deeply down to its roots, which seem to be, certainly in the West, I'm talking about the West,
obviously. You know, ancient Greece is the foundation for the West. And I feel like what's
happened is the cracks have gone right down to the very foundation. And suddenly, this pre-Western
cultural energy is bursting out, like lava or something. And it's coming out in this weird
kind of way. And it's, you know, it's quite chaotic. But I'm getting such a sense. I mean,
that's what, to switch me on when I heard him speaking, you know, it wasn't really the content
so much. It was just this energy and this recognition of this is something ancient.
I'm actually getting a pipeline to ancient culture. And it's fascinating because it seems to speak to
a time when the people had a balance between body, heart and mind. And they kind of brought it
all together into some incredible cultural moment that's lasted 2000 years or more, you know, and
that. So, and it makes me think of that idea that Terence McKenna had about the archaic revival,
like we've kind of come back. And it goes with the whole spiral dynamics thing of, you know,
that I don't know how much you know about that. But when you get to that second tier,
you re, you're revisiting the first stages of human development. But, you know, the next
go round. So that's all those things seem to be coming together in a fascinating way for me.
And I suppose, you know, I'm not really one for hope anymore. I think hope is a kind of false
investment. But I'm just seeing some kind of possibility for reconnection
to what to me is real and more balanced through all of this. I mean, I may not even see it in my
lifetime, but I'm seeing the beginning of it. You know, this kind of this energy represents to me
the beginnings of some kind of breakthrough. If we survive what's coming next, then
I could, you know, I can see a sort of another grease, whatever the new version of that is,
you know, eventually, from all of this, if we make it. And that's kind of exciting. Yeah.
Yeah. It's a lot to unpack there. Yeah.
So I want to go back for a moment to what I was attempting to communicate about knowledge.
And rather than adopt what I think, you know, this is one of the mistakes that I think we
moderns make. That's a terrifying mistake, actually. So when we're concerned about a term,
we go to the dictionary, or we go to what we think the common definition or meaning of the term is,
when that's actually not how language is supposed to work, like it's just supposed to work by us
deciding on purpose, what our purposes are, and how we are trying to see,
and then molding the language together so that it is consonant with our intent in our conversation.
And I think that that's the difference.
What's moderns are subject to language. And one of the things that Amman is aware of,
even though he doesn't talk about it a lot, is that's not, that's not how language works.
You're not subject to language. Language is your toy. You make it do what you need it to do.
And the abstraction that comes into consciousness when we play the game the modern way is terrifying
because it's uninhabitable, relationally, intellectually, poetically. So I just want to
mention that briefly, that what I was yelling at a moment ago was the absence of the human
in the concept of knowledge as it's popularly played when I should have began more intelligently.
So just that little correction there.
Well that, you see, what comes up for me as you're saying that is
what Amman kind of points to and he refers to it. I mean he's in love with the Greek language
and part of his love is the fact that it has this capability to do what you just described.
Where you can kind of tailor it to whatever you've got going on. It's got this extra dimension.
And for me that just reminds me of poetry because poetry to me is like the raw material of language.
It's kind of the awe from which culture and language is built. And when poems at certain times
resonate deeply with people, they have meaning that's contextual, that's about that moment and time.
And a word you've heard a thousand times before can suddenly mean and feel completely different
because it's been used in the poem. And I feel like these things are completely related.
And what excites me about this idea about the Greek, which makes me want to learn it even though I'm
no scholar. And you know, I wonder even if I would have time to study it enough
to get what I'm after with it. But I'd love to find the experience of language that's creative in
that way again. Because of course language is alive. This is the other thing that he refers to
and we all know it if we look through history. It's constantly evolving. Words do change their
meaning sometimes completely the opposite. Or they kind of slowly die or they almost flat line
and get forgotten and then they get revived later on. And new words are being made all the time.
So it is this kind of, even in our culture, that's the case. But I'm fascinated by this extra
dimension of language that you just pointed to. This kind of, I mean, how would you describe that
sort of further to what you've already said? It's this capacity to kind of create in the moment
new language. But everyone who's speaking it would understand. Do you know, I don't know,
what do you think? What's your view on what that is, that extra dimension?
Okay, so many things here.
There's a certain age, if you watch children, you will discover that between the ages of like nine
and 12, in their peer groups, presuming that they have peer groups and they're not just isolated,
they will begin to forge jargon that is specific to their peer groups and allows them to say things
that others can't understand. And this is the inversion of the adults. You know, when they're
going to take them and they act like, should we take the dog? Should the DOG go for a WALK?
Right? Because they don't want the dog to hear the question and freak out and start
kissing itself with glee, right? Or, you know, they're spelling words in front of the children
who don't yet spell, which is a very interesting, you see how profoundly fascinating that specific
Kloy is? Because nothing is going to be more interesting to that child than what the hell
those letter sounds are and what the adults are trying to hide from the child. Child's
going to be highly motivated to figure out that coding right quick, right? So there's a lot of
games that go on. Unfortunately, we tend to, the jargoneering of late childhood, tends to get lost.
We will be unlikely to encounter it again unless we know comedians. Comedians neologize. They will
make shit up to make you laugh. They will put two words together that you never thought and you're
just like, wow, you know, neologizing turns out to be crucially important to human linguistic
consciousness and play. I do it somewhat regularly, although I'm trying to think of
having any examples in my mind at the moment. I probably don't. I can come up with some or
maybe just do it while we're talking. But languages like German, for example,
are particulate in such a way that you constantly can create new words by just mixing the parts
together. I don't speak German, but I'm aware of this feature. So like if you say zeitgeist,
for example, you mean like spirit of the time or time spirit, zeitgeber means time giver,
zeitstor means time taker. So the zeit thing means time. Now there might be something resembling
that in English, I'm not sure. But if we had a cohort that was both playing at being human together
and performing missions that were important to us, we would develop private language.
Right. Pockney in the UK was an example of a coded rhyming language. That's incredible.
I think how powerful that is. Why are we not playing games like that?
Well, I mean, you must have equivalents in the States because I mean, Cockney's the one you know
because it's probably had the kind of biggest reach internationally. But every part of the
country where accents are different have their own language and version to that. You know,
when I was a teenager in Manchester, there was a thing called back slang, which was kind of like
words were shifted around like a letter was moved from the front to the back and things like that.
And I think every sort of urban center and maybe even in the countryside, I mean, I'm sure because
there are phrases and ways of saying stuff in all, you know, England is such a tiny country,
but the difference in accents, if you travel like 15, 20 miles, somebody can be speaking in a
completely different accent and have a whole set of phrases that are particular to that place.
And I guess that's less. So now, you know, in my lifetime, I've seen the sort of homogenization
of English and also the Americanization of English. So that's probably being diluted a little bit now.
But, you know, two generations ago, it was alive and kicking and it's still there. It's what,
you know, it's it waits. It's it's potential is there all the time, I think.
Yes. Okay. There are there are forms of slang. Of course, there's like the urban dictionary
stuff, right, on the internet. But cockney seems to be to be a very peculiar thing. And I'm not
an expert on it. You've grown up in that place. I only know a bit, you know, from across the pond
or whatever. But it's very profound because it's it's a rhyming slang. And it's meant, if I understood
it correctly, it was meant originally to be able to talk about the stuff you shouldn't be doing,
right, trying, so forth. And by the way, I just opened up my notes, right, and the first note that
I opened to presentation. This is a, you know, this is me neologizing. And the next note after
that is I'm walking around the street the other day. And there's because we're having sort of like
a little festival here. There's muses, there's musicians like every 10 feet, right, where normally
there's maybe one per neighborhood or something. So much music that there was it was music was
impossible. Right, it was over music. So, you know, I do play with neologizing myself. But in order
to do that, you have to be in a cohort that neologizes together for some reason. If we're
isolated, we're not unless we're very linguistically precocious and I kind of am, right, I'm a, you
know, you're not supposed to say you're a poet, it's like saying I'm a shaman, right, but I,
I write poetry. Yeah, I'm very aware of it. It's important in my life. So unless you're with a cohort,
we're not really likely to do that. But it's crucially important that that language serves
our purposes and that there's an actual us, like a real, like right here with you and me,
there's a real us to the degree that we
so funny prioritize, right, which literally means to make before, right, to make come first to the
degree that we prioritize the us, rather than, for example, me becoming fascinated sound of my own
voice, which is an actual problem that I have to wrestle with.
The playful way in which children make up. So like, I knew I was in touch with a young girl
for quite some time, because I was close with both her and her mother. And she was an unusually minded
person. And she would talk about this word that her and her friends used that they made up. I
believe that the word was bonnet, but it didn't have a meaning. They would just look at something
and one of them would go bonnet, and the other one go like, yeah, bonnet, right. And, and but it didn't
have. Or perhaps, Darren, it had a meaning, but it wasn't an intellectual one. It was a self thing,
right? It's a feeling. It's a way of emphasizing
some kind of differentiation from the dead inside bullshit that the adults are constantly
practicing together. Like, it's a presentation, right? Every time the adults are speaking, right?
It's another presentation. Yeah. Yeah, I mean, this is one of the things that I talked about
in one of my recent recordings on prison nearing in English, you know, which is just the establishment
of these dead inside ideas and proposals, postulates, models of humanity and reality, life and death,
and, and they're just fucking uninhabitable, right? Yeah. No wonder the kids are like doing drugs and
going crazy and doing crime and being semi suicidal, if not directly suicidal, right, testing
themselves against that. They don't want to, you know, even back when I was a kid and it wasn't that
bad, we had an agreement among me and my friends that if we made it to 35, we would take each other
out. Like, I just don't want to don't let me become like, don't let me become one of them, right? And
that was in the 70s when things were still pretty good. Yeah, yeah, yeah. I know that looks like
a golden age now, doesn't it? And we're like, please, no, God, don't let me do that. I don't
want to live like that even for one day. Just come if like whoever's still alive, you know,
take the other guys out at 35, right? Yeah, that's it. I mean, that is it. It's that sense of
the fakeness. Teenagers, it's interesting, you're talking about kids having their language. My
daughter, my youngest daughter is 12 today. So she's been inhabiting and still is, to some degree,
that place that you're describing. And her older sister is 15. And she's very much now in that
place where she's just looking at the adults with contempt, you know, like, you know, starting
really starting to see their bullshit and just having no time for it at all. And I've been,
it's been great for me because I've been noticing this arising in her and I've been consciously
aware of the signal she's sending me whenever I'm just doing some adult bullshit habit thing.
And luckily, I've realized that's why the, you know, there is a natural need to pull away from
your parents at that age. But also, what happens or has happened a lot in our culture is the adults
are so steeped in their bullshit and their repetitive nature by then that when the kids get
to that age, they've just had enough of it. And usually the adults can't see that themselves.
And so just think the kids are being awful. But luckily, something, I don't know how, but something
in me said, pay attention, she's showing you where you've got stuck, where you've just been in the
habit in the grind of parenthood. And you started to just spout the dead shit sometimes. So whenever
I get that signal now, I really receive it, you know, and go, okay, I'll question what I just said,
or I will, you know, I will, whenever I notice it or whenever I can, I'll admit when I've got it
wrong, or what I just said was bullshit, or, and she I think she senses that now that,
and it's an unspoken thing between us, there's a kind of, there's a sort of
camaraderie between us in a weird way, that's a silent one. And the more and I'm realizing the
more I practice that and pay attention and use her insight to, you know, recalibrate myself and
remind myself to be here in this moment again. And, you know, listen, she's got something to share
with me now. And it's really valuable. And the more I notice that and I pay attention to that,
I feel like this bond between us gets stronger. And, you know, we can have disagreements about
things. And she is only 15. And she's got, you know, that arrogance, and she doesn't know a lot
about being alive. And, you know, and she doesn't understand that a lot of the positions I take
are because I've lived for this long. So all of that's in there, but she has something so valuable.
And I think that's what teenagers have, they have, they're really holding up the mirror
of everything that you've kind of all the habits you've developed over that time from when they
were born to now. And they're saying, some of this, maybe most of it is bullshit, can we have a look
at this now? So yeah, interesting. So much there. You know, I guess it's in some way
socially or morally or linguistically dangerous
to speak in certain ways about our children. And
Aamon is very clearly
speaks with great reverence, wonder, awe, and respect about young women, right? He's talking about
10, 11, 12, 13-year-old girls who were trained to hunt men from horseback and kill them with
boys and arrows and are masters of intoxicants and venoms and things. And it's very clear that he,
I mean, I'm not saying he's, I don't know how to put it.
I know what you're trying to say. You know, I'm trying to put it, it's really difficult. It's
so triggering all of this as well. Like, it's so, I mean, I'm, you know, as I'm saying, I've got two
young daughters. And I am, I'm so open-minded about all kinds of things, almost everything,
but there's one place where I'm completely unreasonable. And that comes to fucking pedophilia.
I just want to fucking kill those people. It's the most viscerally repulsive thing to me.
And everything in my instincts just wants to kill it.
The protection of our children, especially our female children.
Not that we don't protect the males similarly, right? Somebody's messing with us.
I mean, yeah, get it. And I absolutely am on the same channel there.
But also fascinating to kind of realize that it's also a product of our time,
you know, because I'm looking at my, my 12 year old is now she's going through her body is starting
to change. And, you know, when you've got, when you have daughters, you realize they become women
so young. I mean, by women, what I mean is they're physically ready to have children so young.
Yeah. You know, by our cultural standards, it's too young.
But, you know, I can see how, you know, when your lives are short or when you're in a completely
different time, a completely different time, a different culture, you know, when girls became
able to have children, they were ready to go. And that would have been completely built into the
culture. Yeah. I mean, there still exist cultures that marry off children, at least the girl children.
I don't know about the boys. There are cultures though, that are so different from ours.
I'm not going, I mean, it would be too provocative for me to talk about the things that I have learned
from studying anthropology, way too provocative. I'm not going to say anything about it at all.
Yeah. Yeah. What I am going to say is that
it's not wrong for us to adore our children or to revere the youth and the beauty of the children
without sexualizing it specifically, without making it like an erotic commodity, for example.
You know, a couple of times in my life, I had the privilege of taking care of
either a young girl, I mean, literally my friend who named her daughter Athena,
had me take care of her for six months while she was working in town.
And that was one of the most amazing experiences in my life, because Athena,
and this is the first phenomenon, you know, this is the goddess that Oman's actually talking about,
right? Her mind and her way of being in the world were so superior to anything her mother could
table. I mean, her mother's pretty sophisticated, but Athena's mind is sharper than any adult's mind,
more incisive, more insightful, devastatingly on the mark, like all the time,
and playful and explorative and curious. You know, when I would teach her, I taught her pieces of
Latin and stuff, and she was so smart. She kicked that stuff up right away and applied it to medical
language and stuff, taught her things about the bees. I mean, strangely, this is going to sound
ironic, but I taught her to pay really close attention to the bees and how to rescue them
when they're on the ground, and she was fascinated by that. I taught her how to draw birds to her
hand, and she was ecstatic about that. And so, you know, we had a blast together. There was no
there was no sexual aspect to that relationship, but it was an incredibly deep bond. And I let her
leave me. I trusted her intellect. Yes, there's things she doesn't know about the world and
that's dangerous and stuff like that. And, you know, I would point those things out if she started
to veer into some direction where I thought, like, this is not going to go well if she continues
in that direction. And a couple of times, parents had me talk to their daughters who were autistic
or unusually minded and very imaginative because the child had no adult who could sort of understand
where their consciousness is. And these were moments of incredible learning and profound
insight for me. So there's a difference between the sort of two different aspects of this idea that
we call pedophilia, right? There's the bad thing that we mean when we use this word, we almost
always mean this bad thing, which is adults sexualizing children. But there's this other thing,
which is the adoration of child's developmental moment and prowess and the beauty and spirit in
child, which maybe we need a different word for or something, but these are not the same thing.
And we can't, we should never kill this one because it sounds similar to this one, right?
Yeah, yeah, yeah. No, absolutely. I mean, kill is the word. To me, the thing that I, you know,
that I fight with my whole being is that it's a it's a murdering. What happens in those moments
when an adult, you know, abuses a child in that way is that they kill them in some way,
because they're all, you know, so many people that I've known who were abused as children,
it breaks them for life. And, you know, people, people do incredible things to come back from
that, but it breaks them in such a fundamental way. You know, it's a kind of murder. And,
you know, that's what it feels like to me. It's a, and it's also a kind of,
I don't, I can't even find the word for what it is, but you're spoiling something so beautiful,
you're, you're ruining something. And, and it's, there's just, and it's an indicator of
something deeply wrong culturally or in that individual. But I mean, the individual is a
product of their culture. You know, if we were in a sort of, you know, I'd be fascinated to know
how tribal groups kind of dealt with that. I mean, when, obviously, when, when there was,
when it was, you know, younger girls got married and things, then it was all part of the,
the culture. And that was fine. But if somebody was messing around with somebody younger,
I don't know. But I guess, again, they, if you're living in that reality of the moment,
things are always changing. There aren't rules. I mean, there are some rules, but there's also
this flexibility. You don't want to know, you don't want to know the answer. Right, right.
I'm telling you straight up, you don't want to know the answer. Because there are examples
of behavior that are so off the charts that we would, like our brains would just explode. I mean,
we'd just be like, pop, you know, like, no, boy, what? I think we're getting little glimpses from
Amon, aren't we? You know, because he's, he's basically just showing, you know, these are
little insights to that culture and that, that time. But obviously, everything you can imagine
has been part of some culture at some point. So yeah, it's true. And I have no idea whether Amon's
bizarre, circus-like, you know, phantasmagoria perspective.
If there's, if there's any evidence for what he says about, like Jesus being a pirate who
trafficked in children and stuff like this, if there's any evidence for that, I haven't seen it
in anything that he said, right? He's, he's sending things from the Septuagint.
And the only thing he really seems to focus on is this one passage in Mark where Jesus is in
a public park at 4 a.m. and there's a young boy there. And maybe he reads the Greek so that the
the, the disciples, right, are teenagers. And look, okay, hang on a second.
He's got this unhinged way of delivering it that he doesn't clearly point to,
to where the, you know, what these, even when he's looking at the sources, he's not directly,
clearly translating, isn't he? He's not doing that. He's not giving that.
You know, that's what's kind of a bit mad about him is that he's making all these claims,
but he's not actually clearly backing it up. But you know, that's his style as well. And
it's so fascinating because there's so much about him that just doesn't work for me at all.
But it, again, I almost feel like it's not him for me. It's that energy. He's communicating
that culture. And that's what fascinates me. And I can take all the kind of pollution in the signal
because I feel like the energy is valuable, at least for now. It may just be a catalyst
to kind of move towards something else for me personally. Because I can see he's also,
you know, he's very kind of culty. I can, you know, imagine certainly for sort of younger people,
you know, they could really, he's quite charismatic. He's breaking the rules. He's
being provocative. He's got this kind of slightly punk performance art style,
you know, his whole look, his little sort of almost bed-sit living situation, his,
you know, all the little bits, you know, the little details. I mean, it's art. I kind of enjoy
just for the art of it as well. You know, I've got, I've really, you know, the sort of
purile nature of it kind of bothered me a bit, but I could tolerate that. But now he's going
political. Ugh, he's really kind of spoiling it now. I wish he could kind of just move aside from
that because he seems to have a bit of a woke mind virus. All right, so there's a bunch of
things I want to say here. First is, if I had a crack team of humans that we went on missions
together, I want a couple teenagers in that team. I want maybe even a child in that team.
I want the perspective of non-adults. I want it. And I want them to have meaningful roles
where they get the experience of their thought, concern, and perspective mattering to adults.
Beating the adults. Yeah. Right. I want them, you know, we think we're trying to prepare them for
life. In what way? What are we doing? We're not, they're not living. They're trying to escape the
prison that we keep imposing on them. Okay, I guess there's some training in that, you know,
but what if they actually have meaningful roles where their perspectives
and urgencies and motivations were not merely seen, but were nurtured in the way that leads
to their development, right? And how crucial it is inside a team to have children, adults,
and elderly people together chasing something together, right? Which is this is the thing
we don't do. We segregate the ages very severely. Whether it's intentional or not,
doesn't fucking matter because the outcome is isolation and the crushing of human spirits.
Mm-hmm. So I'm very much not agist, right? I'm anti-agist. And I'm not anti anything. I'm pro
inclusion or something like this, right? In the sense of we need to give the different generations
a context where they can integrate together and see with and for each other, and then and then use
that that seeing in meaningful, inactive context, right? Where they're doing something together
that's important to everyone in the group. You know, as far as almond goes, he's really weird
because he's on the one hand, he's like, Jesus was child trafficker, you know? And on the other hand,
he was like, those 12 year old girls were the shit, you know? They were the fucking they became
the Medusae, you know? And he's in love with one of them. Clearly, one of those, he doesn't say,
I have a cheat. It's a dead woman. He says, I have a cheat. It's a dead girl who can resurrect the
ancient, right? That's not a cheat. That's his lover. That's his companion in his soul. He sold
his soul to that girl, right? So he's got this really intense, weird, you know, bipolar, bipolar
thing where he absolutely despises pedophilia. It's clear he does. And he's constantly accusing
the Christians of this. He's like, those Christians are just doing the children in the back room,
right? And then on the other hand, he's, he's subsumed and subservient to the concept of
raising the young women over the men entirely, which is demonstrated in some way in when he gets
fired from the university because he gives the crop, right? He gives the crop to the act, the
young actress who he thinks is totally brilliant. And he has her beat him on stage with it because
he wants her to know, he wants her to have that experience of what was really going on. So he
knows the other actors can't, can't receive that sort of physical punishment. So he accepts that.
And then the guys in the audience, right, the administrators or whatever, they're just like,
you're done. It's over for you, bro. You're, you're out. Well, that and the sort of astral
visitation, which, which on the one hand he jokes about one, he's like, yeah, they said I was,
you know, hovering over the blah, blah, blah. And then in another podcast, he basically says,
you know, well, like, I was, it's the woman, I think it's the girl I was doing the incubus ritual
on, right? And he talks about it now, doesn't he? Like, he's getting comments from people and he's
kind of like suggesting, you know, yeah, I can come and visit, you know what I mean? It's,
oh my God, okay. I haven't seen that. No, no, I heard there was, there's not in those words,
but it was, it was like that basically, you know, he was, he was playing with that edge a little bit
as he's obviously got a following now. And he's probably getting propositioned, you know,
he is a cult leader, somebody contacted me yesterday, and they were like, you know,
I didn't quite know how to take the comment at first, but they were like, you know,
I was deeply involved in that cult. I was one of the mods on the discord. And I just want
you to know that like, any kind of questioning or pushback or disagreement is not tolerated
at all. You know, I don't know what the history of that is. And look,
Amon is a phenomenon. I mean, he's, he's like a comic book hero, and, you know, and a priest,
and a teenager in a man's body, and, and, and, right. So there's, you know, good luck in encompassing
him. So that again is, to me, it's a sign of this cracking of everything. It's like all these,
all these edge characters now can start to sort of will appear and, and, and, and be broadcasting
something that adds to the whole mix. And, you know, I feel like the, there's value, you know,
in my own exploration of trying to find signals in all the chaos that makes some sense to me, because
I don't know about you, but I'm so frustrated with not being able to have conversations with
people because they're so limited or things are off limits or they just don't get it as in
they have a simplistic view of how things are, it's this or it's that, you know, and I, so I'm
always looking around the edges for anything that is bringing some truth or reality or seems to be
plugged into what is rather than this world of ideas or this dead thing that you talk about,
that a lot of adults, you know, are dead and live in a dead culture. So I feel like,
and I'm sort of just getting the sense that we're going to be seeing more amongs appearing.
And, you know, and maybe even we were talking, you know, just saying it's time to start talking
ourselves, I feel, because we have something of that, but maybe we're a little bit more grounded,
you know, we're not as entertaining or as, but I think we have something to share, you know,
yeah, well, maybe, but it's not, you know, whatever it is, it's natural, right? You're just
being that thing, but I feel like this, it's, I'm almost feeling like it's time for everyone who's,
who's, who genuinely, who from a place of sincerity wants to kind of shed some light on
what's going on without any kind of hidden, you know, sort of, lost my word, without, you know,
not trying to manipulate or get something or just a genuine, you know, care for humanity in the world,
just share what you've got, your, your perspective, your true perspective, your honesty. I feel like
it's valuable now that we're having these conversations, the real conversations. I feel
like we need, everyone needs to be sharing the real conversations, not the propaganda or the
opinion. I had this insight myself through the day that I don't have any opinions anymore,
because I've realized that as soon as I have an opinion, I've stopped paying attention to what's
going on. I've died, that's death, that's like, when you say, I've got it, that's the moment of death.
So I feel like, you know, I have sort of patterns of how I'm experiencing the world, but like a river
that has its patterns because of the way the rocks are or the way the flow is happening,
it changes subtly and sometimes a rock moves or sometimes the water comes fast and shifts
things around. And I feel like my, what were opinions, which were just like dead damming of the river,
are now these kind of flexible patterns in the stream that could completely change in any moment
or may last for a while, but they're always sort of adjusting and shifting to the current.
They're not fixed, that's the thing. They're fluid, you know? Yeah.
Again, so much unpack there. All right, so I'm going to say something about the opinions very
briefly. I live for insight, so every day I'm trying to chase that. And part of why I make
recordings is because I'm not having conversations with others who are chasing insight. So what I
do is I imagine others who are chasing insight, and then I talk, I speak as though I am among them,
because I need that. I'll die inside without it. If I were actually with others, we would generate
that together naturally, easily, for sure. I mean, I have a fire inside my mind and it's alive,
but it needs a context in which to both receive and to shine and transmit.
Right. So without that context, I have to create it. And that's why I write, make music,
sing, write poetry, have conversations like this. Yes, of course, we live in the age of what I call
opinionaires. These are people who have a million dollars worth of opinions. They don't learn,
they don't care. But there is a problem with knowledge, again, back to the beginning of
the conversation where I was questioning this, because the problem is machines, right? The problem
is, I spoke about this recently in one of my, this was an insight I had a couple of weeks ago,
where there's fundamental error, where we transfer the expectation, this is my teacup,
which is a mess because it's clear and you can see all the tea stains. But
in fact, basically, that's a lot like our minds, right? They get stained, but we can't see that
we see with this, we're starting to see with the stain instead of through the glass, right?
And the stain is a historical thing that we're fucking attached to because of our egos and our
vulnerability and our fear and whatever. But my point was, maybe this is a better example,
when we transfer the expectation of physical continuity to cognitive concepts, ideas,
equivalencies, analyses. And so the problem with this kind of stuff, with the transfer
from the machine idea to cognition, is if you have a boat, which is a vehicle that you travel in,
don't change your boat every day, right? The boat's not fluid. It's the same fucking boat every day,
right? And there's some way in which that property gets transferred into ideation
and conceptualization and evaluation and analysis and all of this. And that's what creates opinionaires.
I'll just throw something in, though. The boat isn't the same boat every day. It's constantly
being worn out. If you've ever had a boat... Yes, yes, but... And sometimes it gets damaged,
or sometimes you just need to change something completely on it, you know? Yeah, but this thing
has never changed, right? And this is what you use to grab things within the mind and then hold
them up and point out their features to each other, right? This thing, right? The tweezing thing.
It's the same fucking instrument every time, right? But this is artificial. This is not artificial,
right? This is alive. And so there's a difference between the tool and the being,
between, you know, what, the tweezer and the octopus of the mind. And we are not, most of us,
are not in contexts where the mind flexes and opens and explores and dreams and envisions and wonders.
We're in contexts that are slave-making and prison-eering primarily.
So we have to, if we want to have something more than opinions, then we have to forge
contexts together in which the vitality is primary, right? In that vital richness of
learning and growing and developmental spirals, right? So that we get up-register from
where we start and then we keep going, right? It's the same with me. I have insights. I have biases.
I have things. I have pet ideas that I think are amazing, but they keep changing. I keep
discovering things. I want to just go back, though, to the thing about almond and politics,
briefly, because it's tied in with what you're saying about people need to speak.
Actually, I'm missing the thing you said a little bit, but it was something like,
you think it's time for people to, you know, one of the things almond was saying yesterday about
what he calls free speech. Free speech isn't the capability to speak freely in the Greeks.
Free speech is the necessity of speaking, what must be said, what must not not be said.
That's his idea of free speech. That's a very profound difference from how we see it,
because we see this as like, oh, Babel, you know, whatever you say, whatever you want,
you get to say whatever you want to say. He's not saying that at all. He's saying something
much more severe and radical, which is free speech is the obligation to say the unsaid things.
That's what he means by free speech. That's very radical and profound. I wouldn't want
almond as a politician. He's a dangerous, dangerous person, my dear. Extremely dangerous.
It's funny, isn't it? His whole obsession with the tyrant and, you know, he's projecting that
to Trump, but guess where it is? He even said, he even said something like,
I think I secretly want to be a policeman. Oh, right. Okay. Well, he's got that kind of kink,
doesn't he? You know, definitely. There's a power thing. There's a strange subdom.
Definitely. Definitely. Sure. But yeah, he's such a trip. Anyway, what I was trying to say is
one of the things he's saying, okay, so his view is that we're on the brink of apocalypse. I don't
have too much trouble with that as an idea. It looks that way to me, feels that way to me.
And what he's saying is that on the brink of apocalypse, humans become transformed, right?
And they transform primarily, you know, he's very bipolar. So they transform primarily in two
directions. Tyrants rise and become gods. And now that Trump has been bloodied, right? They talked
about how this was both a liberation to pierce the ear specifically, or to pierce it with an
awl up against a door, right? It was a bond. And so now that he's been bloody, he's like,
he has been not just initiated, but like chosen, right? He's faced death. He's been cut. He's chosen.
He's validated by the dark gods or whatever creates tyrants. And I mean, I understand features of
this because I've been down this path. I mean, I had an experience where I was being nominated
for a path like this, right? For a more than human path. And I rejected it because it just
looked very fucking dangerous. And I didn't trust the motivations of the situation that was involved.
So I recognize what he's talking about. But then the other thing is the
the liberators. What does he call them? There's a word in Greek for the people who
kill the tyrants. And so he's he sees like this bipolar thing where tyrants, tyrants will rise,
but from the polis also will rise tyrant killers, right? And there will be this
conflict. And yeah, he's very focused on Trump. I can see why he's seen these.
He has seen the sequence of transitions before historically, and he recognizes that.
And he's saying like, you guys don't know, because you haven't read, you haven't seen what happened
over and over again. And this is what happens every 150 years. In major cultures, this is what
happens. So, you know, yes, he's very focused on that. And look, I'm not, I'm not trying to
sing on his praises. I learned a lot from listening to him, though. And he's nuts. He's, you know,
crazy. He's a brilliant teacher. He is. It's fascinating to me that he's doing so little
actual direct teaching of Greek. And yet he's teaching Greek really powerfully,
because his whole delivery just inspires you to want to learn it. And this jointed, irrational,
illogical way of communicating it, I think actually will work. I think if you, if you were,
you know, if you were immersed in that for a year, you'd probably learn more Greek and become
a better Greek scholar than if you did any other form of learning. That's, I'm getting a real strong
signal of that. Like, he's an inspiring teacher, because he loves it. I mean, his love of that
language is so, I mean, that's what keeps me interested, is when, you know, all the other bits
of him that might rub awkwardly against me, that bit where he's just purely, like, physically,
sensually excited about the language. Like, it's really physical, you know, sexual. He's
horny about Greek. And that's fucking amazing. So that's what teaches, you know, that's what you
want in a teacher is someone who's so lit up by the subject that you just get pulled into it.
Yeah. Okay, so first of all, I don't think he's teaching Greek a little bit. He has classes,
like I think twice or three times a week, that are just teaching Greek. And then he's also doing on
what's that, wise or wisdom or something that place where you can book him for private lessons.
He's also teaching there. But let's face it, when that guy's teaching Greek,
he's not like a fucking professor. It's like being taught Greek by a wizard.
Absolutely. It's coming out of him like magma, right? Like,
it's coming from the source. It's coming from Greece from that time. Like, you know,
that's what he's actually opening the pipe. And here it is. You want to learn Greek? Well,
let's fucking go there. Yeah. And here it is. That's what I feel from him is.
He's also straight up saying two very radical things. They have the two substances, right?
Chaikyon and the Theriad. Okay. And these are substances that are used in the rights,
the mystery rights. And it's so funny that I understood where he was going all as the first
time I heard him and it completely blew my mind. Like, it was like a shotgun to my brain.
And what he was saying specifically is the women would kill you. They would administer a poison
and you would become terrified and you would confess everything you'd ever done wrong because
you know you're about to die. Yeah. And you want to get it off your chest. And they used a similar
drug to interrogate people. It would terrify them so badly that their whole body would just
start vibrating and they would just emit every bad thing they'd ever done, right? And then,
so they would kill you and or they bring you right to the brink of death so that
essentially you have like a near death experience, right? And you're up above the human for the first
time, fully aware. And then they would resurrect you, right? And then you would be free of the fear
of death, which meant you could not be enslaved, right? No, there's no threat after that that
can terrify you. You know, not necessarily that you have eternal life, which is the weird Christian
idea. It's this other thing. It's that this life is a subposition of freedom that's essentially
absolute and inviolate, right? And so now you can't be fucking compromised, right? You have
actual freedom. And this is one of the weird implications of Oman's insanity. Okay, so
am I going with this? So, um, oh yeah, okay, so what he's actually saying is, you know, it'd be
great if we could have the rights and the kaikion and the theriac and stuff, but you don't need it
because the Greek language itself will do this for you, right? I will give you aonic life. He's
essentially saying that he is the door. He's a Jesus. He's the aonic Jesus, right? I am the way,
I am the door. Follow me. I will give you aonic life through the Greek language in which
it is encrypted, it is encoded, and I will put the spirit of it into you and you will be liberated
from the fear of death and from slavery and from lying, right? From the lying bullshit of the
cultures that we live in. But tell you things about divinity that can't be true. Go ahead.
Well, I feel like that's the tyrant, that's the self-deception, the way he thinks that he can do
that because you have to go through the process and for everyone it's different. And you know,
what's super exciting for me is that this idea has reemerged now when we're also seeing this kind
of psychedelic renaissance happening or this upswelling of interest in that. It's exactly what
culturally we need. We need to have those rites again where people die to themselves and to
this life and go into the underworld and get resurrected so they can actually become human
beings. So they have a chance to become an elder so that the culture has a chance to have that
perspective that puts it into the greater picture, into the mystery, that roots it in the mystery and
thinks in terms of the future and the past. You know, it's that maturity that's missing
in our culture. We don't have the rites of passage that create elders and that's what was going on
back then. I think that's why that culture was so profound because it was built into the culture.
It was so advanced. It was, you were taken beyond everything you knew. You were killed. You were
actually killed. You know, and you went on some kind of, you did go on an underworld journey. It
was a literal thing because and you were dead and then you got brought back to life.
That's profound and then you have a culture that's built on that where all of the important people,
but you know, I mean, I don't know how far it went. I don't know whether there was a class
thing to it and some people weren't allowed to go through that or what, but you know, maybe and
we're talking about Greece, maybe that kind of ancient Greek peak of that culture is when it all
came together in a beautiful way, but its origins were before then. You know, tribally people were
doing something like that for sure. You know, all of that, these cult traditions he's talking about,
they came from small groups of people doing that stuff. You know, it all percolated up into this
moment where it came together and created this culture that our entire civilization is built on.
I mean, our civilization is a catastrophic counterfeit of it.
Well, it is, it is, but its foundation was that and then something when, you know, this is the
next thing is like, what happened with that whole Christian thing? Because that's where it seemed to
take in a wrong turn or we kind of denied ourselves, we suppressed this origin story.
I was thinking the other day I was thinking, wow, it's so fascinating that the whole horror show
of the Catholic Church and the pedophilia and all of that abuse, it's as if because the origins of
Christianity had that integrated into it and then they tried to suppress it and push it down
and control it and deny it. It's come up again in this perverse way, you know, almost like in an
individual person, you know, if you push down and suppress those base urges or your kind of very
origins, eventually they come up in an unhealthy way. It just felt like it was so poetic in a way
that I understood now a bit more about why that's happened. You know, and I even started thinking
bishops wearing purple, you know, it's so fucking interesting, right? There's so many correlations.
No, I mean, purple, the purple you could throw on and out the window and just go at the history of
purpleness and you're going to discover like explosions of, you know, I mean, by the way,
like there's, you know, wait, I can't point properly. It's my favorite color. I've had a
relationship with purple my whole life. It's fascinating. Yeah, mine too. Yeah, purple and
magenta and stuff, right? Like, yeah. No, yeah, you could just go with the history of purple. You
wouldn't need almond. And there's so much there, like, obviously, the Greek language and the culture
comes from somewhere. Hillman is a staunch opponent of the concept of proto-Indo-European.
He thinks that's complete, just made up bullshit, academic lies. It's never not a thing. But he
talks about something that he refers to as the Pulaskeian, or Pulaskeian period, which is sort
of where the origins of some of this stuff arise, apparently. But I'm trying to, I'm very curious
about what the hell is meant by the gods. And clearly, there's a catastrophic problem with
the rise of monotheism. Some kind of a developmental, like, warp or fold in group human cognition.
You know, it's weird the idea of a chieftain or a queen or a prince or a king or a ruler,
which is hilarious because it means to measure, right? The measure, the one who measures
deftly and correctly and so forth. And obviously, they're nominated and validated by the gods
themselves. So you can trust they're measuring because the gods have validated them, and this
kind of thing. The strange crook and flail that the pharaohs hold, right? These are devices of
measurement and of both knowledge and purgation, right? Because the flail is actually the device
that you use to separate the chaff from the grain. And the crook is the device that you use to catch
sheep, right? So this is the probe. It's husbandry. It's unity of the two. It's the cane and able
unification right there, right? I am cane and able in one, so to speak, you know, from Genesis,
wherever the hell that story comes from, because it certainly does not come from the Jews.
So yeah, there's so much, there's so much there. Like, who are the gods? What are the gods? I mean,
you know, in my own life, I have some experience of some of a divine intelligence that is unlike
anything I ever imagined possible. But if someone says, well, what do you think that was?
I'll be very careful about saying anything, to be honest. But I can understand at least the idea
that it is plausible, perhaps even likely, that our distant ancestors were cognitive and
cognitively emotionally and reproductively symbiotic with non advanced complex non human
intelligences that dwell in the substrate of time space itself. They are hyper distributed
over their aonic. They are outside of time, right? And that humans may have been,
we may have been the bees to their flowers. And our civilizations were the fucking honeycomb
of that relationship. And then the flowers disappeared. And now we're just down here going
like, what the fuck am I buzzing around for like this? What am I doing here? Right? I mean,
you can imagine, I don't know, remoras without sharks or fish without water, right? You know,
birds without air or whatever. Like this is the problem that I think we're actually facing. Our
species was born for a completely different thing that we've never fucking tasted. And we have
millions of stories about it. And we're born with the memory and expectation of it. And then it
doesn't fucking happen. And we freak out. We don't know what the fuck to do. Right?
So there's two, two parts that for me, one is the psychedelic experience and this meeting of
entities and archetypes. I mean, maybe the two are interchangeable. I don't know. There's these
archetypal aspects that we, you know, unconsciously are all connected to and maybe
actually consciously, if you're in that kind of cult ritual and you've taken the right drugs,
then you can go meet and see the gods in that sense. So there's those kind of possibilities
in that sense of where the gods are. But I also think when people were a lot more embodied,
animal like in connection with nature, they were sensing and meeting spirit
in its different forms in nature. And the gods were also in nature. They were, they were perhaps
in other living things or, you know, they were, they may be not just living the psychedelic realm
or that dimension, but I feel like there's another dimension that's deep in nature. And if you
really, like an animal in nature, you're seeing and connecting with the entities that are in nature,
those energies are there. So those, those kind of almost like heaven and earth
places where the gods might be. But then there's also the monotheistic thing, I think, comes from
the sense of oneness or the one consciousness that we can also all experience at times or
have access to. And I feel like it should be all of those things. There is this one consciousness
I feel that we share. And there are these gods. It's, and I don't know what the relationship
between the two is, whether the one consciousness is just one consciousness between humans,
or whether, which it feels more instinctively and experientially to me, the one consciousness
is shared with all living things on earth and material that we, this kind of material realm.
But maybe there's this other realm that's outside of that where the gods live. So there's these kind of,
do you see, does any of that kind of make sense? I feel like it's all of those things are real.
And we started choosing one over the other, rejecting the physical, the kind of the new,
the number of gods, the kind of whole cluster of them for the one thing. And the one thing wasn't
the kind of shared consciousness. It was perceived as something almost outside of us or something,
or not, not that over time it became that. Because I think initially, the, you know,
the Christians or the monotheistic religions in their early days were just accessing oneness
together and calling it God, they weren't separating it and adding all those things kind
of crept in like a sort of pollution. And then, and then we started getting disembodied and then
it became, you know, we just went off on a weird tangent. So anyway, lots there.
All right, so first of all, from what I've learned of traditional Blackfoot knowledge,
through my friend Ryan Furstiver, who's a beaver man in Blackfoot, traditional spiritual,
you know, situation, they don't have any gods. There's no gods. Everything that is holy or powerful
is natural. It's the sun. It's the moon. It's the mountain. It's the beaver. It's the bison.
It's the little plant. It's the little stone. It has to do with the sky and the earth and how they
relate, right? So there's no such thing as like a god or a demon or anything. There are
what you could call negative influences, but there are in English who knows what the hell
the Blackfoot would say because in Blackfoot language, the whole idea of identity is nothing
like what it is in English. You should get a taste of what identity is in a language that's, say,
15,000 years old, right? Because, you know, Omen's going like, man, that stuff 5,000 years ago,
you've got to get a taste of that, dude. It'll free your mind, right? But you should get a taste
of something 15 or 20,000 years old. You want to free your mind? See what they were doing back
when they realized that language was dangerous. And if you believed what language told you about
identity, you were going to get in a lot of trouble, right? They knew better than that. They knew that
they would constantly go against the language. Like the idea of an enemy should hear the story
that they have about what this idea of an enemy, how confused it is, right? How dangerous it is.
Because what happens is very briefly, two enemies meet in a cave and they can't tell that they're
enemies. Yeah. And they're blind. They can't see. There's a storm outside. So they sort of touch
each other and slowly figure out like, oh my God, that's the guy. I left my village to kill
one of these guys. And he's the guy who left his village to kill one of my guys, right? They were
meeting in this cave. They formed this plot. When they go back to their respective villages that
are supposed to have a, you know, a battle, they don't have the idea of war. You know, such idea
as war. They're supposed to have a battle and they tell the people, they give each other a lock
of their hair, right? And they tell the people, oh, I killed one of them, right? I buried him
over here. Like, come with me. Show you where I buried him. They're like, you need to kill him.
Where's the rest of his scalp? You know, blah, blah, blah. This is where scalps actually come
from in Blackwood. It's just one story. So they bring both of them together, bring the peoples
that are supposed to have the battle together in this place in the springtime. And the two
warrior guys, the men that met in the cave, exchange families. So this guy gives him his
family and this guy gives him his family. And then the people live together in the spring,
in this place, and the children are ecstatically happy. All the teenagers and the children are just
out of there and the elders, they're all out of their mind with joy. They have all this thing
and then accidentally during a game at the end of the season, when they have to go back to their
respective places, a teenager is killed in the game accidentally. And the enmity rises again as
they go back apart. Okay, so there's that. Now, then there's this other thing. Okay, the problem
in the monotheism, which if you look specifically at Gnostic traditions, right, they will point out
that these single gods are not trustworthy. Yahweh wants you slaughtering people, like kill the
animals, kill the children, kill every, lay waste to that, burn it down, you know, destroy those
people. And what you start to see here is a kind of like a schizophrenic, a complex schizophrenic
otherizing, right, that has no kind of moral or ethical or relational intelligence whatsoever.
It's straight up fucking immune system shit. It's just kill the others, kill them, kill their
children in their beds, kill their mother, kill the grandmothers, kill the animals, burn their fields,
tear those forests down, rip the temples out, kill. And so what kind of, what kind of a God is
that? Like, how does that even arise? And in this, you get into like the Julian Jane's arc of
the origins of consciousness in the breakdown of the bicameral mind, where there was this kind of
this transition in human cognition that occurred over about the past 2500 years, where
effectively we've confused an aspect of our weird cognitive conceptual development
with the gods, right. And so now we're obeying features of cognition, people are hearing voices
tell them things and so forth. I mean, not that voice hearing is only insane, but it is a very
peculiar feature of human potential. Have you ever heard a voice? Well, I think all the time,
don't we all? No, no, that's not what I mean. Okay. No, no, I mean, what a voice that clearly
feels like it's something else, not you. Right. That's the first part of what I mean. And the
second part of what I mean is, it is this voice of the thundering thing. It's not like me saying
words. Okay. If I were to emulate it, it would be terrifying. I won't, I could emulate it. I would
look like a mad, psychotic person if I tried to emulate it. But in like, I remember the first
time that this happened to me. It was late in the night, the voice came from the upper left
corner of the room. This is important. And it basically just said like, I am here. But in
thunder language, right, like nothing I've ever encountered before. And the only other time I
heard a voice, there's, okay, so voice hearing has like a bio electrical component. The body
starts to change. You're, you start to enter into a liminal state that could be hypnopompic
or hypnogogic. Right. And so you're in this vibratory state. And both times when this happened,
what would happen is there would be a catastrophic dip in my bio physical energy. It was like a
the opposite of a pulse. Right. And then from the bottom of that dip, then the voice would emerge.
And I would hear it. Like a pressure drop, like, yes, everything was sucked out. And then came in.
Boom, right. Right, right, right. It's important to, of course, I understood what you meant by
all the time. I knew what you meant. But yeah, no, no. This is a different thing. So the other
time was a similar thing. There was a sudden dip in the bio. I don't know what to call it in my
energetic coherence. And the voice that happened then.
I realized like, oh my God, the people who suffer from this must really be suffering because I've
heard many people speak about it. And I've had friends who close friends who hear voices.
It was like an old drunken Southern guy. And he was like, you're a fucking piece of shit,
you fucking maggot piece of shit. You know, just like absolute hatred, insulting denigration.
And I was just like, oh my God, because I've heard that people hear critical voices and stuff.
But until you've had the experience of it directly. And I realized like, oh my God,
what would happen in my life if that became a constant experience. These experiences are relative
to the rise of monotheism, right? The voice hearing thing was a thing, right? And it's still a thing
in some cohorts of people under certain conditions, right? Those are the only two
times I've heard voices. So they're very specific, one time situation. Oh, no, wait,
there was a time when I was a child. There was a time when I was a little boy.
But yeah, that monotheism stuff, it's important, I think, to entertain many perspectives on it,
not one or two. We can entertain a sort of a pro biblical or pro Islamic or pro
Hindu perspective on monotheism. And we can also entertain the Gnostic perspectives of the
demiurge and the bad gods that took over people, whole peoples, and then just set them warring
with other peoples. But there really is this thing that's sort of like a distorted feature of the
immune system, where it's just like violent, straight up violent. And you can see the justifications
for war and things that come out of this and are really, really toxic. I mean, unless I'm very
confused and I could well be, and my entire life history of despising war is just confused because
I don't understand. Like Arjuna with Krishna on the battlefield, or whoever Arjuna is with,
is it Brahman or Krishna? And Arjuna is saying, I can't kill my family, my brother. And he's like,
you don't understand. It's already done. You have to do this. Maybe I just don't understand.
Maybe war is actually somehow like a heart, like the, you know,
diastolic of the heartbeat or something, right, of the humans. I don't know. I'm not in light.
I'm just trying to, I'm just appealing in the beating.
Yeah, just a question for your perspective in relation to what you just said.
So this hearing thing, do you think there's an equivalent that's visual and an equivalent that's
felt? You know how we all have different people are wide in different ways. Some people are,
you know that, yeah. So I wonder, do you think there was,
was it happening in all those realms? Were people like seeing somebody? Were people feeling
somebody as well as hearing or this, this external thing? Or you had experiences in those
other realms apart from here? Okay. So first of all, I'd have to hear from people.
And I'd have to see records of people who made this claim.
Sure. Surely there are visual hallucinations that have felt components. And what was happening to
me was not merely auditory. There were psycho emotional components. Also, I should mention
this is perhaps highly problematical because I've spoken of it now here today.
But I should mention that a couple of the people I told that story to
started hearing voices, that voice after over and over again, like not once or twice.
One of them was very angry with me. They were like, you gave me this thing and now it's in
my mind and I can't get it out. And that person wasn't emotionally or mentally unstable.
There's something contagious about that specific thing, unfortunately. It wasn't my intent to.
Yeah, yeah. So it wasn't, I was going to say, so was there anything particular that you remember
about when you were communicating it in that instance that sort of made it stand out? Or was
it just like it was now? Look, it was night. I was with my girlfriend. She was asleep.
And I had this first experience and I woke her up and told her what was happening. She was
immediately furious with me. Absolutely furious. Why? Why are you telling me? Now it's going to be
like this for it. Like, why did you do this? You know, why did you tell me? And then my ex-girlfriend
I told at the same time and she turned totally white. She just turned white as ghost and said,
I heard it in my own mind on the day you said next day I heard the same thing.
And other people I have told it to have said strange things that don't make sense. Okay.
They don't rationally make sense. Yeah, there probably are other modalities, but voice hearing
is a particular vectored thing in my mind. And it's common among certain kinds of drug users,
people who are experiencing psychosis, schizophrenia, not that we know what psychosis is. Psychosis is
a broad range of things. Schizophrenia is a broad range of things. It's not one thing.
Some of that stuff's positive or pro-noic. Not all of it is, you know, only madness.
So it's a very complex mess that, I think. I don't know exactly what to make of it.
Julie and Jane seem to think that there were an array of faculties
that degraded or transformed over time in vast human cohorts.
And much of what he has to say in that book is some of the most brilliant things I've
ever heard a human being say. He's wrong. He's openly wrong about some stuff, but that book
is nuts. And I've read it, you know, 10 or 12 times. It was directly pointed out to me
again when the intelligence that wasn't human was with me. It was like, that book there.
This book over here. I mean, the two primary books that were pointed out were that one and
Korzybski's Science and Sanity. But, you know, these are books from my own intellectual history.
So, yeah, what are minds? The hell are minds? You know, what they usually are, I think is
it's like having one piece of a bird, right? It's like you live your whole life and you've got
like one, one lung sac of a bird and you're like trying to keep that thing going, but it doesn't,
you don't know what it's for. You don't know that it's part of a bird. You don't know that the bird's
part of the forest and the insects and the sky and all those things. You just have this thing
that you're trying to just keep it going. Right? It's trying to keep it doing its thing.
So, when we were living closer to the natural world in small groups,
were we living in the full bird at that point, do you think?
Much closer. The idea of individual humans is one of the dumbest ideas in the history of the
planet. Agree. It would be, I mean, I don't want to create images of violence in people's minds,
but imagine if when your child was born, you snipped off their fingers, put them in a box,
and then gave them that box. That's what happens to our humanity, okay? And no one would ever do
anything that stupid, but we do it with things that are more precious than fingers.
Right? And we just were completely unaware that we're amputating the vast force of faculties that
are natural to our humanity, and then we're pinning those to a fucking board like they do with insects
in museums, right? You see these boards of the insects, right? And they're like incredibly
beautiful dead shells of nothing in there, right? And there's millions of them. And as we do that
more and more, those beings disappear from the natural world, but we have the museum display,
you know? Come see it with your children. Yeah, we've got the DNA. It's all fine.
What the actual fuck are we doing? What are we doing? This is the opposite of everything possibly
beautiful or true. Yeah, I think that that sort of summarizes, for me, the whole digital
experiment. And this idea... I mean, it's literally what I said. These are called mages.
But for the whole kind of technological metaverse or whatever they're calling it,
it's just fucking insane. The world is so rich and beautiful, and
anything that takes us away from that is just insanity for me. And I'm wondering if this energy,
this archaic energy is gonna pull us back from the brink of that, because that to me,
that's death. That's worse than death. I mean, it's not death. It's just if there is a thing that's
more dead than death, that vision of us uploading ourselves into machines is like a dead than dead
thing. Very important what you said there. More dead than death. That's what the human...
That's what the extended human cohort is after. And it's because they're captured by processes that
are fundamentally dead inside. And the feed on the death of meaning, identity, relation, history,
nature, the sky, all these things. I just have to show this image because it's so fucking perfect.
All right. This is McGillchrist's book on... It's the fragmented, right? This thing thinks it's
God, but it's a token in the mirror, right? It's the loss of it. It's the absence of everything
having been condensed into a point of like a weapon that penetrates and cuts,
and it cuts little distinct identities, right? It's so funny when you said the digital world,
because I just talked about snipping off the fingers and putting them in a box,
and these are actually called digits. This is where we get the word, you know, this is where
we get the idea, right? But these are... This is alive. This is the most important...
This is the whole origin of the trouble and the gift, this thing.
We talked about this before, and it's interesting that that image has the opposing...
It does. It does. It's pinching. Yeah. You know, that... It's all in there, isn't it? Interesting.
And also this is this, right? This is a broken piece of this thing, which is a device
that allows a specific mode of disembodied reflection, right? The mirror is the absence of
the engaged other mind, other spirit, other lineage of the family, of the history, right?
That person before you, the mirror is the weird absence of an actual being, and yet it is that
absence that allows you to see your visage. There's so much crazy, amazing things we can learn
together if we just take the time to understand the predicament that we're in and where it
originated from and what that teaches us about what we can do instead. And that's really the thing
that I'm most on fire about. Yeah, I wonder if that the first time the first thought was looking
at a reflection in the water or something. You know, that kind of where there was this abstraction
where you saw the world reflected,
because that's like the opening to mind or something, or that kind of thinking mind anyway.
There's so many important things to understand about the idea of reflection,
but also weirdly, the best analog for consciousness is water. There's no other. It's water. It flows.
You can shape the flow. That's why that voice echoed in the minds of other people. It shaped
the flow. And once it shaped the flow, it developed an iterative echo, right? And hypnosis relies on
this. And so does trance and so does dreaming. All of these things, they are related to each other
and they have to do with transforming the rhythm of the flow of consciousness. And when the humans
get together and they make a circle and they start bouncing up and down and they hit the drum
or they, they, you, you lay, they, you'll, you'll, you'll late, right? They're, they're
modulating the flow of consciousness together and they're creating, I'm other creating something.
You know, it's the, if we were listening to the occult explorers, which I was listening to
yesterday, they were like, you know, that drum, that timpanum, that's Athena's hymen that you're
vibrating. You're making it vibrate, right? And it's intact and it rings and it changes
the chorus, right? And all these things. It's really amazing. It never occurred to me that the,
the analogy between drum skin and the hymen and the timpanum in the ear and the barrier between
the outside and the in and the sacred gatekeeping of that, right? All of these things. This is why
I listen to those crazy people. It's for insights like that. Yeah, yeah. Interesting.
I feel like we should pause.
And maybe I'd like us to explore, perhaps next time we get together, I want to explore this.
Yeah, I'm all into exploring this. Yeah. This is the key to memory and liberation,
because this is the thing that has trapped us, right? What is the picture behind you on the chimney?
It's, I'll grab it. So this was something that my gran had. She spent a bit of time
when she was first married, just after the Second World War finished. My grandpa used to
work for BP and he was out in the Middle East. He was an engineer and they lived in Iran and Iraq.
And this is something she picked up out there that I've kind of inherited, I suppose.
It's very profound.
By or, or what the story is, it probably refers to something well known that I'm,
that's just outside of my knowledge, but yeah.
The color scheme is familiar to me from a metaphysical perspective I was shown when
the other intelligence was with me. Right. The red and the blue. Absolutely fundamental.
Everything that exists understands this conversation between red and blue.
The stars, when we look at them in the sky, if they're approaching the earth,
they shift toward blue. If they're at the parting, they shift toward red. Right.
It's fundamental to, to being, even beings without eyes understand red and blue.
Coming and going.
Well, they're the bookends, aren't they, of the visible light spectrum?
Right. Important. Yeah, brilliant. Yeah, and of course, the feminine is
red birthing blue. Right.
And the masculine could be seen as the opposite. I have to think more carefully about that.
Well, you need both, right? So, yeah.
Yeah, I just want to show, I can pull this off. Let me see if I can do this. And then we can,
you know, we can wrap up.
I've had this on my wall for many years. More than, more than 20 probably.
And it's a painting by some well-known artist, or it's an assemblage, but it's relevant.
You see, like the red, it's all red and blue. There's nothing but red and blue.
And this is like the holy, virginal mother over here.
Mother and child. Is that a little, I can't quite, is that a person inside? Yeah.
Yeah, she's pregnant.
I love the expression on his face and the empty thought.
Yeah, this is, this is just one of the most primordial images I've ever seen. I've had it
on my wall forever. A friend of mine, a brilliant poet named Jeff Conant gave it to me.
He's long been a crusader for indigenous rights and nature.
It somehow, for me, sums up the insanity of the nuclear family as well.
I just kind of, it encapsulates that in some way too.
Yeah, that is some crazy, weird, modern nut house. I mean, not incomprehensible, but loopy as hell.
Well, thanks for that journey. That was interesting.
Yeah, thank you, Tim.
I'm so happy to do it again.
Yeah, so appreciate your mind and spirit and the warmth of your heart and your deep embodied
the richness that you bring from the garden and the land into the speaking.
Yeah, I'm looking forward to, thank you. I'm looking forward to just the creative act of this for me,
with you, because you have this incredible mind, your UFO. And I, you know, nice to ride on it.
But yeah, I just feel like there's this potential. For me, it's like we're talking about the language
this kind of extra dimension in the Greek. I feel like conversation has an extra dimension
when it isn't just two talking heads giving their opinions. It's a creative act. And I feel like
that's kind of what I was saying, that I'm feeling this compulsion and I'm seeing, I'm seeking out
I'm seeing and seeking out people conversing who are creating, who are in the act, not just,
you know, speaking from their comfortable place, but exploring, exploring. Yeah.
Yeah, trying to see. Yeah, trying to see. Not, you know, yes, of course, knowing, but trying to see.
Yeah, yeah, I can read from the book of Darren and I do a little bit of that.
And, you know, it's not terrible, but yeah, I want to see better. Every time I go to look,
it's like going to a living place or something, or meeting a frog, or, you know, I want to see
better together whenever we can. And I'm so grateful. You know, if my mind's a UFO, then you're
the pilot. We go together to see better. I trust and believe in that process.
Cool. All right. Well, I'll pause it here, but let's say goodbye.
