Hello, I'm Gav. I'm Dan. We're the Slow Mo Guys and today we are without lab coats.
Well, we got these lovely things instead. It's true. We're also without our phones
So there's no microphones, but hopefully that one's doing all right. We're here at the Colorado School of Mines
And what are we gonna be doing Daniel? Well with when you're mining you need to use explosives a lot of time
Yeah, right, so that's what we're gonna be doing. We're gonna be using quicker than a shovel exactly except for instead of using it for
Mining we're gonna be using it for Slow Mo Guys purposes. Yeah, which involves a toilet
A safe some mannequins mannequins mannequins are gonna bite it plenty of explosives
We also have an absolute myriad of phantoms to get an absolute range of resolution and frame rates. So
Let's have a blast
because of the puns and stuff
I've destroyed a few bugs in my time you do like your spicy food. It's true
Yeah, but now we're literally gonna destroy a bog. Okay, right? This is pretty savage
So we're gonna have
Debt cord coming around and up into the system
Which is gonna be full of petrol and then the detonation train will go down here into this five pound booster charge of high explosives
We're just gonna detonate and cause a shockwave and hopefully
Destroy the bog. So you've taken care of all the
Explosive putting and over here in this giant metal protective box
We've got two phantom V 25 12
This one is set to
28,500 frames a second this one is set to 207,000 frames a second. So it's very low resolution, but
Very very fast. Also
Up there in that yellow box. We've got a V 2640 which will be a HD about 12,000 frames a second
Alright, let's watch that back
There's where's the toilet, that's just
I didn't see a single piece not one piece but I just saw a big white bright flash
Maybe it went out the back
And all of this white cloud here is all petrol
So did we not see it from the other angle because the cloud covered it and now we're seeing the viable here
Yeah, I think or maybe it just went up look at it all lighted up now
It looks cool. Look at this. All of that is lighted up now. Look at it expand
So scary
Tell you what the dynamic range on this camera is not bad like it's pretty much held all of those highlights
Even though we're at such a high ISO
You know, it's also really cool as often you don't see a big flaming explosion
With rubble going everywhere. Yeah, it's just a flaming explosion. Where's this?
You've got pieces of toilet. Toilet-y shrapnel
Well, that's where the toilet was
It's I think there's no pieces of it left. It's literally dust. It has been entirely
Eviscerated it's dug up pretty much a crater and cleared the area of stones completely
So this was up there with those guys
Whoa
Oh
I'm touching it
Cheers for that
Next experiment. This is a the beefiest safe we could find for $150. I think it's about 150 years old as well
I like we paid $150 for a safe that doesn't work. Yeah, we're just trying to get into the safe
Like if you imagine if you're a bank robber
We're gonna try and just blow a hole through the door. Yeah, this safe seems to have lost most of its concrete
Yeah, but we've got this barrel here to see hopefully we'll see it come into that. Yeah
So what we've got here is a shape charge
It looks funny because it's got a copper cone inside and packed in behind the copper cone is explosives
This is the deck cord. It's what we'll use to initiate it
So explosion will come down the deck cord down here
Hit the back of the shape charge and the explosive explosion the detonation will start at the back and travel forwards
What that will do is force this copper cone into an inverse jet
So it will the back part here right the back will come out here before this this part even gets hit and it'll form a jet and
That's used to penetrate things like
tanks armor or
safes or anything like that and the correct you have to have something called standoff and that's
Six times the diameter of the cone which means that that's about 23 centimeters 24 centimeters away from what you're gonna penetrate
Because that's the width is the width is about four centimeters
So if you if you had it too close you had it too close as effective
It wouldn't be as efficient. It would the copper jet wouldn't have reached peak like penetration capability
I've never seen a shape charge in slow-mo neither of I actually not like a not properly because they usually part
Absolutely instant what all right wind that back hold on
It's honestly like when a meteor enters the atmosphere and you just you're watching a big ball of light coming through the air
It's the same sort of speed as well
I feel like the copper's already gone into the water and then when we spin on you'll see that
Miles later the barrel comes up. Oh, I just love how directional this explosive is. I mean, that's what it does
Literally nothing went anywhere else
Hang on so it went into the barrel. They didn't come out the other side, which means there must be some copper at the bottom
That was it right through but it's annihilated all the concrete around it
It's like you see all this concrete here. Yeah, that was in the safe and this lock
Oh
Look at that. I know we say this a lot, but like it's nothing
Excuse me solid metal. Did I just go through something?
So all of the shape charges I've used before in the military have been solid copper lining
Yeah, whereas this is an oil and gas shape charge and it's actually made of copper powder
So there won't be any
Solid bits of copper anywhere and you can see here. That's what that is. Yeah, that's what that is
That's the smattering of copper powder and before when you when you ones that are used against tanks and things
You can actually see the copper that's left over in the hole that makes because it's solid copper. So we've got
Doris and Frank here
Who are
Retired mannequins. Well, I've noticed that Doris's fingers come off. Yeah, that's why she was retired. She had an industrial accident
This is a shock tube. Yeah, and it has inside
It's called a dust explosion which travels down the tube at about 2,000 meters a second and that's enough to initiate a detonator
Which is then enough to initiate debt cord, which is what it's used for
But what we're going to do is trail it all the way from where we are all the way down
Swelling around it's going to come to Doris here. We're going to wrap it all the way around Doris
Like this down to the bottom where we're going to hit a detonator
Into some debt cord, which is then going to wrap all the way back around her
Around her here and then that will actually explode and hopefully sort of obliterate her because this is just sort of quite safe
It won't do anything to her and then the debt cord this is quite long one
It's going to travel from a neck all the way down to here where we're going to have a shaped charge
Which is going to go through what was his name Frank through Frank Frank through Frank and then we've got some foam
canisters on the other side
that will hopefully explode when the
The copper jet manages to get through him. So this is a huge chain reaction of a bunch of different types of explosives
It's a explosive train. It's what it's called. So you start small with something like this
Yeah, you're going to prime explosives with detonator and then into a debt cord and then into a main charge
So this time I'm going to set the exposure on the phantom is much lower
So we don't get as much white out from the debt cord explosions get more detail. Yeah
Don't look up her skirt. I was looking into her finger
Well, you're looking at my look up her skirt from here down. This is a special occasion
Yeah, because we've got a return of a very rare guest on the Slammer guys. It's other Dan. It's rival
That's right. It's rival deaths. This is a little bit of an awkward situation having both of us here at the same time
You may not recognize Dan because in this video he has a shirt on for once
Explosives and in bare chest doesn't work out. So then this one here will be the edge we start from that'll go up the stairs
See this little symbol here. That's where we're going to pop the debt cord in that little cradle
Yeah, so it's enough explosive force to initiate the shape charge
Which is going to last its way through Frank. This is an absolute operation
It's just so nerve-racking to watch your debt cord on your head basically
I mean, it's perfectly safe. You can chew it and it wouldn't do anything. I
Had a taste earlier. It's called secondary explosive
I
Think so
Looks fake, isn't it? It's gonna be like a little disco happening here
The most dangerous nightclub ever
Do you think the the debt cord because it was wrapped so tight around the head it all just went at once around the head?
Yes, do you think it's in pathetic detonation? So yeah, one of the layers will have got the next one
The shape charge beats the shockwave. Yeah, it's insane. I
I
Deliverally made this one much much darker because we're shooting much much slower
But we should actually see the shop tube travel almost a leisurely pace at this frame rate. Oh
Here we go
It's gone down the legs. We'll be coming any second. Oh, where are we? Oh?
There we go. I think it's just oh
Oh
The step-up in speed is so insane because you see the shock tube going only 2,000 meters a second
But the debt cord is then going at 7,000
It's a huge step up and that shape charge that looks like a damn rocket going off
It's getting about 10,000 meters a second and when you were describing the shape charge
I thought it'd be more like a shotgun where it just kind of blow all in one direction
But it's so narrow and so specific like you could you could shoot someone with it
Yeah, sure you could shoot it right at someone and it might miss like a knee is like an explosive needle
Oh, there's a hand. Oh, that's a good hand. Oh, that's a shame. She's had a hell of a retirement party there
Look at what it's done to her dress the deck was just like
Crisped it up de-dressed
Look what the shape charge did to this guy. It completely sawn him in half. Oh
Totally. I honestly when I saw him in half here. I thought that this part had just come off. Yeah, same
But then I was like still connected actually it's still connect. This is just loose. Oh
He's just taking him in half. There's all the foam that caught fire. Oh, yeah
No, it didn't actually get the other one look. Oh, it didn't get that one. It just completely blew his front out
It's front fell off
To get Doris's head to fall off by wrapping it in deck cord and it I saw it from over there
Pop up about 30 40 feet and then it landed
Just here
Her head's intact. Oh, I blew one of her eye sockets off. Oh, no. Oh
It's gruesome a splintered sever. You should keep that the head. Yeah
Use it as like a I mean surely though if I try and take it home when they try and swab it, they'd be like I
Think there's a small amount of explosives there. So you just say to TSA. You're just like, well, yeah, it blew up. Yeah
blew off obviously
Are you using this as an other another opportunity to blow up some of our merch? Yeah, all right. Oh
It's a woman blow it out. Oh dear. This is a nice t-shirt, right?
Get around this you're kidding
Well, I do this
All right, looks like we're good. What do you think? That's lovely. So we've made what can only be described as a
monstrosity or
Some sort of secret weapon. Let me talk you through this. We've got an avalanche
These are used to fire into avalanches into snow. Sorry to force an avalanche. So it's not dangerous. Yeah
That leads down into this huge fat tube which reaches all the way down to the floor, which is filled
Full of ammonium nitrate fuel oil granular. They look like what you fill a beanbag with except they explode
That's exactly that's exactly what it looks like and then around behind it
You got two five pound boosters
And this is all connected with about six foot of debt cord. So it's about
50 or more pounds of
Explosives here. We also put a third mannequin up the back
Yeah, we chucked her back there just to see if what the effects were compared to obviously this guy's gonna get eviterated
I think that one's probably not going to see much though. I'll see you there
That one
I wonder how much will be left. All right, let's get the hell out of here
Do you remember how this place used to look before we did that experiment? Oh
Look at the back wall. It's just painted
All right, hold on. Hold on guys. Let me get
Hold on. Hold on. Hold on. It's just like it's been a hurricane here. It just blew everything away. Look at the camera
Oh my god, we've got to fan some down
No
We chopped a phantom on to the ground in the whole of slower guys that's never happened. Do you think we have the footage from that?
I hope so
Whoa whoa back there. It looked like a nuke. It was so bright initially you couldn't see anything
Like how would you expose for that initial explosion?
Uh, you could do it, but you'd have to you probably wouldn't see anything you just see nothing else to start with
Oh, that looks like the end of the world. Oh, you can see it. Oh, there's like a sparks sparks and flashes from the uh
Or it's usually the rock would maybe just fast moving plastic fast enough where it's actually igniting on impact
It honestly looks like that was fired from the fat man. It does
That's what it looks like in four out and then once you see the shock wave go up
You see it moving across all this floor back here. See it's gone up there
And then it's lifting up all of the dirt and now it's imploding back down
There's a shock wave hit the camera. That might be one of the best and most well-defined shockwaves I've ever seen
It looks like a pyro plastic flow from a from a volcano. It's just water. Yeah, and then
Through the window bash the camera out to the floor
I can't think of any time that I would have seen any explosion that was that big that close
I've certainly never seen anything like that. So this is the explosion proof camera shelter
I feel like they've never done an explosion this big here. I think you'll see why I feel like they've definitely never done
It's just knocked everything
My arms we were like this we were like, hey
You can get bigger
Look what it did to this housing
No way
It's blown it in it like crippled it front ways. Look at that. It's smooth there and it shoved it
It's like it's like ripped it like a tin cap
What is interesting is that
It chucked mud so far like look at our old barrel with the hole in look at where that was
God the thing even here
You would have been absolutely murdered by that
So the 2640 which was up on the hill
Is it also got caked in mud?
I wonder how I wonder how quickly the mud caked the view of the camera there. Oh you see I've got such a wide lens on it
This is the left hand mannequin that was here it was previously about here that was the one that wasn't the closest
Yeah, and he's turned to paste
I honestly don't know if we can show this is a bit graphic
But look so this lady was stood here
About five six meters away. Yeah
She got picked up by the explosion about another four meters back
Her legs off both her arms are off
That just shows the massive amount of difference between evisceration
A couple bits left and then like you know most of it left. I can't believe it blew in our safety
It's because he put the charge behind the water
That's the that's the thing in in eod. You it's called a disruptor
You place explosive charges behind water and it basically just messes up everything that's in front of the water
Really quickly
So he's placed the charge behind the water and the water's just gone
Straight into the camera shelter and that's what's done that
Let's try and find
A piece of your slow mo guy's shirt. This is it. Oh, is that it? That's it. It's like coated that
Oh, that's the roosterteeth. Oh, hold that up. That's great
Look at that. It's the roosterteeth thing. Err teeth. Oh, no, it's
Turtie turtie turtie turtie
Wow
Do you know do you know my least favorite part of every slow mo guys videos? What's that? Well apart from me being hurt
Yeah
is
cleaning up afterwards
But all we've left today is a smoking crater. What and there's like
Pits of jeans and plastic and stuff. Hey, there's no plastic. It's just biodegradable jeans
That might be one of the most mental videos we've ever made. It's insane. That was that I tell you that's a lot of explosives
Yeah, well
Big thanks to vision research for setting this up and letting us use their phantoms in an extremely
Dangerous environment and thanks to the colorado school of mines for letting us come and blow stuff up here
Hopefully you enjoyed that video. Feel free to follow us on
Social media and stuff subscribe to the summer guys and we got a second channel. We'll see you next time
Feel like the next video should be really relaxing and comparison. Yeah, I think we need something like I don't know
Just chill. Yeah, this was this was a lot
