How on earth can I argue for a local science?
I'm going to be laughed out of the room if I argue for a local science.
But this is kind of what Bill Wimsat hints at in the causal ticket, right?
Thank you, thank you, thank you.
It seems to me that what those folk psychology terms mean, represent,
are what dynamical system theorists would call the constraint regime that holds the dynamics together.
The next stage of this is going to be a study of all the different modes of constraint
that are all operating simultaneously.
This is Brain Inspired. Hey everyone, I'm Paul.
Alicia Juarrero is a philosopher and has been interested in complexity science for a long time.
In her own words, since before complexity was cool. I like that.
In this episode, we discuss many of the topics and ideas.
In her new book, Context Changes Everything, How Constraints Create Coherence.
And the book makes the thorough case that constraints should be given way more attention
when trying to understand complex systems like brains and minds.
How they're organized, how they operate, how they're formed, how they're maintained, et cetera, et cetera.
So as you probably know, modern science, thanks in large part to the success of physics,
focuses on, or mostly on, a single kind of causation.
The kind involved when one billiards ball strikes another billiard ball.
But that kind of causation neglects what Alicia argues are the most important features of complex systems.
The constraints that shape the dynamics and possibility spaces of systems.
Much of Alicia's book describes the wide range of types of constraints that we should be paying attention to
and how they interact and mutually influence each other.
I highly recommend the book, and you may want to read it before, during, and after our conversation.
That's partly because, if you're like me, the concepts that we discuss still aren't comfortable to think about
in terms of normal modes of explanation in science.
Thinking across levels of organization turns out to be hard.
You might also want the book handy because, hang on to your hats, we also jump around a lot
among many of the concepts that are in our book.
So context changes, everything comes almost 25 years, almost a quarter of a century,
after her previous classic, Dynamics in Action, which we also discuss, and which I also recommend,
especially if you want more of a primer to her new, more expansive work.
These ideas touch on all things complex, of course, from self-organizing systems,
like whirlpools, to ecologies, businesses, societies, and, of course, minds and brains.
Find the show notes at braininspired.co.
I'm sure you could tell, I very much enjoyed this conversation.
We also have some guest questions from friends of the podcast, Kevin Mitchell,
who's also coming up on a near future episode about his new book.
And Max Shine from Down Under.
Thanks for listening. Here's Elisa.
Context changes, everything is almost a quarter...
It's Cuban hyperbole.
Oh, what does that mean?
Humans tend to exaggerate.
I probably should have said context changes, most things are a lot of things.
Cuban hyperbole.
I was going to tie it to your previous work, Dynamics and Action,
which is now almost a quarter of a century old.
And so what you could say about that is that context changes action
is a very coarse and terrible summary of that classic now work.
And so I was thinking maybe context changes, everything is just kind of an expansion on those ideas.
It really is.
After I wrote that one, I thought, well, I've got nothing else to say.
But you know, there's been so many issues.
And one of the things is people said to me, you know, there's nothing that's context free.
I'd use that term in that one.
Oh, yeah.
Yeah, that's true.
So what do I call it?
Well, what about context?
It depends.
So maybe I gave short shrift to that one, to that kind of constraint.
And so, you know, things start, and of course, AI and language models and so on.
And for E, I think came out of the process.
So there were a lot of things that I thought once the pandemic started,
I thought, you know what, just sit down and do it, you know, and just put it all together.
And Steve, you see if it comes together.
And I was pleased it did.
Yeah, me too.
I mean, you mentioned the phrase context free, which you have changed now to context dependent in the new book.
Oh, that's the context.
Right.
Context independent.
Yeah, see, that's what I was going to say is, you know, the book, I love the book.
It is challenging.
And one that I will have to revisit over and over because, well, no, it's not bad.
So I'm already, that's not a bad thing.
I'm already a slow reader and I'm a slow thinker, apparently, as well, at least.
I'm a writer is what I am.
I don't write very clearly.
I don't know why I'm good in the classroom that I'm terrible.
I just, it looks still, I spent most of my time just editing.
Sure.
Yeah.
Well, that's what.
So what I want to ask you is, what has changed in your views since dynamics in action?
And, you know, besides just expanding, you know, you cover like so many different constraints and topics in this book.
But what I wanted to comment on before that is one of the reasons why I'm going to have to go back to it over and over is because the terminology and is you're like inventing some of it.
And a lot of it is kind of still, for me, still fuzzy in terms of like what what it actually like it's it's definition and how like how I set the boundaries, you know, with these terms and what they mean and how I can use them.
And so, you know, and we'll come back to this.
But anyway, that's why I'm going to be revisiting a lot.
So maybe let's start with, you know, what's changed in 25 years in your thinking.
I think what's changed is that when I wrote dynamics in action, I basically meant it as a brief against analytic action theory.
Okay.
Can you can you summarize analytic?
The idea that that either that intentional behavior intentional action, you know, the book starts with what's the difference between a wink and a blink.
Right difference being that you should be able to explain away anything that philosophy of mind considers intentionality or intention.
So, teleology was reduced away.
The idea of contentful intentions were reduced away and so my thought was, because I published a number of standalone papers about what's wrong with behaviorist reductions of intention what's wrong with with identity theory
attempts to reduce intentions is on that complex dynamical systems theory was a very good way of entering this whole field that would solve a lot of the problems or wouldn't get you into the problems that all these other attempts did.
But in the last 20 some years, I keep thinking, you know, most stuff in reality is irreversible.
Most stuff is context.
So it applies not just to action, but it applies a lot more broadly.
And so I think I stick my neck out a bit more with respect to general ontology or general cosmology by using the same notion of constraint more broadly than just for action.
Yeah, well, I had to revisit dynamics in action.
As you know, and as you write about in your your newer book context changes everything neuroscience has embraced the dynamical systems perspective and you talk about some of the studies that you know some of the people who have been in those studies have been on this podcast and on this podcast we talk a lot about the
dynamical systems view and then going back to dynamics and action it's like oh my god it's all there already.
Thank you. Thank you.
It's fascinating to me that somebody like Mark Churchland who I use in one of the chapters is the son of Paul and Patricia Churchland who were the foremost advocates of the liminative.
Right.
I was thinking, oh my goodness, this is this is the revenge par excellence of dynamical systems theory, because I once met Paul Churchland here in DC, Dick Schlegel at GW and invited him to speak.
And I asked him back then this must have been this must have been just about when context when dynamics came up.
And it was years ago. And I haven't even considered cut dynamical systems theory.
That has nothing to say about neurology.
Really?
Yes.
Paul Churchland said that in person and I've never forgotten I'm thinking now and the reason I was almost sure that was so is because but way back when I was talking a lot to people in operations research and network theory and that kind of thing.
You know what, there's got to be a network property in the brain that has emergent properties that somehow loops back down and is able to influence behaviors such that these emergent properties get realized in behavior.
That's the difference between an action proper and behavior.
There's got to be some of that. But no, I think that just traditional notions of causality, traditional notions of ontology that only the tiny little fundamental components are real.
So it was all let's look for the neuron.
Right.
It does this. Yeah.
Yeah.
So I find it really, really very rewarding.
Yeah.
Dynamical systems theory has been vindicated in a sense.
Yeah.
I wonder what the elder church lens that their daughter is also in neuroscience, by the way.
I wonder what they think of the dynamic.
I wonder if they've come around at all because the tagline sort of eliminate to eliminate to vism is that folk psychology.
The words that we use in folk psychology aren't real things right and then and then there's a reductionist way to understand things and that's the best way.
But the the dynamic dynamical systems viewpoint kind of it's kind of in between that right because it allows for a top down thing but it doesn't necessarily say anything about the terms and concepts we use.
Well, that's why I think I stick my neck out in this in this one where it seems to me that what those folks psychology terms.
Mean represent are what dynamical system theorists would call the constraint regime that holds the dynamics together.
Yeah.
And so they are capturing an emergent property that is powerful and that's where the whole problem of causality kept bugging me because thinking.
Let's book on on reduction and emergence races.
You know, nowadays, the physicists, like Brian Auckland, for example, have have espoused the truth or the reality of emergent properties, but they still don't want to allow that those emergent properties are causally, causally influential on their components.
They cannot change behavior.
They cannot change in a sense neural architecture in virtue of their emergent properties.
Yeah.
Whereas that's what I think complex dynamical systems lets you do.
Maybe we could suggest segue into causality around a lot.
No, that's great.
That's great.
You'll have to I do it too.
So we're going to be in a real swamp here pretty soon.
So one of the things in dynamics and action also is you've railed against this modern notion of efficient causation as the only valid kind of causation.
And since you're just talking about causality, maybe we should talk about that.
And then I want to come back to also what you have changed your mind about perhaps since then.
So, you know, famously, there are these four different types of causations from Aristotle's days for Aristotle and an efficient causation, the billiard ball, the thing X hits things, why?
And then that moves things.
Thing why that's the only valid kind of causation.
And a lot of your labor is trying to bring back notions of the other of formal causality and causality via constraint.
And so do you think that and from my limited perspective, because I'm reading works like yours and like a lot of similar kinds of works that are trying to bring make teleology, not such a bad word and bring like these constraints to bear.
Because of that, I feel like the old story, the modern story of efficient causation is the only causation.
I feel like that's dissipating.
Do you believe that also?
I think it's still very present in in physics, especially with regards to the kind of causality that we would call top down causality, that in fact, emergent properties really are not causally powerful, that all the heavy lifting, as Van Orden would say, it all happens bottom up.
And so it's really to be explained through efficient energetic transfer.
But I think that's because the idea of causality as efficient, boxes you into the the possible boxes you into the impossibility of top down causation, because if there were top down causation with that kind of causality, you'd have over determination.
You'd have a violation of the closure of the physical and you'd have all these problems.
And so therefore no way that can't happen.
Well, but if you think of.
But what I found fascinating is one of the reasons why I adopted the notion of constraint was every time natural scientists aren't scientists.
Got into trouble thinking in terms of efficient causality, then immediately the term starts to use this.
Well, it's factors or conditions or constraints that are causal.
Well, okay, so I'll, I'll grant you efficient causality as, as, as the term for cause.
So let's call it influenced by constraint.
And that's what I was trying to do, because I certainly don't want to go to an environmental notion of formal cause.
I don't want to go to, you know, Deus Ex Machina or, or your, you know, Paley's teleology or even Aristotle's teleology, which was all built in set up from the beginning.
Right.
That's the way that that's why that's why Darwin, Darwin bought into this.
And so Darwin thought he was very concerned about the notion of evolution, because they have new species appearing that that would mean that it wasn't all built in from the start.
And therefore this developmental process was only an unfurling of preexisting potential.
And what I want to say is that constraints really create new potential, because I think that's what you get from prigogene.
I think that's what prigogene gets the, he was the good pregoser.
Now that we think about it, he was the one who he got the Nobel Prize for dissipated structures.
I think for that very reason.
But you mentioned physics and maybe it's just in biology that the notion of, of circular causality and causality via constraint is more comfortable among biologists.
I think the biologists biology was the last holdout.
They refused to get shoehorned into the model of efficient mechanical causality.
And as I was reading your email and reading one of the latest issues of Science Magazine on Australia, you know, they're talking about the dispersal of distribution of black beans throughout Australia.
And the assumption was, well, this precedes the Westerners who arrived in Australia.
But now they're revisiting the idea that some of the songlines of the native Australians have accounts of these plants and the dispersion.
So the Science Magazine article talks about combining not only the genetic flow of the genes of the black bean plant, but also biogeography and these ethnographic accounts.
So I think that you see it now more in ecology, in addition to just straight biology, but you see it.
And of course, the social scientists have always used other causal factors as their reasons.
But of course, that's what led the heart scientists to say, well, that proves they're not sciences.
Because they need to appeal to unique causes to things that don't scale as a universal law.
And because they use top-down factors that are not efficient causes, that shows for sure they're not science.
Maybe this can just be a jumping off point too. Any of these can be jumping off points because we can go any direction.
But have you changed your mind about anything in particular with regard to the story of context and constraints over the last quarter century?
No, I've just sort of expected, I think I focus more on context-independent constraints because what I think that does...
Hang on, I'll just say context-independence means it's an external constraint that drives a system far from equilibrium, like a gradient or gravity, etc.
It pulls on the system.
Like gradient, particularly. And when you start looking at the different kinds of gradients, either the spatial temporal gradients of gravity, the gravitational...
I like that you just illustrated gravity right there.
That means that space-time is not homogeneous and uniform. There are inhomogeneities in space and time.
Polarities. We know the importance of polarities all over the place. We have polarities in electric and magnetic.
But also in developmental anterior-posterior, right and left, in the development of an embryo.
We have... I think in social systems, we certainly have levels of organization that would give you different points of equilibrium at different stages.
So I think the importance of that, the importance of boundary conditions, I think, as a setting for a context-independent...
So basically, I think of context-independent constraints as those that determine, in a sense, the bounds of possibility space.
They kind of determine the basic fundamental characteristics of possibility space.
But you need both context-independent and context-dependent, and I'll just briefly define context-dependent constraints, or those that which bring things back, essentially away from context-independence, which means more toward equilibrium.
And when you get these mixing and match, maybe not... I know. I just caught myself saying more toward equilibrium.
But away from independence, we'll say, maybe that's a...
Correct.
Yeah. But when you get these interacting is when you can have the ability to develop complex systems.
I think the reason I had given context-free context-independent constraints short shrift back when is because I don't think context-independent constraints complexify.
They don't enable complexity. All you get in principle would be a clump.
Yeah.
They would match.
At the poles, yeah.
And clumps and masses and agglomerations have no emergent properties.
So context-independent constraints don't create complexity.
Once you have a space of possibilities with a certain inhomogeneity in it, then I think complex dependent constraints can kick in.
My question is, why do they show up? Why do context-independent constraints appear?
And I'm wondering whether, again, the boundary conditions, if the clumps are dense enough and they can't move much, then do accidental linkages?
Indeterminism? Are you hinting at indeterminism in the universe?
Well, even the bumps and jostlings of regular Brownian motion, that if they're...
I always try to ground what I say in hard sciences, and I always end up going back to things like the Benard cells and the BZ reaction.
Guys, I'm very worried that philosophers will be accused of flights of fancy that are not grounded in anything scientific.
And so I keep thinking, all right, so you've got Benard cells and a pan of water, heated uniformity from below, and at a certain threshold of non-equilibrium.
In other words, at a certain gradient, correct?
Yeah.
But status quo cannot be maintained. In other words, conduction cannot be maintained.
And so the system flips to linking individual water molecules into local perturbation.
But if that gets amplified by the conditions, then it becomes a self-reinforcing feedback loop.
And that's, I think, where you see the context-dependent constraint kicking in, that then the linkages create standalone units.
Almost like when you're playing Hangman.
You know, we know that instinctively, because if we have towards the end of a word that we don't know what that is, a T and then an I,
well, they're two more to go. Well, it's either going to be NG or ON, because these form like standalone units, because they...
the context-dependence concatenates and becomes a standalone unit.
And now you've got, in language, you'd have a phoneme, right?
But in... that's what a laser is.
A laser is context-dependent constraints of a whole bunch of photon streams getting linked together in a way that they become a standalone entity with emergent properties.
Yeah, so you're talking about, and you just mentioned why you use these examples, because they're less dangerous, I suppose,
because they're, in some sense, simpler, more, I'm going to say low-dimensional, because they're like from physics.
So it feels more comfortable. Maybe that's a way to say it.
But you do venture into these more, you know, like biological systems in the book.
And one of the questions I had for you is, so I'm glad that you're sometimes pausing just a little bit before you say causality or something.
Yeah, oh, I always do. Because that's where immediately a physicist will say, no, that's not causality.
Yeah, right, right. And then I don't know what's going on in your head if you're searching for a different term, or alternative types of terms,
because, you know, reading your book, and one of the reasons why I need to revisit it multiple times, and I look forward to it,
is just because things feel so new to me, and the terminology's so new, that I don't feel...
They don't feel comfortable, right? So I'm trying to think like, how do I apply this term, and how does this concept interact with this kind of constraint,
and they're interlocking in dependencies, and how do I think about that applied to the brain?
And so what I'm wondering is, are these going to feel... You're the expert. Do these feel super comfortable to you,
just switching and thinking about these things, interacting, and the different modalities?
I wish I had made... I had coined the term enabling constraints. It goes back to Patty, Howard Patty,
and a whole bunch of these biologists who talked, several of whose books have the same similar title, hierarchy theory.
And it's because the enabling constraint is able to create a self-organization that can then also embed in the next higher-up level of constraint.
So I particularly want to use the notion of enabling constraints as constraints that enable the formation of a more complex dynamic.
And how does that relate to a limiting constraint? Contrast that with a limiting constraint?
That would be the... I think we tend to use the term constraint, especially in physics and in mechanical engineering,
as limiting, as closing off options. But the biologists tend to use them very often as factors, conditions, feedback loops, catalysts.
See, the nice thing about the notion of a catalyst, two things, a lot of things. One is it spans chemistry and biology.
And even in so-and-so as a catalyst of change, we say that of people. So it's used in that sense, but also because a catalyst is conserved.
It does not use up any energy of its own. And so what I like about that notion is that it's a causal factor.
It's an influencer. That is not in the efficient causality mode. So are feedback loops.
And the thing about a feedback loop, which I love, is that for eons, since ours on that never changed, the idea of something creating itself or feeding back on itself to change itself was forbidden.
It was verbatim. Because, again, from Aristotle's notion, then it would have to be before and after itself.
It would have to be before itself as cause. It would have to be after itself as cause. Oh, no, you can't have that.
But the notion of simultaneous causality does not allow for parts interacting to produce holes that have emergent properties, which then simultaneously loop back down and constrain the parts of which the hole is made up.
And so that's why I love the notion of feedback loops and catalyst in particular. But then I think once that hole coalesces, then you've got stabilizing constraints, because it has to hold together for a persistent length of time.
Because unlike near-equilibrium thermodynamics, the thing doesn't fall apart. The thing about these Benard cells is that while the conditions hold, it holds together despite changes at the component level.
In terms of fluctuations in perturbation, it has a metastability, which I also like, which is different from thermal equilibrium of classical near-equilibrium thermodynamics.
While the thing holds, it has a stabilizing power to stabilize the constraint regime as a whole.
You say it has a stabilizing power. That's the whole...
That is the dynamic constraint regime that constitutes a Benard cell. A Benard cell is not a thing other than the water molecules that make it up, or the constraints that go into establishing the conditions that make it up, the boundary conditions as context-independent constraints, and then the linkages of the molecules.
Yeah, it's just so hard to think of across scales, these myriological...
Yes, it's extremely difficult to think across scale, because we tend to think in terms of efficient cause across scale.
And all of these biologists... I always wondered for a long time, why did these biologists like Stan Salti, Howard Patti, a lot of them started talking about semiotics.
And seniors, why did they ever get into this? And it finally dawned on me because the relationship between levels of organization, and Herbert Simon knew this.
The near decomposability...
...arromations of constraint, they're not relations of energetic exchange. Right?
So the higher level is a form of constraint on the possibility space of the lower level. So it doesn't let it veer off and disintegrate.
It's interesting the word integrity. It's beautifully here because it just holds it together.
So when I think of top-down constraints, those are limiting because they hold that possibility space within a dynamic range.
And so the thing holds, an organism holds together. Our metabolism might change, a spleen might be removed, a gold ladder might be removed with a constraint regime holds.
Can you name something that is not an emergent property of something else?
Oh, culture.
Culture is not an emergent property?
Culture is an emergent property. Do you want me to...
No, can you name something that's not an emergency?
Oh, quantity is emergent, but it's not an interesting emergence.
Okay, so that's fine.
Thank you. That's a good point. When I think of emergent properties, the emergent properties that I'm interested in are qualitatively different properties.
That affects the behavior of the component level so that that qualitative property continues in effect.
That's why homeostasis, I think of as an emergent property that has interesting features because it controls the goings on at the lower level such that homeostasis, homostatic balance holds.
Whereas a whole bunch of pile of debris in my backyard...
It's still emergent with respect to...
Size.
Is what?
Size.
Well, it's bigger, but if you throw a bowling ball into it, it would be harder to move than if you just had one piece of debris out there, right?
Well, that's true, but it does not change the characteristics of any of the...
There's no top-down.
That's what's been driving my thinking for 20-some years, right?
And that is, how can you explain top-down causality without falling victim or making the mistakes of elongital, all that other stuff?
And that's what I think complex dynamical systems gives me.
And I think the rise of ecology in the last 25 years has helped enormously.
Because we used to think, oh, well, we can kill off the plank, and that's not a big deal.
And the thing is, the understanding that it may mess up the constraint regime that holds the whole thing together is the idea that there are systemic properties that really affect the components,
I think that's gone a long way to making us aware of top-down in a respectable scientific way.
On the other hand, one of the features of complex self-organizing systems is their robustness.
So if you did kill off all the mosquitoes, we might be okay.
I suspect, though, I think robustness means that they degrade gracefully.
I like that.
It doesn't fall apart the way if you break the axle on a bicycle, that will try to go or whatever.
That will just, the thing won't work at all.
It seems as though complex dynamical systems, far from equilibrium, they get a bit out of kilter.
But they continue to work for a fair amount of time until then it reaches its level of instability that that constraint regime cannot hold.
New phase change coming up.
And you get an entirely new phase change that falls apart.
So I suspect that if we kill off all the mosquitoes, we do not know what might enter that open niche now.
Right. Yeah.
Well, there have been all sorts of disasters with introducing in non-native species to kill off one thing.
It turns out they're invasive.
Exactly.
I suspect we've got to be careful because of that kind of problem.
Before the thing falls apart, you might have some really nasty surprises that you didn't expect.
Hey, you mentioned homeostasis.
And again, we're going to jump around.
But I had Henry Yin on and I've had a few other people on who talk about the brain more as a control system than necessarily a complex system.
But we need to think about things more in sort of the old cybernetics way of a control system.
However, the set point of our thermometer is not set externally.
We're setting our own set point, right?
So homeostasis is...
It's uncertain about.
Well, that's what I was going to ask you about.
How do you think, rather, about when we're setting our internal desired temperature, let's say, that we need to be around 98.6, how do you think about that?
Where does that set point come from?
Bottom up, top down, or is it just the...
I think not only comes up, bottom up, top down, but pass forward.
Pass forward environment and...
We forget temporal constraints as well.
Yeah.
For example, folks up in the Himalayas and in the Andes have a whole different oxygen hemoglobin.
Capacity.
Capacity and characteristic because of centuries of adaptability, millennia of adaptability.
So we forget temporal constraints as well.
Yeah.
Right?
It seems as though the same temperature in the fall feels colder than it does in the spring because by the time we get to the spring, we've had a whole winter.
So I think it's multi-dimensional, multi-scalar, temper...
Temporally, I think it...
We forget time.
We forget.
So we...
And all of these complex dynamical systems, I remember a phrase of Prigogenes, I was fortunate enough to meet him a couple of times.
And I've never seen this written down, but he used to use that phrase more than once in person.
They carry their history on their back.
Oh, I like that.
I love that phrase.
In other words, their very dynamical architecture and characteristics embody...
And that's where the four E's come in, embody the conditions under which they were created, evolved, and so on.
His examples were snowflakes.
They might have all started with the same, but over the time that they fell to Earth, their actual architecture changes to embody the temperature, the pressure, all the atmospheric conditions
through which they modified themselves and adapted until they reached the ground.
So I think that's true for us as well, for body temperature, for body states.
I'm fascinated by that whole inflammation, all these set points that I think, in a sense, those mark the parameters of what you might call the constraint dome.
You know, we've got the proteome.
Oh, there it is.
There's the word, the constraint dome.
I was reading proteome and epigenome and stuff.
Well, you know, we need a constraint dome.
We do.
That's all in your book.
The constraint dome is...
No, but I never occurred to me to use that phrase, which is what I like, because it's a whole bunch of them together at once.
Right.
Right.
That's the problem in sort of just mentally trying to imagine these things.
But real quick, you know, you mentioned temporal constraints, but in a sense, this is a question.
All or most constraints are temporal in nature because a constraint is, by definition, slower than the process that it's constrained.
Like a catalyst, right, is more stable than the reaction that it's catalyzing, so it can act as a constraint.
Correct.
But then the cells which enable the tissues, the cell dynamics which enable the tissues, that's faster than the...
Yeah.
So you have a whole bunch of...
So therefore, what's important are the interfaces between the levels of organization.
And what are the constraints that govern those interfaces?
And we would call them, what, codes, rules...
Laws.
Laws, but local, but local, very...
Yeah.
Oftentimes very local, right?
Right.
Well, that's so...
Okay, there's this...
A lot of the physical laws, like, you know, the notion of a force, right?
For some reason, well, when you think about it, it doesn't make any sense.
But for some reason, when you grow up with it in physics classes and you think, oh, force, I know what a force is.
But when you really think about it, it becomes very unnatural, like saying the same word over and over and you lose its meaning.
Are these ideas going to seem as natural to me eventually as the concept of a force, which turns out a slippery idea also?
I would hope so, but that's what I'm always worried about, about neologisms.
And I worried about using the word constraint, but it seemed as though...
What else would you call it?
Better than a cause, because if I use the word cause, then the assumption that that has to be energetic transfer, that's a losing battle, that's why.
So I don't know what else to call it, but to think in terms of enabling constraints is bottom up that within certain boundary, within certain context independent frameworks,
they can generate emergent properties, which in turn operate as second order top down context dependent constraints, if you will.
It's easier to just call a constraint regime.
Yeah, okay, regime's a good word.
Hold the components together so that they continue to satisfy the emergent properties of the whole.
Do you feel like we will be able to write a constraint cookbook to generate dynamical complex systems that we want to generate eventually?
If we think of it as formal systems the way we used to where you would have a universal law, like Newton's Laws of Motion, and I think my answer is no, because if I'm emphasizing context dependence, those laws would be what Carpopper would call well, yeah, those
applies to normal science, but evolution to a whole new constraint structure, to a whole new constraint regime, such as the transition, I would say, from physics to chemistry, chemistry to biology,
biology to psychology first or sociology first or whatever you want to call it, and on and on and on.
That requires a whole new constraint regime.
It's a topological nightmare and transition.
You know what's interesting?
Prigazine detested catastrophe theory and I never understood why.
This idea that Peter Allen, who worked with Prigazine for a long time, you know Peter Allen's work?
Peter Allen, really nice work.
He's retired now from Cranfield in England, but he did a lot of work with Prigazine in Brussels at the Free University.
The idea that the transition from independent photon streams to a laser, the transition from a independent water molecules to a benign cell, the transition from a whole bunch of chemical transformations
to a living organism is akin to a topological bifurcation, that you have entirely new coordinates that apply at this new level.
That to me gives reality to emergent properties.
Oh, ontologically real?
No, I want to say ontologically real.
Okay, that's dangerous.
I don't have to worry about tenure.
So I don't have to worry about retreating to epistemology where the going gets stuff.
That's our models and that's the way we make sense of information overload and stuff.
No, damn it.
I want to say they are ontologically real that the constraint regime that holds a benign cell together or a culture together or a laser together are real.
They are not stuff.
They are not things.
I certainly don't want to reify them, but I don't see why we don't allow the dynamical interdependencies,
which is all these constraint regimes are, right?
They are interlocking interdependencies.
I thought reify meant make real.
Oh, well, yeah, sure, part of it, but then only stuff stuff is real.
Oh, okay.
Okay.
So therefore.
Processes are real.
That's why Whitehead rails against the reification because he emphasized that processes are real.
And I want to say and the constraints that keep processes within a certain space, face space are also real.
They are as real as the face space they are kept into.
Which one do you give?
Do you give more credence to processes or are you a process philosopher, so to speak?
You know, dynamical systems theory seems to place and if nothing else equal to the links as the nodes.
Yeah.
The question of whether the nodes are condensates.
Mark Bergauer uses that term.
The condensates of links of a lot of stable linkages.
Oh, that's cool.
The nodes as stable condensates.
No, as nodes are condensates of stable links or those that happen very often and so on.
So it's hard to say in this new book, I stick my neck out because I did not realize that there's still a question about exactly what covalent bonds are.
Oh, yeah.
I think when you dig into any established thing, we realize, yeah.
There you go.
And the interconversion of matter and energy certainly says, well, you know, so is a material thing simply the condensate of a bunch of constrained energy forces, links and constraints.
Or, or are the forces and the links, the manifestation or the behavior of the, then if relativity theory is correct, which I'm assuming, then it doesn't matter.
They're interconvertebral, right?
But again, they're very local.
See, I want to, I was thinking, how on earth can I argue for a local science?
I'm going to be laughed out of the room if I argue for a local science.
But this is kind of what, but Bill Wimsat, Hinsat and the causal ticket, right?
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
I have a sweet spot in my heart for Bill Wimsat, even though I've never met him, because I learned that he, I don't know who told me or how I'd learned about it.
He was on the committee that approved my first page.
Oh.
The theory rests on a mistake.
And, and so I think that I published that first paper so many years ago.
Wow, that's awesome.
I think Wimsat is fact, you know, and that brings in the notion of explanation, how he's been arguing that sometimes explanations look upwards, not just downwards.
Why?
Because if you do believe that there are emergent properties and they are causally constrained.
With the eye roll, folks.
Exactly.
Then you have to be able to make reference in any complete explanation to its influence as well as to the influence of the bottom up components, which is the way we tend to, we always look downwards.
Yeah.
And let me tell you, I think the reason folks like David Chalmers and company, all this business about psycho, what's it?
Panpsychism.
Panpsychism.
Yeah.
I think what's driving that is that any time you find top down causality, you cannot much deny.
That's got to be mental.
Well, let's put it differently.
It's got to be top down and it's a constraint regime influencing its components.
But I don't want to say that they're just as chemical properties are emerging for physical biological properties are emerging from chemical psychic properties are emerging at a certain level of organization.
I don't want to say that that emergent property way up at the psychic level also exists.
I really don't want to say the Bernard cell is thinking or is conscious or is aware.
Yeah.
But I do want to say there is a top down phenomenon.
I think I suspect that a lot of what's driving the panpsychic.
What would we call it?
I hope so.
I cannot imagine that anybody's taking tears.
I think it's a paradigm.
That's all I can do.
Let's call it paradigm to give it a little more credence than fad.
No, no, no.
It was a paradigm way back in Lucretia's whatever time.
I don't want to get in trouble, Alicia.
Okay.
I have to.
I don't want to get in trouble.
But you know what?
Talking about that.
I just spoke at the theory of consciousness conference in Taramina past spring.
And I suddenly realized I said the same thing I talked about.
I talked at that conference in Antwerp 20 some years ago.
And I was laughed out of the room 20 some years ago.
Oh, wow.
I was talking about constraints and dynamical systems and so on.
Interesting.
You get a lot of this talk about constraints.
I mean, people were talking a lot about constraints.
Yeah.
What is the lesson from that?
Because you've stuck to your guns and did you just brush that off your back?
And this is an aside.
It's more of a personal question, you know, because a lot of people face laughter or dismissal.
Well, I wasn't.
I wasn't literally laughed out, but I was ignoring.
Oh, and nobody asked me questions.
And they just said it's the equivalent.
People were polite, but they didn't understand it.
Well, I didn't explain it clearly, but I think it was just it didn't.
It didn't.
It didn't fit the standard bottom up.
Identity theory or supervenience theory, which was the world was popular at the time,
or a limitism.
Eliminatism.
I never can say.
Hard time.
So it was it was ignored.
I hate to say it.
Absolutely.
You know, Bill Bechtel, who's a nice guy and he's very good.
He's a new mechanist.
He's a mechanisms all the way proponent.
Well, if you look at his mechanics, they've sort of changed.
And and he came to Cuba.
He and Adele came to Cuba with me in a conference I organized in Havana years ago.
And I think his mechanism is not your grandmother's mechanism.
That's true.
But he's adapted like you just said.
But but it's sort of like, come on, Bill, just acknowledge complex, dynamical.
Can't do it.
Yeah.
Well, it's hard to it's hard to change your mind when you've done it.
Yeah.
Yeah.
You mentioned explanation a few minutes ago.
And so in dynamics and action, the I think the last chapter or the next last chapter,
you make a call for the necessity of explaining these sorts of myriological interactions in
terms of hermeneutics or a narrative story.
And and in this newer book, I think I searched and I think hermeneutics was in there maybe
once or twice.
But you also talk, you bring up the idea of order parameters, which are kind of like
these hyper parameters of dynamical systems.
So I'm wondering where you stand in terms of explanation.
I mean, my my original thought was, well, if I could just list all the constraints and
the types of constraints and how they're interacting, is that an explanation?
Do I need a narrative story?
Are these order parameters?
Where what would satisfy me or a reviewer of a paper as an explanation of some cognitive
function, for example?
Well, I use the term hermeneutics.
Another eye roll.
I mean, I don't like neologism.
Although that hermeneutics goes back to biblical.
Right.
Well, that's yeah, when you look it up, it's all about the Bible.
But your point was to go across levels.
You really need to account for these things and narrative might be the only way to do
it.
That I borrowed that back then from Cliff Gertz, who almost defined hermeneutics and
it's kind of like sailing.
You have to tack from the very global to the very local back to the global back to the
local and see how all these constraints interact and change each other.
And I love also the notion of mutual constraint satisfaction, which is what I think is happening.
I think probably narrative does a way better job of accomplishing that than a
Hempel and Oppenheimer.
Hempel and Oppenheimer deductive, no, logical model.
Yeah.
Yeah.
So to that extent, I don't think I've changed my tune.
I just I'm not using the notion of narrative.
When somebody nowadays says, Proust's Madelands, you bring up the whole constraint regime
of the culture of his history, of his childhood, of his experience, that to me is almost like
an order of parameter.
It's a parameter in that it is the intersection of a whole bunch of different independent
variables that together give you a whole tapestry of a whole different face, possibility space.
Could you think of a concept as a constraint?
I think I certainly think of a concept of a constraint and a framework, a cognitive framework,
being a whole tapestry of concepts.
But in such as cognitive, it's emotional.
Think of all faction.
And all faction does not go directly to the cortex initially.
Right.
But I think a concept has a lot of characteristics that are important.
One is they're multiply realizable.
That's a big theme in your book.
It's a big theme in my book because a triangle or triangularity as a concept is multiply realizable.
It's not a one to one capture of the individual physical features of one instance.
I think that we know the child is able to, has understood the concept when they're able to apply that concept to an instance they haven't seen before,
or they were not taught about.
So I think that's extremely important.
I think what a local constraint regime does is it captures a type, what philosophers used to call types and universals,
not a concept or what we would call an emotion.
Not this emotion now here.
An emotion, yeah.
This type of emotion.
It's a bunch of constraint regimes that can be identified with a term like fear or anger or pleasure or avoid
an approach.
All these are code terms to that extent, the reductions.
They're code terms, but they do capture something very real and that is a whole complex constraint regime.
That kind of swirls around this, let's say, fear or something.
It's almost like a process that is itself kind of condensated to use your term earlier.
But still a process and carries with it on its back its history and all of the things associated.
Correct, correct, correct.
Okay, so I didn't tell you this and I know we're jumping around.
I actually elicited a few guest questions from previous guests.
The first one I'm going to play for you, and this is kind of maybe segue into a conversation about minds and brains and then later AI.
The first one I'm going to play to you is from Kevin Mitchell.
I'm going to have him back on the podcast in a couple weeks about his new book, Agents, Free Agents.
Yes.
How Free Well Gave Us Agency.
Yes, yes.
Okay, so I'm just going to play this to you, make sure that you can hear it.
Hi, Alicia.
This is Kevin Mitchell.
I really loved your new book, which very clearly lays out the case that constraints are causes.
That is that the way things are organized is every bit as much of a cause of how they evolve through time as the basic laws and forces of physics.
In particular, you highlight the really key idea of enabling constraints, especially in hierarchical systems, that organizing the elements at one level can enable new kinds of properties to emerge at higher levels.
You say in chapter 16 that emergent properties and powers were not merely waiting to be revealed.
They are genuine creations of path dependent, multiple constraint satisfaction.
And I wanted to push back on that a little and suggest that, in fact, many of the organizations we see in living organisms and design systems are there because of some functionality.
They serve a useful purpose and that many such functional motifs or architectures are in fact waiting to be revealed.
Under this view, a lot of the design work done by evolution is actually an exploration of a kind of platonic design space, followed by retention of useful motifs rather than a real creation de novo.
So I wonder what you make of that notion.
Thanks.
All right.
So that was a long one, but did you get it all?
Yes, I think I got it all.
That's a heck of a question, because I think logically, of course, there is a platonic, maybe undercurrent.
But in fact, I think I'm more like Aristotle did not believe that Plato's forms existed in a transcendental realm.
And I want to stay agnostic about that, but I certainly want to say that they are embodied and revealed and acted upon in virtue of the confluence of these constraints occurring at a particular moment at a particular time.
Locally.
You know, I think I used to think of myself more as a Platonist when I remember getting into philosophy, and I got into philosophy because back in the day, a lot of schools allowed you to, if you were not a science or math major or engineering major, you could substitute a symbolic logic
course for math requirement as one of your requirements.
I thought anything to get rid of, not to do math, which I am sorry, I did.
But when I took the first philosophy course, it was like discovering a whole new platonic world.
It was like, you know, if I'd taken another history course, yeah, you know, it's another king, another queen, another war, another this, but this was like a whole new floor in a building that I'd never seen before.
That's that kind of transformation.
But more and more, I want to kind of remain grounded and rooted to to natural phenomena.
So I really want to naturalize my arguments and speculating about a platonic transcendental realm.
Well, he said a kind of platonic.
He hedged a little bit.
Well, if that's the case, then I'm perfectly happy with his book that way.
So that what is the kind well in Aristotle's case, it's the, it's the Aristotle believed in forms, it's just that he believed in embodied forms and forms as they were.
And so what I want to say is that they are created by this confluence of constraints.
My main concern is to make sure that they are taken seriously such that meaning is taken seriously. In other words, the unembedding organizational level gives meaning to the components.
The amount of glucose in a fudge brownie that I can eat and not get sick is given meaning by what my homeostasis metabolism is operating as.
Yeah, you're okay now, but don't do it very often kind of thing. So that meaning is the multiple realizability of the ambiguous aspect being disambiguated by context.
But but not it not.
And I use the word context very deliberately. I don't want to use context to mean any old environment.
I want to mean the environment in which a system is embedded and from which it has drawn some of its content is enabling constraints and in terms of which it implements its stabilizing or top down constraints.
So so I want to say these are these are new and the properties are real so that yes, superconductivity and a laser has brand new properties.
Yeah.
Did they exist in a pre existing platonic realm? I don't think I want to speculate on that. I'm perfectly happy song. And to me real means it has causal power.
Okay, it has some kind of it makes it makes a difference.
If it's any phenomenon, you know, then I don't that kind of emergence. Yeah, weak emerges that kind of mergers doesn't interest me that much. Okay.
I don't want to speak for Kevin, but kind of reformulating his question, you know, a lot of what you and the field and dynamical systems theories talks about is these state spaces and when you're on a dynamical like when you're on a trajectory within the state space, you.
Yeah, you can visit different areas within the state space, not all of them and the constraints, constrain where you can visit in the state space right.
But if you I wonder if that that kind of platonic realm that Kevin is alluding to is you can think of it as the state space that whether a state space is a real thing right on a trajectory.
Later we can say that we can define the state space by the trajectory and the boundary conditions of the possible values that it could have taken.
But if it's not visiting a particular area of the state space with that. And it did. Would that then be a new thing or would it be visiting a thing for which it already had a capacity for and thinking in terms of like the functions that Kevin was talking about.
I think that's what normal sciences normal science is the visiting of areas in possibility space and hadn't visited before but it's pretty much the same possibility space.
I think that's development biology. I think evolution. I think there are times when it's the entire possibility space that is new. That's what I want to call a creative emergent.
Is this related to Stuart Kaufman's adjacent possible idea?
Maybe.
Okay.
Whether whether we go step by step, you know, each adjacent possible, or in the case of a Bernard style, it doesn't seem that it's adjacent possible. It seems as though there's a threshold of instability.
And it seems to me that that's what happens, for example, a cell in a petri dish as opposed to a cell within a tissue.
Okay.
It's a whole different qualitative phenomenon. And so it's and it's the it's the new possibility space that I want to say is being created. It's an emergent quality. It's not just a new corner in the existing possibility space.
I'm perfectly happy going adjacent possibles.
This is from Max Shine, who's been on the podcast. He thinks he calls himself a systems neurobiologist and he really tries to think across scales and a lot of his research is dealing with things like how neuromodulation interacts with network level things.
So these things are hard to think about and research, obviously. So let me pull up this question.
Hi, Alicia. This is Max Shine from the University of Sydney.
When we think about top down constraints over bottom up activity, we often invoke concepts like the self.
So I can imagine myself being hungry, and that will help constrain the types of actions that I might take in order to find food and satiate my hunger.
There are a number of really fascinating situations like the so called flow state and also states with pharmacological manipulation.
When the sense of self can dissolve, you still see quite coherent cross scale behavior. People don't just crumble into a heap.
They can still perform music and sports at a high level or have a nice walk through the forest.
So my question is, do you view the sense of self as an illusion?
Or do you think of it just as one of many ways in which a system that's organized across scales can be organized? Thanks.
And Mac wants to know whether his question was better than Kevin's. No, I'm just kidding.
No, they're very good, both of them.
You know, I keep thinking how with Gazaniga's experiments with the cut corpus callosum, that there were a whole bunch of weird things like we discovered about somebody was shown an image to the right eye and another image to the left eye and people confabulated.
And so you wonder if in these cases where the self seems to dissolve, there's nevertheless enough connectivity to maintain a coherent structure.
Structure being the self?
Yes, I would say a dynamic, a whole dynamic constraint that keeps being you.
To a lesser example, I think people who sleepwalk or who are hypnotized will nevertheless not bump into the coffee table. They go around the coffee table.
But these could be sort of on the automatic side of behavior, right? So there's automatic and controlled processing.
Right, right. So that, well, but there is control enough that you walk and you don't, you, you, you, you maintain that.
But maybe the flow state would be because Mac mentioned the flow state when that is like when your automatic processes take over and you, but you still barely have, have some sort of control and you're in a heightened.
You're trying really hard and it kind of switches and then you're watching yourself do it kind of.
Yeah, yeah. And you wonder whether we can, could that be a bit like these optical illusions where you can see one side and not the other.
And so to what extent do those constraints to, to what extent do those levels of awareness conflict with each other, can mutually support each other and reinforce each other or not.
Again, I think that, that the next stage of this is going to be a study of all the different modes of constraint that are all operating simultaneously.
As I started, as I started writing this all of a sudden, things like entrenchment, like buffering, I have a whole chapter of where I catalog some of these buffering and entrenchment and
Today, scaffolds and all of these that seem to all be operating simultaneously and that certainly a lot of the social scientists have understood very, very well.
You know, in public policy, oh, look, if we can entrench this rule and regulation, it'll, it will hang on for way longer and avoid any kind of attempts to, to remove it as a regulation that I live in DC.
That's why I think about it.
And so you wonder, starting to map things in terms of constraints, in terms of possibility spaces might start to illustrate how all of these work and the possibility of therapeutic intervention as a result because that's what all this recent talk about psychedelics.
Yeah.
No, you wanted to what extent a psychedelic literally disintegrates the constraint regime of the self of, of the pre-established coordinates and parameters and so on.
Yeah, the ego.
Exactly.
The ego.
You wonder to what extent that, that is a, that is a disruption of the constraint regime more than the disruption of vision or, yeah, vision to you get maybe hallucinations, but, but that's not as interesting as, you know, I go like that and I push my elbow I can hallucinate all these standard
you know, optical illusions, you don't call them hallucinations, optical illusions, right?
Yeah.
So at what point do we start looking at this and the answer is that's going to take a lot of very interesting research, kind of like Ramachandran's famous example with the phantom limb and the mirror and so on.
Yeah.
It's not that possible unless there is some control regime that is modulating the sense of pain that incorporates, you know, I can imagine being in an automobile accident and having my arm mangled or my hearing these descriptions of these IEDs and
and things like that.
Correct.
And so you go, well, here's everything together because if you didn't have the visual input, if you didn't have the conceptual understanding of what this means on and on and on, you wonder if the pain would be would be different.
And so how all of these constraint regimes interact and what are the necessary inputs at each point to maintain that particular constraint regime so that then you have a global sense of self that I'm not sure we're all that coherent when every in every day.
I don't feel coherent, but my wife would beg to differ.
You're enough to be operating, but it's not like, you know, I heard something horrible happening outside.
I wouldn't react and I even even in a sense of flow.
I think there's enough cognitive control that if some horrendous perturbation, the standard answer is you drive home and you don't even know if you went through that red light or you don't because you drive home in that.
And that path every day and you don't even think about it.
Yeah.
But certainly if a child ran across your front of the then you'd immediately get out of that flow and react.
So, so there's how much control in which case, how can we use it therapeutically for obsessive compulsive disorders for PTSD for all of these.
I think those are all disorders disorders of constraint regimes.
So, okay.
Regulation of regulate.
It's a it's the regulatory system that's shot.
It's like the on switches on all the time, or the it is modulating it the way it's supposed to modulate it.
So these are regulatory meaning constraint regime issues.
Not structure, not function.
It's the regulatory constraint regime that modulates these other two that that we don't understand that much about I think.
I'll see the PTSD, chronic anxiety or depression, all of these that are sort of I think we've pretty much taken care of no we haven't taken care of but we understand how it works a low hanging fruit of the, you know, yeah well you know the glucose is out of whack.
That causes, but where stress or epigenetic stress can be inherited several generations down.
That's a regulatory issue then and that's what methylation does and that's what I think a lot of these constraint regimes do.
So that there's this phenomenon sort of piggybacking on what Mac was asking about there's this phenomena in psychedelics right you can use them therapeutically.
And in some cases like near death experiences serve as therapeutic events and people come back kind of different right.
And is this a way to is one way to imagine that and maybe even electroshock therapy is another example.
I'm not sure if that's a good example.
Yeah, yeah.
You have all these kind of entrenched constraints locally in your brain and in your mind and operating things.
And then when you so I'm sure you're aware of the psychedelic study that when you administer psychedelics often what happens is there's higher connectivity in your brain less modularity right.
And could could you maybe this is speculation but would you think of that as just resetting all of the attractor states and then when they come back up they can come back and slightly different.
Probably and it might open up.
It might make the interfaces more porous to contemporary experience so you don't have to be worried that the explosion is the ID or that that you don't have to wash your hands a million times in order to.
Because you know, yes, I think that the that more and more as we read these kinds of novel forms of therapy that they are they usually are targeting issues of regulation.
To me fascinating.
Yeah.
This is then starting to study how exactly that connect the home stays stays whole.
Strain don't connect.
They all because all the connect on the proteomics and all the rest of them all the owns all the owns then are modulated by the whole constraint dome of the entire.
But that also includes the constraints of your society.
You know, I love traveling to Europe.
When I travel to Europe the weight of history is very obvious.
Compared to the United States.
You ask somebody at a restaurant in anywhere in Europe and how do you prepare this dish.
Half of the time it's the way it's always been prepared.
Yeah.
In America, if you do it the same way as you did it six months ago.
Oh, you're stale.
You're boring.
You're old.
It's encouraged the constraint regime.
Now that's not to say that they're not all sorts of problems for marginalized societies where the constraint regimes are very clearly kept entrenched very deliberately.
Yes, I understand that.
But it's all a question of the constraint coming from the culture as well.
That's why in the four E's the whole infant, for example, their emphasis on affordances.
So I don't know if we said it earlier.
This is like the inactive embodied.
What are the other two?
The four E's.
Anyways, embodied cognition.
Correct.
Yeah.
Embodied cognition, which Andy Clark and Paolo and even Merlin Dallen, where about when?
Extended.
Extended embodied and acted.
There we go.
We got three out of four.
You know, I always say I frankly do not think that a chair affords opportunities for seating for a lot of people.
You hear stories of folks from, I don't know which culture who were brought to the United States and they will stand on the toilet because it didn't occur.
And I don't think a tatami mat affords opportunities for sleeping for those of us who were not raised in a Japanese.
I mean, affordances are clearly embodied in the constraint of the society in which you grew up or you know about.
Embedded.
You just said the fourth E. It's embedded.
It isn't.
Okay.
And I think how things get.
See, I don't think you have embeddedness in Newtonian science.
Right.
Things are just plunked into a featureless space and time in Newtonian science.
Yeah.
But that's the beauty of it too, because it's some simplicity, right?
It's spherical cows.
It's in a vacuum.
It's correct.
But it's it's featureless.
Whereas embeddedness is you're really embedded, meaning that embedding layer affects you.
And you are a part of that embedding dynamic as well.
It goes both ways.
All right, I want to ask you, because we're coming up on time and I have a thousand other things to ask you, but let's stay on brain and mind for just one more question here.
And then I have some I want to ask you about artificial intelligence and your thoughts on that.
So thinking about dimensionality and going up in these a myriological level, right?
So a lot of this modern neuroscience is reducing the dimensionality of your brain activity into these low dimensional manifold structures and then the dynamics come in when you have a trajectory along that manifold.
And a lot of some people think that that's well, maybe that's the closest thing that we can get to right now in describing in relating brains to minds.
And then but marrying that idea with the idea of capacity.
And this goes back to Kevin Mitchell's question.
What I want to think is that I'm not a low dimensional mind.
I'm a I have a high capacity, right?
Is there a way like is there a story I can tell myself that I'm going from the high dimensionality brain activity that I have moving quote unquote up a level to mind and that can.
That's a messy statement.
I know.
Can I increase my dimensionality?
Do I have to reduce it?
No, I think, for example.
Letters form words.
I think of a word as a higher dimension.
You can do more with those words.
You have options available in words and keep going sentences.
But that's certainly true for atoms, molecules.
Is the higher dimension.
Do you mean is it a higher possibility space?
Or is it I guess that's kind of equated to higher dimension.
That's what I think of.
It's a higher possibility space whose coordinates are relational.
Okay.
And if that's the case, then you have a way higher possibility space.
So that's why, for example, the example I used in the book, which is Montes understanding of how these chimps are able to.
Because the possibility space they have forged is a task defined possibility space.
But it's of a different type.
Exactly.
The type is simpler in that you have one concept of a type that captures all the way.
You have to look at the colored dots.
You have to look at the movement of the dots and so on.
But it's the task that is defined and the behaviors is executed in terms of that task.
Is that lower dimensional?
I think it's way more sophisticated than it would just in terms of the intensity of the flash of light.
But here the task is a huge constraint as well.
Yes, but it's a much more complex dynamic than would be the physical features alone, right?
Yeah.
So sometimes people say that complex systems are a simplified description of what's going on.
Sometimes I think of it more like streamlined.
Okay.
The streamlining gives you characteristics that you wouldn't have otherwise.
And so the organization of that monkey's brain in response to training, which would be the neighboring constraints, right?
It seems to me opens up a world for the monkey that may be captured by the essential characters of the task, but not of the pure physical component alone.
So in that sense, I think of it as an expansion, chemistry can do more than physics, biology can do more than chemistry, even though they are nonetheless not violating any of the underlying laws.
Right.
And the complexity of that organization that opens up possibilities, I think.
All right.
So my mind could be more cool than my brain activity.
I could feel better about my mind than my brain.
Probably.
Yeah.
Brain gets really, you know, and I think that's true.
I think as people age, they get worse at tasks that are just repetitive or...
Oh, I thought that's all they could do are tasks that are repetitive.
But I think understanding connections and understanding nuances and things like that.
Oh, I'm thinking way aged.
You're thinking like R-age, maybe.
Well, I'm thinking of the difference between...
I don't know.
It's more like difference between understanding and just pure speed of activity.
My grandmother, who's 99, she cannot learn a new card game.
Right?
She can play bridge, but she can't learn a new card game.
But that's 99.
Yeah.
So maybe that's even a different type of...
Yeah, it's in any one or maybe she's not interested in it.
Maybe.
Come on, grandma.
Yeah.
Yeah.
But I see it's a different kind of understanding.
I don't know.
Would you call that wisdom?
Well, hopefully.
I think that's what philosophers were looking for.
Yeah.
The question is, but I don't think it automatically happens as you get older.
And there's a lot of old fools around there.
Sure.
Yeah.
There are a lot of old fools out there.
Yeah.
Okay, Alicia, I don't want to take all day for you.
So I want to switch to artificial intelligence here for a few minutes.
Yes.
Are you good on time for a few more minutes?
Yes, I am.
Great.
All right.
This is a lot of fun for me.
No, me too.
So I was actually kind of surprised in revisiting dynamics in action.
And you go into it in a little more detail, I think, in context changes, everything.
That you refer to like neural network.
Yes.
Examples.
And in both books, you talk about the semantics that come along with syntax when you put recurrence
in these neural networks.
And you cite Jeffrey Hinton and actually Michael Plout who, or David Plout, who was one of
the authors on that paper, I did a course with him.
Anyway, that's near here and over there.
I always call him hidden plot and shallots because hidden and shallots probably plot and
shallots.
But that, well, go ahead.
Finish up.
Anyway.
Again, I'm Cuban.
Yeah.
Well, so given what we've been talking about and these interlocking systems and how important
that is for complexity and the constraints, given all that, I'm slightly surprised.
And you talked about a constraint of closure from Massimo and me.
Moreno and Massimo.
Moreno and Massimo, which I love that book also.
But that is very specific to biological systems and not just biological systems, but complex
systems in the natural world.
And those types of things that we've been talking about are not built into neural networks,
or only some of them are, because maybe you talk about the recurrence and how that can
lead to semantics.
So anyway, I was slightly surprised that I started reading about the neural networks
because I thought, oh, well, a lot of the things that seem to be important in these complex
dynamics that give rise to our rich mental worlds and rich ecologies and stuff are missing
in the artificial intelligence systems, or maybe they're not.
And I wonder what you think is missing in current AI.
I think what's missing in current AI is context.
In other words, somatic.
Oh, okay.
Because context, I think, is it context changes?
No, no, that's the title of your book.
All you need is attention, which is a different form of context.
Like the modern transformer, which underlies all these large language models, is all about
context in terms of word embedded.
But it does not have somatic information.
It does not include historical context.
Well, this is how it's changed over time.
So I think you need, it does not include social, except indirectly as the social aspects get
revealed in languages.
Otherwise, you don't have direct somatic interaction.
Now, once you have these things, once you have the chip, the video chip in a machine that you kind of raise as a child with all the video, with all the video, with all the auditory.
You're actually, you're speaking exactly to my previous guest.
I haven't released this yet, but he raises artificial agent chicks exactly like newborn chicks to look at this developmental trajectory over time.
Which people did with chips, remember?
They tried.
Yeah.
Without, did not turn out very well.
Yeah.
Because at some point it didn't scale up.
Now the question is whether the, but I think that if in fact, we have.
We have eons of evolution behind us.
Of the planet, of the, of life and so on.
You wonder if you can short circuit any of that and get.
Right.
Well, we seem to be partially.
Well, I mean, I certainly want to say a sunflower is aware of the sun.
Okay.
Tropism is a form of awareness.
I don't care what you call it.
Self awareness.
No, I don't think so.
I wouldn't want to say that.
So it's the dot example of the, you know, which the elephants, it's on another saying crows can do it and so on.
So is that what is it like to be a crow as well as a bat?
So at what point do you start saying, well, this is not just it recognizes its body with something.
And you want.
Or it really recognizes itself.
Self or is there a self in the, in the chip that can point to the screen when it sees its image with a dot on its forehead.
At each point, I would say it's an emergent property, but certainly I've got to tell you those hint and plot and chalices.
I had been playing around with these problems for ages and I had not sat down to write dynamics in action.
I read Hinton Plot and Chalice, which I went the fact that that that's really simple.
I mean, we're talking how many decades ago neural network was able to according to Chalice.
I think it was when somebody asked him, how do you explain that it produces the errors of deep dyslexia, not surface dyslexia?
And his answer was, I can only explain it by saying it self organized a semantic attractor.
So semantics would be an emergent property that changes the output.
That's what I would call it.
Strong emergence.
That's what I would call it top down.
It changes the probability distribution of what its behavior sets that it produces an output that reflects the semantics of the attractor.
So AI does not have closure of constraints.
So this is another idea that, you know, it's not self generating.
It's byproducts don't feedback in that sense, or maybe you have a different outlook.
Now.
Now.
Now it doesn't.
Exactly.
That's the question.
The question always is not what's practically doable today, but in principle.
Sure.
Sure.
But I mean, are we going to have to emulate life then?
Are we going to have to have artificial life to have whatever the hell real artificial real intelligence, real artificial intelligence is, right?
And that's again, an answer for the constraint on how many of these constraints are really not necessary for for intelligent systems that would assist a neurologist or,
you know, maybe you don't need experience, you know, emotion or, you know, I mean, I don't know.
So, but my, but what I find fascinating is that even without somatic input without any of this other stuff, the kinds of errors that people talk, oh, they hallucinate that it's so similar to the kinds of errors that you got with
the split brain gazaniga issues.
The thing is making up some kind of story that would make all the inputs it has so far coherent.
Correct.
Even if it is, well, that's a typo.
I've seen one where the output, well, the people were, the trainer was saying, no, that's not right.
That's not right.
That's not right.
At one point it said, well, you know, that was just a typo.
Excuse me.
Yeah.
Yeah.
What ideas or concepts do you find yourself like revisiting the most when you're working?
What ideas do you have?
Do you revisit and are unsure about or think you need to grapple with more?
I think the notion of how do you account for the emergent properties characteristics in
each particular case in each particular individual?
How do we, how is there any hope to be able to map this other than say, well, if each one
is unique, then well, then that's the end of science.
I mean, we need some kind of general.
Formal.
We both winced there.
Yeah.
I don't know.
I don't know how to phrase it.
Is it a back forth hermeneutic kind of multiple constraint satisfaction?
How does that work?
And I love that example that I got from Kussler and Koenig, I think their book way back went
on psychology.
Oh.
And then you're renting out an apartment and the apartment has one large wall and it's
got a window here and so on.
And this is going to be your bedroom and so you're constrained because the bed has to fit
against maybe a wall, but then the chest doesn't fit because the other wall.
So it's a question of multiple constraint satisfaction.
So do you turn the chest of drawers into a night table because that's the only place
it fits.
And so you're adjusting it and it's constant adjustment.
That's what you see in dynamical systems.
That's the kind of meta stability that someone riding a bike or someone on a tightrope.
You know, one of these people going on a highway or a tightrope.
It's not the kind of equilibrium of your old time near equilibrium thermodynamics.
It's a meta stability where it's a constant adjustment of constraints.
Correct.
And so how do we, is there any hope to be able to map this in a way that provides some kind
of general guidance as to how this is going to play out in a particular situation?
How much do you have to know of the background?
How much do you know?
Do you have to know the context to be, you know, and I think, I think that's one good
thing that Aristotle had said was, you don't, you can't teach law, medicine and ethics
because those are eminently context dependent compared to science.
So how do you do it?
You can only do it through apprenticeships because the apprentice gives you this.
And when I talk class, this is what I do.
You know, you get a feel for it.
So, so is that what a good coach in a business does?
Because they've got enough of a feel for it.
They might not be able to formalize it into a standard algorithm, but they've got a feel
for the situation that therefore can provide guidance.
This is why a coach doesn't need to be more of an expert than the expert as well, I imagine.
You know, you have to have a feel for it.
And how do you, how do you formalize the feel of something?
And that's what a master musician does.
I just finished reading a book by Adam Gopnik called The Real Work.
And it's about the mystery of mastery.
Oh, it's fun to read.
And so he talks about, you know, how do you, is the master seeing something that's at a
different level?
And Huffstetter used to talk about that when he talked about the chess master who's shown
a chess game in progress for a few seconds and then they're asked to reproduce the feel
for the board.
They would always put the pieces in different locations than what was actually presented
to them.
Oh, right.
But the strategy, the strategic position, white and black were in, remained the same.
Interesting.
I've seen that the newbie doesn't see.
The newbie is worried about playing the piano one finger here, one finger there.
Simulating each move.
That's like the physical signal that's coming in.
Obviously mastery means that you see a level of organization that in the case of chess's
strategy, in the case of magician is the prestidigitation, it's the magic.
And what is it that you're seeing that then matters?
And I think that's the constraint regime that we're all trying to figure out.
Why is it that the same person, that the soldier next to that one didn't get PTSD?
They were in the same explosion.
They were more of a man.
See, that was the old tradition.
It had to be an internal characteristic.
Whereas what I'm saying is what are the interdependent constraints that make a difference?
You began that with like wondering if there is no hope or if there is hope.
Is there hope?
Do you feel optimistic?
Look, you've got to assume that we're all humans.
So there's got to be some commonalities somewhere.
At what scale, at what granularity?
It's hard to say because you look at families and you see kids from the same family raised
by the same friends, going to the same school, and they're so different.
So you wonder, how does that happen?
Is that all in birth order?
I mean, there was a time where people talked a lot about that.
If temporal constraints matter, then order, temporal order has to matter at some point,
but to what extent, to what degree?
I think that's what the, what's fun about this is that there's a whole new possibility
space of research that opens up when you look in terms of constraints rather than looking
in terms of, you know, when the people were into the genome, I thought, you know, people
are assuming again, one disease per genome.
Looking back, that's crazy.
It's never going to happen.
I knew that that was the case.
You knew that.
I didn't know that.
I mean, yeah, because I had this linear thought, that's the way I was raised.
We all were raised that way.
That's what we all assume.
But now the question is, well, is it going to be one protein fold per disease or per disease?
So at what point is it, no, it's the context that makes it fall this way rather than that,
and therefore gets this functionality rather than that, even though it's the same string
of amino acids.
So, all right, so it's the confirmation.
What is it in the context that makes it conform a certain way?
Well, in the case of development, we know that one cell in one part of the fertilized
egg is the one that, because if it's in that location, that's what's going to turn into
the first neural crest.
Is that pure random?
Then that raises, that brings randomness there rather than at the quantum level.
So how does that work?
Who knows?
But it's fun to think about.
It opens up a whole new way of looking at a whole level of organization that we thought
was just illusory or just epistemically convenient.
But if we really say, all right, now let's pretend just for the sake of argument, it's
real.
How does this play out?
What does this mean?
What are the implications?
I mean, it's not just one level, though.
God, I now want to ask you, what's beyond consciousness?
It's turtles all the way up.
I just use that.
I just use that.
It's everywhere.
It's the whole tangled, you know, it's an entangled bank that's, but it's not random.
It's very, it's, people use the word still use the word chaos when they refer to things
like the Lorenz attractor.
To me, it's, it's, it's this sort of, no, it's just a high level of organization that
we didn't appreciate before.
Yeah, that Lorenz butterfly is very organized.
Are you kidding?
But it never repeats the same trajectory twice because of its path dependence and so on.
So, so we have to understand what are the constraints that lead to that higher level
of organization and how does that work?
Well, Alicia, in terms of possibility spaces, it just occurred to me that if, if the science,
the philosophy of constraints is a possibility space, your book context changes everything,
filled the hell out of that space.
And I'm glad that we got to visit some of those places today.
I really appreciate it.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you for asking me.
I really, it was fun.
A lot of fun.
Thank you so much.
Thank you.
I alone produce brain inspired.
If you value this podcast, consider supporting it through Patreon to access full versions
of all the episodes and to join our discord community.
Or if you want to learn more about the intersection of neuroscience and AI, consider
signing up for my online course, Neuro AI, The Quest to Explain Intelligence.
Go to braininspired.co to learn more.
To get in touch with me, email Paul at braininspired.co.
You're hearing music by the New Year.
Find them at thenewyear.net.
Thank you.
Thank you for your support.
See you next time.
Thank you.
