would you like to know more? Hello, Malcolm. Hello, Simone. I love your response. I love that it is
your signature greeting with people, very high energy. But I also think it is an element of your
social autopilot. Not that I don't have a social autopilot. I'm on that right now. But I think
that's a really interesting part of human existence, because for the vast majority of our lives,
I don't think we're actually, let alone not sapient, not even really conscious, not even really
aware of what's going on. Oh, yeah. And I think it's so arrogant when people pretend that they are
aware of most of their lives. We talk about something called road hypnosis, where they look
back on a drive and they're like, I don't remember what I was doing during the drive. Their brain
shuts off recording. And the question is, how much of our life is road hypnosis?
And I think it's a huge portion of our life. And it's something, this is what initially got us
talking about consciousness early in our relationship, was how do we at least enter
moments of lucidity where we are aware of what's going on, somewhat sentient, just long enough
to be able to change things about the internal self model that does run our autopilot, so that at
least in the majority of the life when we are on autopilot, we are better serving our values, better
people, more productive, more emotionally in control, et cetera. And I think our thought
on consciousness really evolved in interesting directions from there, when we started really
thinking about what consciousness means and why maybe it exists. So I think this will be really
fun to talk about. Why don't you talk a bit about what you think sentience is? I think sentience,
our experience of consciousness, in other words, is really an emergent property of a
memory compression system. So imagine you have a building security system with tons of different
inputs. It's a feed of doors opening and closing within the building, a bunch of different camera
feeds, a chemical monitoring system coming in, everything's feeding into this one control room,
and then being put into a camera feed, and then being stored in memory. And there's
a man watching the security feed. And I think that's our experience of consciousness is that
our minds are synthesizing, smell, sight, hormonal fluctuations going on, a lot of very
complex inputs. They're synthesizing them into something that can be compressed in a unified
memory, which if relevant will be stored in long-term memory and then may in turn influence
sort of automatic instinctual responses. And because this memory is being codified,
and in the moment it's being run through like a camera system, we're getting the impression
that there is some kind of observed conscious driver that is running consciousness.
I'm going to run this back to you. It's almost like what you're saying is this guy who is
sitting at this feed, he is collecting all of these different camera inputs, all of these
different sensory inputs, and they are encoded in this single quote unquote experience, which is
being written into the hard drive of this computer. And when he is referencing what happened in the
past, when anybody is referencing what happened in the past within this big security array,
they are referencing this encoding. And it is because they are referencing this encoding,
it creates the perception falsely so that the way this encoding works is the way that these
things are being experienced in the moment. But it isn't actually. Well, and that there's
some intentional driver that's shaping each decision intentionally through that interface,
essentially, whereas the interface only actually affects insofar the memory itself influences
automatic reactions. So, and I think the research supports this, we automatically respond to things,
we automatically start taking action in response to stimulus before we have some kind of conscious
understanding that we're doing that. And our memories absolutely, yeah, MRM missions have
shown this. And while our memories will influence those responses, our current
experience of consciousness is not in the driver's seat. It is just passively experiencing this
encoding of memories. It believes this in the driver's seat. I think that this is what's really
interesting is it will apply this feeling of consciousness to any experience that you're
doing or any action that you're taking. So when you're doing open brain surgery on someone,
you need to keep them awake to prevent accidentally cutting part of the brain you're not supposed to,
so they'll check, right? You can do things like apply a small amount of electricity to a part of
the brain and get the person to move their hand. And then you ask them, why did you move your hand?
And they'll say, oh, I felt like moving my hand. And you can also see this with split brain patients.
These are patients where the corpus callosum is split in their head and their right brain and
their left brain actually function pretty independently of each other when this happens,
right? So you can cover one eye and communicate with part of their brain and not the other part
of the brain. So you can tell part of their brain, pick up a Rubik's cube and try to solve it.
Then you put something on the other eye and you ask, okay, why did you do that? And they'll say,
oh, I always felt like solving a Rubik's cube. I always wanted to do this. And you can do this
with more complicated things. So there's this experiment, really great one, where they would
give people pictures of like attractive women and they say, which is the most attractive?
And then they do a little sleight of hand later and say, okay, why did you say this one was the
most attractive? But it wasn't the one they chose. You'd actually replace it with another picture.
I mean, you can do this with political beliefs as well and all sorts of other things. And
most people will say, oh, I chose this person for x, y, and z reasons and go into detail about
why they chose that person, even though that wasn't the person they chose, which shows that a lot of
our consciousness, a lot of the way that we describe our sentience is more like sense making of our
environment. We know we made x decision, but x decision was actually made completely outside
of our sentience as control. And then we have this little like lying historian in our head,
which is like, no, I made the decision. I made the decision. I make every decision. But but he's
also recording the history that we remember. So then he's going through and saying, okay, I made
the decision for this. It's not that he doesn't have any say. See, this is where he does have a
saying. It's something that you mentioned, which is that he can encode emotions into the things
we're doing. And this can actually cause a lot of emotion. No, emotion isn't the right word,
because emotions do, you know, let's say that emotional narratives, emotional. Yeah. So that
they can encode positive or negative modifiers, and they can shift the narrative, like they can
change the camera angle or add sad music to something essentially to make it seem like a sad
scene. I'm sure like you've seen like the YouTube video of the Mary Poppins like preview, but like
done with scary music. And it just seems oh, yeah, like that. Yeah. Like that's how we can change.
Yeah, that is how we can change the narrative. And the first time I was ever introduced to this idea
that we take action before we consciously are aware of it. The person discussing it said that
there's a lot of implications to this because it would lead many people to believe that they
don't have free will and have them just say, oh, none of this is my fault. I didn't consciously
make this decision anyway, where that's really not quite, we would say the right conclusion,
because you do have the ability to color how you perceive reality. It's not in this kind of
immediate non asynchronous way that you would expect. I would say that this is just the myth
of humanity versus the actuality of humanity. And we would argue that we likely evolved this
ability because it was like a compression algorithm for communicating ideas to other people. I
actually don't suspect that great eight have this sort of internal thing that we call consciousness
because they didn't need to communicate these. It's a really good compassion algorithm for
linear experiences over time. But one of the big lies that is that happens throughout this process
is it convinces us that we are a singular entity when in fact our brains function much more like
we see AI's function with individual instances running. And we can see this with the corpus callosum
split that I mentioned earlier where it basically means that we have two largely separate parts
of our internal mental processing that are happening separate from each other. This idea
that the decisions you make happen before they enter your conscious mind, what that basically
means is you have another part of your brain which is making this decision and then delivers it to
the conscious mind. When we were talking about the idea of a security camera with a bunch of
different feeds, a lot of the processing is done locally at these various security cameras
before they all get centralized into this sort of communal feed with many of the quote unquote
decisions being made at those local levels. And so we have this illusion of ourselves as a singular
entity which is created by the way this sort of sentience processor works. But it is just an
illusion. And so when we say, oh, we don't really have self-control or we're not responsible for
our decisions, I think that actually even overstates the level to which we exist in any sort of a
meaningful concept close to how we think we exist. And so then there's this, I would say, added layer
of complexity or maybe confusion. You shared with me an article saying that a very high percentage
of people don't have an internal monologue. What we would describe as another high percentage
of people can't even create images in their mind. And so what we're even describing as consciousness
is also not even something that is universal as part of the human experience, which is interesting.
Because I think most of us who experience consciousness as we're describing it would
have a very hard time understanding even what that means. I don't know. Maybe someone watching
this YouTube video doesn't have an internal monologue. I wonder. It's hard for you to model
that. But I suspect that the variance within the human condition in terms of how things are
processed is probably a lot larger than we give it credit for, and it will be even larger in the
future. The statistic that I just cannot stop mentioning because it's something that more
people should know, that if you look at the hereditability of IQ right now and you look at the
selective pressure, so you look at the number of people who have these markers versus people who
don't have these markers, which you can see because it's genetic markers that says you, is this,
the number of kids they have, we're likely looking at a one standard deviation shift down in IQ in
the next 75 years in developed countries at least. This is probably going to affect developing
countries later. So I guess good for them. There'll be all the geniuses in the world will be in
Africa or whatever, but places where you have this post prosperity, fertility,
collapse situation. And when we think about how quickly and how much human IQ can shift up or
down, we use this one marker IQ, but I suspect it's linked to just all sorts of things about
how we process reality. So actually I wanted to dig in a little bit more on the subject of kids
because I think that also as we've become parents, we've had a more complex understanding of how
consciousness develops because we see it start to emerge in our kids. I think there's definitely
this point at which we see consciousness blossoming and it's not one day our kids aren't very conscious
and the next they are. I think that consciousness for example is starting to emerge more and more
especially in our three-year-old. It's just beginning to emerge in our two-year-old and I
think a lot of that has to do with where they are with language processing. I think it really
influences. Well that's why I say I suspect this had to do, it evolved alongside language to compress
ideas, but I think that this is where you can see how the system can break in a way that can be very
useful in relationships. So this isn't just like theory or whatever. So one of the things you'll
often see one of our kids do is he'll be in a bad mood but he won't like understand the concept of
generally being in a bad mood so he'll start crying and he'll say I want this, give me that toy and
then you get him the toy and he just it doesn't stop the bad mood and so he needs whatever he
notices next, close the door or move that chair like he just was like whatever is currently causing
the littlest bit of discomfort he thinks it's the core cause of like this bad mood or why he's angry
or what he's angry about and as humans I think this happens as well and this is really bad when
a friend tells you you're justified to have an angry state or something like that because then
this little narrative maker in your head says ah now you get to be angry now you're socially justified
to be angry and you will feel very angry about something or you might be in a generally bad
mood and your partner comes into the house and he does something that just annoys you in the slightest
and then you create the internal narrative that you are in this bad mood because of what your partner
did and when you keep in mind why you're feeling these things and you try to keep like fully in
touch with the way your brain is actually working it leads to a lot more harmony and a lot fewer
fights and relationships because you have language for I am in a bad overlay state right now which just
means I'm in a bad mood generally but I'm not actually mad at you or anything specific. Hold on
though actually I think you've touched on something very interesting there which is that maybe sometimes
consciousness and narrative building hampers more than helps up for example like the toxic girlfriend
who has a bad dream in which her boyfriend cheats on her she wakes up angry at him like she's mad
for something he can actually do or maybe one day she's just in a bad mood but then she makes up
some narrative about it's because her boyfriend didn't bring her flowers and doesn't appreciate her
some he did something mean the presence of consciousness and the presence of narrative
building would cause her to turn what might be just a very transient bad mood into something that
builds a grudge over time and literally ends up killing the relationship humulatively
that sometimes consciousness hampers us more than it helps us. What I love about what you're
saying here in this fall is your idea of what it means to be meaningfully human and it's the
spectrum of humanity which is you become more human the more you take mastery and ownership over
these sort of evolved or quirks of the way your brain works and you don't allow them to control
your actions your actions are more logically decided and more decided based on as close to
an objective view of reality as you can get I mean so from the perspective of humanity that you
convinced me was a good one because this wasn't the one I had before somebody who does that somebody
who has a dream and then can't logically understand that is not a justified reason to be mad at somebody
that they are like meaningfully less human than another person and so then what does it mean to
be fully human it means to have total mastery over these things and that is something that we
don't have but I think it helps people understand because a lot of people hear the level of disdain
we talk about things like sentience and love and happiness and other human emotional states that a
lot of people venerate but they don't understand where that's coming from but then wouldn't that
make an LM more human than we are people may not know a large language model is more
sophisticated than we are and it's also not bogged down by the need for hunger human
failings hormones all these sorts of pollutants not pollutants they're very instrumentally useful
for biological human in a modern globalized society and often with the type of knowledge work
that humans are expected to do it's pretty counterproductive well I think that this comes to
your goal for yourself where your goal and iteration of yourself that is your idealized
iteration would strip out your emotional shortcomings be they love or happiness or hatred or pain or
greed and I'm not that way by the way I am not as bought into this philosophy as Simone is I would
not strip those things away from myself I think that they add something that I feel illogically
I still think has some value but I don't know maybe you feel that way too and you're I'm mixed
on it I'm mixed on it I one I'm deeply uncomfortable being human I really don't like my body I really
don't like being human I don't like the corruption to our objective functions that human weaknesses
cause but my general stance is if this is what I have to deal with if I've been given a meat puppet
I'm going to use it to the max I'm going to play the game you've given me a crappy little
battlebot I'm gonna take that thing and I'm gonna destroy everything even if it's the worst machinery
ever I think the way she talks about pregnancy she's I have a uterus I am gonna wreck that thing
I am gonna have so many babies I'm going to know what to shreds if that's what it was meant to do
yeah then as a woman I reach the plains of Valhalla by dying in childbirth let it happen
don't worry I promise I will play that clip at your funeral and I really should probably plan
that out but yeah I feel conflicted I mean I yes if this is the hand that we're dealt I'm gonna
play it and I'm gonna play it hard but at the same time yeah I really aspire to that I don't think
that has to be me and I guess that's maybe it's more AI and machines are my Beatrice and Dante's
Inferno this idealized version of humanity that I know I am not and that I do not aspire to be but
that I deeply admire I don't need to become it I don't need to be with it I just I just see it
as a better iteration and as naturally and morally superior does that make sense what you hope is to
make our kids superior to that oh for sure but our kids are still biological they're still human
so I think I'm playing the field I'm pretty sure this next generation is gonna be the first that
integrates with tech I know you say aren't generations gonna integrate with tech I'm sure
that AI models will be trained on if not us family members or our kids or a combined version of us
which would be even cooler but I still think that for a while we're gonna be biologically human and
limited by the shortcomings of biological humanity there is one other element of consciousness
that I think you downplay you used to not downplay it as much and I don't know why this has changed
maybe because you're so focused on the role that language plays in consciousness but I do really
think that humanities focus on modeling the actions of other animals and humans plays a role
in our development of consciousness because one there's talk about this model for humanity it's
yeah it's the model of humanity that we use in the pragmatist guide to life which is our first
book which is why I don't talk about it because it's an older idea that I had when you're trying to
model other people's behavior what you do is you have a mental model of them which is like an
emulation that you're running within your own head of the way that you think that they are going to
act and the things you think that they are thinking this is how you're able to have like
arguments with little simulations of other people in your head you have modeled them and you've
modeled you and you are arguing with this different entity and I actually when I was a neuroscientist
one of the spaces I focus on was schizophrenia and what I actually think that we are seeing when
people hear voices is a lower activation of this using tms transmitting simulation you
would hyper activate parts of a person's brain and then if you'd like hyper activate the parts
that's associated with saying letters right you like put a letter in front of somebody
and they won't be able to help but say it because you have primed them with a vision of that letter
and you have lowered the threshold I think what's happening with schizophrenia is something similar
to that they have their system that they use to apply mental models to other things gets activated
too easily like it can be activated by the slightest thing like they look in a store window
and they're like oh that must have been done with intentionality there must be some like
thought process behind the way everything with a range or they see something innocuous in the
environment like a helicopter and then they are like oh why is the helicopter there although
there must be a person in it they must be thinking about me oh my gosh or they begin to hear whispers
this is why whisper hearing is associated with schizophrenia auditory hallucinations are much
more common than visual hallucinations visual hallucinations are incredibly rare but anyway
so that's what's happening with schizophrenia so the question is okay what does this have to do is
the regular person what it has to do is a regular person is that I think people have a sort of
internal mental model of themselves which is used to prime emotional reactions to things
so when the way we talked about this little like sentience box in your head what it's doing when
it's judging whether or not you should react emotionally to something and how you should
react emotionally to something is it is testing what's happening in this sort of simulation saying
that's what we would call our sentience against this little mental model that's running of the
way it thinks you should be feeling and you're saying oh does this mean he should be feeling
anger oh does this mean he should be feeling happiness and then it outputs that emotional
state by telling you that you should be feeling this the way you can see this is that if somebody
justifies a particular emotion like you should be really angry about that often a person will become
much angrier and they'll begin to spin away or how could you let your boyfriend do that to you
and then you're like ah this mental model has been adapted to feel angrier and you will actually
experience much more of this emotion but what were you talking about if not that
in general the role that modeling things played in developing human consciousness that maybe
what happened is one humans have an evolutionary advantage if they are able to model predators
and prey because then they can anticipate the moves of these organisms before they make them
and that too that ability would start to just like with schizophrenics get misapplied to that
compression algorithm of memory that's being formed that's it's a mixture of language and so
language and narrative building plus our modeling things that were literally anthropomorphizing
ourselves if that makes sense that's a good way to put it and I think people see first of all
people with schizophrenia not schizophrenics they are not defined by their theory but like people
with Frenchness but we see this in how easy it is that we answer anthropomorphize things so I think
it's very hard to not answer anthropomorphize like a dog right like you see a dog you can see
its happiness you can see it's worried about things you can see it and you perceive it as
experiencing these emotions the same way human does even though it probably doesn't and you can see
this in in in when people kick those robots oh yes oh my gosh yes I see somebody kick with
these robots and I'm like I feel so bad for the robot I'm like how do you do this to this portal
I know logically the robot's not experiencing all that now when you're a human and you're
anthropomorphizing yourself and you have no way of knowing that you're not feeling these things
in a real context we struggle to not answer anthropomorphize robots how do we know that the
robot's not suffering how do we know if its objective function is to run and kick the ball
into the net that it's not experiencing some kind of suffering movedly eyes on a soccer ball people
will feel bad for it c'mon I I'm just trying to think of the things that people like definitely
can empathize with when I'm talking about this anthropomorphizing of things that most people
don't think we should be anthropomorphizing with saying that if you didn't know whether or not it
could feel emotions and everyone around you said it could feel emotions you would 100 believe that
robot was feeling emotions as soon as you saw it kick because you feel so bad and it gets back up
and it tries to walk again and as humans it's the same way if you didn't know if you didn't have
hard proof because you haven't gone through all the studies like I have and you didn't know that
humans probably don't have full control of this sort of sentient aspect of themselves and is
likely irrelevant you would totally answer for more of our humans and so I love this way of doing
things c'mon a very interesting thought on your part there is a subreddit I don't know if it still
exists it's nsfw where people put googly eyes on butts do you think that people are anther butts
you know butts uh are they are they anthropomorphizing the butts is that part of what's fun about that
you and I loved no it's more me I try to figure out like what is making people tick behind weird
nsfw subreddits but I'm wondering oh that one is an outstanding one subscribe if that's what
you're interested in is deep dives on why people are engaged because that's what the pragmatist
guy to sexuality was totally like a meditation on this why are humans like turned on because
obviously we're very interested in the way that like the human mind actually processes things
I left science why didn't I leave science because I didn't feel like real researchers being done
and I felt like there were specific narratives and it was like toe the line or else
and I'm glad that we have reached a level of financial security where we are able to
talk about these things and research these things because we actually do a lot of independent
research which if you're wondering how we get to these ideas and the data that leads us to get to
the ideas go to our books that that's where we discuss it all but yeah I mean it's really fun
and there are just so many low-hanging fruits because academia is not doing anything anymore
or not doing the same level of work I think it should be in these areas so there's one more thing
that I think consciousness some credit for and sapience in general because I think that an easy
conclusion to make from our theories around consciousness especially I see it as an illusion
is to say the Collins's don't value consciousness they think it's an illusion therefore it doesn't
matter to the contrary I think it could easily be argued that sapience is one of the things that we
think is most valuable most interesting it's what distinguishes humans from other organisms
but it's what makes us but more important more importantly than that it is this narrative building
this whether or not it's illusory or not it is what enables us to edit our objective functions
that is the one differentiating factor any non-conscious entity any entity that doesn't have
this narrative building effect this weird recording and encoding system and modeling system
cannot question its actions it cannot look at the compression of all the inputs and the narrative
that is being woven in say should we change the narrative and I think that I've seen critiques
of consciousness where people totally miss that where they say consciousness can get in the way
things not necessarily it was evolved because it worked not because it's superior and I think
they're missing the core point here that consciousness has enabled humanity to pivot in ways
no species on earth has ever done. It's what allowed us to make the leap I completely agree with you
and there was a final point I wanted to close out was here that there was this fun video clip
of we were talking on pierce Morgan and you were talking and you can see me moving my mouth to your
words as you're talking and people might wonder why I'm doing this and then this actually relates
to something we were talking about in the video so we are both on opposite sense of a spectrum
if my model schizophrenia is correct you basically have an autism to schizophrenia spectrum
which is how much do you innately mentally model others with people who are autistic or have as
burgers not innately running mental models of other people whenever they're interacting with
people and people who are on the schizophrenia side of the spectrum not being able to help
running mental models even when there's no humans around and when we say Simone is diagnosed autism
so definitely on the autism side of the spectrum then I am almost certainly when I look at myself
on the schizophrenia side of the spectrum which is I don't hear voices or anything like that
but I really struggle to not mentally model people I'm engaged with to the extent that I
basically almost pass out after social situations I find them so exhausting if I met a big party
it's like just constantly modeling everyone and that's what was happening on that podcast
I was in a heightened emotional state where I really cared about what she said so I was running
through the words in my head as she was saying them and trying to process how she would respond to
something and I couldn't help but move my mouth because it was that sub-level of stimulation
like I talk about people can't help but say the letter when that part of their brain is TMS
and that's what was happening there but there are reasons why we have in the human genetic code
autism and schizophrenia why it hasn't been evolved out of us and it's because both of these
extremes are useful autism can make you able to act more logically about the world around you
not being encumbered by constantly mentally model others and then my ability people often
will say it's like eerie how much I can tell what other people are thinking like to the level where
it can feel to some people like I can read their mind in a conversation and I think
that is why you have these people on these schizophrenia side of the spectrum
and then sometimes they just get a little too much of these genes and it leads them to
hear voices constantly instead of just having a really hyperactive ability to mentally model
anyone around them. Yeah no 100 percent Malcolm is on overdrive and then he'll sometimes be
thinking about conversations with other people while we're walking and I can always tell
because he gets so deep into them that he's literally like gesturing as that's like we're
driving in the car he'll like one hand is on the steering wheel on the other hand is like
gesturing a silent conversation he's having with someone he anticipates speaking within the future
or reliving a conversation he had in the past and he will have these aftershocks from when we
socialize where he feels the stress or pain of saying something not quite right to someone
and it hits him like a ton of bricks and he will like visibly like crumble and cringe and
it's not just cringe yes like somebody just kicked me in the nuts or something yeah like
it looks like he has been physically hurt by something and that is not something that I can
even begin to imagine and I do think that it's a lot less stressful to be on the
autistic end of the spectrum and to just not know that other people yeah I'm just like
like nothing going on there like it's such a good partnership and I think it was one
of our main goals throughout our books and throughout our lives to understand how humans
think and process things and what's really happening in the human brain I started my
career as a neuroscientist and a philosopher and that was my interest it's like what's really going
on and being able to be in a relationship with somebody who sees the world so differently
has given me such insights that I would never come to on my own and I just admire that so much
about you Simone and I admire that you have taken me to where I am which is somewhere I never could
have reached without your guidance and I love you so much I love you so much too you're the superhero
that I always wish existed and I still worry that I'm going to wake up from a coma at some point
and find out that you're the sidekick that actually does everything I might be the superhero she's the
hacker nerd in the background that like actually makes everything work I know if the hacker nerd
went away the superhero would have nothing that is so our relationship I have nothing without you
actually doing all the detective work and telling me where to go next it's a massively inflated
I just follow her instructions I don't manage my calendar at all I just I'm operating on Simone
is driving me like she says what was the one thing like the thing from aliens oh yeah like
I'm not talking to people I'm the alien suit that you're using to punch through a power loader
you're the you're Ripley oh okay okay that's the other way we both feel about each other
I adore you I love these conversations and I know we have to pick up the kids now but
I think you're gonna make another dish tonight so I'm gonna have fun oh yes another base camp
cooking we have a little side playlist of anyone seen it where I try to come up with new dishes
so you get it right you get to see the college household at night what happens after them I'm
Yes all right see you soon love you
