Thank you very much.
And I'm conscious that you've all had already a very full day, and I'm also conscious that
many of you came expressly to hear Ian talk and meet him in person.
And Ian has prepared a lecture, you know, something substantive directed at this event,
the theme of difference from his work.
So I'm going to introduce him, introduce the context of his work a little bit for those
who don't know it, then step aside, let Ian take the stage, speak to him for 15 or so
minutes myself, and then pass on to you for Q&A, and I'm guessing we're going to have
more questions and we'll have time to answer.
So do think not only about what you want to ask, but how you want to ask it while Ian's
talking.
It's a real honor to introduce Ian McGilchrist.
I've now known Ian since 2011.
There was a moment when I was working at the Royal Society of Arts in London, when the
chief executive there, Matthew Taylor, who normally chaired events, just couldn't do
the one with Ian.
And two days before I was given his, fairly large, but not quite as large as the current
book, The Master and His Emissary.
And I was very excited.
I thought, well, very interesting bold thesis here.
I started reading it, and on the evening of the event, Matthew actually showed up backstage
just before we were about to go on stage, and I was like, oh, please tell me I can share
this event.
Please, like, don't, you know, last minute.
But actually, it worked.
I went on stage, spoke to Ian, and that was the beginning of a very important professional
relationship for me.
And since then, I've done a great deal of work promoting Ian's ideas.
I feature in a documentary about him, visited his house on sky, and now, by many strange
twists of fate, became the publisher of his most recent book, The Matter with Things.
Now, as some of you may know, and even if you don't know, you can just glance at it
here if you can see the, I might hold it off if I have the strength in my left arm.
But this is two very significant sized tomes, two volumes of The Matter with Things.
And I believe Ian may have the precise details, but the words alone are roughly 600,000.
But then that's just really kind of where it's getting started, because you also have
quite significant appendices, notes, bibliography, references, index.
So by the end of it, it's something approaching a million words, I believe, for both volumes
together.
But they're wonderful, wonderful, wonderful words, and many have read every one of them.
And some have described it as, you know, really the book of our times, the book that everyone
must read, of course, there's many of them, but this is one of them, I think.
And it's very, very deep, and it does deal with very fundamental matters about the nature
of life, the purpose of life, and the meaning of life towards the end of the second book,
especially.
So I just wanted to share one more thing, which is that when I was describing my experience
of reading this book, I posted a photograph of a large pencil that comes from the United
Nations, so one of these sort of souvenir pencils, and it was put along the spine of
the book diagonally, so you could sort of see the sort of significance of the book somehow
in the image.
You know, it's the social media age, I was doing what I could.
And then somebody said to me, ah, yes, this is actually a three-pencil book.
And I said, three-pencil book?
He goes, yeah, that's the sort of, you know, the might of times if you have to scribble
and take notes and underline and write in the marginalia, all the different things about
the book.
This was Damien Walters, I think his name is, who's a science fiction writer.
I said, only three pencils for the book to this size?
He goes, well, the complete works of Shakespeare are only two and a half.
So you can see there, it's really a commitment to read the book, but one that's richly rewarded,
and I believe Ian's going to speak to some major themes from it.
So I think for now that's all I can say, and look forward to talking to Ian later.
Ian McGilchrist, everyone.
Thank you very much, and I hope you will tell me if I'm not audible, and I'm telling the
thing is to have it as close to your beard as possible without touching it.
I'm going to try and do that for however long I speak.
I'm also rather sorry that I have to do a sort of Tom Jones impersonation.
I'm slightly beyond that, but this is the way the system works.
I'm very pleased to be here.
I'm delighted, and I think that this is the right audience, the ideal audience, to engage
with what I felt I was doing in writing this inexcusably long book.
I myself have told that this book was terribly important, and I really got to read it, but
to say how long is it, and when I was told, well, the text goes to 1300 and something
pages, I'd have said, well, forget it.
I hope though that you can be encouraged to dip into it.
It covers a lot of ground, and I think it's quite permissible to dip into chapters and
see how that works, and then I'm rather hoping that in the end you'll see that it's a single
story if you like, and it's best if you can read it that way.
Why did I write it?
Like many people here, I feel that we've reached a crisis point in which, frankly, we no longer
know who we are.
We haven't the foggiest idea of what we're doing here in this world.
We don't seem to understand any kind of directional meaning in our lives, and if we find anywhere
told that we've just painted them on the walls of our little cell in order to cheer ourselves
up, I can't tell you how profoundly I disagree with that formulation, which seems to be a
pervasive one these days out of reductive materialism.
And A.N.
Whitehead, who's a philosopher I very greatly admire, said, as we think we live, and I think
there's something wrong with our thinking processes, and that's what I was hoping to
have a little influence over.
You may know that I wrote an earlier book called The Master and His Emissary, and that
concerns the division of the brain into two hemispheres, and this book, the newer book,
also begins from that standpoint.
This is not reductive in any sense.
It has been put to me by one person, only one person, but he does persistently say it.
He's a philosopher who will remain nameless, I want to spare him his blushes, but he seems
to think that just because I talk about the structure of the brain, I must be reducing
mind to brain.
However, I've now over pretty much 2,000 pages between those two books, made it very
clear that my whole thrust is anti-reductionist.
Why would one be interested in the structure of the brain?
You might well say, I'm really interested in the mind, but I don't really care where
things go on in my brain, it's not relevant.
And I'm sympathetic with that, but I also think there's something very, very important
about the way the brain is structured, and whether the brain gives rise to consciousness
which I can't believe, or it transmits consciousness which it might, or it permits consciousness
which is what I do believe, it will shape the nature of that consciousness.
And it's therefore quite relevant that this organ is divided in two, right down the middle.
If you've never seen a brain, it's rather like a walnut, and it has that division down
the middle.
If you have an organ which is said to be a computer, I mean that's an image that I very
much detest, and it's entirely wrong on a whole range of grounds, but if you do think
of it as having computing power, why would you make an enormous division down the middle
or since its computing power exists in the number of connections it can make?
Why is the brain asymmetrical?
The world around us isn't asymmetrical exactly, and the skull is pretty much symmetrical, so
what's this about?
Why is the right hemisphere broader at the front and larger altogether, in fact the biggest
asymmetry in the entire brain is the largeness of the right frontal cortex?
And why something that one did learn about in medical school and never heard about the
right hemisphere?
It's broader towards the back on the left, and this was always said to be because of
the invention of language, which is a very important part of the history of humanity,
but that can't be right because we know that plenty of the great primates, bonobos, gorillas,
chimpanzees have these expansions, but they don't have language.
The final thing is these two hemispheres are connected by a band of fibres at the base
of the brain, over which 2% of the neurons in the brain actually cross.
So it's set up for two rather distinct conscious nexuses.
Why is that?
Is it just us?
No, it isn't.
The difference between us or at least mammals and other living creatures is that they don't
even have a corpus callosum.
So the corpus callosum is a mammalian invention, and it's gradually getting smaller in relation
to the size of the brain.
So our brains have expanded that the corpus callosum remains small, and a lot of its traffic
is saying, I'm dealing with this, you keep out of it.
And that's true as you go down, as we like to think of it, down the evolutionary tree.
So it's true of amphibians, it's true of reptiles, it's true of insects, it's true
of every creature that we know of, including the most ancient creature, still extant.
It's 700 million years old, nematostelovectensis, and it lives off the Isle of Wight, where
it only marginally raises the average age of the inhabitants.
And it already has this asymmetry in its neural network, described by Thomas Holstein, who
discovered it at some Heidelberg, as the origin of the mammalian and eventually the human brain.
Well, I think there is an answer to that, and it's quite a simple one, and I've never
heard any explanation that goes near doing as good a job, and nobody's told me I'm wrong.
And it's this, every living creature has to be able to do two incompatible things at once.
They have to enable themselves to survive by eating, and they have to enable themselves
to survive by not being eaten.
And for the first, you need to have highly targeted, precise attention to a detail, for
a bird to pick up that seed accurately and swiftly, for an eagle to be able to catch
that hair.
Whatever it is, you lock onto your target, you know what it is, you go for it.
And that attention is very, very precise, but it's only about three out of the 360 degrees
of the per view that we might have.
Meanwhile, the right hemisphere, sorry, I hadn't mentioned yet that the left hemisphere
is the one that does the targeting, the right hemisphere is tasked with doing the whole
of the rest, basically, of seeing the whole picture, looking out for predators, looking
out for contra-specifics, looking out for offspring that need feeding and protecting.
And so, this can't be done, actually, it's not just like trying to pat your tummy and
rub your head or whatever it is you're supposed to do, pat your head and rub your tummy as
much.
It's actually impossible unless you have two ways in which you can dispose your consciousness
at once, and that requires two neuronal masses capable of being conscious at all.
So, that explains this division, and it's based, as I say, on attention.
And when I realized this, the penny didn't drop immediately, because I had been chained
in a rigorously analytic, cognitive way, and I saw attention as another interesting cognitive
function, like memory and language and so on.
But no, attention is something very, very special.
It's how we bring the world into being.
Let me just explain a little about that because it's central to what I'm going to say.
I repudiate either of the two main alternatives that are put up these days in the public
arena as possible ways of understanding the world.
I think most of us detect that it's not quite true that there's just a world out there.
First of all, it might not be out there.
And secondly, it's not just out there in that we are connected to it somehow, and how we
experience it changes at least the weak claim as it changes for us what it is we experience.
That's obvious.
I believe it actually helps to mould what is there in a less personal way, in a more
universal way, eventually.
But it also makes us who we are.
So if I get in the habit of attending to things that are living as machines, I will see only
their mechanical aspects, and I will see that this works very well.
And so it worked last time, it'll work next time.
And soon I can't see any alternative to seeing living things as mechanism.
So I call attention a moral act by which I mean that we have a responsibility.
And that word responsibility is important because it suggests the coming and the going,
the giving of something and something responding, a reverberative relationship.
I actually also claim in this book and argue for the position that relationships are primary.
So relationships are prior to the things that are related, the so-called relux.
How can that be, you might say?
How can you have a relation before you've got the things that need to be related?
Well I take the view that actually everything is related and that it gets its being from
the context of all the other things to which it's primarily very directly related, but
ultimately to the rest.
And that therefore you can't tell what that thing is until you've understood the network
of webs of relationships out of which it arises.
In any case, attention is important in this way.
And I have this view that it's neither what I call rot, reality out there and we are just
passive receivers of it, nor is it mumbo made up miraculously by ourselves, sorry those
were acronyms in case you...
It's something very important, an encounter.
So every experience is an encounter and it's not made up of things, it's made up of encounters
with what are effectively processes, relationships.
For this reason, the way in which we attend to the world matters enormously.
And the title of my latest offering, this enormous book, is The Matter with Things,
which is, we read on several levels, I mean on the first level obviously I think we probably
all agree there's something that is the matter with things.
And I think that what's the matter is our obsession with matter partly, at least if
you assume matter is the simple stuff that has nothing to do with consciousness.
If you think it has a bit of consciousness about it, then you've already smuggled consciousness
in and we don't have to explain how it somehow mysteriously arises out of matter.
But if you think of matter as simple, well you're on to hiding to nothing because if
matter has nothing of consciousness about it and has no direction and no knowledge of
any of the things that make life worth living for us.
How is it that after a few million years this completely blind collision of senseless particles
gives rise to Bach's St. Matthew Passion?
This is a miracle, if ever there was one.
And reductionists always end up having to do it and here a miracle happens.
I don't do that because I believe, and I may come on to that later, I believe that consciousness
is foundational.
I think it is what the philosophers call an ontological primitive, which means it can't
be derived from anything else.
It is the primary stuff of the cosmos.
But if attention changes what we experience, how we relate to it, how we act, how we think,
it's pretty important.
And if the two halves of the brain have manifestly different ways of attending, and there's not
a single neurologist, psychiatrist, physician, neuroscientist anywhere in the world who will
deny that these two hemispheres have this greatly different way of attending.
If that's the case, then it follows that they produce two different kinds of experiential
worlds.
They'd have to.
And I haven't got time to go through all the things that differentiate them, but let
me just give a sort of lightning sketch of how they differ.
So you can see that if you are paying attention to something that you already know is important
for you, and latching onto it, and then later latching onto something else, and then seeing
one of those two, and it produces a picture of isolated fragments that are already known,
familiar, useful, they're decontextualized, they're abstracted, because they're an example
of a kind.
It's another seed, another rabbit, whatever, the differences between Peter Rabbit and his
brethren are not available to the left hemisphere.
This picture in the left hemisphere is one which is effectively inanimate, literal.
It takes language literally, because it's not very good at reading subtle signs.
So body language, facial expression, tone of voice.
You don't even need to get into the complexities of metaphor, but already the right hemisphere
is much more skilled at this than the left.
The left hemisphere simply takes poetry metaphors literally, and then pronounces, as some philosophers
have, that they're lies.
However, the ancient Greeks thought that metaphors were the key to understanding.
Aristotle says that this is the key to every kind of thinker, the strength of that thinker
or of that artist, is to be able to produce new metaphors that illuminate.
And indeed, I think it's very well accepted now that all language is metaphorical.
In particular, scientific language and philosophical language are metaphorical, because they're
often dealing with abstractions, and we don't have the words for those.
We have the words for the things we encounter in daily life.
So you've got on the one hand this picture of isolated fragments that have no meaning,
in the epistle direction until we put them together, that are inanimate, decontextualised,
abstracted, and they co-together to form a picture of a lifeless diagram, a theory,
a map of the world.
Now there's nothing wrong with a map, and there's nothing wrong with the left hemisphere.
We need it, but it won't give us the full story, just as consulting a map of this area
before you came wouldn't tell you what you see outside the window, what you would experience
in this house.
That's all left, as it were, in the realm of the right hemisphere.
So what does the right hemisphere see?
It sees that nothing is ever certain, fixed, and fully known, that there is always a degree
of possibility that it may be something slightly different, and indeed, since it sees unique
cases rather than just general categories, it's aware that actually every blade of grass
is different.
So it sees a picture of these undrasped, but processually knowable, not known already
completely, but something we can come into a knowing of.
It sees them as interconnected with other things, constantly flowing, not fixed down
so that we can easily grasp, and as I say, individual, implicit, and embodied.
Now all that implicit and embodied stuff is terribly important, and it's all the kind
of things that a computer won't be able to understand until it's caught a body and until
blood is flowing through its chips, and it knows that it's going to die, and it's suffered,
and so on.
The left hemisphere is, I hate the idea that the brain is like a computer, as I've already
said, but there is something about the left hemisphere that is rather like one's personal
computer, in that its level of understanding is very low, very poor, but it's very efficient
at carrying out procedures.
There's a division of labor, really.
The right hemisphere is rather like you when you've gathered data, and you want the computer
to process it.
You shove it into the computer.
The computer wears away cleverly for a short while and produces an answer.
The computer doesn't know what the answer means, but you take that back into the real-life
world and reinterpret it.
So it's this dynamism in which you begin from the right hemisphere, move to the left, and
move to the right.
And I'm indebted to Jonathan for having christened this, the McGill-Christ manoeuvre.
I don't believe it's a manoeuvre, but anyway, whatever, and it's best imaged by the idea
of learning a piece of music, you're first attracted to it as a whole by the right hemisphere.
The right hemisphere sees the whole picture, the left hemisphere sees parts and analyzes.
So then you start to play it, and you realize that you've got to take it apart.
You've got to really keep practicing that passage of bar 18, and then you sort of understand
the theory of this structure of the piece.
So you see how it's here that we return to the tonic, and that's all very well.
It's important.
It's good.
When you go out to play the piece, finally, you must forget all of that.
You'll give the most terrible performance.
And there's very much in life that is like this, but at the moment, I believe we live
in a world in which we take the lived experience.
We then turn it into a map, a theory, a diagram, take it apart, leave it bits all over the
floor, and then, yeah, well, it doesn't seem to mean anything to me.
And this is surely a very padway to be understanding the vibrant, living, complex, rich, beautiful
world around us.
So that's the sort of neurology part of it, if you like.
And I begin the book.
It has three parts.
In part one, I talk about the neuropsychology, and I begin with looking at the ways in which
we could gather some knowledge about the world, to gather it, not to process it, but just to
begin the process of having anything there.
And I take these to be attention, but also perception, which is not the same as attention,
judgment, which is formed on the basis of what you've attended to and what you've perceived,
emotional and social intelligence, and cognitive intelligence, IQ, in other words, and creativity,
because nothing ever comes to us just as a blank.
It comes to us as a something.
And sometimes we need to be able to revision what that is before it sets.
And we can do this very, very rapidly, so we don't even know what we're doing.
But all those faculties, all those portals to the world, as I call them, are more reliably
exercised by the right hemisphere than by the left, all of them, including cognitive
intelligence, IQ.
It's very, very clear.
And that might surprise a lot of people.
And you may well say, well, that's ridiculous.
That can't be it.
I mean, how on earth would we get by with a brain that only half of which is really reliable?
Well, the answer is that the very important business of getting stuff accumulating power
is the job of the left hemisphere, and that it does exceptionally well.
So when you have a stroke in the left hemisphere, the right hand with which you manipulate the
world and use tools and operate machines is dysfunctional or non-functional.
You may lose the power to use language.
And one way of looking at language is we didn't need it when we lived in small communities
where we understood one another directly and lived together, but we needed it as communities
became larger and larger.
And instead of having I-thou communication, we had to have I-it communication and I-they
communication, and that is also damaged.
But get this, it's much easier to rehabilitate somebody after a left hemisphere stroke,
despite all that than it is after a right hemisphere stroke, because somebody who has
a right hemisphere stroke may well not understand the world at all.
It's not that they can't manipulate it.
They just can't understand it.
And people complain that their partner, they have a partner who suffered such an injury
or stroke, is no longer empathic in the way that they used to be, doesn't seem to understand
a joke, doesn't seem to understand what's going around him, doesn't understand the conversation.
So that's kind of important.
In the second part of the book, I deal with epistemology, which is how do we get from our
findings, our data, our information, our percepts, our judgments?
How do we get from there to broader conclusions about the world?
And how do we build up a picture of the world?
And I suggest that there are four of these, science, reason, intuition, and imagination.
And in the world in which we live, none of these is quite perceived right, so excessive
claims are made for science, and at the same time science is not scientific enough.
If science were properly scientific, it wouldn't be as dogmatic as it is, it wouldn't dismiss
things that don't fit the current paradigm, because the whole history of science is of
people finding things that don't fit the current paradigm and then revising.
And again, we don't respect science enough, so there are now movements that disrespect
science or disregard science or refuse to publish science if it doesn't happen to fit
with your political view.
This sounds remarkably like 1930s Germany.
Then there is reason, and reason is very important, and again I think the world has lost its reason,
it's lost its reason of boldness.
How rarely do we hear that concept which seems to be central of the reason of bold, not just
the rationalistic, and I'm making a distinction there which is made in other languages between
different types of reason.
In German there's a difference between Vernunft and Verstand, and there's a kind of procedural
logic which is not unnecessary, it's very important, but you ought to be able to synthesise
that with the products of a life well lived, of a kind of experiential wisdom, and that
is reason.
And then there's intuition, which has had a very bad press lately, because there are
lots of psychologists who go around to companies making a lot of money telling them they must
never trust their intuitions because they're all wrong.
Psychologists rather like the feeling of having power over other people and seeing things they
don't see, and so there's a kind of a chauvinism about their wish to dispense with intuition.
When I say the examples they come up with, which is quite true, our intuition would probably
guide us to the wrong answer.
There aren't such things that can be set up, and our delivery is set up by psychologists.
They draw on principles that would normally lead us to the right conclusion, but on this
occasion just don't happen to.
And I can show you optical illusions which are so extraordinary that you can't believe
it until it's demonstrated, and yet I don't know many people who say, well, after seeing
that I'm never going to open my eyes again because they might mislead me.
We need these factors, and imagination, I just want to make an important distinction
between imagination and fantasy, fantasy.
Fantasy is something that takes us away from where we are, and it sometimes thought that
imagination is like this as well, but imagination is not.
Imagination is the only way in which we can truly enter into and understand the life,
the existence of whatever it is we're contemplating.
So it's a completely different thing, imagination.
Words from St Coleridge wrote about this very interestingly, I haven't got time to talk
about that now, but they did, and they contrasted the sort of dressing up of something in a
fancy way in order to make it look different and funny or moving or sentimental.
And they contrasted that with the sort of deep gaze of attention in which the thing
at last is permitted to come to be itself in your presence.
In a word of Heidegger's, well, the translation of what Heidegger used in German, unreason,
it presences, and that's slightly different from being present.
Being present is very passive, but the idea of presencing is the thing comes into being
through the encounter.
Now in the world we're in at the moment, I just think there's an awful lot already that
one could say that we're missing here, but what I do, and I just finished the counter
through the book, part three is, so we've looked at which hemisphere is more trustworthy
and the answer is, in almost every case, the left hemisphere will mislead us, is literally
delusional.
I'm using that word in a pop sense, I'm using that in a psychiatric sense.
It gives rise to frank delusions left for itself.
It's not reliable, so we know that.
We know we should be paying attention to what the right hemisphere tells us, even if it's
harder to grasp.
And we now know that we need to bring at least three out of these four, science, reason,
intuition, and imagination, if not all four to bear on all our problems, but I find that
generally we divide into camps who use either the first two or the last two or nothing at
all, that's three camps.
Then we come on to the last part of the book, and in that I sort of say, well, how do we
understand the cosmos and ourselves?
How do we understand our position here?
What do we think the cosmos is like?
And I begin with a couple of chapters about its structure.
The first one is on the coincidence of opposites, which is a very, very important point, which
has gone out of our culture and with it has gone some massively important insights, wise
insights.
We think that things are arranged in linear fashion, so on one end of a line there's something
you like, on the other end there's something you hate, and it's just where you graduate
yourself on this position, but this is not true.
If you pursue something that you think is good more and more, you will definitely end
up with the thing that you were fleeing from, thus it's famous that Anarchy leads to tyranny.
And we don't understand this.
It was obviously as a child that people on the extreme left of politics were awfully
like people on the extreme right of politics, but the answer in calibrating these things
is not just to find a midpoint where things go flabby as it were.
The secret of making a good apple tart is have sour apples and lots of good honey, and
this produces a wonderful apple tart, but just bland apples won't produce any of this.
And the image I like to give here is one that is made by my favourite philosopher of all
time, Heraclitus, 6th century BC, far more interesting than Plato.
They're called pre-Socratic philosophers.
I think the so-called pre-Sonic philosophers should be called post-Heraclitian philosophers,
but anyway, in this realm there were a lot of very interesting voices, and then we got
thrown off track for about 2,000 years, and we began to recover it in the 19th century.
Yeah, I'm sorry, I'm being brief and flippant, I'm a great admirer of Plato, I studied him
in Greek at school, I know all of that, but nonetheless, I think that there's a lot about
the way in which Plato has been interpreted his legacy, and Aristotle's legacy, and that
we have had to try and finesse and make more complex and pass on from.
The image from Heraclitus is that of the string of a line, the musical instrument, or the
string of a bow.
The point he makes is that it must be pulled apart in both directions very hard, and you
might say, well that's a waste of energy, why don't we just let it go slack, and then
of course the string will not let fly the note, it will not let fly the arrow.
So the tension between these opposites held together, but not collapsed into one or the
other, but both genuinely held is very important, and some people get around this by collapsing
the two, it's just saying they're all one, they're not all one, they're importantly rather
different, or they say they're so different from one another that you can't say that they
coincide, I would suggest that both of these positions is wrong.
And then I talk about the one and the many, I won't go into that, but that's another
whole famous philosophical problem that I think is very interesting about the relation
between the general and the unique, and the particular and the eternal, and the insight
I just want to pass on briefly is one that I think is best expressed in the work of Goethe,
which is that you find the particular, sorry, you find the general and the universal, not
by turning your back on the particular, but by going through the particular more deeply,
and you find eternity not by turning your back on the temporal, but by going through
the temporal and seeing eternity there in the temporal, that of course is itself a paradox,
but I'm no foe of paradox. In part two, I have a whole chapter on logical paradox,
which I think explains, I take about 30, one's known to philosophers, and suggest that the
reason that these paradoxes arise is that there is a conflict here between the way the
left hemisphere sees it, and the way the right hemisphere sees it, and guess what? The way
the right hemisphere sees it is more in touch with reality. I'll give you an example of Achilles
and the tortoise. Achilles was famously swift afoot, the tortoise challenged him to erase,
so Achilles said, no, I don't think so. He said, come on, you can never catch me,
Achilles thinks, well, okay, and being a generous kind of guy gives the tortoise a head start.
The tortoise, however, is right, because first of all, Achilles has got to get where the
tortoise now is, but by the time he gets there, the tortoise has moved on to a new place.
Now his job is to get to where the tortoise has gone to, but by the time he gets there,
the tortoise has moved on, and this is an infinite series, so he can never actually
overtake the tortoise. However, we know that he'll overtake the tortoise in two strides,
and the problem there, which I can't unpack now because I've got to get to the end of my
talk quite quickly, is effectively the mistake, his thinking of a continuum retrospectively as
fragmented and analysed. And then in the rest of the chapters of part three, I deal with the trivia,
time, space, matter, consciousness, value, purpose, and the sense of the sacred. And most
people are with me when we get time, yet very interesting, yes, space, matter and consciousness
are very important. What a hell, why do you put values, purpose, and the sense of the sacred in
there. And I believe these are things that are absolutely essential to our understanding of the
universe, of the cosmos and of life. And they've been dismissed from discourse by science, not out
of malice, but out of a very good principle. It decided that the way it wanted to investigate things
with what it calls objective, and in that it didn't want to introduce values, it didn't want to
introduce any kind of purpose, it just wanted to see what was there. And then it reports back
solemnly after its investigation, couldn't find any values, couldn't find any purpose. But to
borrow an image from C.S. Lewis, this is like a policeman who stops all the traffic in the street
and then solemnly notes in his notebook, the silence in this street is very suspicious. Science
has not proved that life is meaningless, that there is no purpose, that there are no values,
it's not its job to do that, and we need to see that, and it needs to see that. But I believe
that all consciousness, and let me say it briefly, I think the consciousness matter relate like this,
I believe that consciousness is the primary substance of the universe, if you like, although
substance is exactly the wrong word because nothing needs to be under it, it is the stuff,
if you like, of the cosmos. But again, it's not stuff, our language stuffs us when we try to talk
about this matter. So consciousness is that elementary stuff, and consciousness is always
directed towards something else. We're seeing something, we're taking it, being aware of
something, we're examining something, we're just contemplating something, but that is directional,
and it's guided by value, and it's guided by purpose, and these things are throughout in the
living world, and I would say having read Jude Caravan's latest book, which is very interesting,
a lot of the book is about the preanimate world, that there is evidence of clear purpose and value
in terms of beauty already present in this cosmos. I think what life does is not just bring
consciousness, because as I say consciousness I think is everywhere, but it brings two things,
it speeds up the process of responsiveness and intensifies it and broadens it. So
unlike the Roth in my garden, I can appreciate more of what there is in the cosmos, that's life
given to me, and what that life means is something that I can come to understand very much faster
than any of the processes that would have existed pre-life. There are animate processes that can
happen at thousands of the second, that if they were in an inanimate context would take billions of
years. So what is matter? Well I think matter is a phase of consciousness, I think that consciousness
exhibits matter to us, that's indisputable, we wouldn't know matter if we didn't have consciousness.
However it's not true that we wouldn't know consciousness if we weren't material, we don't
know that. A lot of scientists assume the brain somehow, nobody's ever got even with a whisker
of explaining how it could possibly happen, but if matter were to give rise to consciousness,
it's a matter of dispute, and I for one reject it, but we can't deny that matter is something
that's in our experience. And I say well why is matter there? I think it does one main thing
that can be seen in two ways, it allows things to persist for a while, always only for a while,
and it also offers some resistance, and I believe that creation, creativity depends on resistance
in the face of resistance, it can't happen. And resistance is paradoxical like everything else,
what is friction? Friction is what stops motion, that's what a physicist will tell you,
but it's also what starts motion, I'm not able to move at all without friction. So things have dual
roles and this resistance is highly creative as it's been seen by many of my favourite philosophers
including Whitehead and others. So where am I going with this? I could talk to you about the sense
of the sacred, I included a chapter on that and many of my philosophical friends who'd read the draft
said don't include it, you've got some really important philosophical things to say here,
but nobody will take you seriously if you talk about the sacred, and they'll go oh he's a faith
and so I almost for a nanosecond wavered, but I realised that I couldn't not write it,
even though it was the most difficult thing I've ever written in my life. It cost me more blood,
sweat, torches and tears than anything else I've done, because I wanted to be
honourable to what was there, I wanted to be truthful to it, I wanted to be faithful to it,
and neither oversell something or understated and of course I believe that all that realm of the
sacred and divine is not, is not expressible in ordinary language and is not grasped by our
common concepts, it is itself beyond such things, but that doesn't mean it's unreal, I mean it's
just an elementary logical mistake to say well we can't talk about it, we can't conceive it,
then it can't exist, but it can, and we can't measure it in the lab, I know that, but we can't
measure love in the lab, I can't demonstrate love to somebody who's never experienced it,
and the sacred is like that, you can't get it from, it's like trying to learn how to swim by
sitting on the bank of the river reading a book, you actually have to get into the stream, but if
you do you will find that something responds to you, I swear that it will, it may not be what you
expect, but there will be this responsive encounter, and it's that that we are made for, and I believe
that it's that, the business of seeing, experiencing, reflecting, doing our best to magnetize in the
world of what is beautiful, good and true, that is the reason we're here at all, so we have an
unfortunate, if you like, role, and we started rather late, so I'm just gonna, I'll wind up in
five minutes, and you've probably heard of Pascal's Wager, yeah, and Pascal's Wager for those of you
don't know it, was the maybe a god or the may not, if there is a god and you decide to deny him,
you've made a big mistake, but if there isn't a god and you think there is, well no harm will come
of it, and it's always seemed to me not really to cover the basis, and to be a little bit venal in
its, in its motivation, but there's something called the Galperist Wager which goes like this,
either there is a god, in which case, yep, we better get to know that god, or there isn't a god,
in which case no harm is done, I love Pascal, but there is this possibility that whatever the divine
and the sacred is, it is exploring itself, it is coming to know itself in its creation,
one might ask why did this logos, this ble, this ta, this Allah, this god, why did it bother with
the creation, and the answer in most religions is that god is love, and love is relational,
coming back to my idea that everything, everything is actually relational, and relations are two
way relations, so you have to have a cosmos in which something can come that can appreciate
that divine ground, and it's exploring that, unfolding the beauty of it, that is the purpose
of the creation, and here at the very last minute I come to the question of division and union,
which I would love to give a whole hour's tour, because it's very, very important, but let me be
very brief, Goethe, again another person I very great admire, said, dividing the united, uniting
the divided, this is the business of nature, and it is like he says, the sisterly and diasterly,
which are the two beats of the heart, it is like the inhalation and the exhalation, and he also
suggests, or hints that it's like the warp and weft of a fabric, into which our being is woven, he
said, now I think that is extraordinarily important, and perhaps I'd just leave it there and we can
explore it a bit, but in my view everything depends on seeing this importance of having division and
union, but of having them unified, not divided, this is an example of the meta position that I
hold on many things, for example I think it's great that we have both and, but we also sometimes need
either or, but we don't need either both and, or either or, we need both, both and, and, and I of
course my whole works about symmetry and asymmetry, which I think goes much further than the brain,
goes into the substance of life, and I believe there that we need not just symmetry or asymmetry,
but we need the asymmetry of symmetry and asymmetry, that really is a lot of work,
and it's all there in the postage you want to pie it.
I'll give you a chance to take a rest in for a second or two, quite a tour de force,
and I'm keen because of time to really involve the audience quite quickly, so I'm going to just
have one question on the sacred, and it relates to an experience I had with you
on the out of sky, a little minor tragedy is that before the book came out, I traveled up to sky
to film a day long interview with Ian about every aspect of the book, which was recorded of course,
but for a range of reasons that won't go into, we could never retrieve the recording,
but there was a moment towards the end of that time that I particularly wished we'd
caught on camera, and it was a moment where Ian started welling up with tears,
and it was speaking about Christian mythology, and how beautiful you found it, and one question
I have for you here is to speak of the sacred might be threatening to scientific peers in
a scientific context, and it might be risky because you're invoking quality of life that's
well, you can tell me in a minute whether you think it's supernatural or not or whether that's
the right expression, but it's invoking something entirely natural, but outside of our normal sort of
capacity to empirically perceive things that would be a more sort of orthodox
way of looking at things, but in that moment, I felt you emotionally were very deeply invested
in this, and I've also noticed in some of the reviews, perhaps by Rowan Williams, perhaps by a
few others, they wonder if you're sort of pulling your punches a bit, that actually, far from not
including this in the book, you culminate in the sacred, and yet even in the sacred chapter,
it's quite cautious and quite tempered, and we just, I just wonder what stops you from saying
what you just said towards the end there, something of the order that like God exists,
it's very important we come to know God, and our life should be directed in that sense, what's
pulling you back from that? Yeah, I consistently, as you say, pull my punches for a good reason,
and actually at the end, I don't say, and I say that although I'm very suspicious of a lot of
God talk, and although the very word God produces all kinds of complications that need to be dispensed
with, I think we're too quick to say we can bypass this or dismiss it, and that I think it's our job
to try harder to understand what this ancient truth that people have always believed is about,
why do we think we're wiser than they were? And I do actually say that nothing I have experienced
is in a sense more certain to me that there is some meaning to this idea, and that's expressed in
that way carefully, because as Jesus said, we should be as wise as serpents, but as gentle as
dubs. And part of my job was not to draw people to Christianity, I think I'm a rather bad Christian,
and I'm not a committed Christian, and I don't go to church. On the other hand, I cannot think of a
more wonderful mythos, and I use that word without any implication that it's false, and the mythoi
by which we live are the most important kinds of truth, and if you think you don't have one,
you've probably bought into the one of our age, which is that everything is a machine, that's a
myth as well. And I think it's such a powerful myth about a God who is involved in the creation in
such a way that he actually also experiences suffering, although there's a complex concept
in theology by the way, because he may be so-called impassable, but I don't want to go into all the
details, but the beauty of this idea, and the extraordinaryness of the art, and the music,
and the poetry, the architecture, the words of the liturgy, the words of the King James Byron,
I think these are, they speak to me directly, and I came from a family that were neither very
well educated nor at all religious, and I sort of first encountered all this in my early teens,
and I just thought whatever it is that I've been taught to believe about the world is not right,
I need to commit myself to understanding this, and I thought that I would probably actually become
a monk after I'd gone to Oxford and graduated, but by then I saw sense and realized I'd be a
very bad monk, and would also make a very bad monastery, so there we are. Just a little follow-up,
we heard from Linda this morning about fortune telling, and in my group afterwards we spoke
about astrology, and there's a sort of book you may know by Jeffrey Kreipel called The Flip,
which is premised partly on seeing consciousness as primary, but not just that, there's also a lot
of parapsychological data in it, and he's arguing that really there's a moment at which suddenly
the world looks very very different. Now my impression knowing you for many years, you care
very deeply about your scientific authority and respectability and for good reason, but I also
wonder if you know to what extent can we go there as it were, to what extent is it legitimate to
wonder if the eaching might actually speak to you, or the tarot cards might actually have something
to say about your psyche that's meaningful. Is this beyond the pale, or is this...?
Well, not to me. I'm far from being able to say that I know or experience or have in my world
picture the whole story. I haven't, none of us has, and it's the hubris of modern humanity that
seems to me it's worst traits, and what we need is a massive dose of humility which may come,
alas, with societal collapse, but we certainly need to re-embrace modesty for and compassion rather
than anger, division, power struggles, and all of that. There are also a couple of things really,
and one of the things I forgot to say, and I just want to say this about why I didn't bang on
about Christianity is that as I say I'm not necessarily sure I'm a Christian, but I also
didn't want to be exclusive. I didn't want people to get there and go, oh God, he's a Christian,
so now we've got to swallow all that, but I wanted to draw on religions worldwide, and I found that
they had enormous wisdom and that these wisdoms cohered, and what's more they cohered with the
position I'd been arguing for through neuro-psychology, philosophy, and slightly physics. I have a
band of what I call tamed physicists, and when I want to say something in physics I,
there are people who approached me and said, far more than biologists, this book is terribly
interesting to us as physicists, I know that's good, so then I send them, is this okay to say,
probably, so why am I saying that? I just don't want people to think that anybody should be excluded
from this, even those who are very, very tentative, and I often think that the honest diagnostic is
the closest to somebody who's really honestly searching for God. Sorry, where were we before
that? Well, just that I'm, I think... Well, it depends what you define as natural and supernatural,
and I think that lots of the stuff that we've now sequestered in the cupboard mark, supernatural,
is not at all unnatural, it depends how you look at things, if you happen to notice certain things,
and things, events in life or reading something can make you open your eyes to it, you start to see
it, and that doesn't necessarily mean that it's real, I think we should be skeptical, I think
that scientists are not skeptical enough about their own findings, and I think we should be
skeptical as thinkers, as philosophers, as scientists, but I also think we need in the
end to be skeptical about skepticism in the sense that you can take it too far so that you're
paralyzed and don't really know that you can believe anything, that would be a mistake, but you see,
it's not, what one believes is not something one worked out in a seminar room, it's not the
culmination of a series of propositions, the root of the word belief is from love, it's
liven, you know, and the old English word leaf, dear, and what we believe is very importantly
what we are attracted to is right, what we have faith, faith is uncertain,
faith is incompatible with certainty, and faith is more valuable than certainty, certainty means
you're certainly wrong, it's one of the only certainties we can have, and so it's very important
to maintain this idea, I mean I want to say this whatever because I think it's so important,
a reconceptualization of truth, truth is not something out there, a distant goal that we can
work our way towards, truth is something we can encounter in this world, and it's not a thing,
it's a process, it's a journey, and it's about not something being definite but of a continual
unconcealing, so we are unconcealing the truth, we are sweeping away misconceptions as we find our way
to, as we find our way to God, whatever you mean by that word, and this idea of truth is very
important because truth is at the basis of fidelity, when we talk about truth, Calvin just
talked about two surfaces that are true, indeed they say they marry, and truth is what happens when
warring factions stop fighting with one another and come to what we call a truth, a truth is derived
from the word true, and truth is something that we uncover in the business of living, so it's a
very different thing from what goes on in the seminar room usually, but if the seminar room
takes into account pre-socratic philosophers, modern phenomenological philosophers, it may get close.
Okay, thank you, so questions now from the audience, if you can put your hands up,
I think I'm going to have to do this roving for the recording sake, so the mic is there to
be recorded, I think if you want to ask a question but you don't want to be recorded,
let me know, but I'll assume you do, so I'm going to bring the mic to you and I'll begin,
yes, does anyone else want to play the roving role? Nick are you sure? Okay, so then we'll take these
two at the front, if we can take a few together it helps, not too many because it can become
too overwhelming, but maybe two at a time and we'll see how it goes. Thank you Ian, I think we all
want to thank you for persevering with the million words, you live on sky, I live in a tiny house
on wheels in the Derbyshire Dales and I'm very careful what goes in and your book is in, so thank
you, you say consciousness is primary, for you is consciousness mental or material or neither of the
above. Okay, thank you Ian, I'm looking at the two lights behind you which are on all the time
and it made me think about the right hemisphere and the left hemisphere, do they flicker one on
then the other one on the other or are they both on at the same time or do they fade in and out,
do you have a sense of that? We take those two together. I'll deal with that question first
both our hemispheres are operating all the time, which one is guiding our attention
is more a matter of a divided role and so effectively we don't need to be thinking and
shouldn't be thinking that we are just using our left hemisphere or right, what I'm talking about
there is a short hand, I believe that in this world when we enter into discourse we don't like
contradictions, if you contradict yourself that's almost worse than talking nonsense, anyone will
listen to nonsense as long as it's coherent with itself, but actually truths are often very very
complicated and require different things that we go, well that doesn't add up, I mean the left
hemisphere is very quick to dismiss anything that seems contradictory or paradoxical.
The second question or the first question actually is very good, but I think what you've done there
is reinforce a division that I don't think is correct between the mental and the physical,
so consciousness is the ground of both mental and physical life and the physical life is the
material expression of consciousness which we also have in an immaterial way, so consciousness,
let me give you this image and what is water? Well you think you know what water is, it's that
translucent stuff that flows, but it's also that very hard opaque white stuff that's extremely cold
and can crack your head open and it's also in this room, I mean this upper part of this room
is filled with water, but we're alive and we don't see it, so there are different ways in which
consciousness can be manifest and if you like a congealed form of consciousness is what matters.
I want to get to the position where I don't collapse the division between my mind and the
consciousness of the universe or the garden or you, so we don't collapse the two, we don't
entirely divide the mind. We live in a country in which we think division means separation,
but it doesn't, it doesn't mean actually having to separate, it's being able to see the difference
and the best example of this is in a bar magnet where there's a north pole and the south pole,
they're completely connected to one another, but they never separate, in fact night and
night can possibly exist without the other and there isn't a hard division where they see.
Okay thank you, wow more hands, okay Isabella and Milky just opposite.
Yeah thank you Ian for this great talk, I moved again to hear your story and I'm most interested
right now to hear whether you had an experience that brought you to the place you are right now
in terms of your feeling of the sacred or was it purely through studying, so from my experience
reading you and poetry has brought me as close to a religious experience as I've ever had
and that sounds too much, but it is true and I'm wondering whether it's for you becoming
a scientist and doing the work and thinking concessually and feeling something that you didn't
get from that that brought you to digging deeper and then having an experience or the other way
around. Okay thank you and take Milky's question as well please just there Nick. I believe you kind
of touched on it with your conversation with Jonathan, but you mentioned four elements,
science, rationality, imagination, reason, I forgot the other one, imagination and intuition,
but there is I think there is a missing part, at least it feels to me memory, memory, remembrance,
footprints of people you touched on it at the end I think in your conversation
and another thing I wanted to add was if you give an advice to a technologist, someone working in
the tech sector what would that be? Okay I'll just speak that one in the end, how do you save the
world from AI quickly? So Isabella's question, where did the sense come from, from ratiosination
and study or from some kind of revelation or experience? It's never come from revelation
and oddly I didn't think I've had any revelations in my mind, I mean other than suddenly oh wow
when I experience a work of art, I don't know whether that counts or just a very beautiful scene,
I've been saying oh wow all my life, aren't these really revelations, not in the kind of
way that I think you're suggesting, so it's been an accretion of experience that has been cohesive
since I was a teenager, I mean I remember as a teenager having a very strong view that
the whole was not the same as the sum of the parts and I couldn't explain it and people would say
so what's this mysterious something else that gets put in when you put the parts together
and of course I didn't know how to answer that, I wouldn't know now but
so he was continuous as a piece of life. The question that you asked Milti,
yes memory, you see the way I think of that is that he's a sort of subset of all the things I've
mentioned, so science needs to remember to amass and to bear in mind past experience, reason is
based in my view not just on logical working of things out but being able to make the right
analogies to see the correct context with all of which comes from experience and one way of
talking about experience is memory and I would say the same thing about intuition and imagination
that they're fed into by memory but thank you for drawing my attention to it because I think
memory is a very interesting topic and I'm thinking hard about actually what I think about memory now
because we're beginning to think that living organisms must respond to imprints that we can't
find in DNA and they may be in fields that bear such memories, this has been considered rather
wacko in the past, I hope Rupert Sheldrake will live long enough, dear man to see himself indicated
as I'm sure he will be. Thank you and just a follow up on Isabella's question because it was
such a profound one, you did say that you're not enduring the talk, I thought I heard you say words
to the effect that if you there was something along the lines of if you listen, if you attend,
you will feel a healing response, it wasn't it wasn't quite if you listened for God you'll hear
but it was a little bit like that and so I just wondered to push back slightly on what you said
about the accretion because that makes it sound still quite safe, there is a sense in which you're
experiencing a relationship in your life is there not? Many relationships with the divine
if one can say that I believe with nature with people and I sometimes think you know you mentioned
if you listen you'll hear God speak, I do listen and God doesn't speak and I sometimes said
look it wouldn't hurt you just once, they something, just human family, you are there
in communication with me and then I made it I think and maybe that is God speaking in me but
I spoke to you this morning when you looked out of the landscape, I spoke to you this morning
when you got a phone call from your daughter, I speak to you all the time, what's the problem?
Okay wonderful thank you, more questions, Darius and so just one over this corner here
because then we'll get the cluster, you can see a cluster emerging, we're coming to you,
we'll take Darius and then we'll move to the cluster. Thank you, so you've been using two sets
of terms, one is ground of being and then you've also talked about God, so is that a distinction
that is clear to you, I mean God is generally like a personification, some entity with a
personality while ground of being connects to other traditions like Taoism which do not personify
the ground of being, it's a profound mystery and once we personify it we're actually over defining
it and making too many assumptions about it. I think we'll take this, that's such a big one I
think, basically we just asked is God a person if I understood it correctly, I think so because
it's too big to get with another question. A very good one, of course what I mean by the
ground of being is that which in a way doesn't kickstart being in a temporal sense, it's not
the cause in the sequence but that underwrites all being, so it is there as the ground of being and
this is where I want to mention the Trinity, a Christian concept although I discovered that
it's actually a very ancient concept that was in many pre-Christian belief systems but at school
this always seemed to be manifestly absurd and I always felt a squirm factor when the Trinity was
mentioned, I mean what is this about the man, the boy, and the bird, you know, it doesn't make any
sense to me, as I matured in my thinking I realized it's extremely important as an expression of what
I was much more able to accept which is Pantheism and just to gloss that for people who are not
familiar with the term, Pantheism is the belief that God is just the sum of everything, I don't
believe that but Pantheism is the belief that God is in everything and that everything is in God,
has its being in God, so that God is never separate from anything in the cosmos and
the way in which that manages to work for me is that it manages to bridge
the debate about whether God is, what's the word, suddenly lost the words,
female, female, I'm just kidding, that wasn't the word,
I don't know where the God is, I hate this, with transcendent, where the God is transcendental
or imminent and I believe that it's important to be able to hold both of these things without
collapsing into one or the other and in that sense God is both the sort of ground of being
and the process of this cosmos, I said that it was in or he or have you like to put it,
I meant it unsatisfactory, she is also unsatisfactory, I just stick with he because it's conventional
and he or whatever is that other is also in the process of creation and is present in within
us right now and it was made clear to me by a simple Franciscan monk in my teens who said
well think of it like a book, where is the book, is it in the mind of the writer or is it in this
book on the table here or is it what happens when you read book and those are the three things
that's also in Rumi, I like to be able to bridge these things, Rumi says it is the water source,
it is the water that flows to the cup and it is the water that is drunk.
Thank you, I can just check with the audience, I'm conscious of time and energy
and so we're at the beginning of the end now, there's a cluster of questions here that we will
take but I'm just conscious that we're talking about God and there was a time when I first
met Ian maybe a decade or so ago where that would have created quite a strong degree of discomfort
and I'm just wondering if anyone cares to put their hand up, if you feel that talking about
God is somehow discomforting, uncomfortable, okay thank you, anyone else? Yep, any more,
don't be shy, I'm sure you have lots of allies, right because some people, yeah this is sort of
tacit coercion sometimes baked into the conversation, just good to know you're, you know,
that's not surprising and many would feel it. Other questions now, the cluster?
Could I just comment on that, it's exactly avoidance of coercion that led me into the position
you put me with first because you don't seem to come out. I didn't want any of my readers to feel
he's got design wrong, right? But I don't and I'm constantly in a game, it doesn't have to,
nobody has that to do with it. I do appreciate that's the intent, I'm also wondering though
whether it's felt so palpably that the intent is somehow less important than the experience that
this is in the room as it were. So okay, we have a cluster here, let's take it, yes the hand's been
up for a long time. Thank you Ian, I wanted to follow up and dive a bit deeper into what you
mentioned about friction as not only that which creates resistance and conflict but that which
propels at the heart of the fabric of drama and expression in the cosmos. And particularly
within your work how you see deception as an essential part of this friction, I want to differentiate
it in two ways, perhaps the left brain side of deception being that which is asserting a
particular story to enable a certain way of being to sort of self-justify itself and perhaps more
right side of deception which would be that which you find in the greatest forms of art,
whether it's poetry or comedy or even science where it's a form of deception that unearths
its own limitation speaking to its own limits of language or it's something that unravels into
further creativity and I'll be curious how deception ties into your work. Okay Ian, thank
you, we'll take a few more questions if you don't mind, hold the question about deception.
One bridge was just in front of there Nick and thank you. Thank you Ian for your very important
ideas. My thoughts are in Alice in Wonderland and Moby Dick's some very important ideas were
hidden and passed on to a public that might not go very deep initially. In the age of
shortened attention span which we have now, how would you feel and have you thought about if your
ideas were packaged in a say a Netflix show or something that would make it more accessible
and for what age group would you feel it would be most appropriate and effective?
Okay thank you, so let's take those two then deception and then genres.
It was deception right if I heard correctly, not perception but yeah no deception and the
different kinds of deception that there might be a kind of creative deception in the right
hemisphere as I understood it whereas the left hemisphere's deception is invariably
maladaptive in some way. If I've done justice to the question. To understand if I can relate to
right hemisphere deception. Well yeah the trouble is that I think that
as even Mike Gasoliger who's the biggest mechanist in the world believes the left
hemisphere is not really interested in truth and so it does project the most massive
lies and it's also vastly overconfident that it's right. So it is the home of mistakes and
deception. I'm trying to think how the right hemisphere would deceive us except in as much as
it would not contain what it is the left hemisphere can say or would say. So the left hemisphere is
different from the right hemisphere in its relation with the other hemisphere so the left hemisphere
is exclusive of the right hemisphere but the right hemisphere is inclusive of what the left
hemisphere knows and actually in the image of the master and his emissary the title of my earlier
book it's the master that actually instructs the emissary to go and do this where
expects the emissary to report back but the emissary goes off on I think that it's the master so.
Okay more yeah I would just feel that there's so much more to come I don't know how to
praise yeah it's it's it will hold the question in the air and but the the subsequent question
about genre I mean you have had almost like I see a sort of you know many different kinds of
I was about to say Russian doll if I'm honest and I suddenly felt the sort of political weight of
that but I was thinking that the the number of different kinds you've had you know RSE animate
that there weren't seeming any millions there's been a kind of yeah documentary there's been yeah
all that yeah yeah and and I have Jonathan very much to thank for this because he said after I'd
given this talk we have somebody who will turn it into a cartoon and I said oh god no that's an
absolute words thing they can have because this stuff is already you know in most people's mind
the pop idea of the two hemispheres is ridiculously a caricature I don't want that and then after a
while he said no I've talked to the guy and he's read your book and he really understands it okay
and then along the day the thing came out the actual talk it's about 11 months after the talk
had gone up my talk had 12,000 views that afternoon the animate had 46,000 views and so I'm completely
converted to this and I'm delighted to report I don't know if you've known this actually yeah I do
you do yes the guy who did it contacted me and said that he wanted to come and interview me for the
purposes of making some more and he came and interviewed me for three or four hours and he's
going to make he says five or six very short animus and that will that will be a very helpful move
I think I don't think it's that people have become incapable of this kind of attention but they
you're quite right that they need some kind of way in they need a lure yes exactly okay thank you
we have a few more questions so Nick yeah a lot yeah thank you at the back we've I've noticed you at
the side I've noticed the two wings here we have Dominic I know Dominic you've been trying for a while
I get it and we have take one at the back first quick question you you're a very observation
you're a very convinced monotheist whereas very convinced monotheist no isn't that monotheist
whereas most religious people uh entertain the existence of many spirits and beings and gods
and goddesses and demons and so on so that's an observation the question is different traditions
and communities use the word spirit or energy and you use consciousness are they talking about the
same thing or is there a reason it's consciousness somehow different it's talking about something
different I think that's a big one Nick we'll take that one first big one is I mean ultimately I
say that these things can't be neatly carved out from one another but I still think it's very useful
to use different terms it's very important to use the terms north pole or south pole correctly
of a magnet but you know effectively they exist together they co-create one another and so on
I mean polytheism is interesting but I think that it's a step behind what I'm trying to say
which is that is the union of division and union so it's not unreasonable for this god that is
if you like ever present in the world to take different manifestations at different times
and maybe when when I have an experience that I think is of the sacred then that is a very
particular thing and in the past if it had taken place in a wood or you know on a mountain it would
have been a different god I don't think that's really necessary and and I think that there are
differences between spirit and consciousness and god I mean consciousness is part of the
cosmos that the god is the ground of and what I mean by spirit is not just my consciousness my
consciousness could be engaged in something absolutely nefarious or horrible or trivial
but that is not spirit what you mean by spirit I believe or what I mean by spirit is something
rather special not just any other consciousness and so we have a word for it that seems to be okay
okay thank you there's so many other questions Nick and also you've described yourself as a
dauist but we'll come back to that maybe in subsequent question yes thank you yeah I know I
know Dominique I'm don't worry saving the best for last I just want to thank you for the ways
that you articulate and bring to language things around maybe I'll have a quiet voice
just extending gratitude for the ways that you're bringing to language
matters of of the sacred okay just expressing deep gratitude for the ways that you're bringing
to lexicon ideation of the sacred and innate ways of knowing I feel like the colonization
of god is like one of the greatest unravelings that many of us experience in this age and
I found the metaphor of the violin and that duality being important and of the the
poles being really important really poignant in this time of what we witness all around or what's
bombarded all around us around division and I wanted to ask this this I wanted to like
zoom in on this duality of division and unifying or how you might bring that to words what does that
mean for each of us acting in this age in response to the extent of the divisive epistemologies of
material reductionism what kind of rigor does that require of each of us acting as agents
in this okay thank you Zoe even before you answer we need to take the last round of questions
okay because I think just because of time so I've got this question in mind and hopefully you have
to okay quickly please yeah um what what's driving you what's your life's mission okay good one
good one we'll hold that thought and a few more please yes dominate okay well domain's going last
because I've already promised that um yeah it's sort of related to what Linda was saying about
I was very struck by her talking about this morning about things like fortune telling and
which is a long way from from the sense of the sacred that I was getting from your book but it's
a lot more closer to what everyday understanding of the spiritual is and there's one part in your
book where you touch on near-death experiences but say you're not going to go into that
and I suspect for the reasons you've already explained around other stuff with the spiritual
what I I'm fascinated by is that near-death experiences are actually very very well documented
now and in a way if that were better known that might be a way of pushing us past this sense
that the place we're in at the moment where basically humanism rules and says when you're dead
we've got the question near-death experiences question mark and uh okay Steve and then oh we've
got sorry one two three never done okay yes please we won't be able to answer all of them but Ian's
such a brilliant synthesizer he'll get to the gist okay so question
I'm interested in how you feel this work is landing in society so um how have you been most
touched by the receipt of this work and most disappointed okay great and then Steve
yeah we'll go yeah we'll take two more then we're then we're really okay okay okay okay
let's let's answer that's answer yeah okay we can do two sats then if people can yeah fine go ahead
I love the first one I'm very keen on that it's kind of what I'm here for but it's okay go ahead
so Zoya's has a question about the the violin metaphor the the tension what does it mean in
real life how do you put it into action it's the technique I suspect not the microphone
yeah why is this this always happens to me that the person who's interviewing has a good microphone
this has repeatedly happened there is a god after all and also I was amused when I was at the
chalk valley festival I was being interviewed by Donald and Gaysman and he had 25 questions and
we had about 30 minutes and I said I'm going to try and be concise and he said well I've never seen
that before um but the trouble is that I'm trying to compress a lot and that's my excuse anyway
I think that the idea of the division and union is very important in resolving tensions because we're
not but I but almost more important because I'm short of time I'm going to say this I think that
the elements that are required are humility charity or compassion and a degree of awe which before
the extent of the things we can't know don't know so people's certainty that they're right
that the other person must be wrong they must be terrible because they held an opinion that
they don't hold this is all utterly horrible and nobody should be forbidden to say what they
honestly and truly believe as long as they don't say it in a in a very inflammatory and horrible
way so I'm really worried about that in society and I think the answer is not to ban people all
the time but actually to do the precise opposite but to sit people down and listen and look it's
not very complex you can have marital therapy between a couple that are at one another's roads
and you get the person to speak and then you say no your turn's coming now what did your partner just
say no that wasn't what I said at all now that actually would be a very very useful exercise
I'm going to be really annoying to you because I wonder I'll say something else while I'm on
this topic because I didn't have a chance to talk about which is values effectively there
is only one value for the left hemisphere and its power and the entire debate about everything
since about the middle of the 19th century from marks onwards has been about power every way we
look at things is about power it's the only value that counts if you're an artist it's no longer
good enough to be beautiful to have beautiful work it's almost a put down it's powerful and that's
the only thing we respect nowadays is power and you may say well that's the the way men have left
but don't let's embrace that let's try to get away from it let's not just drill further into power
let's talk about beauty goodness and truth until we talk about beauty goodness and truth as our
guide we are stuffed now there was another question on another one and another yeah well the big
question was the the purpose of your life I mean there was a big question about what's driving you
and what's oh yeah yeah well it's quite easy to answer I don't know but in retrospect my life
has made sense at the time it never did yeah I mean why did I I wanted to do philosophy university
but for various reasons I didn't I it wasn't an honest degree the one I wanted to do philosophy
and theology so instead I read literature why did I do that I know why did I switch to science
in medicine why you know in retrospect it all makes sense but what drives me is if you like
and it is a driver it's a demon I mean I have a diamond you know in in Plato's sense it is very cruel
and won't give me time off and says no you might want to do that but no you're sitting down at
this stepping you're going to write and but the reason I want to do that is because I believe
that I have a vision that is coherent and I believe that it changes the way people look at life I
know this I absolutely know it from all the feedback I get and so as long as I've got breath
in my body I'm willing to go around trying to promulgate it and my impression is that it's
landing very well across the educated intelligent reading public and there's a deafening silence
from neurology and no not from neurology and psychiatry but from neuroscience so I've had
tons of wonderful messages from neurologists and psychiatrists all around the world but not from
neuroscientists except for Raman Chandran but he's a clinician as well and and so some very big names
in the field have responded but what hasn't happened is I've been able to move on neuroscience
and neuroscientists are people who let spend their life in the lab but neurologists and
psychiatrists actually encounter people oh and you know the brain that's got nothing to do with
people but it has and you know I've got Mike Kazanigar on the film the film The Divided Brain
and he actually says you know he takes these findings of neuroscience and so on and then
he applies into the lives of real people I'm not comfortable with that well I'm not comfortable
with you Mike because you're you're not doing the job you should be doing that anyway
there's one more question over here which was what has pleased me or displeased me yeah
and well that was a similar question it's okay it's not it's not the same I want I want to
respond yeah I was just asking about but that thing about near-death experiences but I think
it's a good question yeah I'm not against them I wouldn't mind having one none of these things
ever seems to come my way but um maybe one day well but no I don't I'm I'm appropriately detached
from it I'm prepared to believe the evidence I know there are very good scientists involved in the
area but I have enough battles to fight without people going oh I see so he's one of those people
who believes in seances and I don't know what I think but I really have to fight my battles a bit
and it's about restricting I've got enough to cover without having to cover things that will
only land me in in the soup okay okay but I want yeah who was the man who asked me what pleased me
all right I want to say what pleased me and what didn't
you can answer that at the end I can say all right
hey and um my question is um it might be a little late for this question now but um
I'm curious why do you think the priest we went in the direction in the western world
after the pre-socratics in the direction that we went and didn't follow what you know some of the
to profound because I'm with you I think the pre-socratics are extraordinary so why did we take
that direction yes
so actually my question is quite quick I think do my tongue perhaps it's quick but I wanted to go
back to the brain and you said something you were talking about Jude Coravan and you said that
animate life enables the speed of consciousness and I wondered why that's important and then it
was kind of a follow-up on that question which was related to what Linda said which was could we
you know you're talking about consciousness and matter and um could consciousness be another way
to think of time and that matter enables the flow of time okay if I can remember all of that when
we get there um so history of ideas yes I mean really so is not to waste time I don't really know
I think what happened was there was um a great deal of commerce with the east with India with
Persia and so forth and that many of the ideas one finds in those cultures and in Greece at the time
of the pre-socratics are very consonant with one another and then something happened in which
we took a step back and started to inspect ourselves more self-consciously and that's what
gave rise to this process and I found something very interesting in Whitehead the other day which
is a society thrives until it starts to overanalyze itself I believe that's where we're at now
um yes um well rather as I said before there's a reason why we have these different words because
um
yes yes
yes all right I think probably the way I put it was was suboptimal thank you
um what I would have been better to say was that responsiveness is what life magnifies
so there is a way in which inanimate matter is responsive if water comes eventually it moves
and so on so there's a kind of very slow process but it's not going to give rise to a satisfying
sense of the divine so you need to create as it were creatures that are much much more responsive
and then they respond faster they respond more deeply and they respond more broadly
so that's what I meant to say and I think that's what life brings to the party
um
no no no because there's a time thing yeah I mean in the chapter on time I I think we miss
I suggest that we misconceive time because we don't understand the nature of flow
and consciousness may be a kind of flow but first of all I'd have to talk about how flow is different
when you're inspecting it from the outside and when you're actually in it and so when you're
standing on the edge of a river with a stopwatch and a clipboard and time and the river seem to
be passing if you get into that river and move in the exact flow of the river um time will appear
no longer to be an issue because you're moving with it and so time time is in itself absolutely
fascinating but I wouldn't want to say collapse it into consciousness and I think time can exist
without without our self-consciousness um if you say that it's part of the structure of the universe
which I believe it is and consciousness is the origin of of everything there then I see what
you're getting at but I I'm just nervous of conflating things that ought to be kept separate
so no I just wanted to say I mean I really
my first book I wrote in my 20s was called Against Criticism and it sold about 400 copies and it
then got unceremoniously remained it um it's slightly satisfying to me that if you now try
to buy a copy it will cost you two thousand pounds but but um I didn't believe that the
master and his emissary would take off I genuinely didn't and it caused the change of my life
because I actually gave up the day job in order to lecture and write further and the good side
of that was I could live on sky and the bad side of that was that um I took a 90 cut in income
but what has really staggeringly moved me and it really does move me every day is people who
write to me saying this book changed my life I mean if an author gets that once in a lifetime
they should be overjoyed but I do hear it time and again and people also say which makes me feel
I must be on to something somehow I knew all this but I had no way of articulating it defending it
but you have given me confidence this is so moving I mean after one of the reasons I went to
psychiatry I can say is because I wanted to investigate the mind-body problem that's true
that's very sort of top level but another level you know I'd had wanted to be a monk I decided I
didn't really want to be a priest but I felt very happy being a doctor and I had a very warm
relationship with my patients and one of the things that crossed my mind is if I'm going to retire
from that well that's going to give a huge hole in your life actually it didn't because I've met
so many people through this work and I was free to do other things but anyway I just wanted to
say that I'm enormously grateful um to them for that and I I hope that people will continue to write
because everybody's contribution is somehow different and it increases the feeling that it
was okay to go through all the you know the loneliness of the long-distance runner because
it really has been in a very very very long and hard grind at many times and I I don't really although
I may appear to be confident I don't really I have that kind of imposter syndrome and when people
say no this thing really means something to me that means something very great to me so I just
want to thank you all very much
you
