Thank you so much, Lee. I hope you can all hear me okay. You might be wondering why it
looks like a horror movie here. I'm currently in Kerala, India, with my family, and there's
been a power cut just a few minutes before coming online, which means weirdly the system
preserves certain things like Wi-Fi but allows other things to die like lights. So I currently
have my phone light beaming in on me, which is why you have this effect. So don't be scared.
Do imagine the best and not the worst for me in this context. We are speaking about imagination
today after all. And it's a great pleasure to invite, well, to welcome you all here first
of all. And this is now the fourth in our series of talks with Ian about the thing,
the matter with things. I get confused with that because I wrote a book once myself called
The Moves That Matter, and every so often the two books kind of flip in my head. This
is about the matter with things, and it's the fourth in our series. And we're particularly
interested tonight to speak about imagination. Our prior event was more about sanity prior
to that about value and prior to that matters of Ian's work more generally. Tonight we've
arranged a conversation with Phoebe Tekel, whom I'm very pleased to introduce to you
all. Many of you will know her already. Phoebe is, I'll give the formal definition before
the informal one, a biologist, systems thinker and founder of moral imaginations. It's an
organization driving a movement of imagination powered activism, placing life back at the
center of the economy, politics and systems of governance. Phoebe works across multiple
societal contexts and has advised government, the education sector and the food and farming
sector. More recently, she has worked with Camden Council to train council officers in
the skills of collective imagination and horizontal leadership. And people will speak a bit more
about what all of that means. But I can say that I know her personally. I was also part
of a sort of imagination practice that she did with a large group of people in Berlin
a few years ago. So I have firsthand experience of how she evokes and elicits sort of imagination
in large groups of people for the greater good. And it's a practice that continues to
develop and be refined as we go. Phoebe is a scientist by background. Like Ian, they
have in common this kind of deep, deep spirit of scientific inquiry, leading you beyond
science, which I think all the best scientists somehow on the one hand remain loyal to science
and yet somehow move themselves beyond it as well. And I think they share that at the
very least. I think the way I've seen this conversation in outline is that this is a
chance for Ian, who's fascinated by imagination and makes it one of his main pathways to truth
in the matter of things, to speak with someone who's working very seriously and in a very
dedicated way to bring imagination, to walk the talk of imagination in practice in civil
society contexts, where we say we need greater imagination, but don't always know how to
go about doing it. Phoebe is actually taking it very seriously and trying to do that. And
for Phoebe, it's a chance to get a richer, richer, more full theoretical take on what
exactly imagination is and why. And I believe they're going to explore many things, including
moral imagination. So it's a great pleasure to let them speak to each other. And I can
release you from the terror of this image of me with the light and the darkness. I hope to be
back for the Q&A looking slightly more respectable. But until then, I welcome the chance to
introduce you to Phoebe Tekel and Ian McGill-Crist. And I hope they'll have a great 50 or so
minutes talking between them. And then we'll speak about how to do the Q&A once it starts then.
Thank you all very much. And I'll see you a bit later. Bye.
Ian, is it just me who thinks Jonathan should probably stick to that, that kind of intro in the
dark with the light? I think it's a marvellous improvement. And so often a negation proves to
be extremely positive. I agree. What better introduction to a session on imagination?
Indeed, indeed. So yeah, you carry on. No, no, I'd like you to go far away.
Okay, so I mean, I wanted to just start by by saying that it's not an exaggeration to say that
it's a huge honor to have this conversation. And just to say a big thank you for your work. And you
know, on reading the master and his emissary and also, you know, the two huge tones, which I've got
here on my desk, the two latest books, massive, I've been using it as a laptop stand, but also
really amazing, really fantastic, incredible, but really grateful because as I have been reading
your work, what I have been finding is that there is a resonance to the work that goes beyond just
the content. There's a sort of grammar of meaning. And it kind of reminded me of the conversation
you and Zach were having about, you know, how meaning and value are so inherent in the universe.
And I really had this sense as I read, had this sense as I read your book that there is something
resonating in your work that is much deeper than the the left hemispheric kind of, oh, that's an
interesting fact. And oh, that's a great quote. And that's a fantastic bit of research. There is
something going on at a deeper level, which perhaps also has something to do with identity,
because actually, as a scientist, as somebody who started life in the sciences and felt profoundly
dissatisfied by the kind of scientific route to truth. And and, you know, really felt that the
sciences as a whole were just quite impoverished as a way to understand reality. And as I'm reading
your books, I'm feeling like, you know, you've done me and probably many others a huge favor to
give us a stack of kind of research and backing for what that feeling is the feeling of like, this
can't be all there is, there must be more. And, and, you know, I found my way from science, you
know, how long ago was it about seven years ago, I left the lab at Imperial College London, finally
kind of said, okay, I love science, but there's something more. And actually, if we want to try
and address what's wrong with the world, clearly science and technology don't have the answers,
because we've been trying that route for the last 200 plus years. So there's something else. And,
and, you know, I found my way to imagination, which is obviously the topic of what we're going to
focus on today. And I found it profoundly encouraging that, you know, the final chapter of
your of the first volume of the matter of things is, is imagination, it kind of feels like you went
on a similar path from questioning, you know, science is the only route to science and reason is
the only route to truth. And to questioning, well, what, how are we unmaking the world, you know,
through perception, through some kind of divorce from reality, because clearly, there's
something going on, if we're so out of touch with reality, that we're creating the kind of
destruction with that we see today. And I'll stop in a second. But one of the other things I found
profoundly satisfying was that you also came to the same conclusion, that imagination is not a
faculty and a capacity that takes us away from the world. It's actually one that brings us closer
to reality. And I feel like this is what I've been trying to say for the last kind of four or
five years, when I started the work with moral imagination, I was saying, I think imagination
can get us closer to what really matters and what is real. But I felt like I was sounding like a
crazy person. So that's where I want to start is just a big thank you, really. And I'm curious to
hear, you know, any, any thoughts you've got in response to that?
Oh, that's, that's a very kind introduction. And there were so many things in what you said that I
would love to pick up on. I mean, one, one that just comes to mind is the, the difficulty of
articulating the really important things. And these are the things that don't, therefore, get
adequate treatment into science and in the discourse of reason, both of which I honor hugely, as I
believe you do too. But I don't accept that they are the only ways of reaching reality or even
necessarily the most profound ones. But they make a very, very valuable contribution. And I worry
about the way in which sometimes nowadays, people are too ready to disparage either science or reason.
So yes, but essentially, it's going to defeat language. Because what we're, what we're, what we're
going, what we're talking about when we're thinking about imagination is a resonance between
ourselves and another. And that other isn't necessarily well specified, but it's absolutely
real. It may be just the existence of a phenomenological world around us. It may be a realm in
which the better ways to talk about ourselves are as embodied souls. But there is here something
that language will always bring to the ground with a great thud, which is in no way does justice to
what it is that we're talking about. So I do think that imagination is central. And that's why in a way
I did work towards that at the end of part one and that section on epistemology. And you'll notice
at the end of part two, which is the metaphysics, I have a chapter on the sense of the sacred, which
is also another thing that you, you know, from the very word go, it's going to defeat language. But we
mustn't be put off by that. We must stick to our perceptions. And you can have perceptions and you
can have insights without them necessarily having to be explicit in language. In fact, all the best
ones are not, which is why we have poetry, why we have music, why we have ritual, why we have
narratives, myths, all these things are able to put us in touch with things that importantly need to
remain implicit, unless they're going to be degraded by this, the common coin of everyday
language, which makes everything similar to something else that we already know. So what are we
going to do about the realm where we're going to find things that we don't already know, because
language only deals with the stuff that we do, unless it works against itself. And you may know
that my first book was called Against Criticism. I wrote it in my 20s. And well, anyway, yes, I think
it was, it sold about 400 copies. And after that was unceremoniously remained it. And Faber made a
big loss on it. But the idea there was to argue, there was something wrong with the way in which we
conceived academic criticism, which was to take an entity that was living entirely imaginative,
implicit, embodied, and utterly unique, and turn it into something every day that was general in
nature, decontextualized, disembodied, and from which the magic of imagination had disappeared. But
there was another meaning to the title, which was that criticism could work if it worked against
criticism. In other words, there is a kind of discourse, which is aware of its own limitations and
can incorporate them. There is a kind of science that can be aware of the limitations and therefore
not become hubristic about what it can definitely state. And it's getting into that area where you've
neither rubbish something, nor said, this is our savior, this will give us all the story that will
never be the whole story. Because I believe that whatever it is we're trying to contact is
essentially infinite, and also of infinite importance, which gives us a bit of a thing to
think about during our lifetime, because we have a short period in which to make use of this amazing
gift. So that's what I'd say in the outset. Anyway, how would you, what would you think about that?
There's a lot there.
Good.
So a metaphor, a couple of things. So the metaphor that I can't remember where it is in the book,
but where you talk about the flat, maybe it's in a quote, the flashlight, and the the fertile
dark biochemist, who is talking about how
Erwin Charg F. Yes.
Yes. Yes. And I loved that. So he was saying, you know, I think people think that science is about
illuminating the darkness, but actually science needs needs this fertile darkness. And if you
think that you're illuminating it, it's the it's the kind of flashlight in the in the void, you
know, in the the dark, starry skies and, and, you know, kind of incredible, mystical, ineffable
universe. And you've got this flashlight. And you're saying, well, we found we found it. It's
this room here that we can see. And I thought that was such good, such a great metaphor for what
we what, you know, what what the situation we're in. And then it also made me think about, obviously,
as an imagination, activist, you know, person, you know, obsessive, I've read quite a lot of
Blake, William Blake.
Wonderful. Yes.
You know, his work is huge, hugely, not just inspirational, but like your work, the kind of
work where I read his work. And I think, ah, like, yes, this is this is resonating with what I'm
finding in my practice. And, you know, in the kind of lab of imagination, where we're trying out
practices and working with people and actually seeing some of, you know, what he's talking about
and kind of 17 years, feeling like, yes. And he I think there's a work of his art where he paints
Newton. And, you know, he's painted Isaac Newton with this. And he's like staring at this, at this
piece of paper, which has got like a beautiful graph on it. And then there's like the big chaotic
mystical universe around him. But he's just, you know, he's focusing on this kind of perfect,
you know, perfect equations or, you know, some sort of representation of the world. And so that
that's what comes up for me is that, you know, science is beautiful and elegant. And that the
reason why I chose to study science and I loved it, like I'm sure you did as well. But we think
that we are discovering everything, you know, it's quite often that I hear people say like, oh,
what if we run out of things to discover of the unit? You know, covered so much. And actually,
what if we run out? Wow, what an important reality.
You need imagination to see how little you know, if you don't have any, you think we know it all. But
yes, I'm so glad you brought up Blake, who by the way, you know, we both know that Blake was a
wonderful man, also quite frustrating in some ways. And he did tend to, for his own purposes,
demonize Newton, who, you know, interestingly, was was more fascinated by spiritual inklings of
his than he was by his physics. But it just goes to show that a great mind can, I believe,
encompass both. And many of the great physicists of the last 100 years show that exactly, that they
are able to see into the heart of things matter, and see in there something beyond and more
profound. And that that brings me back to Blake. And I hope this is a fruitful connection. I think
the quote is, to the man of imagination, nature is imagination itself. I think I use that at the
beginning of the chapter. And what's really interesting about that, you can puzzle over it,
what do you mean, the man of imagination, nature is imagination itself. But just before it, I
quote, Richard Feynman, who says that nature has a far, far greater imagination than a human
being, which is really a way of saying, our puny imagination can only get so far in investigating
what there is. But I think that Blake is making a more profound point. And it's a very good point,
which I entirely agree. I think what Blake is saying is that the imagination, you are not
inspecting or something over there. But in imagination, you are already in whatever it is,
so that the subject object divide is actually transcended. So that if you really look into
nature, you are already in nature. And this is what imagination is about. It's about healing
the divide, not in some terribly weird and new edgy way, which means we can stop thinking. But
there is something desperately profound in this idea that in the realm of imagination,
we are actually contacting not a representation, which is what the left hemisphere offers us,
not a drawing, a picture, a graph, a theory, but the actual experience of what it is in which we
finally see sort of through it, but not in the sense of seeing through it to something that's
separate from it beyond, but seeing through the veil of familiarity to its real core.
So I think that that's one thing I'd like to say about imagination is that it brings us to this
place. We're not sort of just making stuff up. We're definitely not making stuff up. In fact,
that's the opposite of what we're doing. We're respectfully, honorably, humbly,
with awe, approaching whatever it is and thereby allowing ourselves for once to get close to it
and into it. I'm so glad you said that. During the work of finding the thread of imagination
pulling on it and starting to unravel a huge amount. What I've been uncovering in my research
and thinking and writing and practice is that imagination, I think, is one of the most deeply
misunderstood things, not non-things, actually, because I think one of the reasons it's been so
good is because it's been so thingified. It's been so, it's like, oh, the imagination,
the thing that is over there that we do sometimes on the weekend and we have it when we are
children, but we don't have it when we're out. And it's this ridiculous kind of, even the language
we use around imagination is completely, it's not just inaccurate, but it leads us into completely
confused realms and creates quite an odd relationship between ourselves and imagination.
And this has been a lot of the work of the last few years is like, actually, before I even get to
do the work of actually testing and experimenting with how can we increase imagination capacity,
which is also a bit of an odd term. Because actually, what I've been finding is that there's
nothing to increase because it's not a volume or a thing. There is just unblocking to be done
from the relationship to it. Yeah, I mean, I can keep going.
We'll do.
I mean, I wish this was like a four hour conversation because it's so good.
I know.
Unpack some of this.
What I just wanted to comment about since we've had a little hiatus is the idea that
imagination is not something that has somehow to be drummed up.
It's something that is there all the time. If our certain way of thinking doesn't get
between us and it. So we use and have to use the left hemisphere as mode of apprehension
in order to be able to function properly. But as I'm always saying, there's nothing wrong with
that. There's something good about that. As long as we can then remember to go beyond it,
to have finished that process of unpacking explicitly and then say, right, it's none of
that, although that has actually helped us on the way. So it's as people say in so many
religious traditions that the seeking of God is not that God is hiding somewhere,
but God is there if only you don't stop yourself from seeing. And that could be said,
I think about the imagination that it is there. And it's by not doing things and by not
espousing certain views and not acting and so on, but allowing, permitting something that it
will come into being for us. Exactly. And one of the things that the participants of the programs
that we're running with moral imagination say is that one of the most valuable things that we're
doing when we go into local councils is giving them planned unplanned time. And to start with,
the kind of managers were like, what do you mean unplanned time? But that's actually what it takes
is just how can we expect exercise imagination when there's no space or time and we're
completely flooded by the need to deliver, to produce, to perform worst conditions for
imagination. Modern day. And those are all expressions of the left hemispheric mentality
that we must have something we can measure. There must always be a utility. There must
be a product to this. Otherwise, this has been completely wasted, even if the time that you
spent was profoundly useful, but didn't actually turn up anything measurable at the time.
So it's all this administration managerial thinking that, in my view, is mushrooming in the
world. I mean, so fast that I think there's a very palpable difference between now and five years
ago. I mean, it was bad all the time I was growing up. I complained about it in the 70s and the 80s,
but I hadn't seen anything till you get to 2023. And I think this is partly to do with machines,
which of course have no imagination, have no understanding of context, individuality,
embodiedness, feeling the spiritual, anything, but are following simple left hemisphere rules.
So it's much worse. It's much worse than talking to an administrator is having to deal with a machine.
And now most of the time when you want to do anything, you have to interface with the machine.
So that is the death of imagination. And I'm sure you know, Paul Kings North uses the term
the machine as I think is a perfectly good way of talking about what I mean by the left hemisphere.
All I'd say is that it's bigger than the machine in the machine is an expression of this left
hemisphere mentality. But the left hemisphere mentality is behind the machine and behind
many other things. So for example, we we look at various predicaments, the obviously the destruction
of the planet, the the catastrophic changes in climate, all of these things. And we see them
as something either bad luck or bad planning or something we did wrong. And we look at other
things like the growing disparity, not the diminishing disparity between the unimaginably
rich and the poor. And we think, well, we must have got a problem here. And what did we do?
And there's all these different problems. What's the solution? And the answer is,
they're not problems, but in dual Heinz terms, their predicaments that we have brought about
by a certain way of thinking, which leads inexorably to each of these, and to a de spiritualized,
desacralized sense of the world in which we live.
Yes. So, so I'm just holding in mind, you know, there's a couple of things I'd like to cover
in this conversation. So I'm just following the thread of where it's going, but I will pull
us into a couple of things. I'd really like to say, I'd love to spend some time on the brain
and imagination neuroscience, because that's something that, you know, I've done a lot of
thinking and research around. And and would love to talk to you about, you know, linking it with
the right, right and left hemisphere, and also talking about moral imagination, which was my
way into imagination. We must talk about both of those. Yes. Yes. I didn't just want to have,
you know, hat tip to chat GPT, because you mentioned, you know, machines don't have imagination,
and I'm sure that it's on everybody's mind is, you know, right now, there is a lot of talk about
how chat GPT seems to have imagination. You know, it's, it's kind of churning out poems and
rap battles and, you know, it seems to be creative, even though it's, you know, through a mimicry of
all the information, you know, kind of emergent property of all the information it's gathering
and kind of fairing off. But, you know, do you want to say anything about? Oh, gosh, I do. Yes.
Because, I mean, I want to say that I can't intellectually completely rule out that at some
point, some creation of ours might might achieve a kind of consciousness. I just can't rule that
out partly because I believe the consciousness is the original primary stuff of the cosmos,
in any case. But what you mean there, and what I mean by imagination is not what this is doing,
what it is doing is exactly what an imaginary person doesn't do, which is do a very quick,
which of course, a human being couldn't do in this speed, what machines do is just do things very
fast is to sort of do a trolley dash around Wikipedia and come up with an answer. And it
will even make stuff up and be quite sure that it's right because it sees a pattern and jumps
to conclusions, which is what the left hemisphere does. And really, this is no different from
something that existed decades ago. I can't remember the name of the man, but basically what he did
was he fed all of Bach's works into a computer, and then set some sort of, you know, let the
computer look at these things and then imitate a work of Bach. But none of these works has anything
like the power of Bach. And Bach's very first composition, when he was 19 years old, is already
one of the most staggering pieces of musical writing in history. And it wasn't derived from
anywhere. So we're looking at things that we must be careful, you know, because a machine can be made
by human ingenuity to simulate almost anything. I mean, there's no limit to how far you can help
it simulate. The question is, is it simulating something, or is it actually achieving it? And
so far, there's no evidence that it's achieving it. And is there also something about, you know,
it's almost like a left hemisphere response to art or to the sacred. It's like, oh, but, you know,
we could just churn out, you know, does the sacredness of art become affected if it's something
that's being churned out through random, you know, reorganization of, you know, fact and
existing art? I mean, that I think we could talk for the whole hour just about this. I did just
you know, to touch on it. It's relevant. Well, really, it's really the logical conclusion
of the Industrial Revolution, which was to take things that took a lot of craftsmanship and
will, you know, occurred in nature, and try and imitate them and then produce thousands of them
very, very fast. It's exactly what was going on already in the early part of the 19th century.
It's just been heightened to another level of technological sophistication. But it's not
going to produce, it's never going to produce works that have profound human meaning, because you
have to have a body, emotions, the sense of relationship, the knowledge that you're going to
die to have suffered, and to be aware of the limitations to what it is that you can experience.
And I just think this is, this can be fed by a clever IT expert into a computer that seems to
say those things, but it can't actually do them. So back to, imagine it, the organic.
I said at the beginning that I felt it was one of the most deeply misunderstood,
and we thought about the signifying of imagination. I was in your chapter 19 of your book, you talk
about how, I guess the parallel is that many people, when they think of imagination, think of
fantasy, think of daydreaming. And this is often what I get when I talk to people about what I
do. It's like, oh, yeah, we need more imagination, we need more fiction, we need more creativity.
Another big misconception I've been fighting is that people think that my work is all about the
future. It's not about the future. It's not about time. In fact, I actually think in the imaginative,
imaginal realm, there is no time. It's not a time-bound place. And so that's been quite an
interesting thing to unpack, is that people immediately think that what I'm doing is helping
people imagine the future, when actually the work of moral imaginations is really about
shifting perspective and unblocking and seeing what is there. So it's not, we're not trying to
get people to think about the future. You're about, were you about to come in then?
No, it's very interesting because, I mean, you know that you sent me some things to look at
about an hour before this, and I therefore didn't have time to look at them in any depth.
But I was interested by your three pillars, which would seem on the face of it, to suggest that you
are interested in the past and the future, as well as our relationships with the natural world.
I like that, actually, because I think that one thing we've lost is the sense that we are,
it's part of our atomistic way of thinking. We are part of a flow which includes the past and
includes the future. And our ancestors and any of our offspring are already present in our lives
in some way. And we owe them each a moral obligation. We have a moral obligation to those who
worked hard, sacrificed, died to produce the things that we take for granted. And all the
wisdom that they stored up, which is now just being trashed and thrown out of the window.
And we have a moral obligation, a very big one, to those that come after us, not to
carry on defiling and destroying what is their birthright. So I like that. But maybe what you're
saying is that in the realm of imagination, there is no time. I wouldn't know, really,
whether it was or not. But I think that when you're really in the realm of imagination,
you're not aware of time. You're not aware of time passing. So that when you make contact,
after all imagination, it's not only not a thing. It's a relationship. And that relationship is
reverberative. So something is going on that is bringing something into being. And this is why
you have to do the kind of one foot in either camp of saying, it's not just something I make up,
but it's not something just out there given. It's something that comes into being that is utterly
real. An aspect of what it is is revealed in the relationship with my imagination.
And so we're dealing there with something that is the only hope we have of getting into reality.
Because if you just look at Wordsworth and Coleridge, they're the greatest
philosophical writers on imagination in any language, I believe. But I mean, what they were
saying is that when we think we see something, we look at the mountain and we just see a lump
of rock and so on. But it's only when we use our imagination that we see into it. And in doing
so, we don't see something that's other than a lump of rock. We see what a lump of rock is,
that lump of rock is, by the way, not any, that lump of rock is for the first time. And this
reminds me of the Zen master Dogen in the 12th century, who said, when I sought enlightenment,
the mountains were just mountains and the rivers were just rivers. When I was in the
process of seeking enlightenment, the mountains were no longer mountains, the rivers were no
longer rivers. When I achieved enlightenment, the mountains were mountains and the rivers
were rivers. And I think that's the point is we're not putting something in place of something.
We're allowing the real entity for the first time to become real in this world. And we each,
to blink to moral imagination, the reason I believe that attention is moral is because the
way we attend changes what it is we find. And what we find is part of the imaginative world,
that is the only thing that is real. And so we are actually creating something,
either something terrible or something good by what we do. And that means that we each bear
the burden of a certain kind of responsibility for what we do.
Mm. Lake talks about twofold vision, which I think is relevant here. And I love the,
you know, his couplets of, Oh, God, may, may us keep from single vision, Newton's sleep.
And, you know, I love it because it, you know, what he talked about was actually the view of
the world is just material. That's Newton's sleep, you know, falling you into a sleep away from
reality, which you actually feel through twofold vision, meaning one eye and, you know,
looking and seeing what is, but the other eye, having this internal mind's eye of imagination,
and that is the twofold vision of what is real. And we've been lulled into a sleep, you know, by,
he clearly has an issue in Newton, but he also depicts Newton as like a beautiful,
healthy guy. So I don't feel the only fact, but for Newton, it's not only him. And as you say,
he also had a great interest in the mystical and the mysterious. I loved that, that kind of, you
know, this is lulling us into a dangerous sleep, which we might not wake up from before it's too
late. And that's why it's so urgent and so existential, actually, because actually we're
asleep at the wheel, and we're heading towards a cliff. And I completely agree.
Yeah. And I did, but imagination can wake us up.
It needs to, because as I say in one of the books, I don't know, that we're like some
nambulist wandering towards the abyss, humming a happy tune as we go. And that's the left
hemisphere. It doesn't see what's happening. And yet it thinks all is fine, because I know
and I'm in control. So we need to see, I think Blake also said that, you know,
that the man of imagination sees not with the eye, but through the eye. And again,
it gives this idea of a depth to what one's seeing. But what one shouldn't think is that what one sees
through the eye is some hidden reality behind what it is. One sees into the depths of things,
as Wordsworth said. This is a very, very important idea that he, in fact, he talks about
lulling our intellectual, Wordsworth talks about in the Tentonabula, about lulling our
intellectual faculties asleep, so that the, that we can see into the depths of things.
So there's a kind of sleep of reason, which is either what Goya thought was terrible,
and I know what he was talking about, because it's happening in our own time, when people
just decide that they're going to dispense with reason, because it doesn't accord with what they
want to believe. So they'll just believe it anyway. And so there is a sleep of reason,
but there's sometimes a need to silence the hemisphere that does all the processing of
language, so that the other hemisphere, the right hemisphere, can for once see the whole.
Which is actually what happens during sleep, which gives rise to dreams,
isn't it? The kind of dominant, I've been, my research has led me to the default mode network,
which I don't know if that is left hemispheric, dominant network, because it seems to be the
seat of rationality, reason, also the sense of self. When we're born, we don't have a default
mode network. So as babies, we don't have memories, because the default mode network is what gives us
that autobiographical sense of self. But it's also what constrains the imagination. So as children,
we have imaginary friends, and those imaginary friends are not close our eyes, and somewhere
over there, they're here with us. People see children talking to their imaginary friend,
because it's there. And so interesting that the default mode network becomes stronger and stronger
into adulthood. And I think it was either Blake, or somebody writing about Blake,
talked about how compared adulthood to the falling out of Eden, the kind of innocent
childlike wonder and awe and imagination that we have. And then as we older, there's a kind of
divorce from that and the strengthening of these networks and also our culture and society
that is constantly strengthening the neural pathways of reason, of rationality, of modelling,
predicting, controlling. And it's interesting that often when people go through our workshops,
they talk about rekindling or reconnecting with a kind of inner sense of childlike wonder.
Someone's even said, I feel like I've discovered the five-year-old that was kind of asleep inside
me, which sounds a bit contrived or a bit silly. But there's something interesting going on,
that people are finding a reconnection to a childlike wonder, which has a huge pain,
that they feel a great sense of grief that that's been lost. And this is all connected,
your work of the kind of dominant rationality reason. Anyway, that's a jumble of thoughts.
No, no. Yes.
As that.
Well, no. Of course, there are different kinds of imagination. There's the imagination
of a Michelangelo or Bach, and there's the imagination of a thoughtful, lively five-year-old.
And in a way, there's a sort of parallel to the way in which there is a kind of
knowing which gets in the way of unknowing. It's not the same as the unknowing you have
when you're ignorant and still have to learn. It's the unknowing that, in fact,
goes beyond knowing when you know enough to know that you have to practice unknowing.
Similarly, there's a kind of innocence a child has, which is, as it were, a gift that they have.
But there is a kind of innocence that a saint has that comes the other side of experience
and is greater than either the innocence or experience. And so I would say that there is
a kind of sense of imagination. The imagination can grow. It doesn't have to be stunted by life.
But the processes whereby we educate people can certainly contribute to a process of
making them feel small and making them feel silly if they confess to imaginative ideas,
such as an imaginative friend and then somebody says, now, don't be so silly,
there isn't really anyone there. And of course, this links to bigger topics like
amongst other people, poor old Dawkins, he's become like Newton for Blake, but he just keeps on
saying these things. He sort of believes it's terrible. He's his own worst friend. How dare
people indoctrinate children into these ideas of a spiritual realm and a divine realm as well?
They never think of this if they weren't indoctrinated into it. But actually, there's a lot
of research, some of which I quote in that book, which shows that children naturally are aware
of things beyond what we call the realm of the five senses. But this is kind of
drummed out of them by being told it's wrong and humiliating them. And then they go, oh, well,
and they're lucky if they can then reconnect with it. And of course, what in my experience
certainly helps to reconnect one with that is the greatness of art in all its various forms.
And the experience of what everyone likes to call it religious or spiritual life.
And nature. And nature is core to all of this. Yes, absolutely. Yes.
So into moral imagination, because I did this is really, you know, imagination is absolutely
fascinating. And it's, to me, it's, you know, the most convincing route towards
getting us out of this mess, you know, existential crisis, as many people do in their 20s, and
really felt like, you know, what are we doing to the world? And that crisis has essentially led
me to imagination. But through that crisis, you know, the question I was really asking was like,
how is it that we're making such immoral decisions? How is it that we are making decisions that
are so self-serving, so greedy? You know, what is that about? How does that come about? So I
became really fascinated by morality and ethics, you know, and thinking probably with a hangover of
my scientific, you know, brain thinking, okay, so the problem is a lack of morality or, you know,
a lack of the sacred or some sort of death of what is good, beautiful, and true. So how,
what can we do about that? Started reading about morality and didn't find a lot of it very interesting.
And then came across, you know, came across, you know, the thing I was thinking about was that
actually, the way that we've approached morality in the West has a lot of parallels to the way
that we approached science, that it's very much tangled up in reason, in rationality, and, you
know, the kind of enlightenment breeds of morality, like utilitarianism or Kantianism,
feel like they're very much left brain schools of morality and thought. And, you know, Kantianism
suffers from extreme abstraction, utilitarianism suffers from extreme reductionism. And so I
started wondering what would morality with a kind of upswell of imagination, like where could
those two things come together? And I think it's interesting that a lot of Western morality is
based on, you know, this is a very simple model that Mark Johnson talks about, the kind of moral
moral folklore, so a very basic model of the mind having, you know, four four components,
you could think of it as perception, will, you know, the mental realm, it's got for let's say
it's got for these four members, perception, reason, passion and will. And the way this works is,
you know, perception receives sense impressions from the body, passes them to reason or passion.
And these two things affect our will. And passions become active through bodily experience,
you know, either directly through perception or through memory. Reason receives this information
and calculates and analyzes sense data and passes it to the will. And, you know, basically it's up
to the will to decide how to act based on these two influences. And so, you know, as I said reason
calculates passion, exerts force on the will. And we think of passion as kind of unpredictable,
difficult to control. And reason, you know, exerts force on the will that the will will can
sometimes resist reason. And it can't resist, you know, it can sometimes resist the force of
passion. So there's something here about, you know, that the model of morality being the ability to
use reason to make the right decision and to resist the force of passion. And we also think of
animals as lacking reason. And so humans being these, you know, like a reason, a rational animal
or a reasonable animal. But the role of imagination doesn't play any role here at all. And to be a
moral, to be moral in this folk model of morality is to exert reason and is to resist
the force of passion. Are you with me on this or, you know, is there anything to?
No, I am. I am broadly with you. What I'm thinking though here is that, as you're well aware,
there are different schools of thought about morality and very different approaches to religion
and the religious life. And like everything else, the left hemisphere and the right hemisphere have
different takes on them. And what you're pointing to, what joins together all these various things,
the excesses of capitalism, of rationalism, of mechanism and so on, is that these are
expressions of the will for power, which is essentially the only value, as I've said before
on previous occasions, the only value that really drives the left hemisphere, it's evolved to be
the one that manipulates. And that leaves all the other values that are to you and me, and I think
to all human beings, so important and so neglected, it leaves them out of the picture and out of the
calculation. And I would say that, you know, for all that was a bit autistic and hyper-rationalistic
in some ways, and he did say, you know, the two things that film you with awe, the starry vault
above me and the moral law within me. So, I mean, he was in awe of the fact that there was a morality
at all. And indeed, he thought there must be a God because there was morality. He didn't think
there must be morality because there was a God. So, he thought that this moral thing was actually
very important and intuitive, although his particular approach to it, I slightly differ from.
But one of the things that one now sees in the way we talk about morality is exactly what you
were getting at, that it seems to be about a logical process that will result in the utility
and maximize utility. And I don't want to recap on this because I think I talked about it probably.
You did. Yeah, I think you covered it with that conversation.
Exactly, exactly. But there is a huge problem with this approach and that what it rules out,
as you also are hinting, is the depth and importance of our intuitive imagination,
which helps us to be human. And I think we're just becoming less than human because of the
assault on all sides on intuition and imagination and the substitution of an incredibly mediocre
thing, which is a rationalizing system. And I'm not saying that there is no virtue in having such
a way of thinking at certain stages in any kind of process. You need it. I keep reiterating that
because I don't want to fall into this thing. People think, oh yeah, the right hemisphere is all
creative and wonderful and the left hemisphere is this bogeyman. Left hemisphere is very, very useful,
but it doesn't know its own limitations. And that is the problem we now find ourselves in.
So in a way, I feel rather like, I've just read actually, and very much admire
Dougalde Hein's latest book. He just came and visited on the day that it came out a week or
two ago. And we were in conversation the week after, Dougalde and I. Wonderful. And I don't
have much time these days for reading, but I started reading and thought, I think I'm going
to have to finish this. And I thought it was brilliant. But really what he's saying is,
you know, very much this thing that just aren't a, you know, a sort of wicked network of this
problem and that problem and the other problem. But there is a whole way of thinking that underlies
very clearly the whole package. And it's no good just addressing it at the top level. That would
be like putting a sticking plaster on a cancer. You've covered it, but it's going to keep growing.
What we have to do is to emphasize that the only way out of this is to rethink our moral
stance. And what I mean by that is to embrace above all a degree of humility about what it is
that we as humans can do to therefore listen to the wisdom that comes through silence and through
traditions and through art and through nature, if you attend to it. And to express compassion
and moderation in the way in which we try to deal with these, I don't mean moderation in the sense of,
you know, averaging everything out. But I mean, not supposing that this one thing, if we just do
this, we'll answer everything and being extreme about it. We have to know that there are people
who have differing angles on this and they can contribute something. And so the work you're
doing, which is to liberate people's imaginations from whatever it is that they're constantly being
told they have to believe, is wonderful because it will bring different facets of truth to life.
Thank you. I mean, a really important part of the work is also the connection to what matters,
you know, this moral imagination. The way I see that is that rather than following moral laws and
rules that can actually be massively manipulated, religion can be wonderful. It can also be very
harmful. Absolutely. Looking to kind of top down morality and morality has become a really dirty
word, you know, but a lot of people have raised their eyebrows at the name of moral imaginations
and what we're doing. And yet we're trying to reclaim that and say, actually, what we need,
what everybody needs is to, is to kind of build a muscle of moral imagination and metaphor and
the ability to really connect with what you know matters and is beautiful and good and true and
not wait to be told that or to follow rules or to try and work out what the right law or rule or
principle is. But to get this kind of coming alive through the imagination, through, you know,
through the kind of faculties that we're talking about, the kind of right hemispheric, intuitive,
imaginative capacities to develop that compass of what is right and wrong and what are we not
going to let happen? Does that, does that make sense? There's a kind of what I'm trying to do is
knit them together. I love that. I love that. And I think you walk to wear the superciliousness of
these people who raise an eyebrow and you talk about morality as a badge of pride. It shows that
you're really onto something important because nowadays everything that's really important
is being attacked and destroyed because it demands of some degree of self-restraint.
It demands that we are aware of the limitations and boundaries in things.
We can't just have everything we want and have it now. We need actually to exercise some
virtuous restraint on how we behave and how we think and without it we're utterly lost.
And it comes from an intuitive level. What really interests me is that there's a couple of cases
I refer to in the book in which scientists who completely convinced of course that human beings
are naturally competitive, self-interested, competitive and self-interested, egotistical
and so on, set up experiments to show this and we're honest enough to report that the answer
showed the exact opposite. That people aren't normally naturally and you see this in children
but they don't have to be taught it unless there's something very wrong with them.
I know but generally speaking you see this that they love to help one another. They love to be
cooperative. We are naturally generous and it's further thinking and ratiosination that leads us
to be greedy and self-seeking and speak for our own interests rather than others.
Once again it's the case of there not being a predicament. How on earth do we reverse the way
we are? However, it's actually there. It's all there ready if you can just tear down the edifice
that's been built in front of it if you see what I mean. And the systemic, we haven't really talked
much about the systemic forces that keep us and that really encouraged the kind of qualities
let's do so. Capitalism. Capitalism. I didn't see capitalism mentioned so much explicitly in
your book but I'd be really curious to hear where the place for the kind of systemic critique of
where we find ourselves is. Well I suppose the thing about capitalism is that in a
in a word it's a product of the left hemisphere. However people will say well what would you like
to put in its place and I certainly wouldn't want to put communism in its place. But there are other
alternatives we could talk about based on it would take that to reach a kind of more communitarian
way of living would require probably some disaster I hope doesn't occur but which would
sufficiently disrupt the structures we have now and people would be thrown back on having to help
one another trust one another work together and so on because at the moment we've become lazy.
So go back to capitalism. I think that there are ways of thinking of capitalism in which it's
tempered by other things and so anything that is dogmatic is going to be inhuman and damaging
and so whatever system you come up with it needs to be tempered it needs to be qualified whatever
it is it's going to have to have those and that's not wrong that's just showing that you're taking
into account various different things. But I don't talk about it largely because I'm not myself
particularly involved in political thinking and I don't want to I'm more interested in the things
behind politics than in the politics themselves. I didn't want to start a big conversation about
that which would have been a whole other book one which I'm absolutely not equipped to write.
So yeah. It is an interesting question what could you know imagining to imagine what is a
right hemispheric system if capitalism is created by the left hemisphere what and I thought this
quite often as I've read your work is you know we live in a society dominated by the left hemisphere
in doctrine and it's too far and it needs to swing back but what would a society look like
if it had if it was kind of swung too far the other way you know just to.
Yes I mean if it swung too far the other way I'm often asked so what would a right hemisphere
society look like and I say well very moderate because the thing about the right hemisphere is
that it understands the need for the left hemisphere's contribution and in the story of
the master and the emissary the master appointed the emissary it's just the emissary now thinks
it's the master that's the problem so there isn't really sorry what we're talking about there
the right hemispheric system what would that look like and you know yes what would it look
like yes yes but and we have had periods in history I think where they're not what we would
probably suggest to ourselves now but we're obviously massively creative periods in which
society flourished in the west but they were fairly short-lived and the thing is that every
civilization is fairly short-lived and I can't remember the name of the guy now but
early 20th century writer who looked at 30 past civilizations and reckoned that I mean of course
it's not scientific to say when does it begin and when does it end but a reasonable gestalt was
that they tended to come up and then fade over about three to four hundred years that seems to be
the normal pattern and one way of thinking about that is in the terms of William Ophuls
I can never remember whether he's William or Patrick one this is real name the other is his
pseudonym not a good pseudonym but Ophuls ophu ls who wrote em in moderate greatness which is a
quote from Gibbon but effectively it's a very short book only 80 pages long all of you go out and buy
it after this doesn't cost anything and or much and and he gives us six reasons why civilizations
always undermine themselves by overreaching themselves in various ways and one way of thinking
of that is that this self-satisfying thing of the left hemisphere takes over but one fairly I think
we would all resonate with this one image he has is that civilizations tend to go through phases
in the first phase they require enormous levels of mutual trust valour self-sacrifice courage
hard work you know honor the building something valuable and then when that's been built I think
where the next wave comes along and they can build on top of that and they produce works of science
they produce great works of art they they elaborate on top of this and then the the next wave which
is the final wave comes along where they are basically now soft weak selfish lack self-discipline
think that they're entitled to everything on a plate because they're born and I believe this is
the one we're ridden now we believe that somehow it's it's our right to carry on living in a totally
absurd way which is destroying everything we value thank you for answering that and I know
it seems as if we diverged from imagination but I think a lot of what really brings people's
imaginations alive at the moment is the question of what could an alternative look like and and
also is the unimaginable you know I I that that brings me a lot of hope actually the idea that
all big social change or you know societal change was always unimaginable before it happened
and the you know 50 years world we're living in now was completely unimaginable and so when people
say where there is a there is an air of hopelessness and and kind of despair and you know a darkness
around you know what's coming next there is a cliff edge there is there is so I find it very
encouraging to hear you kind of gesture at the unimaginable alternative well one of the points
that maybe we need to start winding up our bit and hand over but one of the things in
in Dougal's book is this idea that the reason we're so despairing about what's coming
is that we think too narrowly about ourselves and we and the life that we are living now
probably won't exist in the future and it didn't exist in the past either but some creatures will
live with any luck I imagine substantial numbers of human beings will live and the world will begin
to heal and regenerate and what I hope is that those human beings will be will have their eyes
opened to things that we're now blinded to by being too comfortable and too convinced that we
know it all and that that will lead them to to a kind humane courageous working together
in which people you know are bound together by the ties that really make life worth living
and and and it will be in smaller communities than the ones we have now I mean it's not a human
faculty to be able to understand very large numbers and especially not very large numbers of people
is it three million or is it three billion or three trillion we just don't know but you know
we're we're we're famously fitted to knowing about 150 people that makes sense and so I think
one of the problems is we've simply agglomerated everything and that's been partly due to
technology and partly due to capitalism anyway maybe that's where we is that where we begin to
we'd like to have another one of these great I hope it's just a first thank you so thank you very
much Phoebe thank you thank you both Phoebe and Ian um that was really really interesting and I
thoroughly enjoyed the whole arc of the conversation so I'm looking forward to hearing
the various questions that have that will be coming through shortly and I should say that
Jonathan has encountered further difficulties with the power where he is so I'll be conveying the
questions and and moderating this next part so I'm actually going to start by asking the question
that Jonathan had hoped to ask if he were able to do it out loud so I'm just going to read that
out for you and you have to imagine Jonathan's Scottish accent which I unfortunately am not
capable of reproducing and nor would you want me to um so Jonathan wrote and he put this in the chat
as well but you'll have to scroll up a bit to see it um Ian often suggests that the left
atmosphere is power seeking in some sense and both Phoebe and Ian suggest imagination may be
critical to wake ourselves up to our predicament and be some part of the solution and yet power
in some shape or form will always be part of reality so what then can we say about the
relationship between imagination and power and in particular what might it mean to imagine power
is something wisely wielded in a way that does not sound naive or wishful thinking so I think
it's actually quite good as a follow-up to the kind of systemic discussion that you were just
having at the end yes so either of you well um do you want to go first Ian okay um before saying
anything I see a number of people want to know about Duke Gould Hein's book it's called at work
in the ruins um and it has a very long subtitle which is so long it's almost comical and I can't
remember it um power you see there's a paradox that the more we seek power the less we really
have any control or influence over what happens things control us the power seeking mentality
is always frustrated always unhappy always unfulfilled and one sees this I have seen it
as a psychiatrist very often but one sees if one looks around there is and this is often said by
people in particularly eastern traditions that what we're talking about is not a kind of helplessness
but a kind of affirming acknowledgement of one's vulnerability of the fact that there are limitations
and that in all humility and honesty and with or one puts oneself open to something bigger than
oneself and that in doing that one finds a new direction one finds that one is no longer
frustrating oneself one finds a freedom and autonomy that by seeking freedom and autonomy
and that aggressive left hemisphere way we just destroy it I mean there never has been a period
in in in the West when freedom has been more in jeopardy than it is now unless one says well
what about the Soviet era and the Nazi era but we're going back into one of these areas right
now because of a strident un nuanced naive view about freedom and and those sort of things so
that's what I'd say is that I don't think power is this simple thing about controlling others
it's about letting go of control in order to be filled with a spiritual sense of things to be
one with the world and therefore to to to be empowered by it I mean it is an empowering
experience I can say from my own poor poor experience that I find it such yeah thank you
for that Ian I think what I was struck by is that I I worry that we thingify power like we
thingify imagination like and power is not a thing that we try you know that we're trying
to get and grab and you know achieve there's no end to it it's a kind as you say Ian it's a kind of
bottomless pit of like that you can never really reach the end of it I also you know another thing
that comes to mind is that I I think you know the systems thinking which I think is very right
hemisphere and the kind of systems thinking view on power is not like the physics kind of
cause and effect like you know I push the world I push someone and they fall you know right that
kind of mechanistic view on the world of power so you know that kind of model would mean you know
if the way power is exerted is through kind of pushing on the world and things happening
then the way to kind of get power is to barricade yourself from being pushed and to kind of get
more and more powerful but actually we know through you know through systems thinking through
looking at how nature works that it doesn't work like that it's not the only way it works you know
power can also be not zero sum there can be win-win there can be different kinds of power
where you win and I win and we and you know everything there's a kind of mutual flourishing
or a kind of a different kind of power that doesn't need to mean that other people get pushed down
we could all be powerful so I wonder if that's you know a different kind of power
I love that and I can't resist coming back to it thank you very much because the thing about
a complex system and all living things and all living communities and environments are complex
is that they they don't have this efficient causation at the back of them that pushes things
forward instead there is as much bottom down as top up causation if you'd like to think of it in
those ways but there are also different kinds of causes we've selected one of Aristotle's four
causes the efficient cause and think that is what causation is but in fact people's behavior is caused
also by aspirations towards certain things by being drawn effortlessly towards something that is
good beautiful and true what he called a final cause and there are also formal causes which
are becoming important in both biology and physics where is the information about form
in that dna code actually there must be form fields as physics suggests so in biology and this is
now entering into the mainstream it was a bit fringe but it's now entering into the mainstream
so there are other ways of thinking about how things are caused which are in the round and
are beautiful and attractive not being pushed from behind yeah yeah botanical power botanical
power like it all right well let's um ask stewart cambell to ask the next question so stewart if
you can i will ask you unmute you here and if you can ask your question out loud please yeah
thanks lee so um i have a bit of a concern with the term imagination or idea of imagination
it's kind of commonly conceived and that is that human beings can imagine quite wildly and quite
disconnectedly from reality so my interest is in getting a clear sense of how you discern
imagination and maybe as differentiated from from what um in other words how do we
temper imagination or have imagination we relate fittingly to reality i mean we could
say that the left hemisphere imagines itself the master so i if you get the tension that i'm trying
to talk speak to here i'd love to hear what you have to say i certainly do see what you're talking
about and of course imagination is not just some kind of um faulty thinking and i'm tempted to
refer to the saying by their fruits you shall know them that in a way you you know imagination
when you experience it and you know when you find it in others that it is not a fantasy of theirs
um imagination can include dark things but its general trend is towards life and vivification
whereas the appropriation of masterhood by the left hemisphere is a kind of blow for death if
you like for for mechanism so there isn't of course unfortunately a way we can measure in any
sense imagination and of course we can't image it on a on a on a wretched pet scan or anything like
that we're talking about something which is profoundly and only experiential and so um
imagination can um lead people astray this this is right but i think it's rather like being in the
groove that you know when your imagination is taking you somewhere good if you have ever had
which i only very occasionally have had the experience of really writing a poem rather than
just versifying you kind of know when something is happening through you and i think that imagination
is like that it's rather like playing music well singing well or dancing well that's the best i can
say it's completely won't stand up in a court of law but it's it's the best i can do help me out
phoebe i'm sure you've got something better to say well i i've got an easy out which is moral
imagination obviously because it you know what i like to say is um that you know imagination
gave rise to nuclear weapons you know imagination is not it's not but it's not necessarily
positive but i resonate with what you're saying ian which is that there is you know we're talking
about a kind of opening the doors of perception and allowing the sacred to flow through and
you know imagination being the kind of seeing through and allowing you know that real sense of
connection to the world or experience of reality whereas what i think stewart you were talking
about is more kind of almost like active imagination actively imagining things and and
obviously lead to bad things and good things and a kind of directed imagination i i don't think that
stands up in a court of law either but i i think i think it's a good question i think there's also
something about not being just a head you know head-based thing it's also heart it's also embodied
and it's it's throughout and how do we bring alive the imagination that that you know that
is not just using using the neurons of the head but the neurons of the gut and the heart and
there's so much more there um hope that yeah i love that yeah and i i think also well maybe we've
had enough on this question but um you know um when people want to be imaginative and i'm sure you
this is nothing to do with anything you do but you know they say come on let's have a a brainstorming
session you know and my bet noir is the brainstorming session doesn't matter how crazy it is we put
it on the board and so on and let it all hang out this is not actually how creativity works and i
make a big distinction i have a whole chapter separate to the imagination we're on creativity
because i'm talking really about how the brain it can be helped in this and it is nothing to do with
this um simply letting it all hang out that that is not likely to end up with anything very useful
and when you look at people who are truly creative they operate in a completely different way from
the person who is trying to be creative if you're not creative then don't worry you're not a creative
person for now maybe later you will be but right now you're not a creative person but don't try to
be creative because it's counterproductive do you not try i feel like that's a kind of yoda
there's a yoda quote there don't try just do um oh right okay
my life has been yoda yoda poor i'm afraid but there we are
sorry for the introduction there i was just going to say it actually is quite a good
segue into the next question which is from uh rosalind marie so i've just um
unmuted you rosalind if you'd like to ask your question live please go ahead
thank you um yeah i was just interested in well you know william blake is great but he passed away
in 1827 so i'm just kind of wondering if you can speak to contemporary art ideas and imagination
i mean there's a whole world in contemporary art that touches on all the things you're speaking
about it's a huge area um at a lot of talks like this and many others maybe that come from a literature
side often you're getting conversation that relates to artists that are very long ago
and not about what's going on now and this is a huge area which already is exploring what you're
talking about so i'm just all of the things you're talking about but kind of gets left out of the
conversation so i'm just wondering is there any space within that that influences your work
but from a much more contemporary perspective
who is that aimed at both of us um yeah that'd be great you're still there i'd like i would
also love to hear you know the artists you the really you know i feel like there are some artists
that perhaps you're holding um dear to imagination if there's any that you'd like to name before i
yeah speak about before we speak about our own
i would you know i wouldn't because there's so many artists from so many cultures that if
i started to even dig into specific artists specific approaches um you know and even that
brings me back to this question another aspect of the question which tonight and often this idea of
we like there is no one single we we is a conglomerate so i'm kind of interested in the positioning
of us we because we are not and so even when we say we as a group of people
act in this way with imagination that's not true because there's a whole group of people
who are maybe artists or naturally creative or have invested a huge amount of time in a
particular practice of art and art understanding and learning creativity and imagination you know
developing that that are not operating in that way and then there are people in other cultures
that don't operate in that way so i think i wouldn't like to pick specific people because
there's so much rising and so many people i'd just be interested in if you had anything from a more
contemporary place that you were coming with yourselves so however you don't want to answer
the question but you're asking us to answer it that's absolutely fine and the reason that Blake
came up i think it's fair i don't think that's fair because no no i'm not okay that's not a fair
response scene okay that's not fair because well it sounds like it i'm just asking those contemporary
art influence your thought and practice in this area maybe there that's a better way the reason
the reason that Blake came up i think was twofold one is that he's a he's very unusual in that he
writes about imagination all the time he not only uses imagination but he rather unusually writes
about it most great poets don't words was perhaps was another um and possibly coverage but it's not
very common i mean the other is that he is a towering genius i mean he nobody like him in the
history of of literature he's utterly unique and incredibly important and the fact that he died in
1827 has no nothing whatever to do with it if he died in 1827 bc he would be worth exactly as much
as if you were alive now because as Phoebe says there is no time in the realm of true imagination
these are timeless words timeless truth but if you ask me to say what poets do i like what painters
do i like and so on i i can say that i mean one of the things that often happens when i'm giving a
talk is that i have a painting behind me by Ross Love Day which i think is a perfect expression
of the modern imagination and that it is it is a kind of absolutely non-pindownable landscape
and it's also a fantastic abstract that seems to mean something beyond whatever landscape is
being hinted at so that would be an example of modern work which is deeply imaginative and it's
not trying to um give me a message i mean it's death to a work about when it's got a message
and there's a little plot behind what the artist was trying to do with you know or what the composer
really meant well no great art speaks to itself and is not trying to persuade you of anything
that's what i say but apologies if i offended the the question i i was being a bit frivolous
and you have to take that as part of the game anyway um over to you Phoebe um so rather than
naming um specific artists or musicians but i might end up doing that but i think what the
question um what what it brought up for me which i think is a very relevant and interesting one
is the kind of movement ecology around imagination you know what who who who's there and i speak
about something um called imagination justice which is actually who gets to imagine you know
where is the imagination capital in the world like at the moment it's being hoarded by usually kind
of tech CEOs in Silicon Valley who all look and sound a certain way and also have a lot of money
you know and there's a there's a thing around who gets to imagine um which is also not just
um who gets to imagine but whose imaginations get to then translate into you know affecting and
creating and uh worlding you know this concept of worlding from um i think from feminist critical
theory is about how some people get you know it get to create the world um you know and and as um
now i'm thinking i'm going to forget who who said this but it matters who world's worlds um
it's a very famous quote by a writer who does influence me a lot in imagination i'm having
a blank now um you know it matters what words words and world's world it's not just me
yes um it's staying staying with the trouble um is her book um anyway um but something we didn't
sorry just Ian just to add that something we didn't go far away thank you so much Madalina um
something we didn't come on to which i think is really relevant is that there there is a living
you know living um group of people who indigenous people who whose whole culture you know who have
been keeping alive a culture of imagination and and you know resisting not all again it's very
easy to fall into generalizations and labels like not all indigenous people but indigenous
cultures i think really deserve a mention here because there is a a living breathing continuum
of a of a way of being in the world and prince you know principles ways of living relationship to
the natural world so there is a stewarded culture um that is keeping imagination alive in the ways
that we've just been talking about you and i'd love to hear you know if you have anything to
say about that because i think it's very relevant to the question i'd just say a hundred percent
agree i mean i resonated with everything you said and we're interestingly driving to extinction
the little pockets of wisdom that we could be learning from and unfortunately one very great
pocket namely china has chosen instead of offering wisdom that it once had has chosen to become
um a a delinquent western state but i i love what you say about the indigenous people and the
wisdom that is there and it's very very important thank you um i'd like to invite mark read to ask
your question please and this might be the last one depending on um the response time just because
we'd like to end it 40 minutes after as we've promised the 100-minute event but let's see
thanks thanks very much thank febe and and in michael christine i love your books your incredible
writer and febe this is great to hear about you and the moral imagination and my questions about
the moral imagination uh first of all the first time i heard about the moral imagination was
in a book by rudolf steiner who i've talked to in about before it's the philosophy of freedom
and there's more than imagination you can see but anyway my question is and we talked about like
you talked about developing the imagination you know do you either of you advocate any spiritual
practices or do you do any spiritual practice yourself to develop the imagination and why
ask the question because you because you talk about moral development steiner talks about
developing uh imagination inspiration and intuition but he said in every step in
spiritual development should be to be three steps in moral development that's really important
and i think that's often what happens that people do do develop these and actually you know this
might sound crazy but something like trump who is a who is a big fan of norman vincent peel and
the power of positive thinking i think he has developed a great powers of imagination believe
it or not and that and his will to power i like with that but no moral development whatsoever
so i'm just curious about yourselves do you have spiritual practices to develop imagination
if it's you febe go ahead you're the moral imagination person here well so i i um it's
interesting i avoid the word spiritual usually um i think there's a lot of baggage and i also think
there's a huge amount of spiritual bypassing that goes on you know the things that use the
word spiritual and are incredibly harmful and incredibly lacking in any kind of sense of the
sacred or morality so i i stay away from that word um i think the work that we're doing in
moral imaginations the work that ian talked about the three pillars of um future generations
ancestors and the more than human world is profoundly spiritual like i think part of why
i mean i feel incredibly grateful and and kind of honored to do this work every day is because it
i wouldn't call it that you know we're going into local councils we're working with um you know
large institutions but what we are trying to do is create a space and practice that is profoundly
connecting to the sacred when you imagine having a conversation with a person seven generations in
the future you know to touch on iroquois um indigenous thinking that is profoundly spiritual
and sacred so to me this imagination work that i'm doing it's it's not frivolous it's not about
the future it's not about innovation and technology it is deeply sacred and spiritual
and you know personally you know i i meditate i spent try and spend a lot of time in nature
i think meditation and you know that rob bebea is a really interesting uh buddhist teacher who
actually works a lot with imagination within the kind of buddhist practice so if anybody
is interested i'd recommend looking at his work um but i think right now that i i guess
i only have so much capacity for spiritual work and basically my my job is um doing that that
kind of spiritual work and bringing people together and creating spaces where people can
connect with the with the imaginal with their sense of what's important what matters
and so that's my that's my answer and then do you meditate i'm just curious yes i do
um at least it's what i call meditation which is my understanding of mindfulness
yeah um which i think is an important practice that should be taught in schools
so that everyone knows how to do this it's not it's not like the some complicated technique
it's just remembering to stop certain things happening and as i keep saying the first step
in creativity sounds negative to the western mind because we think in these polar ways that
you must be push push push but sometimes actually you get if you're pushing at a dormant pull then
you're doing the wrong thing and a lot of the time it's about stopping stopping doing the things
that are going on in my head and remembering with gratitude the things that i do love and and
and learn from and feel connected to in in my day in my days i'm lucky that i live well by
choice in a rather remote place where i'm surrounded by nature which is a constant companion and
reminder like um Phoebe i dislike the word spiritual which can be anything from having a
scented bath with candles to um you know i i just don't i think the term is terribly
reduced but on the other hand people react very badly if you talk about religion for reasons
i completely understand although in the end i would i would caution people not to dismiss by any
means cry the incredible traditions of the great religions of the world including buddhism if you
call it a religion which i think a lot of buddhists do and quite rightly because it's
in touch with the divine so i i what am i saying i'm saying i don't i don't i don't actually sign
up for anything this is bad i believe i don't go to a church partly because any of the churches
that are within striking distance for me would not be of the kind that i particularly want to go to
um and i would find it very difficult i think but i don't approve of that point of view i approve
of the point of view where you go and you you form part of a community so i i'm putting my hands up
here um as you know i'm not not not any expert on any of this i'm just like i guess a lot of people
listening to this muddling my way through life as best i can you know and when i last checked i
was still alive and that's good thank you i i it's the word spiritual it's funny i i think i'm
trying to reclaim that word because i know it has a dirty you know association like the religion
and very much i was brought up you know the hating religion as a catholic because it was very
moralistic um in a bad way in an exterior way but uh but yeah meditation mindfulness and that's
what i meant really you know i spoke yeah look thank you very much for your can i loop back
around because i just to say that i think there you know i said i i do meditate um but i think
just really in parallel to the conversation we just had about imagination i think there's
something about bringing you know to me being alive in the you know the Anthropocene whether
we use that word or not but being alive in this time and being really awake and sensitive to what
is going on is a spiritual you know it is spiritual like i think that's kind of what you ended on ian
is like i'm alive i'm you know that is a spiritual experience and going and sitting and closing my
eyes and meditating i don't actually think of as more spiritual than the the kind of constantly
waking up being like this is what's happening who am i what am i choosing to do how do i
sensitive um to the the pain of the world to what is happening um i'm just saying that we
are reaching to 100 100 minutes i don't want to upset jonathan even though he's not here
by taking us over um but it's a really good question it really got me thinking that there's
you know the answer i gave first and then there was a sort of emergency yes one and and what the
hell about the timing sorry i'm just gonna say something um the you know the idea that one
should push towards a spiritual goal is also something that requires awareness of its
negative side so you know to be extremely zen you know the answer to being spiritual is to
not try and be spiritual at all you know however it's very good putting on my western hat
to have a routine of sitting down and perhaps reading a certain text or being quiet and
there we are
and somebody put a paradox mindset but we haven't got time to talk about that
and we will send you the questions um so that you have a chance to look at them and um and for
everyone thank you so much um for being here and for those of you that were asking questions and
who wanted to ask that didn't have the time please bring them to the connection session next Tuesday
and um i also wanted to mention that in two weeks time there's um isabella granich who's
going to be in conversation with ian um she's a researcher and facilitator she works in kind of
from a developmental science background works with adolescents um we'll have more information
about who she is and the topic of the conversation very shortly michaels put it in the chat so if you
want to register already for that next session um and this will also go in a sort of modified form
on youtube once we make the edit so um if you want to replay this you'll be able to do that
and you'll see that link come out in a few days but i think just for now i wanted to really thank
Phoebe and ian for taking the time to speak together i personally found it incredibly
interesting to listen to the two of you in conversation so thank you very much and
good evening and good afternoon to everyone thank you
