Welcome, everyone, to this second event. It's good to see you all. I'm Jonathan Ryerson.
I'm chief executive and co-founder of Perspectiva. Perspectiva is a publisher, and we're very
proud to publish Ian's book. This is the second volume of the Matter of Things, Matter
with Things here. Perspectiva does other things, too, though. We're a charity based in London,
and our general emphasis is on trying to reimagine the world from first principles,
giving people permission to do that, social and intellectual permission, and encouragement
to rethink the world. We see this as a necessary kind of work that we have to do today. That
brings with it certain events, and we have an annual festival. We have a European network
called Emerge. We have a methodology we call the anti-debate, and we're in the business
of creating some course material that we hope to start sharing with you all soon. Watch
this space for further developments on Perspectiva, and in the chat, maybe Michael can just share
our website if anyone's interested to know a little bit more about us.
I wanted to say a few things before Zach and Ian speak, and then I'm going to disappear
in the digital sense of no longer being on your screen. The first is to thank, the tonight's
event is free, and that's partly because we were given a grant to help bring Ian's work
to more public attention and to inquire more deeply into the material in the matter with
things. I'm very grateful to the inspiration incubator, particularly Nikki and Max, which
has made it possible for these events to be free. There's already been one, this is the
second. There's going to be double figures events. We don't yet know if it's 10 or 12
or 15, but we're going to be in that sort of magnitude of events because there's a
lot to discuss in Ian's book, and because we want to do something a little bit different.
In essence, Ian's work sort of came to public attention around 2011, some 13 or 12 or so
years ago. Since then, as Ian, as someone who's followed his work closely, the wonderful
thing is that it's coming to public attention, the big idea, the main idea, the hemispheric
hypothesis. That's been a good decade now, a good decade of questions clarifying what
exactly Ian means, what's the difference in the right and left hemisphere, how does it
play out in the world? There's still a place for that. There's a lot of people catching
up with the significance of that and why it's a world-changing insight when you understand
properly what Ian's saying. It's also true that Ian has moved along and deepened the
inquiry and in a more specific way applied his understanding to particular areas. They
need greater attention on their own terms. In this seminar series, there's a kind of
presumption, although we will reiterate and restate the argument as we go, we're trying
to move beyond, let's say, McGilchrist 101. We're trying not to be simply, this is the
main thesis. Can I ask you again about that, please? We're trying to assume a level of
understanding and engagement with the work that allows us to move it on. When I say move
it on, I mean move it on philosophically to really understand more deeply what's being
said. I also mean move it on in a more quasi-applied or proto-applied sense because there's a lot
of risk in rushing too quickly to understand what might follow for Ian's work. But there's
also a need to begin to figure out what it means for each of us in our personal and professional
and even political lives. With that in mind, the first event was trying to frame the purpose
of the series as a whole. That was called Attention as a Moral Act. I also introduced
what I called the McGilchrist Maneuver. There's a little blog post about what the McGilchrist
Maneuver is, I think, and that can be shared in the chat too. That's a way of trying to
get people to orient towards how we begin to think about the places where Ian's work makes
sense in the public realm. What value it might have for civil society rethinking things. We're
continuing that tonight. Just so you know, as a little bit of a preamble, we have future
events relating to sanity and imagination. We're trying to zoom in on particular issues
that are dealt with in great depth in Ian's books, but which also have a degree of salience
and relevance and tangibility in the real world. We don't want to be in the simple business
of because Ian says X, we should do Y because Ian would be the first to say that's not
how it is. We are interested in the shift of perception that arises from Ian's work
and how that begins to look in different contexts and in different thematic areas. Tonight, we're
on a really big one. Values. Value. This is one of the things I want Ian and Zach to help
clarify for us. When I reread, by the way, if any of you are wondering about the reading
material for tonight or what to read after tonight to cover the ground again, chapter 26
in the second volume of The Matter with Things is particularly relevant to what you're about to
hear. Ian and Zach will go into it in more depth, but it's a philosophical take on what value is,
where it comes from, why it matters, and the extent to which it can be perceived directly.
The reason I think I wanted to inquire into this question is because values are mentioned
everywhere. If you're working in a civil society space as I am, everyone's speaking about trying
to work on values for campaigning. There's values in Frames Company that think about messaging to
try and get particular values encoded in the language you use. Political strategy is full
of tapping into implicit values. In the commercial world, the world of commercial ethics, if you
order food from, for example, waitrose in the UK, you hear that they have their chicken, eggs,
and milk come from farmers who share our values. Then, of course, if you're working in the business
world or the finance world, you hear a lot about the value proposition of something,
and the bottom line being about shareholder value. This word value permeates society in lots of
different ways, but it's used maybe without adequate reflection to really understand what's
going on. I'd like one of the things for Ian and Zach to clarify is this distinction between
value singular and values plural. I hope that will come up at some point in the discussion.
Also, what I sense is a big transcendent sense of value, almost value as equivalent with Dower or
God or something like that, and then a value that's something to do with truth, beauty,
and goodness, and maybe love, and maybe meaning, and purpose, the fundamental values, and then
the derivative values like pleasure, and maybe integrity, and things like that. I'm curious
to understand the reverberations of those things and the connections between them.
With that said, it's a great pleasure to introduce both of our speakers. Ian, I think,
goes pretty much without saying for the audience here. He is Inter Alia, the author of The Master
and His Emissary and The Matter with Things. He's a well-known polymathic scholar and public
speaker. Zach Stein may be a little less known, but for those who do know him,
it's usually exciting to give him a chance to speak with Ian. I have known Zach now for about
four to five years, and we went to the same graduate school, although my sense of talking
with Zach is always that I've heard of the books that he's actually read. That's usually my feeling
of encountering Zach. He's a very studious, very early-diet fellow, really engages very deeply with
all the material that he touches. So when he speaks, he speaks with a great deal of authority
because it comes from a lot of study and consideration. He is, among many, many other things,
one of the co-founders of the Civilization Research Institute. He is working on a lot
of different books, but I happen to know as publisher that he has a manuscript in preparation
that relates to metaphysics, which is one of the reasons I thought he was particularly well
placed to talk with Ian tonight. He's also a philosopher of education, and he's written
several essays for Prospectiva, which you can again, we'll share with you in the chat in due course.
So I think that's all from me, if I haven't forgotten anything. I hope I've made sense of
a thank you to our main sponsors, why we're having this series at all, why tonight's event
matters most, and why our speakers are great. And with that, I can disappear for 45 to 50 minutes
and I'll let you enjoy Ian and Zach's company. I'll see you later on. Bye-bye.
Thank you, Jonathan.
Thank you, Jonathan. Yeah, well.
It's a pleasure to talk, never spoken before, so it's kind of interesting to have a first
course, so publicly. It's great. Jonathan mentioned that I'm working on a book on metaphysics,
what I've been training in cognitive developmental psychology as a Neo-Piagetian. And so when I
encountered work, it was actually like that experience of someone saying something that
I almost completely agreed with, where there was just this complete absorption of the book,
and both volumes, and the prior work. And what was interesting to me was that
in my own experience, and in the branches of psychology that I explored and philosophy that
I explored, value was a given. And so the skepticism and cynicism about value that I encountered
in postmodernism and even some forms of modernism was actually kind of like I didn't understand it.
But I also encountered people who didn't understand value as a given, right?
So when I got to the places in your work where it was clear that there were hemispheric
dominance patterns that were expressing themselves across these different philosophical positions,
and even in the personalities of the people who are holding them, lights went off.
And so I'm just kind of thanking you for your work before I get into it.
Thank you very, very much. I hope the lights went on as well.
Yes. Anyway. No, thank you very much. And yes, I look forward to talking about these things.
Perhaps I should just begin, unless you've got a question lined up. Have you got a question
lined up? I had a prompt, which was,
go ahead. Page 1122. And so this is the second volume. This is the chapter on value.
You say something, and it's just a simple sentence, but it's very, very profound,
which is that you're placing value as equally primordial with time, space, matter, and motion,
and consciousness. Yes. Yes. Yes. This is when you think about what is the universe,
what is reality? Time, space, matter, and motion. Sure, everyone kind of buys that consciousness.
You can get people to do that. Placing value as equally primordial to those elements of cosmos
is part of the work that I'm doing in metaphysics at the Center for Enduroism with Gaffney and
Wilbur. And it's part of the work that I was doing as a psychologist, as a Piagetian, where he was
in part with moral judgment and Coldberg. What they were looking at was value-ception,
was the ability of the organism itself to perceive the field of value. Coldberg was a moral
realist. He believed that you equilibrated your moral judgment to a moral reality the way you
equilibrate your socio, excuse me, your sensory motor intelligence to gravity. The gravity exists,
so you operate on gravity as a kid, and you learn to work and navigate space and time with your body.
Coldberg's basically saying, and you do a similar thing with moral reality, with the field of value.
You learn from it. It's not a simple instruction.
And so I'm wondering if you could speak to the philosophical lineage that has always held that
as true. Because my sense is that most humans in most cultures, with most philosophies and
worldviews and religions, held this as true. It's only mostly recently in modernity
that default position has been a value cynicism or value skepticism. And so
I'm wondering if you could kind of underline that point that yes, value is life, time, matter,
motion, really primordial, constitutive of universe.
Yes. Well, I believe it to be so. I felt that people would, and I'm glad you have that reaction,
goodness, you've talked about all these things that everyone agrees are constitutive of the cosmos.
But now you're talking about things like value, purpose, and the sense of the sacred,
which are my last three chapters. And I left them to that point because I thought that if people
understood enough about what I said earlier about the more commonly accepted foundations of reality,
they would probably see why I would consider these things also as foundational.
I talk, I talk, the chapter is called value, not values, as Jonathan pointed out, because
I'm not really talking in this chapter about which particular everyday values we might consider to be
the more important ones. I think there is a discussion to be had about values, but often
values boils down to objectives. And that objective is often economic, as Jonathan pointed out.
And I don't think values are objectives exactly. An objective is something that in the left hand
is where you target, you find a line to go to it and achieve it. Whereas what I'm talking about
is something that is, I believe, impossible to do without. I mean, it's not an invention,
it is something that is there in the ground of being. We don't, I think a very important starting
point is I don't believe that we invent values and paint them onto reality in order to cheer
ourselves up, but that we actually discover values. They are there for the discovery. We
either respond to them or we don't. And perhaps that would take us too far from this discussion,
which hasn't even got going on value yet. But I do argue that the purpose of life,
the reason the cosmos brings into being something quite so counterintuitive as life
with all its problems, is that it is the ability to bring forth in that cosmos
something that can respond to these primordial values. So I think I start by saying something
like, so consciousness is not what life brings, because I've suggested in a previous chapter that
consciousness is everywhere in the universe, and that's becoming not an unusual point of view.
It's, of course, very widely been accepted for thousands of years, particularly in the east,
but it's now being accepted much more in the mainstream of analytic Anglo-American philosophy.
But the idea of value is, I think there are a number of aspects to it really, and perhaps if I
just say something about what I take it that we generally believe in something about what I am
going to argue or what I do argue there, that would help. There are about half a dozen of them,
and one I've mentioned, which is this idea that we don't invent but discover it,
and related to that is that it is not a cognitive derivation. It is not something that we look at
life and then we attach certain sort of things and we call those values, but we have this ability
to be in touch with something which is an ontological primitive. And we do it through what
you've already mentioned, this concept of value-ception, which I believe is a translation
from the German of Max Schäler, who invented a word in German, which didn't until he made it up
exist, which is Warnemann. No, sorry, Warnemann is perception, but Wernemann, which is valuing.
And so Wernemann is really a version of Warnemann, which is a perfectly straightforward
German word for perception. But the link with perception is interesting, because when we perceive
things, we don't take in a piece of data passively. We're not like receptive
plates that absorb data and then do a calculation on it and have a response. We immediately,
as it were, get an idea of what it is that we're dealing with here. And in fact,
we go to meet it, which is another interesting idea. So it's disclosed in a precognitive take on
the Gestalt of what we're seeing. It's not calculated. And this is particularly important
when it comes to my understanding of morality itself, of goodness. It's now been for a long time
normal within the mainstream of Western academia to consider that anyone who espouses another
view of morality than utilitarianism must be making a fundamental mistake. But utilitarianism is
exactly the kind of morality that is made simply out of making a calculation of what results from
it. And that perhaps brings sharply into focus what I'm talking about. It's not about a result.
It's not about a calculation towards a known goal. It is a something that evokes in us a
reverberative relationship. So it calls to us and it calls to us from in front. So it is in that
sense rather like a final cause rather than efficient cause. Most of our thinking is to
do with an efficient cause, which is what pushes us from behind. The thing that makes us do something
in the way that one would make a machine do something. I know you know all this, but I'm
just saying it for everyone's benefit. Whereas a final cause is a cause that brings you to do
something because you have a relationship with it. It's not a self-generated concept, but it is
another. And that's very important part of what I'm saying. And there are just a couple of things
more to say and then I'll hand back to you. One is that this makes it something that is not determined
but is free. We can choose to respond or not and we can choose what we believe actually fulfills
each of these values. So I mentioned that there are goals or objectives or targets or things we
like to do and which ones we decide are beautiful, good or true is another conversation, an important
one, but I'm talking here about the very fact of the being beauty, goodness and truth at all.
And the last point I'd like to make is that utilitarian thinking, which is in fact the value
of the left hemisphere, that of utility, means that values are designed to make us do something
that is evolutionarily beneficial. So beauty is just a way of making us choose the right mate or
whatever. Truth is, the idea of truth is just something that's made up by a powerful hierarchy
to jagoon people into following it and perhaps goodness is in the same league. Now what I'm
saying is that truly understood, properly understood, these values are fulfilled in being
responded to in themselves, not for any further purpose beyond that. So if I leave it at that as
a sort of laying out my stall, you can now pick it apart. No, I think it's like I said,
I agree with so much of what you're saying. And it's one of the things that I think clarifies
the nature of value as you're trying to express it as a basic property of the cosmos. Something I
write about in this work that Jonathan was speaking to, it is that it pre-exists the human,
right? Because if you're a postmodernist, you take value as a social construction,
then there's basically nothing until the human emerges and then we create value systems and
we use them to oppress people or whatever you do with that. But the take here is that actually no,
life emerged to respond to value which pre-existent. So I think Whitehead spoke of the
appetite of the cosmos, that the cosmos had an appetite that it wanted something, that it moved
towards something. And so that the evolutionary process responds to value makes it teleological.
It also means that there's a dimension in biological evolution
that is responding to the same field of real value that we are responding to.
And that's, I think, again, a position that humans have believed before, like I think of
natural law theory. It's not a great instance of it, but natural law is a case of that. And I think
of religious systems where the ordering of the cosmos, you participated in it as a microcosm so
that there was this continuity of value across life and human and divine. So it's interesting
that the power of the left hemisphere to reify a worldview that is so much a minority position
respective to most of human thought is one of the things that strikes me. Because again, there's
something about socialization or early childhood education or the nature of the things that get
the left hemisphere dominance put in place. There's a type of person that hasn't been domesticated
to that by the educational system. It's not clear why that occurs. And for them, arguments about value
as what I'm making here seem, actually, they like them. It makes you feel good. You feel like
you're at home in the universe. The things you care about actually matter to the universe.
And then there's another personality type, let me say, which is deeply skeptical, cynical of that
view. In fact, anything that would make you feel at home in the universe is probably proof that it's
not science, right? Anything that would make you feel comfortable thinking about
the emergence of human value from biological evolution would be odd. So I guess I'm
absolutely not. I'm just kind of proud of that. That's of course,
a case of Petitie open kippy, isn't it? I mean, it seems like it must be wrong because sounds
start from the standpoint that of course, all this has to be viewed as objectively alien to us.
And so it discovers that it is curious enough alien, you know, after after much looking for
things that it has ruled out from the start, like purpose and real values, it finds that these things
can't exist. Or if you hold that they do exist, you can't be being scientific. Well, I mean, I've
tried to argue from science and philosophy for these very concepts themselves.
And it's there, you can see it in the science if you read it from a different angle.
Can I mention Darwin, because people will, you know, we're talking about evolution, you
raised biology. And one of the things that I love about Darwin, apart from anything else,
is that he was motivated in his study by beauty. And that in his earlier writings, beauty is already
beauty or beautiful occurs on one in six of his pages. But in his final writings, it occurs in
on average, every other page he uses the term beauty or beautiful, he's constantly referring
to it. And twice he puzzles over it. Because he says, it's all very well to say that birds
choose a mate because they find them beautiful. And that of course, in itself suggests that it
doesn't just arise with us, with us humans. But the existence of beauty itself remains a mystery.
I mean, what that observation addresses is, given the existence of beauty, how can it be
made useful to evolution? But it doesn't answer the question, how does beauty come about? And what
does it lie in? Yeah, it's interesting. Darwin also writes a lot about love. And I bet they
co-occur with beauty is dynamic of allurement and attraction in the animal kingdom. Not as much,
but yes, yes. Yeah. And the the plentitude of nature in the creation of beautiful things,
because it's not just that the bird appeared beautiful to the other bird, it also appeared
beautiful to us, which seems it seems extravagant. Like, why would it be that the human nervous
system responds so immediately to completely these things? Yeah, this is a point I make.
I mean, that why is it that the the things that birds and animals find beautiful, we also find
beautiful, even though they have no no relevance. I mean, the fact that a bird has certain colors
doesn't or a plant. In fact, a plant that is poisonous may be very beautiful. So it's not a
matter of, you know, being evolutionally beneficial. It just is beautiful. And another thing is trees,
the shape of trees, the shapes of trees are intrinsically beautiful to humans that have been
commented on since time immemorial. But there's nothing about the shape of a tree that can in
any sense be attractive from a propagation of the species point of view. Of course,
they need insects. But don't tell me insects are going around going, that Elm is just exquisite.
Why would my nervous system evolve to be appreciative of the beauty of the tree?
Indeed, indeed. And it certainly is. And so that notion of kind of like moving the utilitarian
calculus down into evolutionary explanation, and therefore believing that that's here,
like my whole body and mind evolved for this very narrow function is in fact incorrect that
if value exists and life responds to value, then it's reasonable that we optimized actually
biologically, neurologically for love, beauty, or had a whole host of values that we actually
have the ability to respond to. And so value-ception, this gets to a question, value-ception is like a
skill. Like values can be trained. And when you think of the aesthetic perception, and I had
training as well, it was a music actually where I so desperately wanted to have certain albums
in my possession, and to expose myself to beautiful things, specifically jazz and Indian
classical music. Why? When I take a working job at a coffee shop specifically to get money,
just to buy these things. So the intrinsic value and the appreciation. So this question of, yeah,
how do you build value-ception? Why is it that our schools, for example, seem to inhibit it?
That the culture seems to actually create the opposite, where things that happen,
where things that happen about being perceived as having value is one way of even describing
the commodity form itself, that you perform a trick. The exchange value overriding the actual
use value, as it were. So yeah, values, how do we get better value-session? How do we
get more confused? Yes, it's a very interesting question, because like so many things,
it's not black and white in that value-ception can only exist once it's been
trained. But it's also true that it can be trained. But it is intrinsic. So I think children,
without any instruction, find certain things beautiful and certain animals, for example,
are beautiful. And they also find some ugly. And this is an important point to make, because
something that might be said is, well, you find all these beautiful things in nature,
just because we're trained that whatever is natural is beautiful. Absolutely not. Although
most of nature manages to remain extremely beautiful, there are certainly lots of things
in nature that are just plain ugly. And in the book, I'm afraid I draw attention to the rather
unattractive features of the shoe-built stork, I seem to remember. There it is. It's an entirely
natural bird creation, but it's not a very attractive one, I think, to most people. So I
think they're intrinsic. And also goodness. I mean, goodness is obviously culturally determined
to a point. But this can be exaggerated. I mean, there are very few cultures in the world where
it's considered good to murder and rape. In fact, beauty, too, is far more culturally universal
than is made out by people who want to impress on us that it's simply made up. Most Eastern
peoples, Chinese and Japanese, for example, find no problem whatever in enjoying the works of art in
Western works of art in our museums, coming to the plays of Shakespeare. We find no problem at all
in going to, in the beauty of their art and their culture. So, and interestingly, it's also true
that things can be found that quite specifically mean things that are intrinsic. So, for example,
certain intervals and shapes and melodies in an Indian raga can be understood by Norwegians
who know nothing about Indian music. If they're asked to say, what is it that this is expressing,
they are remarkably similar to what an Indian listener trained would say that was being expressed.
So, I mean, that's a scientifically verified result. So, I think it's like so many things
that you can have a basic understanding of something. But what we can do is help it to flourish and
grow in beneficial directions. And this is a little bit like anything that grows, a plant.
A plant can grow and will grow anyway, but a gardener can actually make plants thrive more
and can make them grow to another shape or to another size or to another color.
So, there is a way in which whatever is there can be trained by us, but that doesn't mean that it's
made up by us. I believe that Goethe is right when he says that everything properly considered and
appreciated by us calls out in us the faculty with which we can appreciate it. And so, for example,
you talked about music, and I imagine your experience is the same as mine,
that when one starts learning to love music, one loves certain things that one perhaps still loves,
but one can't necessarily immediately respond to other things that as one learns more and more,
the faculty and us to appreciate them grows.
And the deepening of value, one way to think about human development,
the human development is just that maturation, if you will, is this deepening of creation of
more and more value. And it's not the making up more things to care about. It's the getting deeper
in touch with reality. It's actually deepening to this field of value, which, and again, from a
human development perspective, it does seem that it's a disposition that is deeply rooted values.
And that a lot of what occurs is just the absence of support for that skill and things that counteract it,
which is to say anti-value. So preference falsification is the root of advertising.
And advertising suffuses our environment. So there's an intentional thing in our culture
to actually disrupt the ability to truly perceive value. So it's a thing that we need to
think about, like how do we protect ourselves from being confused and then
sit and appreciate how does that actually work? Even just the ability to hold
attention for a long period of time is necessary for certain levels of appreciation of value and
beauty. Which is another reason why attention is a moral act, as we have called this series,
which is a phrase that I think I use in both the master and his emissary and the master with things.
Yeah. So I'm right there. But the implication also, another implication and kind of a question is,
so therefore, if we really downgrade value exception, like let's say value collapses
at the center of culture, which is what you could say is occurring, that we've kind of burnt off
the fumes of pre-modernity and we're running out of a center of value
and even the ability to then perceive value. That's very dangerous. Like if part of what
evolution has been is adapting us to perceive and relate to value. If we cut off that ability,
then we become evolutionarily non-adaptive, which means we go extinct. So another place that
this work that I'm doing is the relationship between value and existential risk and civilization
on the rise, which is that the patterns you're pointing to are actually deep generator functions
of existential risk. If you will, let me drop into that. I'm saying like the inability to
address the simplification of problem to narrow metric. This characterization of a complex thing
as a complicated thing that could be fixed, but actually you can't address all those characteristics
are things that are leading us to a point in civilization that is treacherous.
There's an urgency, I see it as an educational urgency, to figure out how to
to rebalance the hemisphere and that's why I'm focusing on value exception.
That's what we can actually do to allow ourselves to perceive what's actually valuable again,
because we're clearly very confused about what value, if we've been brought to a place where
our civilization is about to self-destruct and AI is a great example. The core of the AI risk
is the alignment problem, which is a values alignment problem. So that's me kind of saying
help us save civilization. How do we learn to perceive value again so that we know?
Thanks. Yes, I can't remember who it is, but you can probably tell me in Silicon Valley who
said that yes, the way AI is going will probably render us extinct, but it'll be very good for
the economy in the meantime. That perhaps sums up the left hemisphere's approach to these things.
It only understands power, control, utility, and as a sort of subset of that pleasure, which is
assumed to be what these things give, although by the way they don't. People who have as much power
as you can conceivably imagine lead unhappy, anxious lives, but there we are. I can tell you for
a few years as a psychiatrist, but yes, how do we get back on course? Well, partly of course,
you won't be surprised to hear me say that even below the fixing of values is this business
of the hemisphere balance, because you mentioned there the idea of a complicated machine that
can be fixed versus a complex system, which is the difference being that a complex system
is intrinsically indeterminate. It is intrinsically free. It is intrinsically not controllable.
It is intrinsically able to move in a way that we can't actually program. So that is
a kind of slap in the face to those who hold this left hemisphere view that we can make ourselves
all powerful. And to me, the most heinous thing that has happened in the last 200 years, or perhaps
even since the Enlightenment, is this belief that we can control everything, that we have power.
And if only we could have humility enough to understand how little we know, how little we
really understand what we're dealing with, and how helpless we will be in the face of things
that we are now setting loose, then it might not be too late to do something about it. So
regaining some sense of humility and awe before what it is we're seeing, respect for these things,
not the whole idea that we make them all up, of course, is a version of this idea that we are
the creators of everything we see. We are the creators of all that we experience. Excuse me,
we are not. We are the receivers. We are the grateful or should be grateful recipients of
some enormous gift that we only partly understand. And we have a responsibility to respond to that.
That's of course at the root of responsibility is this idea you have to respond to something.
And that something is calling to us to behave in a different way. So
obviously, one of the things I would say is that we need to open up the minds of those who are both
now in control and who control our futures to the idea of we don't understand this,
we don't know what it is, but let us find the good in it, the beautiful in it, and
what is true about it. Because at the moment, I don't think there's ever been a period since
recorded time that I know of when truth has been so profoundly
traversed and with the development of AI, it's going to be almost impossible for education,
for the law, for politics to function if we don't know whether something is a video clip that is
made up by a computer showing a politician saying things he never said. When we get to that, and
how do we know that the children or the young people we're teaching have really understood
anything if they can generate an essay that will satisfy an examiner. And it's going to negate
all the things on which a civilization is built. And what a civilization is for is to guarantee
that we are better at seeing the beautiful, the good and the true, which to me are with the sacred,
which goes above it, is the most important value of all.
Yeah, and this is one of the central risks that people don't see in terms of catastrophic risk,
is the true collapse of culture and truth at this end value. Because what occurs there is
basically, and I'm not going to steal Benito Roy's thunder, but basically it's a schizophrenic
break at the level of culture where the entire culture gets out of touch with the ability to
value. And AI is the thing that could perpetrate that break. I wonder too, though, about the
relationship between depression and the hemispheres and traumatic experience in the hemispheres.
So part of me is like, okay, you think you can control the world, and you kind of pretend you
can for a while until it slaps you in the face and something occurs that forces your identity
to reorient. Because I'm thinking like, what is the actual human development process
when someone actually reorients their basic hemispheric dominance pattern? Maybe that's
too simple a way to think. But I wonder if at various points in history where we seem to step in
and speak from the master, were taught sometimes after very hard lessons were learned.
And so I'm wondering if one of the things that will reawaken the perception of value
is actually the occurrence of catastrophe and tragedy?
Yes, I think that's right. And I wouldn't cast it myself in terms of depression, trauma and the
hemispheres. Because that's just too complicated. I mean, I think there's something in it. And you
know that I devote a whole chapter in the matter of things to showing what the correspondences are
between a left hemisphere dominated picture of the world and a right hemisphere deficient picture of
the world. And that of the subject of schizophrenia. So that is very much like left hemisphere overdrive.
And it's been commented before I drew these parallels by people like Louis Sass that something
seems to be happening to our culture, which is rather like what happens in schizophrenia.
And of course, schizophrenia is very distressing condition, which often does lead individually
to suicide. I believe that we are actually pursuing our own suicide very rapidly at the moment. We're
disemboweling our culture and destroying all the good in it. We are disemboweling and destroying
the beauty and the the vibrance of nature. And we've turned our backs on the sacred and the divine
and said that these are just childish fantasies, whereas they're probably the most important
realities that they're not easy to find for us now. So I don't disrespect somebody who can't
find them and can't see what is meant by them. And indeed, I think that the talk about them is
quite problematic. And no doubt, I'll talk to someone else in another session about that.
But nevertheless, I think these values are hugely important to me are losing them. It might be worth
just mentioning, because I think it's something helpful to me, I found, which is Shaler's pyramid
of values. I'm talking here, not about Shiller, but Shaler, Max Shaler, S-C-H-E-L-E-R, who was an
early 20th century German phenomenological philosopher, said by Heidegger to be the brightest
philosopher in Europe of his generation. And he wrote about values in a way that Heidegger himself
didn't, nor actually did, Victor Constantine to the same extent. Although in culture and value,
I find he writes beautifully about these things. But in any case, Max Shaler had a pyramid of values,
a hierarchy, and at the bottom were those of use, i.e. utility and pleasure. And then somewhat
above that, were what he called the Leibnz-Werther, the values of life. And he meant by these things
like generosity and courage and magnanimity and loyalty. And then above that came effectively
what he called de Geissig-Wetter, meaning either the intellectual or the spiritual
values, which I believe beauty, goodness, and truth principally. And other values that you might
mention are effectively derivative from either beauty, goodness, or truth, that we value them
because we think they are either good, or we think they're beautiful, or we think they're true.
And then on the top of this pyramid was the sacred. And what I suggest is that in our own time,
we have inverted this pyramid so that the left hemisphere's value is at the top,
that of utility, and the other ones are said to be simply in service utility.
That is the vision of the materialist reductionists who until recently have held the floor in the
universities. That, thank goodness, is changing. There is a wonderful move of foot I see in
philosophy, I see in biology. And then people see that this very simplistic, mechanistic vision
is gone. It's over. It just doesn't work. Yeah, thank you for all that. That was
intriguing. I'd been saying for some time that we were dealing with basically a suicidal culture
that was running and overdrive down into those patterns. So it's like this from getting too much
out of that. But your enumeration there of the hierarchy of values gets in the Jonathan's point
about values versus value. And is there some structure to the organization of first principles
and first values, like the core of the work that we do at the French for wisdom is that
enumerating first principles and first values from a perspective of continuity with evolution
itself so that there are some values which are periphery, which occur locally. And then there
are other values which are so core that we can actually say that we share them with like animals
and that we share them perhaps cells. And the value pre exists us, then there's a continuity
of value that we participate in. And so things like harmony, right? Like is expressed very early
in physics, where you either get to work or you're not work. And if you think about
multi cellular organisms, or complex organisms, a lot of what's occurring there is complex systems
of interest, harmonious things, humans start to use speech, they start to try to name values,
and you get something like justice or fairness as a continuation of this dimension of yeah.
So that's some of the thing we're doing there. What emerges is that there's a
paucity of language of evaluation in our culture. So this is Charles Taylor makes, he talks about
languages of strong evaluation, being the core of the culture together. And that means a language
of shared value, we talk about a universal grammar value is absent. We kind of have a grammar to
talk about mathematics and science and all of these other things. But when we get together,
and we try to have a conversation about value, our tongues are tied. And especially when we've
got our culture. So there's this need to create some new languages of value, I think.
How much do you think that depends on the level at which one is talking about value? And I've
sort of set up a kind of an idea of certain values such as beauty, goodness and truth.
And it would almost make no sense to say up to a point about these things. We just do think beauty
is good. We do think goodness is good. We do think the truth is good. It's almost a tautology.
But if you start talking about the values that we hold as a society and one may go back to
the call of the French Revolution. And these sound like a very good start.
But immediately one finds oneself and this is where one might get tongue tied and there might be
conflicts is, but what exactly do we mean by these things? And in what context and how much
and for whom? So liberty is on the face of it, highly desirable. And I certainly wouldn't
admire a culture in which there was no liberty. But obviously utterly untrammeled liberty is
anarchy and restraints and constraints within reason are very important. And we of mature
society is able to balance those things. And you know, it's true of egality and fraternity.
You know, what exactly does one mean by them? Are they always necessarily good in all contexts?
Or do we have to finesse them? And I think that's what I would think is the difficulty about
values themselves. Perhaps the only way in which one can
resurrect a good sense of values is in fact by looking at societies that have been stable for a
long time and produced that harmony that you thank you for mentioning that because I think it's
terribly important. And it's not only a very important idea in physics, but also as you point
out in biology. And also, of course, it was foundational in Greek thinking, you know,
from Pythagoras onwards. That's one of those things you can see. Like it's a yes. And you can hear it.
It's one of the problems. Yeah, so it's just it's a remarkable it suffuses. I remember this quote by
Whitehead again, he says, you know, the circle haunts the universe like a ghost. And what he
was talking about was just the presence of universals amongst the flux. And so harmony is
harmony kind of haunts evolution at all stages. And we yearn for it. Like in our in our societies,
we want harmony. And it's interesting that. And what harmony points out is it's all in relations.
It's not unison. It's relations between things, but beautiful and generous relations that work
together to produce only good and beautiful sound. So, you know, and we talk about other
species and humans. And one and you talked about how harmony seems to be very much a kind of human
conception. I think you hinted that at any rate, I'm not misquoting you. But but it is also true
that, you know, birds sing. But in essence, they sing competitively. But only humans can sing in
harmony and attune their voices to one another. So this is, I mean, there's so much that one can
regret about humanity. But the trouble with this is that it leads to a kind of disparagement
of everything that humanity can be. And we need to preserve the ideal of what a human being and a
human life and a human society can be. What its meaning is at the same time as being highly critical
of many of the things that it's now interpreted as involving. And this comes down to my basic
point. And the reason I wrote the matter of things is that we no longer understand what a human being
is, what the world is, and what we're hearing it for. And that's very unfortunate. That's very
unfortunate. I believe in the in the master's emissary, you cited that research that the vocal
chords were more developed before the language centers. So the very first humans communicated
mostly through song, basically, that there was this kind of leading state where there was this
harmonic vocalization of somewhat sapient, you know, bipedal creatures who were basically
singing together before they were speaking. And that the function of language, the function of
language to be denotative and descriptive, piggybacked on the use of the vocal chords for
basically harmony. Yes. Well, you know, I mean, this is, this is, I have to rely here quite a lot
on anthropologists. But there is a prominent school of anthropologists who certainly believe
this, even my than being one of the most best known exponents of it. But what I think is nice is
that there is very good, if you like, paleo anatomical reasons for believing that this is the case.
And from the examination of animals, their ability to vocalize and so on, the nature of their skulls
and their ribcage is too much to explain now, but it's in, in the master and his chemistry.
But what I love about it is that it inverts this assumption that all, of course, all the business
is done with language and music is just some frivolous expectation of language. But actually,
it turns out that the science is on the side that music comes first and that language is a useful
expectation of music. Exactly. That's the idea. And were we being stopped? Was that a
bell to intervene, Jonathan? No, no, it's just that I'm part of my, hopelessly, a tech world.
There's a grandfather clock sitting just in the next house. I am ready to come inside,
but carry on for now. It's a very, it's a very deep point about what society ought to be like
and things that, in fact, we know that summons us to heaven or to hell. Sorry. No, carry on.
It is. Sorry, Zach, carry on. Very pivotal moment in the conversation now. So the point is both that
we misunderstand theoretically the function of language, thinking that its primary function
is denotative and descriptive, when in fact, there's a deeper function, which is the resonance
it allows for between us. As someone who's done some clinical work, when you listen to someone
speak, you're often not listening to what they say. You're listening to the tone and tenor and
anxiety or absence of anxiety and the prosody and the pace of their speech and all the musical tones,
basically, not the content. And in fact, the mismatch between content and that underlying
musicality is a sign to pay attention to. So it's just interesting to think that in fact, we
something as basic as language, we're not, we're missing the hemispheres are allowing us to misunderstand
suddenly and that harmony suffuses this organism and it is resonates with it.
And yet the chanting and the music and then the notion that in the human, the value of harmony
becomes aware of itself. And so we actually arrange and this is the kind of an interesting
note that runs through a couple of places in the matter with things that there's a
something that occurs with the human as an evolutionary emergent, where value and consciousness
become aware of itself in ways that they were not previously. And this is a big I think that's
a really important point. And it goes back to my idea, which I think is absolutely constant
with my understanding of Whitehead, which is that whatever we mean by God, the creative force,
logos, Lee, Burta, whatever it may be, and that is bringing the cosmos into being and the cosmos
is bringing it further into being so that each is unfolding and discovering more of its potential
in this dynamic relationship. It's not a story of a static something that just is or of two static
some things, but of a twofold relationship in which something is ever more coming into being.
That seems to be at the center of creation. And if there's one thing one can say about the cosmos,
it is that it is creative in this way. That is one of the primary values of the cosmos is simply to
make things happen, to differentiate out of an enormously potential unity. All that potential
means when it's unfolded and then to refold it again into a now enriched unity, which then
carries on this process. It's an alternation. And of course, this is very much in keeping with David
Bohm's idea of the implicit order, the explicit order, and then being re-enfolded into the
implicit order. Yeah, we speak of evolving, evolving value or evolving eternal value. Yes,
yes, yes. To think about it. And in the Kabbalistic tradition, there's a saying that
there's more God to come, which is basically that. I didn't know that. If you can give me the
reference to that, because I'm very keen on the Kabbalah. And I've never heard that. But I argue,
of course, that the Kabbalah actually sees that whatever is the ground of being ends off
is actually coming into being. Yeah, and that's the root of this work, because it's the collaboration
with Rabbi Gaffney and Ken Wilber, both esotericists, and Gaffney's command of the Kabbalistic
literature. And it's part of the through line of the matter with things is the line back through
shelling through Boheme to the Renaissance, basically Christian Kabbalists. And other physics
have to be implicit there, which is of this, where God invests in the cosmos the ability to
basically further the divine to create new God. And so as something like harmony falls,
or beauty evolves, the intensification of the value evolves forever. And we participate in
that self-aware, creative value. We either participate in it or fail to do so. And that is
the tragedy that at the moment we're failing to do so. Thank you, Zach and Ian. I mean,
I'm aware that you guys can talk for hours further. And I hope you will at some point,
and I'm very glad you've met. And I feel very validated by the decision to bring you together.
And I hope it's the first of many conversations, because I'm aware that you share depths
and common interests that are sometimes esoteric and are sometimes extremely difficult,
but of fundamental importance. And you're both first principles thinkers in a way that the world
currently needs. So I'm very grateful to have you here and bring you together. But I'm also
conscious we have 330 odd people, some of whom are keen to ask you things. I will before I'll
ask you something myself first, but just to allow the audience to sort of warm up. I am keen, as a
point of principle in these sessions, that we try and ask a question about what's just been spoken of.
Not to revert back to the Gokras 101, as I say. Of course, you may have more fundamental queries,
but it would be good because we've just shared something together that we focus on what we've
heard. And with that in mind, I am feeling significantly clearer about my sort of quam
inquiry earlier vis-a-vis the mapping of the relationship between values and so on.
But I'm also curious about something that is sort of point related to that. And it came up in the
last session too. For all the bashing of the left hemisphere, and I know you're quite famous for
saying that the left hemisphere is your second favorite hemisphere, and that it's one to be
loved and cherished and it shouldn't be knocked down. I feel this work that I feel responsible for
and the perspective is engaged in of working with first principle thinkers like yourselves,
trying to make sense of what they're really saying philosophically about the nature of
reality and our capacity to know it, maybe love it, relate to it. There is a certain dignified,
beautiful role for the left hemisphere in taking a few moments as emissary just to get clear about
what exactly the master is saying. And that's why when I occasionally feel almost guilty,
like when a part of me has a kind of weird socio epistemic guilt about trying to map these things
mentally in a kind of cartography, because I feel shouldn't I just be presencing? Shouldn't I just
be with this? Shouldn't I be playing some music or doing some art here? Instead, I'm trying to
craft out with these words in a bubble chart how they link together and I think no, surely it's not
that. Nonetheless, what I was trying to get at Ian is that you mentioned Scheller's hierarchy or
rather structure thereof of the sacred giving rise to sort of fundamental truth, beauty and goodness.
And then you make mention of this more derivative values.
And that's useful. But what I was left wondering is if value is primordial
and prehuman, and in some sense something that life is for for us to be in relationship with
as you argue in the book. You go on to have a chapter on the sacred, but help me out here with
the distinction not between values plural and the sacred, but values singular and the sacred.
How can we make a distinction between them that's useful to make sense of what's being said here?
First of all, I should just comment that Scheller doesn't imply that the sacred gives rise to the
next lower line of the pyramid and so on down to utility. He simply says that there is a hierarchy
of values and that some are simply more important than others. They are more central, if you like,
to the business of leading a fulfilled human life. What I would say, my answer to it also touches
on what you've just said about the importance of the left hemisphere, that it's good that it should,
as it were, question and try and make clearer to itself what it is that the master is talking about.
But it has to do so knowing that at the end of the day whatever it can come up with
for short of whatever it is the master is saying. The process is useful in that things come out of
it, but at the end of the day it's not going to have an equivalent map and say, ah, I've got the
master's message now and it's all this because that would automatically be wrong. Having said that,
what I think we can see is that the sacred is something that is dark. The mystics talk about
it as a kind of visible darkness, a light that's so bright that in fact for us it is invisible
and penetrable or unknowable. Now if that is the case, what happens is that when it passes through
a prison, we can then perhaps begin to see it. The light is somehow softened, filtered, and the
prison through which that light of the sacred comes is the one that generates, in my view, beauty,
goodness, and truth, that these are manifestations of it that the creation can respond to and that
are its principal lewers that are calling to us to go to it. Does that help? I mean it's beautiful
before I can decide whether it has utility in the sense of helping.
So already I'm feeling the right sort of relative importance of things. It does help and I don't,
it doesn't need to be pristine. There was a moment, I shared this with Zach prior to the call,
many of you will know George Lakoff and his work on sort of the representation of
concepts, particular being embodied and often grounded in metaphors of the body.
So an idea is big, an idea is big for example, or you can play with notions of
something being a long shot. And there's these sort of expressions which get at the idea that the
way the mind organizes itself conceptually is through these spatial metaphors. And I found
myself having a moment reading your chapter 26 where I was going, okay, so you've got this
value that's sort of primordial and pre-human and fundamental. And then you have love, which
comes up when you speak about the relationship between love, and then you have meaning and you
have purpose and not just any old purpose but cosmological, teleological purpose. And I'm trying
my mind to actually see this in space. So I had this moment of sort of, you know, whatever that's
called, edictic imagery or whatever that word is for this sort of thing in your mind. And I was
trying to sort of, right, trying to picture that in my mind and I suddenly realized how absurd the
whole thing was, in the sense that I couldn't possibly capture it because it somehow was, as you
say, always going to be an inadequate representation of what was actually being described. And it was
very useful. It was almost, it was a sort of micro spiritual experience of sorts because there was
definitely a sense of these fundamental features of the universe, love, truth, beauty, goodness,
value, the sacred, meaning, purpose. There's a lot of them, right? It's a family. And you've said
before, vis-a-vis the McGookus maneuver, just as the one as many, the many as one. So it's not true
that they're all the same there. And there's one sense the same and another sense they're not.
And when you try and hold that in your mind and actually see how they map together as if it was
some kind of flowchart, the only answer is a kind of laughter because it doesn't really work.
And it's a liberation in some ways that it doesn't work. And yet there's still a part of me that's
a little bit uneasy. And I'm curious if anyone else feels that way. And if Zach or Ian has anything
to comment before other people come in, I'll start looking at people's questions now while you're
answering that. Okay. Well, I'd just like to respond since, well, your point is aimed at what
I've been saying, I suppose. And I agree with that idea that there seemed to be a family of these
things. But another way of looking at it is that I didn't put love in as a value because I think
love is the grounding, the nature of being whatever. And the sacred is our sense of
that ground of being. And you could say that that ground of being and call it God, whatever
one wants to call it, but the ultimate essence of the creation of the cosmos
is itself purposeful, that it generates automatically, not as an extra thing, not as a
sort of subsequently, now I'm going to have a purpose. But it is purposive, love is purposive.
It is ultimately aimed towards something that it's directed, it is relational automatically.
But I wouldn't again make relation another separate thing. The trouble is that we're so
in hoc to things. And I almost called this book, there are no things, because it isn't a thing,
truth and beauty and goodness. But what we're really trying to adumbrate is the nature of this
loving core that is in itself true, that is in itself beautiful, what it does is automatically
good, although that is something that theologians could dispute, is it good because God automatically
goes there or does God go there because it's good and so forth. But what I'm really saying in
brief is that these are different unfoldings of a single element, the multiplicities, the many
strands that do nothing to in any way imperil the integrity of the whole, but in fact enhance it.
The closest thing would be like a field. So we speak of a field, there's a unified
field of value, but it's not featureless. It's basic property by field would be arrows, we
talk about arrows, so we talk about cosmorodic humanism in which arrows is the foundation.
Field root of value, but then all of these values differentiate out, but some have existed
since the Big Bang and others are more recent. But yeah, they're not things and therefore when
you flow chart them and even when you try to sequence them in a strict way, you can't.
The left hemisphere will do that at lower moral stages of development, but maturity as deepening
into value perception sees inevitable value conflict. And again, it's not a harmonious picture
in its totality. Whitehead speaks about the intensification of polarities, not about everything
getting better, but about the intensification of the polarities and dynamics of values all
co-evolving in tension and erotic kind of like basically self-disclosure.
So erotic self-disclosure. Okay, I'm very great.
Yeah, the questions are very good and we'll come to them very quickly, moving swiftly along. So
I'm conscious that we may not get through all of them, but we're going to try and get to the best
ones at least. I'm also conscious that for many who are of a philosophical mindset,
some of this discussion will have been delicious and exactly the kind of their staple diet,
if you like. But for others who have a more practical mindset, perhaps less
philosophically, you know, adept, it can seem a little abstract. So I have a really good question
here, which is principally for Zach actually, although I'm sure you will have thoughts on it.
And because I happen to know that Zach has written a great deal about propaganda
and thought about it at length and written about it on the Consilience Project website.
And we're in a time of intense propaganda. Zach, the question here is from Kevin Cotwas,
if I've said that correctly. And he just says, can you talk about the weaponization of value
in propaganda? And I'm sure Ian has thoughts too, but if you could begin.
Yeah, I mean, a few things to say there. One, and I mentioned already that
preference falsification being the foundation of advertising.
Just clarify what you mean by that, because I didn't quite get it.
Preference falsification is when you think you value something, but you actually don't
truly value it. You've kind of been tricked into valuing it, sometimes through coercion,
sometimes through tricks of psychology. So, so it's like preference falsification is the
goal of psychology, excuse me, of advertising. Advertising was one of the main places where
psychology was operationalized after World War II, coming out of large scale propaganda programs
that were built during the Cold War. And so you're looking at a science of persuasive communication.
And if everything we're saying is true about the intrinsic nature of value,
and the way the human nervous system responds to value, then if I'm trying to get you to do
something, and I'm a psychologist, and I know that, then the first thing I do is manipulate
your value systems and your value preferences. So, without even speaking about propaganda,
just staying on advertising, we can see that the saturation of that kind of persuasive
to the point of being coercive style of communication is one of the things that has undermined
our ability to perceive actual value. So, that's the idea is that if you're
succeeding as an advertiser, you're not just getting them to value what you want them to value,
like Coca-Cola. Like, why did we drink Coca-Cola? It's actually bad for you.
But people really want to drink Coca-Cola. The main reason you want to drink Coca-Cola is because
of advertising. And they're incredibly, they've been doing it for decades, and they're very good
at it. It's very subtle. So, they're making you want something, making you perceive
value that's not actually value. Just to play devil's advocate for Coca-Cola here,
I feel like I'm on the BBC or something trying to be impartial. I mean, I'll know how that goes.
But I was going to say, it's not just caffeine and sugar. Don't I just want the caffeine and sugar
and some sweeteners? Yes, but that's again part of the falsification of value. What you want is to
feel good. What you actually want is to feel good. And the falsification of value goes right down into
your actual body and limbic system. So, when we sent our boys over there with World War II,
they were not in a position to really know geopolitically what was going on. They were
in a position to have been told what was going on. And they fought for their country with love,
with full flux of value as a result of propaganda. And again, propaganda is very complex to discuss
because there's a thin line between propaganda and education. And it becomes the evil twin of
education is propaganda. Both of them piggyback on value-ception. Both of them employ strategies
of getting you to value something. That's what I was going to ask you, Zach. That's why your
question to Ian earlier about how one begins to cultivate, refine, develop the capacity for
value-ception is culturally critical, almost a matter of civilizational survival. And it doesn't
just apply sort of in the classroom, but it also applies more in the front line of culture,
influencing our everyday activity. And then, because values are values,
they are also explicitly thematized reflectively by propagandists. So like the culture wars
are a result of both sides trying to create conflict around value and values. So one of the
things that makes it hard to talk about values is that they've been subject to in the United States
to a kind of internal informational civil war, where just like in the 30 years before,
the different visions of heaven and hell and other things were used by propagandists to get
the Protestants and the Catholics to really fear and hate one another. Similarly, now, digital
propaganda is working us into a frenzy mostly along these value fault lines, which are identified
and then cleaved. And like salt is thrown on the wound and they're trying to make the value
kind of like as polarized and difficult as possible. I know you have, yeah, you have no
lack of things to say on propaganda. And for those who are interested, if you go to the
Consilience Project, there is, I believe, three very considered early day essays on propaganda
that Zach's written there. Maybe, Michael, if you can put that in the chat, if you can find it,
but it is there. Ian, any thoughts on propaganda before we come on to other things?
I think Zach covered it perfectly, and I agree with him wholeheartedly. And I thought the point
about education and propaganda being evil twins and sometimes being confused with one another,
particularly important at the moment. Right, I agree. This is quite a more refined sort of
philosophical question, but a pretty important one, because I've fallen into this trap myself.
It's by Andrew M. Davies, or Davis, sorry. Much of this conversation has bounced between
aesthetic and moral value. A lot of bouncing. Whitehead makes the claim that moral order is
merely certain aspects of aesthetic order. Here, aesthetic order is wider and deeper than moral
value. How do you understand the, here's the question, how do you understand the relationship
between aesthetic and moral order? Is one more ontologically primitive than the other?
So it's an A plus for the question there, Andrew. What's the answer, Zach and Ian? Do you want to
go first? Yes, okay. It's a good question, and it's one that I do tackle a bit at least in this
chapter, I think. Beauty is a difficult one, because, you know, I'm a great admirer of Keats,
but he did die when he was 26, and he was a poet. He wasn't on oaths as a philosopher, as it were,
when he said that beauty is truth, truth, beauty. This is all you know and all you need to know.
If it were as simple as that, we wouldn't have two quite distinct terms, and the questioner
wouldn't have used them, nor would Whitehead have thought that these words were worth preserving,
because I can think of things that are beautiful and definitely not good, and I can think of things
that are good that are definitely not beautiful, unless you, I mean, it's always open to somebody
to so twist the meaning of a word that it will now encompass, but in the way we normally use
them, they're different. So it caused me more trouble than anything to be able to
deal with these. It's interesting that whereas moral values seem much more distinctly carved
up between the right and left hemispheres, as David Hecht at UCL says, the right hemisphere
basically deals in good, and the left in what is morally bad. I mean, that's his words,
or a paraphrase of them. And so it's much easier, whereas with the matter of beauty,
both hemispheres do get involved with it and do contribute to it, although to go into the
niceties of it would take us too long and too far. I don't agree, in short, with Whitehead on this
particular point. Andrew knows that I'm a great Whiteheadian. But on this one, I just can't really
agree with it because it seems to me that in a way, we value beauty because ultimately it is good.
But we don't value good ultimately because it's beautiful. That's the way I see it. Maybe that's
a product of my modern Western European education and a degree of Protestantism in the background
that I've overlaid heavily with other strands, but I don't know. That's my take on it. What do you
say, Zach? I'm not sure either, but I think about just the big three, the good, the true, and the
beautiful having been differentiated for quite a long time. So there's something to the value of
that differentiation that in modernity, they became disassociated. And you had science running
hegemonic over the good and the true. But I also think of Kant and the structure of the three
critiques. And then at the end, Kant basically is saying that it reduces down to this very complex
form of aesthetic judgment, which is more than just the judgment of beauty. It's also the ability
to perceive the teleological, to basically to perceive value per se, would be my reading of
the third critique, in which case there is something that is neither of those three that's
more deep. So if I think about the sacred, I think sometimes that's just an intensification of all
three at once. And that there's a deeper field of allurement or arrows that is primary to the
emergence of even the differentiation of those three. And there's a story that Weber tells and
Habermas tells about the differentiation of those value spheres after their pre-modern synthesis,
that there was a time when they were merged in the idea of the sacred, that slowly they were
differentiated out. Habermas talks about the linguistification of the sacred and the differentiation
out of those three, and then eventually the asymmetry that emerged with the unbounded rationality
of modernity. So that's me not really answering the question, but talking about what I know about
the question. I could just quickly come back for a couple of things. The first is that your
indication of Kant shows perfectly what I mean by what one can achieve by redefining what one
means by beauty. Because if you call this aesthetic, then you are enlarging the meaning beyond what most
people normally use it to mean in order, like Humpty Dumpty, you're allowed to do that. But then
have you really achieved anything by applying this particular term to it? And the other is just to
say that I think your illumination, that the sacred is all the three of these combined, it's
just perfect. Because this is what I was saying about the light being differentiated through
coloured glass. But when the colours are separated, one doesn't call red, blue. But
nonetheless, in the light, they are together. Right. It occurs to me, Zach, and I know Ian,
you know Daniel Schmackenberger as well a little bit, but Daniel has said in a couple of his talks,
I've heard him say, and I don't know whether he still holds to this philosophically, but it's a
very elegant line. He says, I wouldn't really care about goodness and truth if it wasn't for beauty.
That was his way of putting it. It was something about the charm and sort of
intuitive elegance and attraction of beauty was sort of primary, that it sort of drew you,
and you know, this is how I understand his claim. There was something about beauty that was the
prior motivation to look at goodness and truth. I'm not saying it's right. I'm not saying it's
exactly how he means it, but for what it's worth, he said it. And I find it quite an elegant
proposition or provocation to think about. But Ian, you've already answered adequately why that
might not be the whole story. And likewise, Zach. And I want to get to some other questions,
and I can see we still have, let's see, quite a few more. Michael, do you want to take a shot
and ask it yourself?
Yeah, yeah. Jonathan, thanks for that. Yeah, so I guess my question stands from the fact that I
feel this view that is being put forth here, that value is ontologically fundamental.
If that was to take hold more broadly in society and culture, I feel it could be very,
very powerful, like a very, very powerful view to transform our way of relating to life.
And I guess, and before I ask this question, I'm aware that it might be my left hemisphere
grasping after certainty. But I'm wondering, and this is really for both of you, Zach and Ian,
how likely is it, do you think that in time, the evidence for this will become more and more
compelling? Do you see that the new scientific findings will start to make a compelling case
for the fact that that we can actually quite convincingly say no, value is ontologically
fundamental? Zach, you mentioned about how we see maybe in biology, values that seem to be
existence, existent outwith any need for human beings to exist. So I'm kind of thinking in those
terms, yeah, I'll leave it at that. And I have something to say first and then use that, yeah.
Sure, go ahead. Well, as I always say, prediction is a fool's game, but I don't think that science
will ever answer this question or shed a great deal of light on it. It's a philosophical question
of a kind that science is not really equipped to answer, I would say. And, you know, that's no
disrespect to science, but there are certain places science won't take us profitably. I think,
though, that it may become more vivid to us when the over sophisticated, over technical, over
scientific way of conceiving ourselves has been blown away by a collapse, some kind of
cataclysm that will lead to suffering. And here I go back to something that I think
Zach was, I think, getting at when he talked about or hinted at the idea that suffering might
actually enable us to see certain things that otherwise we wouldn't. And I do think that in
a paradoxical way, but then you know that I profoundly believe in the coincidence of opposites,
that the way in which things will get better is actually by getting worse, that in doing
that our vision will become clearer, our responses will become more natural,
and we will see what matters. And that that which matters to us and which will enable us to survive
will to be to be able to trust people and to achieve something which really exemplifies
goodness, truth and beauty. And you might say, but in circumstances of dereliction, would beauty
matter? And in the book, I emphasise that the earliest human artefacts that we know about
are beautiful and seem as what was he called the chap who did the history of the world in
a hundred objects, suddenly forgotten his name, Neil, the director of the British Museum for
Heaven's sake, what was he called? I don't know. Anyway, well anyway, you surely know about the
history of the world in a hundred objects. Anyway, no. Yeah, but not the author. No, no, okay.
He's very well known, but his name's suddenly gone. But anyway, he said that one of the things
that he noticed was that when we first started making things, the simplest hand actors,
we required them to be beautiful as much as we required them to be of utility.
Right. And I quote a consultation on a school in Mexico where the parents in a very poor area
were going to be gifted with a school and they were asked what above all they would value in
that school. And the first thing they said was that they wanted it to be beautiful.
Yeah, I mean, the return to value at the core of culture is inevitable. They have cultures to
survive. That's one almost like a symptom of the state of our civilization is the degree to which
we are removing value from the center of culture. And what's interesting is that
the native disposition of the human is to respond to value still.
So we haven't been completely dehumanized yet. And there's evidence to show that like during
natural disasters and when other things occur, people spontaneously do heroic things. They
spontaneously collaborate that the number of people who go completely sociopathic is actually
much smaller than you'd think that our spontaneous action under complete adrenal overload is basically
to respond to immediate value and save that baby and get this person water and just do what needs
to be done. So the fallback position of the human nervous system that's evolved to respond to basic
value. So Green and Paxton have also demonstrated much to their surprise that the default position
for us is to be honest and that lying is actually stressful and difficult, not that we are naturally
deceitful. So I think these things are really important that you just said. Sorry. And just that
we have a few minutes left and I've been brought to task and quite rightly for the genuine balance
in the questions. And it was entirely because I haven't seen askable questions. But I believe
there's one from Claire. I can't see you, Claire, very easily on the screen. But if you're there,
please let it be known to us with a hand up and that'll make it easier to find you. I know what
your question was roughly, but it'd be better if you can ask it in your own voice. It's early
morning here and it's in Wellington, New Zealand. Welcome. Thank you. No, it just sparked my attention
was that when you were saying, I'm a PhD student and I'm dealing with these topics. And I've very
much focused on the idea of the paradigm shift to make consciousness fundamental to matter.
You know, matter is secondary and consciousness is primary. I'm looking at that issue.
And then you said that value is fundamental. And I thought, well, how many things can be
fundamental? And if value and consciousness are both fundamental, what's the relationship
between the two of them? And are the other qualities that are defined as fundamental?
Good question. And perhaps I could just have a quick stab at that.
I myself hold that consciousness is an ontological primitive and that matter is
an aspect of consciousness. But it seems to me that consciousness is intrinsically relational,
that consciousness is always consciousness towards or consciousness of something else.
And therefore, immediately comes into the question, the nature of this relationship.
And if there is a relationship, and maybe one would say that it is intrinsic, and here I'm not
multiplying entities, but just saying these are other facets that one can talk about about love.
Love is intrinsically relational. It is intrinsically beautiful. It is intrinsically
good. It's intrinsically true when it is true love. So these things are, I mean,
we get tied up in linguistic knots, but it's not that there are a whole cupboard full of entities.
And we come back to my point that there's a problem when we verify things, whereas all we're
really alluding to is different qualities of this primal whatever it is. That would be my answer.
Zach? Thank you, Zach.
It's a very deep question. And as I alluded to before, I would take consciousness matter,
time, space, motion, value as differentiations from an underlying field, which I would characterize
probably as being a field of value if I had to pick one of them, which is interesting that,
again, the basic root of the cosmos is like a desire, like an appetite, like a wanting to be.
Then once you get after those, the question is, is there some more fundamental set as one of the
things that were working on us? A limited set of first principles and first values that would
characterize cosmic evolution, basically from the beginning, which we can either choose to
self-consciously align with these first principles and values of the cosmos or not. And this is the
view of cosmorodic humanism as we're articulating it recently. So I'm not clear how to, I don't,
it's kind of above my philosophical pay grade to make the final decision about those fundamental
categories. But I do think that the list that Ian gave where you add consciousness and value to
matter, time, space, and motion, that's a very important basic list. And the addition of value
is just one of the most important philosophical moves that can be made in our culture today,
because people kind of buy consciousness. They're kind of, even physicists are willing to buy
consciousness, but the idea that the universe matters and has a purpose and that the universe
responds to value is intrinsically valuable is a little bit like that. So the addition is just so
critical, I believe. It puts the press on. It puts the press on. The hardcore left-of-view
reductionist view puts them into a corner. Okay, thank you, Zach. Is that a good enough response
to the question? Yes, I will ponder that. But the only thing is I was thinking is that
matter, time, space of all three-dimensional activities or qualities. And I'm just, you know,
I always thought things like consciousness value beyond maybe three dimensions.
So that's, again, a deep question. Ian, I have the same similar experience while shifting between
these things in the second volume. Yes. There are different kinds of things going on that are all
fundamental. Yes, you were asking a very deep question. And my attempt to answer it very briefly
will not be satisfactory. But what I would say at the moment is this, that
I believe that matter is a phase of consciousness that could be considered secondary to consciousness
or could just be a way in which consciousness can manifest under certain circumstances.
Its reason for doing so is to provide two things that consciousness can't, which is a degree of
permanence and a degree of resistance and the degree of resistance and permanence
up related to one another. And why resistance is important to creation would take me a long time,
but it's a theme I deal with in the book. And once you've got matter, it cannot, we cannot talk
about anything material at all or imagine it without the need for time and space. So when people
tell me that by some mathematical jiggery pokery, they find equations in which time disappears,
I would say, well, you've just cut the rug from under science and indeed philosophical discourse,
because without the existence of time, we can't say anything, know anything, and we can't rely on
anything that we empirically experiment with. And so we get into knots because of the limitations
of language, but also of our consciousness. We're limited beings, let's enjoy it and
let's celebrate it. And but what we have is glorious. And it's up to us to, you know,
respond well to what we've been given. Thank you, Ian. It's a great thought to end on being
limited beings. Time is one of our limitations. And we were trying, first of all, we were trying
to be disciplined about our 100 minute events, 100 minute moments, we're thinking of calling
them, we're still working on it internally. But really glad that you've all shared this one with
us. And there will be further events coming up. We will have one in two weeks, like I say,
we're not quite certain who the mystery guest is, but it's one of two people we're currently
clarifying that in the next couple of days that will become clear. And this will carry on for
several weeks. And we the event is free and perspective is a charity. But if you've enjoyed
this event and you want to support our work, please go to our website and there is a donate
button there if you feel like giving it additionally to allow us to carry on doing this kind of event,
carry on publishing this kind of work. And all that remains for me to say really is a very deep
heartfelt thank you to Ian McGilchrist and Zachary Stein. Thank you very much, both of you.
Thank you to David. And thank you for those who put questions in the chat if it could be
saved and sent to me later, I'd like to see them because I'm very interested in new light
on what I'm trying to illuminate myself. Yes. And yes, thanks a lot for the questions. I will
hopefully see most of you again soon. And I think over and out. But thanks a lot. Take care and see
you again soon. Thanks everyone. Very good.
