So music metacrisis and metanoia. So what I want to talk about today, it really kind
of comes down to these two ideas. Acrasia and metanoia, two ancient Greek words. And
you see the statue that's related to Acrasia is someone kind of bound in chains and unable
to break free. And then this sculpture, which I discovered online when I was looking for
a counterpart to the sculpture of the man bound in chains, has this kind of quality
of an inner light bursting forth, which I think speaks to metanoia. So I want to look
a little bit more deeply at these terms. So Acrasia is from the Greek meaning without
and kratos meaning power or strength. So it's a lack of power, it's a lack of strength.
And the term Acrasia really means a kind of lack of command of oneself. And so this,
we see this when individually when we know what is the right thing to do. Intellectually
we might think, okay, you know, what's a really important value to me is to be healthy. And
so I don't want to eat too much chocolate. But then we have a weakness of will. And we
go for the cookie or we eat the chocolate anyway, you know, so that's a kind of banal
form of Acrasia, maybe a more painful form of Acrasia might be when we know that we don't
want to lose a temper with people that we love. But in the midst of strong emotions,
we say things that hurt people. And so it's having some understanding, some intellectual
knowledge of what is the right way, what is the wise way, what is the good way to go.
But then for whatever reason, we're not able to adhere to that, we're not able to be in
alignment with that. And so I mean, my sense is that this is a very, when you hear this
term, there's a kind of familiarity, we think, oh yeah, I can see that in my own life, I
can see that in myself. I feel, I believe at the moment, we're experiencing a kind of
civilization on Acrasia, where our kind of young, nascent global civilization is collectively
going in a direction acting in ways that I think many of us sense is not wise. Many of
us sense is taking us in an unwise, a wrong direction. And yet we seem unable to change
that, to change course, to do something different. And there's almost a kind of an inevitability
of this unfolding of the meta crisis. So this is our kind of predicament that we're in. And
the counterpart to that or the journey that we could maybe make to something different,
I think is encapsulated in the term metanoia. And so metanoia comes from the Greek meaning
meta, the Greek term meta, which means change after or beyond. And the word new, which means
meaning, which means mind or consciousness. So it refers to a kind of profound change of
heart. But it's not just a change of mind, like a kind of shallow kind of change in the
way of thinking or change of opinion. In fact, in the synoptic Gospels, it's the first word
that Jesus says. So it has the term metanoia has a really deep history that speaks to a
profound inner revolution and inner transformation. And it relates to one seeing the error of our
ways, but also this kind of profound commitment to go in a completely different direction.
And so if we are stuck in a kind of civilization like crazy, then one possible solution, if I can
use that word, although it's not the most appropriate word, the response needs to be some
kind of collective metanoia, some kind of profound transformation. And I want to share with you a
depiction of metanoia before I say a little bit more about metanoia. And it actually comes, it's a
somewhat humorous depiction, but it comes from the film Blues Brothers. And if you haven't seen the
film, Jake and Elwood Blues, I think Jake just gets out of prison, and then they go back to their
orphanage and the orphanage is about to close and they're running out of money. So they need to kind
of find, find them, they're given this task, you know, like the hero's journey, they have this task
to complete. And they're told to go to church. And Jake's not happy, but he doesn't want to go to
church. I think Jake is John Baluchian, Elwood is Dan Lackroyd. And then you see this kind of
metanoia transformation that happens as they're in the church listening to music. So I want to play
this for you just now. One, because the music is so wonderful, but it also, it only came to me
after I wrote the essay that we published in Substack, that this is an example of metanoia
through music. So I'm going to play this for you just now.
We all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all
We all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all are all the ones, and we are, we are the killers, and we are the slain, and we are the slain!
And another Japan, and I'm then, I'm now, I'm now, I'm now, I'm, I'm now, I'm now, I'm now, I'm now, I'm now, I'm now, I'm now, I'm beautiful, I'm now, I'm now, I'm now, I'm now, I'm now, I'm now, I'm now, I'm now, I'm now, I'm now, I'm now, I'm, I'm now, I'm now, I'm now, I'm now.
Jake, are you all right?
Hey, Luke!
Hey, Luke!
Hey, Luke!
Hey, Luke!
Hey, Luke!
Hey, Luke!
Bear.
The bear.
Bear.
Do you see the light?
The bear!
Do you see the light?
What light?
Have you seen the light?
Yes! Yes!
Jesus, hey, stop dancing, Christ!
I have seen the light!
The band!
The band!
The band!
The band!
The band!
The band!
The band!
The band!
The band!
The band!
The band!
The band!
Raise up!
And God bless the United States of America!
The band!
The band!
So, what's interesting about this, I think, is when I hear the term metanoia, it sounds like, oh, wouldn't that be lovely?
Wouldn't a metanoia be a wonderful thing to have, you know?
Some kind of spiritual awakening.
And it seems to my mind, within kind of spiritual circles, if you like, a metanoia could be treated a little bit like
how falling in love is treated in rom-coms.
Now, bear with me here.
What I mean by this, and I think there is actually a deep connection between metanoia and falling in love,
but in a romantic comedy, a couple fall in love, and then that's the end of the movie when they get together.
And it's, like, happily ever after.
But, of course, you know, if you've been in a relationship that's lasted any amount of time,
you know, the falling in love is not the end of the story, it's the beginning.
And then there's the relationship, and maybe the many decades, being in a marriage, and the work, and all that happens with that, you know?
And so, you could look at a metanoia, or if we talk about what the world needs, and we talk about, like, it's a shift of consciousness.
Like, if we had that, then everything would just be solved, everything would be fine.
But I actually think a metanoia is simply the beginning.
And then the painstaking work begins of actually bringing oneself and one's life into alignment with that revelation, with that understanding.
And, of course, in The Blues Brothers, I never thought I would turn to The Blues Brothers as a source of wisdom, but there you go.
In The Blues Brothers, the metanoia experience happens at the beginning of the movie.
It's the start, it's not the end, it's the start that's then they go on their kind of journey.
So, I just want to situate that in that way, that the metanoia is not the kind of, once we achieve that, that's the work's done.
That's just the first step.
And so, to my mind, metanoia, and this is just the way that I understand it.
As I say, it's a very deep term, and there could be many different ways of understanding and moving into this.
But what occurred to me was that metanoia is a three-part transformation.
And it's a transformation in loving, it's a transformation in knowing, and it's a transformation in action.
And so, I'll start maybe by talking about loving, by saying metanoia is a transformation in what we love.
What I want to point to is it's a transformation in their structure of value, a hierarchy of value.
This is something that was a wonderful conversation between the philosopher and educator, Zach Stein and Ian McGillchrist.
And as it took place, you can find it on our YouTube channel, Perceptiva's YouTube channel, maybe eight or nine months ago.
And they talked about the importance of value-ception.
And with value-ception, what they're talking about is this capacity that we have as human beings to perceive value directly.
And that value is not something that we just kind of, our consciousness paints on to the cosmos.
But it's something inherent in the cosmos, and that we actually perceive it, we can come into a relationship with it.
And one of the points, and I can't remember whether it was Zach or Ian, but I think they were very much in agreement with this,
was that there is a problem with our society's collective capacity for value-ception.
Like as a society, our value-ception is not working very well.
We are valuing the wrong things and not valuing the higher goods that we should be valuing.
And so in an individual metanoic transformation, what happens is, before the metanoia, the individual might be concerned with narrow egoic concerns,
status, reputation, comfort, pleasure.
And then, with the metanoia, their concerns, what they value, what they deeply care about, starts to transcend beyond themselves.
An example of this, of course, is a Christmas carol, Charles Dickens' Christmas carol, where Scrooge, all he cares about is money.
But through those kind of, the dreams and the encounters with the ghost of Christmas past, present and future, he becomes transformed and he cares about things beyond himself.
So there's this transformation, and this is why I call it transformation and loving, because it's about what we deeply value, what we deeply care for and about what we love,
and therefore what we want to serve.
And then also I see it as a transformation in knowing, because along with this comes a kind of reordering of our understanding of reality and our place within it.
So, for a Buddhist, it might be an awakening into the profound interconnectedness of all of life.
And then the kind of myopic narrow concerns of the self might seem silly, you know, and there's kind of an overflowing of compassion and love outwards.
And in the Christian tradition, it might be seeing oneself as a kind of a child of God or Christ, and then once placed within the cosmos is shifted somehow.
So there's a kind of transformation or understanding of reality and what matters in reality and our place within it.
And again, I think this connection to falling in love I think is quite deep, because if you think about when you fall in love with someone, the loving them, the coming to value them comes along with the learning more about them,
the insight into them, so the learning about them, the discovery of the person and the loving them are kind of like one and the same thing, they kind of happen together.
And so I think there's this profound transformation in loving this is profound transformation and understanding knowing insight, and then these two things bring a kind of call to a new kind of action.
And I think this transformed action has, and we can think of as having an interior aspect and an exterior aspect.
And the interior aspect, I believe is the kind of orientation to the spirit to spiritual practice to transform oneself.
As I say, you have a kind of metanoia experience.
And then you give an example, you go on a retreat.
You have as wonderful experience, you feel maybe deep sense of peace, you feel you're in touch with the wondrous life, the miraculousness of life.
And there's this sense, now everything is going to be different.
Now I'm going to be a completely different person.
I'm going to change how I live all the rest of it.
And then three weeks later, you're back at home in the same job with the same partner, and you find yourself being the same old grumpy son.
So you've always been, you know, this miraculous experience.
And then back to the way you were.
And, you know, the first time you're going to retreat and then come off it, that can be a bit disillusioning.
It can be a bit disappointing, you know, it can be kind of crushing actually.
But after you go on more retreats, you see, oh, this is what happens.
And so then the practice becomes nurturing that nurturing the soul really nurturing one's spiritual transformation so that oneself can.
Go in the direction of what the metanoia is calling, and then also in the external world, living that.
So this is the and while I'm talking principally about the individual, I think this can apply to us collectively.
And I kind of collective metanoia would be a kind of profound transformation in what society what we collectively value profound transformation
or understanding of reality, which I think is taking place in many, many respects.
And I think this field is really important to that.
And then a profound transformation in actually what we do how we live that is informed by that deep care and that deep understanding of reality.
Okay, and the contention I want to make in this kind of workshop is that music has a particular power to enable a collective metanoia.
And I just want to just refer back to the term of crazier from earlier.
If you remember that term, it means a lacking command over oneself.
It means an absence without power.
Particularly, I think the absence of the kind of spiritual power to the existential power to do what one feels is right to do what one feels called to do.
And I think music actually has within it a spiritual power to enable a collective metanoia.
And I think this is just a very brief aside one thing that as many of you will know Ian McGill's Chris work and the difference between the left and right hemispheres.
And he talks about how the left hemispheres principle concern is power and acquiring power.
But I would I would argue that the right hemisphere has a power as well, but it's a different kind of power.
It's not a power to control a power over another.
It's more a power to enchant more a power to in soul and more a power to move the heart if you like.
And this is what music can tap into.
OK, so we better have some evidence for this.
And music has this power.
So I want to explore this now.
And just before I get into this, I should say I'm not saying that music by itself can address or resolve the metacrisis or solve all the world's problems.
That would be completely idiotic and totally foolish.
And because the metacrisis is so multi multidimensional, our response will need to be multimodal.
We'll need lots of different and a variety of responses, maybe countless responses in many, many different ways.
But I do believe music in the arts more generally will be necessary because the kind of they can speak at the level of consciousness in a profound way.
And I want to talk a little bit about that just now.
So music has deep roots in our nature, both ontogenetically and phylogenetically.
So let me explain what those words mean.
So phylogenetics is the study of evolutionary history and relations among or within groups of organisms.
So when I say music has deep, is deep in our nature phylogenetically, I mean, it's deep in our evolutionary history.
For many researchers, they believe it predates the emergence of language.
And in a moment, I'm going to show you a clip of a dog actually dancing to music.
And you can see that the dog really is grooving to music, which suggests this deep common ancestry that goes way back predating ourselves as humans.
And then also what's interesting is ontogenesis is the development of an individual organism or anatomical or behavioral feature from the early stage to maturity.
So this talks about the kind of development of like the human being from the embryo and all the way up to, you know, the baby to the infant and so on and so on and so forth.
And what's interesting is that there is a appears to be a parallel between ontogenesis and phylogenesis.
So what is ancient in our evolutionary history, you can often find it in the early stages of the organisms development.
And so this is an example, this is really, I'm just going to move this little zoom box here.
So you can see this is a fish, salamander, tortoise, chicken, pig, cow, rabbit, human.
And you can see the embryos of all of these creatures are very, very similar.
And of course, interestingly, the human embryo, when it's really, really young has a tail, because that's part of our evolutionary history.
We evolved from mammals that had tails, even even prior to mammals, fish, reptiles.
And then you can see as the embryo develops, it starts to take its own path and goes its own trajectory.
Okay, so music, I want to argue is is deep, deep ancient part of ourselves.
And I want to share with you some videos that reveal this now.
Now I'm going to play this clip and you'll watch, you'll actually see if you watch closely, you'll see the dog moves actually in time to the music.
And then of course, you can also see the expression of the dog, which shows his or her pleasure as well.
Okay, pretty clear that dog likes his kind of funky blues.
Okay, next video, I want to show you of a mother with her baby.
I can find the video.
And what's interesting here, you'll see the mother sing a few songs, the baby and the baby's quite happy and then she'll sing opera.
And I just want you to notice the strength of the baby's emotional response, like the baby responds to this music more strongly than many adults would.
Okay, so my son who is super happy all the time and loves when I sing every song, like everybody clap, clap, clap, clap.
Everybody sing la la la la la.
Okay, so he loves that song.
He loves heavy metal.
Okay, that should like terrify a baby, but not George.
But when it comes to opera, he gets super emotional and upset.
George?
Okay, so I think it's very interesting just how profound the baby's response is.
Like the pathos in that opera music, the baby picks it up and his response I think is just revealing how quick we are to kind of resonate with music.
And what's interesting is this, the deep kind of, the fact that music is deep, deep in our nature means that it's really cross cultural.
And so I want to show you another couple of clips.
One is of Bobby McFerrin.
And I'll just let this clip kind of speak for itself if I can find it.
Give me one second.
Okay, here it is.
Expectations?
Expectations.
Watch.
Ba.
Ba, ba, ba.
Okay.
Ba, ba, ba, ba, ba, ba, ba, ba, ba, ba, ba, ba, ba, ba, ba, ba, ba, ba, ba, ba, ba, ba, ba, ba, ba, ba, ba, ba, ba, ba, ba, ba.
Dilla, dda, dda, dda, dda, dda, dda, dda, ba, ba, ba, ba, dda, dda, dda, dda, dda, dda, dda, dda, dda, dda, dda, dda, dda, dda, dda, dda, dda, dda, dda, dda, dda, dda, dda, dda, dda, dda, dda, dda, dda, dda, dda, dda, dda, dda, dda, dda, dda, dda, dda, dda, dda, dda, dda, dda, dda, dda, dda, dda, dda, dda, dda, dda, dda, dda, dda, dda, dda, dda, dda, dda, dda, dda, dda, dda
ba, ba, ba, ba, ba, ba, ba, ba, ba, ba, ba
ba, ba, ba, ba, ba, bro!
Baaaa, baaaa, baaaa, baaa, baaa, baaaa, baaa, baaa, baaaa.
Yeah.
Now what's interesting to me about that is, regardless of where
I am anywhere every audience gets that but it doesn't matter you know it's just
you know the pentatonic scale for some reason if you're okay now in that little
video clip Bobby McFerrin used the audience for singing what's called the
pentatonic scale in music and I might be able to to play this let me see can
you guys hear this if I play this can you hear that note there yeah so the
pentatonic is just that's it those five notes and that's the scale that he was
using and I want to show you one more video now and I might flick through this
video a little bit because I don't want to spend too long on it but it just shows
you the various from various cultures all over the world using the pentatonic
scale and in the Western musical scale there are 12 different notes that of
course can be arranged in all kinds of different forms and there's all types of
different scales and but the pentatonic are for some reason these five notes are
are used by cultures all over the world much more than any other scale so let
me just find this and bring this up okay I've got it now
okay and it goes on but you get the idea for some reason these five notes touch
the human being activate our emotions speak to love speak to pain speak to all
of these different aspects of what it means to be human and all different
cultures all over the world create music around these five notes now of course
there's a lot of music that's created out with these five notes but there's
something quite universal about this and so what I wanted to kind of point to is
the fact that music has an impact to touches in a kind of deep way and move
consciousness way and so to return now to the little slideshow I want to I want
to now explore the three pathways that I think music can offer to to enabling
this collective metanoia so one and this relates to of course the knowing is
music as a metaphor and is offering insight into the nature of reality and
ourselves and so the first thing I want to touch on is I want to share with you
three different metaphors that music can offer the first one is a little bit
playful but it just I just want to show you how music reveals truths about who
we are as human beings mirrors our nature and then mirrors also the deep
nature of reality so the first has to do with something called the 12 bar blues
and the 12 bar blues is this structure that you see here and if I can I can
maybe play it for you can you hear that yeah okay yeah okay cool so the 12 bar
blues is and one of the most widely used famous song forms in Western music
and Western music and it was the the absolute foundation of rock and roll
okay and the devil's music and that's important because we're gonna come back
to that in a minute so I'm gonna play so if I was to play the 12 bar blues it
would be a bit like this okay so I'll play in a kind of rock and roll kind of
rhythm so this would be the one chord and then back to the one and then the five
and what's interesting about this and I don't know I'm sure other people said
this I think I stumbled across this revelation myself I don't know what it
says about me but if you look at the structure of the 12 bar blues it's
actually pretty similar to the classical pattern of an orgasm now why would it be
the case that the music of rock and roll which is kind of the music of sex you
know that's what rock and roll is all about and and which people you know
derided as the devil's music if you look at the structures of them it stays on
the one for a while and then it gets to this the four chord which is that middle
part where it kind of gets to the plateau right and then the excitement
building and then back to the one so this is just a slightly humorous example
but it just it just shows you how music has this capacity to speak to deep
aspects of who we are ourselves as embodied beings now another aspect of
another kind of music a kind of metaphor that that can be that music can offer I
think can maybe teach us something a little bit more profound so this is
something that we use actually at the beginning now of the anti-debate that
perspectiva and has developed and the anti-debate is seeks to be an antidote to
this debate a way of having public conversations a kind of democratic
discourse that is that moves beyond polarization and moves into a deeper
appreciation of diversity of you and there's there's there's many aspects to
it and I am there's a lot to the anti-debate and watch this space because
we have a video on it coming out soon but I just want to share with you one
metaphor that we use that draws in music that it's helpful to to understanding
what we're trying to do with it and I think it's helpful to understanding the
nature of truth actually so when we think of consonants in music we usually
think of intervals that fit well together so you can see there if they if I
was to play the note middle C okay well I play if I play this note here actually
so this is C and then if I play the note above that's an octave above and you can
see in those first two waveforms the second waveform this one here is double
the length and or it's the ratio of the two wave waveforms is two to one so the
second there's there's for for the same length of time there's two waveforms for
the length of time it takes for one in the first and this is why these two notes fit
together because the wavelength is one is double the length of the other and so
they sync up very frequently now if I go to the next note G which is the fifth
that has a ratio with the note C of three to two two three to two so they're very
they're very consonant intervals these intervals fit well because the wavelength
fit together so when we think of consonants or harmony we usually think
that harmony is about consonants it's about notes that fit well together and
in some sense this is true but if you only play notes that fit well together
then what you'll actually get is quite boring music you don't get anything
interesting okay it sounds a little bit deranged there's too much order you know
actually when you play music like that it's almost that you know it has kind of
the kind of quality of a totalitarian state comes to mind now if you take an interval
that has a lot of dissonance so rather than these two notes together an octave rather than playing
C and C I play C and B the ratio of those two notes is something like I can't remember
exactly it's something like eight to nineteen or something it's very dissonant and you can hear to
the ear those two notes clash okay but if I play two other notes along with them so these two notes
clash but when I add in E and G so I play C E G and B then they form a chord called the major seventh
and actually that dissonance is unfolded within our larger relationships that actually produces
a more beautiful harmony and all of music is all about the interplay of dissonance it's actually
the interplay of dissonance that creates beauty that creates richness that creates soulfulness in
music it's not consonants consonants by itself consonant intervals don't do much at all
it's actually the interplay of dissonance and to my mind this is also true of the nature of ecosystems
if you think about the relationship between a lion and a gazelle it doesn't look very consonant
certainly not from the gazelles point of view okay there's a lot of tension a lot of antipathy
animosity but when you take the step back to the ecosystem as a whole that is unfolded within a
larger harmony and so what can this teach us well what happens if we apply this to the notion of truth
rather than there being one truth what if we understand the ontology of truth to be like an
ecosystem and actually there are a diversity of truths that come in together that kind of form a
larger whole um so this is to my mind about the the direction we need to go and these kind of
metaphors might offer us insight about about the nature of reality okay i want to go to one more
now so um i'm just gonna get grab a guitar
okay so unfortunately i probably need a very very close microphone for you guys to see this
and you won't be able to hear it either but you'll just have to take my word for it
if i play this string here
it resonates and vibrates okay now the other five strings in the cut guitar don't do anything they
don't move but if i play this note
here if i put my finger in this fret
that's the same tone same pitch as this note and what's interesting is when
two strings are at the same pitch and you play one of them the other starts to resonate as well
they start to sync up and the and the other one actually starts to resonate and vibrate
if it's not the same pitch it'll just be completely static
so what is how does this offer us an insight what is the metaphor that we can draw here
well i want to i want to argue that this is actually a metaphor for music itself
because i believe that music has the capacity to allow different consciousnesses so the
consciousness for instance my consciousness the consciousness of ana the consciousness of heli
of kylan robb we can actually come into a resonance together through music and this is what
this is what music does and i want to share with you an example of this um a quite powerful
recent example of this which is from the singer oliver antony and he has a song um i'll see if
i can bring this up now you might have heard this you might recognize this i think this video now
has over 110 million views online and um there's something about the pain of his song about the
authenticity of his of his of his singing the melody and the words that that resonated with
people all over the world um and so i'd like to i'd like to play just a little bit for you
i've been selling my soul working whole day over time hours for bullshit pay so i can sit
out here and waste my life away drag back home and drown my troubles away it's a damn shame
what the world's gotten to for people like me people like you wish i could just wake up
ain't it not be true but it is all it is living in the new world
with an old soul these rich men know for rich men lord knows it all just want to have total control
want to know what you think want to know what you do and they don't think you know but i know that
you do is your dollar ain't shit and it's tax to know him don't go rich men don't go rich men
okay i feel really bad for like having to cut these songs off uh
so i hope you can you can bear with me in that um what was interesting about this
was if you look at the comments on youtube you see people from all over the world
saying how they resonate with this people living in iran south africa finland zimbabwe
uh the uk turkish netherlands germany australia it goes on and on um and there's one comment
that i wanted to just highlight was that somebody said i'm from the uk and this song
isn't just an american anthem it's a world anthem and so there's something about music
and i think it's because it goes into the depth of who we are as human beings that
that it can kind of to um to use to use a kind of musical cliche strike a chord it can it can
somehow consciousness is all over the world and different people can can resonate in the same
understanding that's much more profound i think and much more powerful than just words just saying
yeah to just say working people working class people are having a hard time of it at the moment
doesn't do it like his song does it you know um and so one of the ways that music can can enlighten
can reveal deep aspects of the nature of reality aspects of nature ourselves is through metaphor
and i've talked a lot about metaphor but the other way is is actually through direct experience
um and i want to share with you a couple more songs um one is from a band called the swan
silver silver tones a group of singers a group of gospel singers i was fortunate enough to stumble
across this group of singers when i was about 15 and i just happened into a cd store and bought
some kind of compilation of great gospel singers for about i think it's probably about
one pound fifty at the time um and these are some of to my mind some of the best singers i've ever
heard and you might notice that i have a particular affection for the african-american musical heritage
so i'm going to play with you for you a song called mary don't you weep and for me there's
something amazing about this music that comes from a time and from a people who suffered
extremely like suffered terribly and the music has within it that suffering has it has within it
the pathos the the the struggle of life and yet it has joy and yet it has ecstasy and yet it actually
tilts into moments of transcendence and hopefulness and to me that says something profound about the
what it means to be human and what's possible for human beings i'll play this just now and it's
just about just short of three minutes i think this song but we're hopefully not being too indulgent
but i think it's it's just so good it's worth listening to the whole thing
and just to notice just noticing the warmth the softness in it but then the kind of movement
to the climax of ecstasy enjoy at the end
hey
your little sister don't have tomorrow no more now can i get a witness he said
mother don't have tomorrow it may be somebody sick today if somebody here ain't got no home
but listen
fellows
they got drowned in the sea
but i believe a man said me
your little sister don't have tomorrow no more
now listen now if i could read your mind i could i won't tell you that i surely would
know
put your foot on the rock stand on the rock where mold is stood one day
because of the fair road line that's what the battle said you got drowned in the sea
only one day but i believe the man said
he said me
you said
you won't have to give up night for one more
and maybe it could have been a little hard to hear
and i believe jesus said i better call a little bit loud
wish i had somebody to help me call me
baby
i know your bridge over deep water been trusting my name
i don't believe she heard you you better call it again
baby
okay this one's silver tons
so
this is the annoying aspect of
metanoia but there's another aspect which is the music of spiritual practice
and this is the kind of the action part of inner transformation
and there are many ways in which music as is either enhances spiritual practice or is a direct
directly implicated or the direct path of spiritual practice
i'll come back to the writer and the elephant we see this in the indigenous traditions
and plant ceremonies and christian choral evil and even song and buddhist chanting and the
sufi mystics the whirling devishes and breath working then of course more recently
as an existential and spiritual practice psychedelics music is often really really central to that
and one of the reasons i think music is particularly powerful and it relates to this
this notion that jonathan high developed this metaphor or the writer and the elephant which
is a description a way to describe um the human psyche and so he sees the human psyche has been
composed of these two parts the writer represents the rational mind the intellect their capacity for
planning um our capacity to uh um uh yeah get and plan make decisions and see into the future
and the elephant is our kind of deeper more evolutionary ancient instinctual emotional
impulsive self and what's key is the way these two aspects of ourselves relate to each other
so on the surface it might look like the rider is in control the riders decide and right go this
way go that way but really if the elephant wants to go in a different direction what hope is the
rider got you know and so this speaks to the the the problem of acracia that we might see what the
right thing to do is we might desire to go in a certain direction but due to our emotional selves
our instinctual selves our impulsive selves our desire for pleasure our the force of fear of
whatever it might be the elephant goes its own direction and the reason spiritual practice is
so powerful is because we can then it's a way for us to train the elephant it's the way for the
riders to say to the elephant okay we're gonna learn how to go in the right direction you know
and i think music is particularly powerful aspect particularly powerful method and spiritual
practice because music actually speaks to the deeper aspects of us it doesn't just operate at
the kind of upper intellectual level the more more recently evolved
aspects of human cognition but it speaks to the depth of our being
and which is why it's used in all of these different traditions and it can be used devotionally so
then it can kind of draw us towards the good draws towards the beautiful draws towards the transcendent
it can also be used as a kind of an alchemical process like in breathwork practices or psychedelics
where the music itself seems to be a kind of a catalytic agent they can actually bring about
kind of inner transformation um so i thought it would be nice actually for us to engage in just
a little bit of practice right now together and use music as part of that so what i want to do is
just do a very short meditation i'd like to guide us for for a few minutes and then i'd like to play
a very well-known song you've probably heard it many times and Debussy has cleared the loon
which is a beautiful evocative very deep song and piece of piano music but what i'd like to do
is guide us into contemplation on the interconnectedness of the cosmos and then as we listen to the
music just rest in the kind of remembering um in buddhism the word from mindfulness is sati
which means remembering and another way of saying remembering which i really like i learned from the
trauma um uh specialist Peter Levine is remembering being the opposite of dismembering
so when you this when something is dismembered it's pulled apart but remembering is to sew back
together so the invitation is to kind of rest on the remembering of our interconnectedness with
everything are coming back together the whole and i think this short quote from from Einstein
which is also well known is is appropriate for this and this is something Einstein i think he
wrote this to a friend when they it he recently experienced the bereavement and he wrote this
to them to console them this was in a letter he he sent it to them a human being is a part of the
whole called by us universe a part limited in time and space he experiences himself his thoughts
and feelings as something separated from the rest a kind of optical delusion of his consciousness
the delusion is a kind of prison for us restricting us to our personal desires and to a
affection for a few persons nearest to us our task must be to free ourselves from this prison
by widening our circle of compassion to embrace all living creatures and the whole of nature in its
beauty okay so if you want to find a way of sitting that feels comfortable and stable
and i'll guide us in a short uh meditation just for a few minutes and then i'll play the
piece of music and my invitation is just to listen to the music and let yourself rest into it and
just let your attention really be fully with the music and where it wants to go okay so
it'll be nice to when we close the eyes that feels comfortable for you
you can also be good to take a few slightly deeper breaths
with each in breath and out breath
allowing the mind allowing the mind to kind of rest down into the body
and feeling also the body supported
by the chair whenever you're sitting on
feeling the gentle force of gravity
operating on the body
and then allowing the breath to find its own rhythm
allowing the body to just breathe naturally
almost everything that is alive breathes in some way
so sometimes it can be a sense that life is breathing us
in the breath
it's a rhythm in nature like so many rhythms the rhythm of day and night
the rhythm of the seasons
the rhythms of the tides
the heart beats of countless creatures
and of course the body is warmed by the sun in this moment
without the sun there would be no heat
and also the body is full of water
is dependent on the rivers the oceans the clouds
so simply resting here a kind of remembrance
the interconnectedness with everything else
you
You
You
You
You
You
You
You
You
Hey
Need some time to come back
Back to back to the screen
Back from the cosmos back to the screen, okay
So I'd like to
Just finish by
Speaking briefly, but music is
realization and so if
if
If the music's capacity to enlighten is about bringing us into deeper understanding of reality and offering insights to reality and
Insoling is is about
practice
Then if we come back to that kind of those original three aspects of metanoia
To my mind music is realization is is maybe the most important and most profound
Which is transforming what we love
Transformation of loving
very much in that respect value section and so to this end I want to
Draw in the words of take that hand
and
and
Yeah, I'll read. I'll just read this out. This is from I think the fifth of ten love letters to Mother Earth
Take that hand writes dear mother earth
There are those of us who walk the earth searching for a promised land
Not realizing that you are the wondrous place who've been looking for our whole life
You already are
Wonderful and beautiful kingdom of heaven the most beautiful planet in the solar system the most beautiful place in the heavens
You are the pure land for countless Buddhas and Bodhisattvas of the past manifested realized enlightenment and taught the Dharma
I do not need to imagine a pure land of the Buddha to the west or a kingdom of God above for I will go when I die
Heaven is here on earth the kingdom of God is here and now. I don't need to die to be in the kingdom of God
In fact, I need to be very much alive. I can touch the kingdom of God with every step
So for me this is
Quite a profound
View on the nature of life and the nature of
The nature of our relationship to what could be called divine or sacred and
One way that this is spoken on the pithiest way this this is spoken of this is it
Which is to say that
Music it doesn't just point towards the true the good and the beautiful it doesn't just point towards
The possibility of a sacred relationship with reality or the realization of sacredness
music is itself a beautiful manifestation of
Truth goodness and beauty it is reality manifesting as joy as beauty a sacredness
And we can participate in that directly through music and in this end tradition. They teach that this is
Available to us all the time and a similar sentiment is depicted in this in this
Painting by Michelangelo on the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel
Where you have Adam and God reaching to each other and if you look closely you'll see that Adam's finger
Where God's finger and arm is fully outstretched Adam's finger is for them to make contact
It's up to Adam to just extend his finger that little bit further and the the beating of this is
That what we can fare is that God is all of what's available to us the ultimate the divine the sacred nature of reality
Beauty truth goodness the wondrousness that is reality is available to us
But it's just up to us to kind of wake up to it to realize that to be to kind of make that movement towards it and
I like to think that music is
Is
If this is to add one more dimension to this to this picture music is kind of God calling to us singing to us
urging us to come into contact with this sacred
nature of reality and
This is there's a there's a conversation recently between Amy Gilchrist, Dany Schmutterberger and John Verveke and they talked about
The need for really for a transformation or value-ception for collectively as to come a
To reorientate towards deeper true or higher values and the term the sacred actually came up 52 times in the space of the conversation
And it wasn't just in one part it came up throughout the entire conversation and this is
three and
very
accomplished thinkers
Putting their minds to the question of how do we address the metacrisis and how do we chart a new path and there was this
Constantly coming back to this need to orient towards the sacred and my sense is that music offers us a way to
Not just to point towards it, but actually to participate in it to realize it to experience it in the here and now
and
This is I think for what music offers us is realization
And it's the it's it can help us fall in love with reality
If somebody can have a an appreciation of the sacredness of the beauty of reality
through music
Then my sense is that that can open up into an appreciation and the sacredness of reality as a whole beyond music as well
I'd like to share for you one final final clip
Okay, just before I get to that clip. I
Just want to share this briefly
and
This notion that the fruit fruit contains the seed
So far I've been talking about
Music is metaphor as a way to understand reality music is spiritual practice and all of these things would point to the notion that that
Music is a way to get to some better goal
okay, and you could think of all of our
Attempts to address the various crisis we're in the predicament we're in
Means to some kind of end maybe in the future, maybe 70 100 150 years where human beings finally learn how to live in harmony with each other on the planet
But I think we also need to understand that
What what what we can learn from this this notion that the fruit in the seed can be the same thing
And what I mean by that is if we if we are seeking a more beautiful world
One way to explain the way to that is that there is no way to a more beautiful world the more beautiful world is the way
So
We actually if we if we if we seek to bring into being a more beautiful world
We have to realize it in the here and now
We have to make it come alive in the here and now and when I think about
What a beautiful more beautiful world might entail it definitely has people singing and dancing it
People somehow coming together in community. Maybe sharing food
Maybe they're celebrating the joy in the miracle of life. Maybe they're having a live experience of the beauty and the wondrousness of existence
there's something of that there and if we can do that in the here and now and
Move into that more and more. I think it shows the seed for more in that it shows the seed for a more beautiful world
Whereas if we think well, that's kind of a luxury
We need to just figure out how we're going to transition off of fossil fuels or we just need to figure out how we're going to deal with our
The the kind of scourge of misinformation or we need to just focus on the problems
My concern is that we'll actually forget to be in love with the world
We'll get to be in love with reality and that is really surely going to bring our demise
So there's a there's a there's a need to bring to life
And the more beautiful world in the here and now and if we do that that has its own causal power
That's has its own causal agency
and the final thing I want to point towards is that
We need to find
New ways we need to give birth to new forms of communitas
That generate the right set and setting to fully harness the spiritual power of music
And so what I mean by this is in psychedelic therapy and psychedelic practice
They talk about the importance of the set and setting
If you're the set is the kind of mindset you bring to the intention you bring to it
And the setting is the environment the people around and if these things are not right
the the likelihood of a good trip or a valuable trip is
Goes down and the likelihood of a bad or very traumatic trip goes can go up quite a lot
But if you get the set and setting right you can have a much more helpful experience and I think just now what happens with music
sadly in our kind of spiritually hollowed-out culture and our
The way kind of capitalism is has has has infiltrated every aspect of life
Music is reduced to mere entertainment something we merely consume and we don't really engage with it in
In
Profound spiritual context or with a profound spiritual intention
Kind of related to the this historical moment to the challenges of our times and
If I feel like it's something we we need to experiment
We need to explore how we can do that and I don't know how to do that quite honestly. I'm not sure I
Also think there's a necessity to do this in ways that are not bound
within the old religious traditions, which
To many people the kind of dogmatic metaphysical and cosmological claims turn them off
And we need to do this in a way that can be more pluralistic more open
But never nonetheless our firms the deep mattering of life
and so I want to just share one one final video now
which is of is is
Which I had the chance to record when I was in Argentina and last year and in Argentina Buenos Aires
my wife Kylan and who's on this call we were there for I think just over two months and
One of the things that we saw a lot, which was quite in some sense kind of amusing
But also wonders is that the the Argentinians they protest a lot seem to be always on the streets protesting, right?
But whenever they protest
They're out playing drums and they're dancing. Okay, so I want to show you just a quick
video
That I took of of just this
Oh
Okay, so there you go
so
This is just an example that was that doesn't happen at least in my country in Scotland
We don't see this, you know very much at all
but it was it's kind of woven into communal cultural practice that has a kind of socio-political end to it goal in mind and
It becomes a form of Communitas
But it also is devoted to some
wider aim and I'm really curious about how could we
Form how can we kind of give rise give birth to new forms of communal activity new cultural practices
They really harness music and the address that speak to the challenges of our time
And so that's the one of the things that in this project that we are we are kind of in the in the very early stages of a
Perspectiva, I'm giving my mind to to think about how that might happen
So that's
Me I'm finished with that workshop. I hope you guys are not totally
Exhausted by that and I very very much appreciate your presence and attention. I'd like to do now
