No.
They have their issue about the
issue of the law.
I would say that's good.
And I think that's great.
Now, everybody knows he's a liar.
But you agree, and Joe, you're the liar.
I want to make sure.
I want to make sure.
I heard you ordered last in your class.
Not first in your class.
When conflation gets out of control, interest rates go up.
Let's not do half of it.
Please, let's trust answers.
You weren't voting.
Excuse me, Chris.
I'm speaking, and I'm not done yet.
You had a chance.
I had a time when you wanted to speak, but it was.
Let me say a little bit at the beginning before we start about why we're doing what it's about.
Debate has its place.
Debate can be beautiful, edifying, it's often a spectacle, a clash, entertaining, it's
often very enlivening, it's done well, it can even be informative.
But sadly, the way the world is today, there's many structural incentives towards polarization
built into the way we get our information.
So we're in a phase of history where divergence and bifurcation and disagreement is actually
being compounded and exacerbated by the systems and structures that prevail.
And this is a big deal because democracies or even any functioning form of government
that includes people relies on a capacity to discuss adequately what's going on.
So I first encountered the idea of the anti-debate when I read a post by Peter Lindbergh on
the eMERGE site, WhatIsEmerging.com, and that was a relatively political version of
the anti-debate.
It was particularly framed with regard to recent debates that were happening in the US.
He was saying, wouldn't it be great if we had something, a different kind of practice
that was, if anything, the exact opposite of all the things that were going wrong with
debate.
Just look at it as a form.
It's typically two people.
Historically they would be male, today they may not be, and there would be an audience
watching these two people flesh something out, and very often there would be a contention
or proposition.
And that gives rise to a contest.
One side has one view, one side has the other view, you mobilize the arguments to support
your view, you find the counter arguments to your opponent's view, and of course there's
a great illustrious history to debate.
So when debates are done well, it can be really rather a beautiful thing.
But there are so many things militating against doing it well.
The very architecture of social media is built upon maximizing polarization.
And paradoxically the way it does that is it unites people in what they're against.
People are looking for that sense of contest, even conquest, even humiliation.
So we want debate to be sort of there as a reference point to ground people in what
this is.
It's a kind of public exploration of any given subject.
But it's empty in the sense of antidote.
It's trying to actually get beyond all the things that we see as being wrong with debate.
I was involved with the anti-debate from almost the very beginning.
My involvement really stemmed from my own long-term question about where is the voice
of the people, you know, we're living in a socio-economic political system that really
only gives voice to the people once every five years, and that only requires them to
vote in a choice between two parties.
What I've always been interested in is this idea that every human being plays a part in
a really colorful and rich tapestry of voices that could add up to something that would
respond holistically to the problems that we are facing today.
What I've just realized is that all my decisions on this are made by my feelings.
We live in a time where we're all exposed to things that we struggle to make sense of.
We can't quite agree with ourselves.
Our values don't always align with our actions.
Our ideas don't always chime with our values.
And a lot of what the anti-debate is getting at is that internal struggle.
It's about finding your own inner center in a relationship.
So what are we trying to achieve at the end of it?
It's not some beautiful middle position in which everyone can agree on.
It's not some consensus verdict.
It's a deeper felt sense of your relationship to the issue of hand.
The anti-debate is a process where you can bring much more of who you are as a human
being, your emotional self, what is important to you spiritually, what you value deeply
and bring that into a conversation about things that really matter and about issues where
there can be contention, where there can be disagreement and dissonance and to try and
hold that gracefully in the service of our collective wisdom feels like something we
deeply need.
As we go through the process, we are experimenting.
And so while we have a methodology and we've done this before, we're ready for surprises
and we're quite happy for you to help us co-create this.
I feel that for me personally, the anti-debate has really come alive since Evo and Indra
have helped me with it because I've realized we've connected it to democracy a bit more
closely.
This is something about a practice of democracy if it's done well.
I have been a designer.
I have been a participant, a guinea pig you could say, and I've been a host.
And I would say it definitely has a lot of potential because it's fun, it's engaging,
it's challenging, it's all those things.
And because it goes just beyond theory, it goes beyond thought.
That's why I think it has such potential because I don't recall who came up with this quote,
but it's easier to act your way into a new way of thinking, think yourself into a new
way of acting, and I believe that is very, very true.
I think peace, we don't really know that much about peace and whether it's interesting
or not because we don't know much about it.
So I would suggest that actually peace is a lot more interesting than violence, it's
just that we actually haven't explored it very much.
Action, arguably, is the true transcendent value in the world, so you have to act, you
have to put yourself on the line, you have to take steps, you have to stand, take a stand
of what it is and see how other people receive you or don't, and either way, this is a kind
of courage to put yourself into a new world.
We managed to put together a funding application with the encouragement actually to the credit
of the John Templeton Foundation.
When I first met somebody there, I spoke to them about it as an idea, there's this thing
called the anti-debate, we don't know what it is yet, we need some time to create it,
we've actually no idea what the practice looks like yet, we want to start trying, and we
may even take a while to get to public engagement because until you know what you're doing,
there's no point in putting something out there that's just not yet formed.
So the first few anti-debate practice sessions were six people gathering together and we'd
often practice with two people together, choosing an issue we wanted to be somehow contentious.
So the early stages were quite interesting in terms of the one-on-one activity was not
without its value, we learned something about what it was to inhabit another point of view,
but mostly it was slightly underwhelming, it had this feeling of, this is not the call,
the anti-debate had its own kind of agenda, its own kind of source energy.
Context are not two people, most organisational context, most political parties, most communities,
any given electoral system, invariably multiple layers of interest.
So the evolution of the anti-debate was something about recognising that the one-on-one conversation,
while it still had its place, wasn't necessarily our touchstone, and there might also be something
about the way the world is evolving that makes it less and less likely that one-on-one will work.
There's something about social media that's changed from being mere consumers of kind of
information and knowledge to actually what they sometimes call prosumers, you know,
we're actually creating and consuming at the same time.
So most people who inhabit an online space will have a political view or a view of any given
contentious issue and they'll also be observing views coming in and they'll be relating to them
in various ways. In that context, watching two people thresh it out is not nearly as interesting
as a larger plural encounter with lots of different views on where they come from.
So we began to think that rather than doing it one-on-one, we needed to set up a process that
was a bit more collective, a bit more plural, a bit more collaborative.
And it was also very clear to me that the anti-debate was a quintessentially offline activity
because it's much more interested in the role of the body, the role of somatic data,
what's happening in your body as part of what's going on in an argument.
One innovation we had was tabloying, where you would show in space your view of the
question at hand or issue at hand.
Agree, disagree.
But I'm going to ask the room to speak to itself.
Just an observation in myself that I notice that when I move to a position,
the first thing I kind of almost unconsciously do is kind of say, who's in my community?
Hello, Helen. It's nice to see you there. Just noticing that.
So one of the main ways to move beyond debate was the question.
Debate the question is given to you and you may or may not like it.
There's a power struggle in the very question and about what should we be talking about here
and why. And we felt that needed to be part of the method.
How are you feeling about what you're hearing in relation to your question about
is fear ever useful?
It feels related, but it does feel quite separate.
Or rather, it feels like there's a hearing or a polarity here.
I'm tired of not seeing women in all of the powerful institutions.
I'm tired of women not being acknowledged as voices.
I'm tired of old women being made invisible.
I'm tired of girls being conditioned to become passive with toys.
I'm tired. I'm just tired of so many things.
Is masculinity the problem, Sherp hands?
Okay, we have a question now. You have completed the first stage of the anti-debate.
We didn't know what we were going to talk about 15 minutes ago. Now we do.
And so this would move on to the next phase is what we sometimes call the question bomb,
which is that within any good given question, there would be millions of other questions nested
within it. So for example, one question we had along the way was, is war natural?
That's a good example of a question that needs to be disaggregated.
What is war? What is natural? How do we decide what is natural?
What do we imply when we call something natural?
How do we make a distinction between war and conflict?
And it's not for one single authority to answer them.
It's for the room to know that these questions are alive.
And next, we'd often have something about thrashing it out.
So we'd say what we feel about this.
We were quite early on keen to get to feelings, right?
This is a very important part of the anti-debate.
And that felt like I was having something taken away from me.
And I don't choose to believe that it exists.
But in an individual sense, I don't choose to give over my power.
It's just not true that human beings are primarily rational creatures, right?
Yes, we have reason.
Yes, we're capable of great rational prowess when the time comes.
But underlying it all, there are these deep feelings of threat perception
and anger and fear and maybe resentment and a kind of identity protection going on.
These are all baked into any given public conversation.
Our job in the anti-debate is to make them a part of it.
So we're less subject to them and they become more like an object of inquiry
that we can begin to explore together.
Some things we succeeded, some things we failed, but that's what we were trying to do.
Well, it's very short, really.
I think this is a human-centered question.
And I would like to think that we think beyond the human
and natural refers to the whole of creation.
Okay, one more question relating to this.
Thinking and feeling are both the same and different.
If you agree with that statement, go here.
If you disagree, you're here.
Who loved the mood?
Who felt great and now we're getting somewhere?
Right.
I was standing in the middle and I didn't feel I could go to the end of the room
and then you say something like that and I'm like, great, that's exactly where I was.
The fact that the emotion has a legitimate place in the anti-debate,
for me, that was a big thing.
I think this idea that reason and emotion are different parts of cognition
are different parts of cognition and they don't really have a way of working well together.
I think it's really outmoded.
We really have to learn to bring our emotion in the way we deal with people in the right way.
This is why these sorts of opportunities to hone your skill, your cognition,
can be quite helpful.
So for me, I found it quite revelatory.
It was a thrilling experience.
Throughout the anti-debate, we're also very keen to keep in mind the critical mass of people
who just couldn't give a damn, right?
A certain number of people who are like, this is not for me.
I don't particularly want to talk about this.
They're not going anywhere.
They're part of our world and we need the process to somehow acknowledge them
and bring them in when the time's right because they sort of helped us to get in perspective
whether what we're doing is really the right thing.
And over here, still, are the people who felt they couldn't get behind these positions.
And we'd actually like you now to be another group.
That's why we chose the name in the process to call you the enigmatics.
People that we don't actually know really what they think and feel.
They know what they think and feel.
As part of the group in that first anti-debate, they called the enigmatics.
There was a good 15, 20 of us who were just sort of sitting toward the back of the room
watching this all play out and feeling really just sort of
disillusioned, disenfranchised, disenchanted with the process.
Which I thought was really interesting because I think that's really reflective
of what happens in society.
These people are always in the room and they're always in your community
and they're always in the public space.
So I'm just going to invite you for a second to hear from the people on this side over here.
Well, kind of standing behind that, but feeling reluctant to move into a new group.
For the same reason I don't join a political party, although I vote.
Because I'm kind of thinking, where's the empathy?
How are we going to shift into empathy where we can sit down with people we really disagree with?
I pull back from the project because I think that that sense of being before what's not known
actually takes the development of quite deep relationships between the participants in a
debate and so bringing to people together for an evening or an evening afternoon
when they don't know each other before and maybe are coming together because they feel
they're on opposite sides cultivating the sense of trust and not just in each other actually,
but faith that being mistaken or being exposed to a wider or alternative viewpoint
that that can be good for you. I just felt that we didn't really get to grips with that.
We didn't quite know how to bring that about.
I think one of the main challenges has been moving from theory into practice.
There are a lot of really good intellectual ideas, concepts, frameworks,
but when you move that into live practice with warm bodies it's difficult and there's a different
skill set that's required. It's much more important to focus on the relational.
Okay the answer debate, where's it going? What's it for? Who's it for? What are we trying to achieve?
It always had this feeling like throughout it we were like what the hell are we doing?
We're making this up as we go along. Why does it feel that we have to do this?
And yet we don't know what we're doing, right? It's something to do with, you could say,
listening to the future at some level, being pulled along by a certain pattern that is implicit
and you're trying to make it a little bit more explicit. So the evolution of the
anti-debate, that point we began to feel, we were missing a little bit of the initial contest.
The binary gives you a kind of oscillating energy between two forces that can be quite compelling
when it's done well, right? After a while we didn't want it to collapse into dialogue, right?
So we introduced this innovation, we call it swarming near the end and that's where after you've
taken some time with the question to first of all decide on what you want to share together,
and by the way there's a little voting process for that where people people drop out when they
feel the question is not theirs, then you begin to feel the group physically stands around the
question they want to go with. We do that and then there's a certain amount of time exploring the
question in an engagement with the underlying issues and values in the question, a certain amount
of representation of the diversity in the room. Once you've done all that, there's still this
issue of answer what? How can this practice actually in some way focus your mind, actually
clarify what's at stake? So what we build up to towards the end is people showing
not just their opinion, but their moral and political commitment and this is called taking a
stand. I stand for virtue cultivation internally and externally. Effectively what's going on here
is you're trying to recruit people, you're trying to attract them. Embodied resistance is with your
body, it's not something outside of you, so it's about the earth reflecting into your body and
awakening the inner movement of politics. Okay who's moving? Who's moving towards Dominique?
I think it's so interesting that I can't speak about it as if it's a static thing. The words
that want to come to me is like organism, like I don't want to call it a project, I want to find
some term for it that speaks to its sort of living essence because I think that's part of its magic
and its potential and also why it's still frustrating to people because it's not something
that you're necessarily going to come out of with a 12-step action plan. I'm wondering if
anyone here is going to make any difference in their lives or the way they act as a result of this
and depending on the outcome of that is that what this was designed to do or is this process more
like maybe a religious experience or maybe a really good psychedelic trip where it kind of
works through you over the coming months and years without you really realising it's somewhere
deep inside. It felt really alive as a process, it wasn't just sometimes these things can be quite
city downy talky talky but it felt a lot more yeah a different energy to that which I really
appreciated and for me personally I find myself asking myself some difficult questions, some
important questions, I may have left with more questions than I have answers but in a good way.
We all had different takes on the statement and just through this very short discussion we were
all able to see each other's point and realise that actually we're quite aligned on this even though
our focus is on different words and statement. For me the most important thing about the
anti-debate is that it transforms the tempo at which people speak and also even the kind of
personal involvement let's say you know it allows a different register, different levels.
I think there's so much benefit to a group to unearth what's live and that they want to have
a conversation or maybe there wasn't predetermined and just the unearthing of unexpected points of
view and really tuning into where you might resonate with it or disagree but we can learn
from nature to access our better selves as humans. We're stretching a muscle here and expanding our
capacities here which yeah it's really important, I know this is happening in schools which is
absolutely where it needs to be. We brought the process into the schools pretty much exactly as
we've been running it with adults and when we did this I mean prior to this we have no idea what
is going to happen you know we don't know how the young people are going to respond and so it was
real delight to actually find their engagement was so high with it.
That's an age where developmentally young people are figuring out who they are,
what they care about, what they stand for, what they believe and also making sense of the world
and so the anti-debate is a kind of process where that's really what you're doing you're
getting clarification on what you feel, what you think, what you believe but you're also
experiencing that exploring that in relationship to what other people's thoughts, values and opinions
are. One of the things that's interesting about the anti-debate as I understand it is it's
it's something that has that many different people have contributed to over its existence
so it's not it's not just get one sole author lots of people have kind of given their input so
the anti-debate is it all it's like a mutt you know it's kind of this it's kind of this loveable
rogue right and so my hope for the anti-debate is that actually continues my hope is that we can
find a way to release it into the world and that more and more people can start to iterate upon it
and play with it and bring their innovations to it. The anti-debate as a piece of social
software if you like would be very useful if it was simply available to communities to pick up
to learn the mechanics of and to use for themselves set their own agenda set their own
tones at their pace. I think some of the people and even my first impression of it was perhaps like
this is hubris this is hubris to try and attempt to devise a new form of civic dialoguing of
relating of coming into conversation about the world in reality and it is hubristic it is audacious
and yet it's worth it's worth trying it's worth trying. I do believe that creating new social
practices that are worthy of the challenges of our times is a big part of the work it's not enough
to theorize it's not enough to persuade you actually have to practice in a way that speaks to and from
the challenges that you're writing about thinking about it's moving beyond the expectation that a
mere idea can change the world it's the idea enacted socially and culturally that begins to feel more
promising
so
You
