So, could I also ask that everybody turns off their video except for the participants,
so that the zoom will record the four participants I'll turn off my video after the introduction
as well.
Thank you.
What I'll do as well is I will spotlight once we start I'll spotlight all of the four participants
as well so they will be at the right.
Great thank you everyone.
So, yeah, I'd like to introduce a host for this evening Jonathan Rauson Jonathan will
be familiar to many of you, he's appeared on the channel a few times including recently
in the fantastic conversation with John Vivecchi agent in the arena, Jonathan is a chess
grandmaster and philosopher, and has recently written or pulled together and written the
introduction for a book on what's going to be called a metamodernism reader.
What did it end up being called Jonathan, it's here, and it's called dispatches from
a time between worlds crisis and emergence in metamodernity, and I'll explain why that
title came to be in a few minutes.
Awesome.
So, Jonathan, do you want to ask me.
Yeah, David, what's going on like what's what we're doing here but talking about metamodernism
and rebel wisdom like tell me what it means to you because, you know, not necessarily
in great depth but just curious to hear, you know, how did you first meet metamodernism
your eyes meet in a cross across a bar or, you know, the term must have been heard in
a conference or you heard someone using it people are getting excited about it.
But I'm curious to know how you came to it, whether, whether it was fondly or in a sort
of oppositional position, and how that led to tonight's event.
Yeah, it's a good question I'd say that I'm, I don't fully understand it and I feel a certain
level of ambivalence towards the concept.
I get, I mean, it's, it's clearly it's a little bit like game be in a way it seems
like a placeholder for something that feels generally right, that we need some deeper
resolution of the, of the postmodern turn.
So something in that place sounds right and I like the sound of.
I like the descriptions that are attached to it but I find it kind of slightly ungraspable
and very academic.
And, and I, I struggle to, I have a sense of what it means and I see some art pieces that
I would consider to be metamodern, or at least seem to me to be sort of in that space playing
with things in a sort of postmodern way but with a sense of sort of not not just in a
kind of slightly playful or nihilistic way but pointing towards a resolution that I don't
often hear people in the metamodern space talking about.
So I, I feel like, I feel like it's a valuable conversation.
It feels a little bit academic and heady to me and so I'm, I'm interested in where it
meets the, the real world and yeah, and I'm, I'm, I'm here as a viewer as much as anything
to learn more about this, this, this thing.
Okay, great.
Well, thanks, David.
And we're going to do our best if anyone else felt similarly to David there.
And there are those out there who feel like really metamodernism, you need such a clunky
term.
I mean, metas bad enough, modernism is bad enough, put them together, you seem to have
this kind of gratuitously complex term, which is apparently going to somehow save the world
and that seems wildly implausible at some level.
And let me back up and say that tonight we're going to be speaking mostly the four of us.
I'm Jonathan Rouson, as David mentioned, I came into this conversation partly as being
one of two editors along with Lehmann Pascal of the book called Dispatches from a Time
Between Worlds, but I'm delighted to be joined by three friends and colleagues of sorts.
In no particular order, Lena Rachel Anderson is a philosopher from Denmark.
She is currently working principally on Nordic Bildung, but she has a very illustrious background
as a philosopher, has written many books, and principally among them in recent years
is something called a Nordic secret, which is very much worth your time.
She's also written about metamodernity as such a little pamphlet where she gives her
own take on what this term means and why it matters to her.
Greg Dember has come across in different ways, but as a very close confidant and advisor,
often through Twitter direct message, no less, but nonetheless extremely useful for someone
who really understands, well, I think, this sort of more academic cultural theoretical
side of metamodernism.
So he's there as my sense checker for when I'm like, am I pushing this term too far?
Does this stack up with what you know of what the other guys think and so forth?
And he's been really invaluable in that process.
And then we have last but certainly not least, Daniel Gortz, who is, I believe, coming in
tonight as Daniel rather than Hansi, but of course, an important part of the Hansi Freynacht
character that has written really kind of almost cult classic texts on giving metamodernism
a kind of political edge, linking it to developmental theory in particular, but creating visions
for the sort of political visions for the future that wrestle with the times that we're in.
Initially, I called the Listing Society and latterly the Nordic ideology.
And in the show notes, eventually, I'll try and twist David's arm to add in links to all
of the things I've just mentioned, including a side view essay of Greg's that I forgot
to make reference to, which is simply called what is metamodernism and why does it matter?
And that's what tonight's about.
Now, I should say that each of us come to this question in somewhat different ways.
We're not by any means a kind of team in any meaningful sense.
We don't necessarily view the term in the same way or use it in the same way.
And it's not just a terminology.
There's even ideological differences, philosophical differences.
But nonetheless, much of that I'm guessing for the audience watching now, the Rebel
Wisdom audience and the potential audience online is not as interesting as first of all,
getting to grips with broadly speaking, what is this thing and why does it matter?
And then we can get into the divergences of why emphasize this and not that.
So that's how I hope to do it.
And that's why I'm going to go first, because I came to this a little bit like David
with some ambivalence.
In fact, the title of this book I can share in all candor.
The reason this is called The Spatches from a Time Between Worlds.
And it has metamodernity sort of sprawled onto it.
You can see that there.
And and so some people call it metamodernity.
It was going to be called The Metamodern Reader.
But what's quite interesting about the history of this term is that by the time
that idea came to fruition about three years ago, give or take.
And Hansi Freinax influence on the term was so great that people that was almost synonymous.
Metamodernism and Hansi Freinax was they were almost coextensive.
So to create a metamodern reader, look to many of the people we wanted to write for
it to be a kind of tacit endorsement of Hansiism and that many people were reluctant
to go with that. So then, you know, being the sort of diplomatic
try and keep everyone happy as far as possible kind of guy that I am.
We looked around different ways of doing this and we realized that
insofar as I had a view of what metamodernism is at that point,
is that it seems to me to be the quintessential philosophy of a time between worlds.
That we are, in some sense, witnessing the eclipse, latter years, ending inexorable
demise of modernity broadly conceived.
And we are sort of awaiting, expectantly, creatively,
prophetically, perhaps, some kind of new world and that metamodernism is sort of
grappling with that sort of simultaneous ending and beginning that we seem to be
living through together. And that's where the between worlds notion came from.
And also that particular turn of phrase came from Zach Stein, who was one of the
authors in the book, who had written a lot about metamodern metaphysics.
But the reason the title is Dispatches from a Time Between Worlds, Crisis and
Emergence in Metamodernity, was that we wanted to keep metamodern as an emphasis,
as a sort of cohering notion for the whole book.
But we also wanted to already open it up to show this is not just about one
person's thinking or even if he is an invented person living in the Swiss Alps.
Nonetheless, it's it's a broader notion that that many other people have
mistaken. And as I got into it, I began to write my own preface for the book,
which really I spent maybe three months, give or take,
doing the necessary reading to try and get my own feeling for it.
And I'm just going to begin by actually reading out the introduction to the essay,
which is freely available online.
It's called Metamodernism and the Perception of Context.
And you can find that just by Googling is by me.
I'm going to read just the first two paragraphs so you can land this in some way.
Metamodernism is a feeling and all that constitutes the feeling and all that flows from it.
When we consider the mystery of consciousness and the human drama playing out
on this charming anomaly of a planet, feelings are far from trivial.
They have cosmological significance.
The Metamodern feeling co arises through the perception of our context writ large.
It is aesthetic in nature, epistemic in function, historical in character.
And it serves to call into question the purpose of the world as we find it
and the meaning of life as we know it.
If, dear reader, you do not feel called upon to read further to try to understand
more fully what Metamodernism means, I cannot blame you and even envy you a little.
Life is short, there is work to do, and we cannot dance with every ism that gives us the eye.
To paraphrase from Shakespeare's 12th Night, some are born into Metamodernity,
some become Metamodern, and some have Metamodernism thrust upon them.
I am mostly in the latter camp.
I didn't seek out this, whatever it is, word, concept, ideology, pattern, movement,
structure of feeling, structure of feeling.
Stage, state, sensibility, episteme, movement, idea, notion, yet somehow Metamodernism found me.
I have used the term periodically, I have been called a Metamodernist,
and I have editorial responsibility for the book, dispatches from the time between worlds,
crisis and emergence in Metamodernity.
As one of its many adoptive parents, I noticed I feel responsible for Metamodernism
and hope to help it mature in some way.
So that was the beginning, and there's a whole other 12,000 words that follow that.
And I'm just going to speak off the cuff about where I am today,
several months after writing that, unstructured, what it means to me now.
And I still really value it.
I feel less bashful about calling myself a Metamodernist than I used to,
and I'll try and explain why.
So I use the term perception of context,
because I think that's one of the better
casual terms for making sense of what Metamodernism purports to do.
It purports to help you perceive what's going on at scale, right?
Now, how do we perceive?
We perceive cognitively, we perceive emotionally,
but we also perceive in a situated context, which is the early to mid
21st century in an internet infused era in something that's
in a new, arguably a new phase of geological time, which some call the Anthropocene,
but might be more accurately called the capitalist scene.
In other words, a world that's been defined by the forces and modernity
of which capitalism is preeminent.
It's a world that is not by any means entirely secular.
If that's often overstated in the West,
but is one where religion is no longer taken for granted as something
that people orient themselves towards in life.
So to perceive the context of the moment is to perceive something
about ecological degradation, sort of a kind of informational explosion
happening online, the smartphone is the new access Monday,
an awareness of technology coming from not just from Silicon Valley,
but from around the world, radically reshaping our idea of what it is to be human.
And in all of that context, we're like,
what am I to do as a mere individual to make sense of the world and act within it?
And that's where metamodernism comes in as a kind of holding pattern
that says, OK, I have sufficient complexity, no less and no more
to make sense of what's going on for you.
And I need both of these terms to do it.
First of all, we're still in a kind of modernity.
If some say it's over, but if it is over, it's dying very slowly.
There's still a kind of modernism in our education system, in our economic system.
And postmodernism is here, too.
And I think when Lena speaks later, speak about what it means
for these things to be around at the same time.
We're not going through historical phases one to the other.
So it's a mistake to think of metamodernism or metamodernity
as somehow a culmination of several prior stages in which it's entirely a new thing.
It's much better to see it as the kind of thing
that makes sense of multiple forms of cultural understanding,
multiple kinds of sensibility, co-rising in one world.
And that's why we can follow our Twitter streams or our Facebook streams
and see these extraordinary things happening, which on the one hand can be pre-modern.
You can watch like Islamic State cutting someone's head off.
And you can see something much more modern.
You can see people earnestly talking about the stock market
and talking about whether your child is going to get ahead and get into a good school.
And you can have someone speaking about trans rights and the debate thereof
and identity politics of various kinds.
And that would be classically postmodern.
And then you have this different thing, which is something that says
all of these things are still there.
All of them are partially valid in some way.
They all come from a sensibility that's still quintessentially human, still part of us.
And so that's where the term becomes useful,
because it helps to the meta in metamodernism is a way of looking inside modernism.
It's a way of saying it still defines us, but this term gives us a reflex of relationship to it.
And the meta there is quite humanistic.
And the reason that matters is that people sometimes think that it goes
something like pre-modern, modern, post-modern, metamodern,
is if it's some kind of sequential thing.
No, that's not how I see it.
I think it's much better to understand it as the meta is a choice.
The meta is a disposition and a kind of commitment to be
in a certain kind of relationship to the forces that shape you.
So to give you sort of some slightly further clarity on that.
You look at the term metamodernism, and you think I know what metamodernism is.
It's the philosophy of metamodernity.
And what metamodernity is, it's the phase after postmodernity.
No, it's not the way to see it.
The way to understand it is that metamodernity is the phase that is there
alongside postmodernity, modernity, pre-modernity, even indigenous cultures as well.
But what's going on to be a metamodernist is actually to be a particular
it's to establish a relationship, to make a commitment to the times that you're in,
to recognize that we're in a time between worlds.
That's what the meta means in this context is to relate to.
It's a sort of self-referential quality of we are that.
We are those creatures who are in the time between worlds.
We are the ones who have to fathom what the hell is going on
and how we can possibly survive as a species, nevermind thrive.
When we have this technology taking over the world, apparent ecological collapse,
political systems breaking down, and yet we're life's full of hope,
radiant sunshine, great time with friends,
younger generations doing extraordinary things,
enormous acts of heroism and resistance all over the world.
And in that context, we're called upon to make sense of how do we act.
So the the meta in metamodernism for me is a kind of chirological commitment.
It's a way of saying it's not that it's the time before or the time after.
It's the time where the is a kind of injunctive.
The it's a it's a it's a it's a it's a it's a moment to make the resolve
that we have to make sense of what's going on and to make sense.
What makes metamodernism different?
This is what brings in Daniel's work in some extent, Greg's.
The interiority of our lives is quintessentially important to make sense
of what is happening.
It's not enough to do systems analysis, not enough to look at the world at scale
and see what's happening in the news.
You have to look within, to some extent, between and arguably beyond.
That's why the subtitle for my essay, Metamodernism and the Perception of Context,
is the the let me get this right.
The cultural between the political after and the mystic beyond.
So the cultural between Greg will speak to with more authority in a moment.
The political after Daniel, the vision thereof.
What do we do now?
How do we make sense of what's next?
The mystic beyond there are many different sources for this,
but it's a way of saying if modernity is coming to an end.
One of the things that's one of the things that modernity did arguably
was it severed the connection between the good, the true and the beautiful.
It kind of broke them apart.
So you have a kind of scientific truth severed from the kind of ethics
and aesthetics of the good and the beautiful.
And what one of the things Metamodernism has to do is to take
the responsibility of bringing these things back together to get.
There was a joke before we came on about what kind of truth we were talking about.
And the truth that I've been looking for is one that contains goodness
and beauty as a kind of integral part of it.
So that's that's the way to see it for me.
It's like we need to realise that Metamodernism is called for
because we need to wake up to being in a time between worlds.
That's the kind of cultural in between feeling.
And I know that Greg can parse that with more finesse.
The between can mean many things there.
But we also need to political vision.
We need to know what the hell we're going to do next.
That's where Daniel's work is quite important.
And we need the broad spectrum of perspective
that Leonard's work brings as well.
And where I've reached now is that towards the end of the essay,
I was getting to so what the the case for a Metamodern metaphysics is quite strong.
The case to actually try to do the kind of speculative work
of trying to figure out what reality is like.
We're not going to go back to pre-modern religion,
but nor are we going to stay stuck in a kind of flatland postmodern
context where the notion of the sacred struggles to be heard,
where we don't quite know which ritual practices to be following,
where we're not quite sure what the meaning of life is.
We're arguably there is a meaning crisis, as Raveke would put it.
And so that's what I see as the kind of frontiers for Metamodernism now.
It's something about keep on articulating.
What is this cultural moment we're in?
That's the challenge.
That's one of the first things Metamodernism does.
What is this moment?
What does it mean to be in a time between worlds?
What does it mean for modernism and postmodernism to both be part of the world
and yet try to eclipse that or move beyond it?
Politically, non-trivial, it's not just about the next election.
Those who Metamodernists tend to see the problem
in at scale and they see many converging threats and they realize that
one guy winning election as opposed to the other is not going to cut it.
You need to think much more deeply and systematically.
And then the mystic beyond,
I think we do have to question the entire meaning and purpose of life.
That's also a Metamodern endeavor.
So for all of those reasons, I've become very comfortable being Metamodern.
I think it's all of those things.
I think it can be some more than others.
Some are truer to the canon.
Some are a bit more speculative, but they're all part of the picture for me.
And that's why I'm happy to be here.
And I'll be moving into the back right ever so slightly for the next
well, 40 minutes or so.
But I want to begin with Greg actually next.
And the reason I want to go to Greg first is quite important
just to set the scene for that.
I'm imagining that those people attending the event and watching online
will have come across Metamodernism in one of five different ways, give or take.
The the first will be the one that Greg speaks to,
which is the kind of rich cultural understanding,
Metamodernism in cultural artifacts, including films and series.
Another will be through Dan Daniel and Hansie's books.
Another will be through Lena and a more sort of historical contextualizing
period, periodization of cultural forms.
There's also a new book by Jason Strom.
There's a more sort of social theory,
rich theoretical account of Metamodernism as a kind of capacious,
encompassing notion of different ways of doing theory,
which has got quite a lot of philosophical acuity and is recommended.
And finally, as I kind of umbrella term to be a Metamodernist,
is this kind of philosophy of a time between worlds,
loose, catch all term for people who are somehow rethinking the world fundamentally.
OK, all of those five are important.
But there is something particularly important about Greg's offering
because Metamodernism has its own intellectual dignity, its own academic quality.
And I think you can't really get into what it means
until you're grounded in that first.
The question of whether you should end there as an open one.
But I think it's important to begin there.
So, Greg, if you could go next, please.
Yeah, thank you for setting the stage with that great introduction, Jonathan.
And thank you, Jonathan and David, for inviting me to this event.
And, Lena and Daniel, I look forward to our meeting of the minds.
For me, the term Metamodernism is a name for the aesthetic sensibility
found in the arts, popular culture and areas such as religion, politics, philosophy,
marketing, slang and humor that has emerged over the last 25 years or so,
replacing Metamodernism as the dominant structure of feeling,
beginning perhaps in the more leading edges of culture,
but making its way into the mainstream over time.
In order to explain what the sensibilities actually like,
I'll tell my own story of how I got interested in it.
I'm an older Gen Xer, which means my high school, college and early adult years
were in the 80s and 90s, which might be considered the peak of the post-modern era,
at least in the United States, my home.
I did generally enjoy the fun of post-modern referentiality,
ironic detachment and surface surfing games.
And on a deeper intellectual level, I appreciated the attention post-modernism
brought to the importance of context, the blurriness of boundaries,
the interconnected situatedness of things and the perspectives of the marginalized.
However, I also felt that this irony-soaked post-modern culture
left not enough room for things like earnest self-expression,
vulnerability, appreciation of beauty and simple pride.
I yearned for all of these things and yet did not want to come across as uncool, clueless or cheesy.
All of this mattered to me a lot as both a fan of the arts
and being myself an artistically-minded musician.
So I wondered eagerly if there would ever be a post-post-modern movement,
what that would look like and what it would be called.
Well, in the first decade of our new century, I started noticing it.
Bands like The Benfolds Five, Elliott Smith, Sufjan Stevens, Death Cab for Cutie,
Rai Low-Kylie, novelists like Dave Eggers, Jonathan Franson, Jennifer Egan,
films by auteurs such as Miranda July, Wes Anderson and Michelle Gondry,
television shows like Six Feet Under, Community, and Bojack Horseman.
These were all very different from each other and yet shared a certain vibe.
They were clever and self-aware enough to pass the post-modern cool test,
yet very much made room for the nuances and intricacies of human emotion.
Now, I am not myself an academic, but my friend Linda Cerello,
who was a religious studies scholar, discovered that scholars in the humanities, philosophy,
and cultural studies had come up with a name for this sensibility, Meta-modernism.
In a 2010 essay called Notes on Meta-modernism published in the Journal of Aesthetics and
Culture, Timoteas Vermeunen and Robin Van Denneker described Meta-modernism like this.
Ontologically, Meta-modernism oscillates between the modern and the post-modern.
It oscillates between a modern enthusiasm and a post-modern irony, between hope and melancholy,
between naivete and knowingness, empathy and apathy, unity and plurality, totality and fragmentation,
purity and ambiguity. Indeed, by oscillating to and fro or back and forth, the Meta-modern
negotiates between the modern and the post-modern. One should be careful not to think of this
oscillation as a balance, however, rather as a pendulum swinging between poles. So it's not
a meeting in the middle, but it's a swinging with each one having its own integrity and dignity.
That's my own little additional comment there. Back to their quote, each time the Meta-modern
enthusiasm swings towards fanaticism, gravity pulls it back towards irony, the moment it's
irony sways towards apathy, gravity pulls it back towards enthusiasm. In the essay, they gave
examples of their Meta-modernism that lined right up with the trend Linda and I had noticed,
and on a website that they founded with the same name as their essay, a whole bunch of other
researchers also began documenting the trend. Meanwhile, the concept spread and was used in
the writings of other authors published in various academic journals and spread further into the
world where arts journalists and online video essayists used the concept of Meta-modernism to
interpret music, film, television, etc. In 2013, Linda and I started our own website,
WhatIsMetamodern.com, where we have so far written about more than 100 examples of Meta-modernism.
Though I'm not an actual academic, I have had the opportunity to present about Meta-modernism
at several academic conferences, and with Linda as co-author, I've had a chapter published in a
multi-author academic volume on the paranormal and popular culture. Linda and I, in collaboration
with the UK-based AHRC Meta-modernism Network, are currently organizing the first North American
conference on Meta-modernism slated for September in Seattle. My own spin on Meta-modernism is this.
While I think that the description of oscillation between modernist and postmodern qualities is
apt, I don't feel like it does enough toward explaining what the motivation is for artists
and their audiences to engage in this sensibility. I believe that each episteme that precedes
Meta-modernism is characterized by its own particular relationship to knowing, and I believe
Meta-modernism does as well. Tradition is about knowledge and ways of doing things
that are passed down from elders and in canonical scripture. Modernism is about clearing the decks
of accumulated arbitrary tradition and using human rationality and inventiveness to discover
new, more true, and more universalized forms of knowledge. The arts under modernism, roughly
1880 to 1950, reflect this. Postmodernism, roughly 1950 to the late 90s, turned modernism's critical
eye back on itself and questioned the very idea of objective independent universal truths. It
emphasized the ways that things were connected more than the individual things themselves
and sought to understand the context in which any claim to truth arose. Postmodern art forms often
employ irony, intertextuality, and the mining of sources that fall outside high-brow aesthetics.
Meta-modernism arose around the turn of the millennium when artists and their audiences
became dissatisfied with the way that postmodernism banished the self, the capacity for certainty
and earnest emotion. However, Meta-modernism does not seek to turn the clock back to the
time prior to postmodernism. Instead, Meta-modern cultural products generally find a way to satisfy
the postmodern itch and re-embrace a modernist sense of conviction. So my formulation is
Meta-modern cultural products serve to protect interior felt experience from the potential
degradations of postmodern ironic relativism, modernist reductionism, and the ontological
inertia of tradition. So why is this important? Why should people try to understand the present
moment care about Meta-modernism? Before answering that question, I should address a bigger one.
Why are the arts in general important? And what is the value in making theories about the arts
as we do when we theorize about Meta-modernism? Well, I may be biased because I am someone who
is very oriented towards the arts, but to me, the arts are the most important tool we have
as humans to understand ourselves, other people, the world, and our relationships with other people
in the world. We use the arts and culture to build stories that help us see ourselves.
Why do we make theories about the arts and culture? Why not just enjoy the arts on their own
without all this talking about them? Because the arts and culture need a story too,
a story about the stories and how they all fit together. So when I talk about the modernist
sensibility that prevailed in the first half of the 20th century, I'm telling a story that helps
me understand the overall cultural unconscious of the people who historically influenced the world
we have today. When I talk about postmodernism in the second half of the 20th century,
I'm telling a story about history and the backdrop of an earlier part of my own life.
And since the modernist and postmodernist tendencies continue today, as Jonathan very
astutely mentioned, even as Meta-modernism emerges, it is useful to understand their
impact on the present moment. Meta-modernism, of course, is a story about the present day
and helps me weave together a meta-story about things going on currently in the arts and popular
culture. So the role of the arts in helping us understand our lives has been important through
all historical periods, not just with Meta-modernism. However, Meta-modernism is particularly important
right now as we grapple with so many factors that attack our sense of meaningfulness in life.
First, there is the lasting legacy of postmodernism that cared more about context than it did about
the actual things surrounded by that context. Then there is our present day hyper-modern,
fractured internet reality with so many perspectives available that it leaves the self befuddled,
searching for a stable place to stand. Then there is also the present day emphasis on
understanding the self as a member of an identity group. There is value in people belonging to
who belong to marginalized groups joining forces to have their needs known and met,
but sometimes this comes at the expense of the individualist sense of identity.
So Meta-modernism is a sensibility you find in various cultural products that honors these
postmodern confusions and ambiguities, but makes an effort to restore the dignity of the
interior self in various ways. Even spiritual transcendence is yet one more factor that can
have a side effect of undermining the self. Of course, some may say that is the whole point
of spiritual transcendence, but in any case Meta-modernism still wants to protect the interior
and the personal. There is an amazing new film out in theaters called Everything Everywhere All at
Once that many people I know urged me to go see describing it as Meta-modern through and through.
The film involves people attaining a consciousness that spans multiple alternate realities,
but it doesn't stop there. What is really about is how one can maintain the connection to the
personal sense of self and family in the face of such spiritual transformation.
That is part of what makes this movie so Meta-modern. It also has a tone that oscillates between
wacky and profound, deals in identity representation in a way that does not undermine the self,
and more. I strongly recommend you go see it. Speaking of recent examples of Meta-modern culture,
a few other reference points. The singer Billie Eilish presents a persona that oscillates between
postmodern norm-busting gothic and sweet wholesome girl next door while offering music that both
reveres traditional forms and breaks them open. The television Ted Lasso is almost groundbreakingly
earnest, but presented in a self-aware manner in which the show knows that its wholesome earnestness
is understood by the audience to be novel, thus calling attention to itself in an ironic
postmodern sense while delivering the wholesome goodness. Another fairly recent Meta-modern
television show is Fleabag, which plays all kinds of postmodern-ish tricks with its form,
but not simply for the postmodern priority of making audiences think about form,
but also in order to gain access to deeper levels of its character's interiority.
I think I'm hitting my time, so I will just leave it at that for now, but I will say
self-promotionally if you want to see how we treat a whole bunch of other examples
of what we see as Meta-modernism. Again, our website is whatismetamodern.com. Thank you.
Thank you, Greg. It's very civilized of you to finish on time, and I'm grateful for that sharing.
I've given in the show notes a link to your essay in the side view, which I personally found
really edifying on both your own take and to some extent how it relates to other takes on
Meta-modernism, so thanks for joining us. I'm going to save Hansi for last, and I hear from
Lena next. Lena, I couldn't find my book. Actually, I just found it. One second.
I just wanted to quickly show this. Yeah, yeah, because I just moved house, so I
had given up, but by chance it appeared. So, you know, Lena has written the book as it were,
so every reason to trust her judgment on this. She actually has a chapter in this book, which we
won't get into now, I don't think, but it's called, But Do You Have a Vegetable Garden,
an alluring title. But for now, Lena, tell us what you think is going on. What is Meta-modernism?
Why does it matter? What's your own view? Yeah, so I am actually old enough to remember the time
before post-modernism, so I grew up in the 70s and the 80s, and I remember when two of my
high school friends came home from Paris in 1984, and they had been to Café Coste in Paris
that Philip Stark designed, and they were like, and they had these chairs with bowling balls on them,
because that was the sort of irony put into furniture. And then we were,
there was this whole new thing about irony, and I had kind of had this sort of
self-irony before that, but suddenly there was a whole culture that emerged with this,
yeah, these cross-references of all kinds, and then we had all the Bat-Taste parties in the
1990-92, and then there was Pulp Fiction, I think that was 94, and so there was this new
movement, and so that would be my generation, and so when I was in my 20s, we all, you know,
distance ourselves from ourselves and everything, and at some point I sensed that you can't live
your life on this. I mean, there needs to be depth, there needs to be a foundation under
things, you need to have honesty, you need to have a soul, and so actually in the late 90s I began to
start exploring this, and I started writing about the future, and I wrote a book series in Danish
called Both and, I'll spare you the Danish part of it, but it's five books, and they're this
thick, and this is the Both and Friday, the last book, and what I actually wrote as the very last
footnote in this monster of sincerity and irony is that, I write here, irony is on the boundary,
or the border between meaning it and not meaning it, I'm writing on the boundary or the border
of irony, so that was actually my first attempt at metamodernism before I actually knew the word,
and that was back in 2009, and so I've been working in this field for a long time, and it's,
I ran into Daniel in email in Stockholm in around 2012-13 sort of, and Daniel was the one who found
metamodernism on the internet and sent an email saying, and we found something, or Daniel had
found something that framed many of the discussions that we had had, and as I started exploring this,
and that was the article in the manifesto by Van Den Akker and Fer Marlin, and I wrote about it
actually already in 2016, before I wrote The Nordic Secret, and what I realized when I was working
with metamodernism as a pendulum between the modern and the postmodern, or a juxtaposition,
or a blending, I mean it can take many forms, I realized that just having a culture of civilization
and understanding of the world of just the modern and the postmodern is simply not deep enough,
there's all the stuff that went before it, and not just the traditional,
meaning the Renaissance, and I mean from Gutenberg's invention of the printing
present back to maybe the Bronze Age, there's something even before that that was radically
different than the pre-modern traditional world, which is the prehistoric indigenous,
and so I started working in four cultural codes, and rather than just, oh the quoting signs from
good old postmodernism, the just the modern and the postmodern, and just having it as a sentiment,
I was more interested in trying to find out how can we create a meaningful future, how can we get
the best from the past with us into the future, and not lose things that cut the roots, so to speak,
from our existential meaning-making, emotional lives, and what it means to be human, and
to make my version of metamodernity, so I talk about metamodernity, and I do it
because I talk about a structure, not a sentiment, and I do it because I distinguish between talking
about four cultural codes that we need to combine or bring together, instead of just talking about two,
but what I realized is that what we can take from the past and bring with us into the future,
which parts of the codes that we can bring with us depends on the group size of people,
if it's not going to turn into corruption, so from the indigenous, I mean we got 300,000 years
of being stone-aged people in hunter-gatherer tribes or in early horticulture, but still very
small communities, that is where we can have the intimacy, the connection to nature, the spirituality,
the group sizes where you can read body language and have eye contact, so you can spontaneously sense
what is going on in the group, and can we go this way or can we go in that direction,
do we all say yes to this idea, do we say no, and do we need to discuss it further before we
make a decision? When you have 2,000 people in a Bronze Age city, town, or with 100,000 people in
an Iron Age Ringwald city, you have to have governance in a different kind of way, and when
the most advanced communication technology you have is little clay tablets and cuneiform, or
litter pigeons or something like that, or horses riding with scrolls of paper,
you have to have a hierarchical system, otherwise you cannot keep peace and social peace within
the community, you also need to have shared narratives, shared imaginary, an imaginary
imagined community, and so religion turns out to be really useful, and it gives people a sense
of community, purpose, rituals that bring people together and share moral norms, and so
societies that managed to develop that survived, societies that did not manage to develop that
did not survive, and then we have the modern world with societies of millions of people,
maybe hundreds of millions of people, and here we have radio, television, printing press,
and so we can communicate with more people, and that is where we also developed the scientific
process, democracy, human rights, equal rights, and so that goes well with hundreds of thousands
of millions of people, but if you try to apply rule of law and democracy in a family of eight
people, you would tear the social fabric and the emotions apart, and if you try to take the
sort of the emotional leadership of the small group and apply it on a million strong
society and have a family deciding everything, we call it corruption, so you can't transfer the
power structures from between group sizes, that would be one of my main takeaways, and then you
got postmodernism where we have all kinds of perspectives around the globe, and that started
in the 90s with the VCR and the disc man, or the Walkman and the copying of cassette tapes,
sounds like generations ago, but that's how old I am, so the different perspectives that we needed
to develop a way of handling came in the 90s and early 2000s, and now we need to bring all of it
together, and one of the reasons we do need to bring all of it together is that we, I don't think
we'll survive our own inventions and our own good intentions if we try to tell everybody around the
globe that we're going to take away your religion, or we're going to create a new form of governance
that is postmodern or only modern, we need to be able to tell people and to tell ourselves that
everything that you know that is meaningful to you if it's religion, you can keep that, but you
have to add something, in this case, modernity and the postmodern, or if you're a modern person
with the modern worldview, taking that away from people is not going to work, but you can say you
can keep your modern science, your way of understanding the world from a modern perspective,
but you have to add something, I mean, you need to connect with nature and spiritual way,
like we did 10,000 years ago, you also need to get the postmodern deconstruction of everything,
and then on postmodernism, I think what I see around me is that we have a generation of young
people who grew up during postmodernism and who unfortunately have grown up in societies that
never gave them moral guidelines, and that is okay when you're 25 or older, but it's not great
when you're six years old or seven years old, the child brain needs adults who take responsibility
and who stand up for the way that the world is, so we need to integrate into our culture if no other
sake in order to be able to bring up children to be mentally healthy teenagers and young adults and
adults, we need to stand up for something as adults and tell children that, oh, this is the
way it is in our home, and now we do it like this, instead of always saying, so what do you feel like
doing, because three-year-olds are not ready for it, seven-year-olds are not ready for it, and it
doesn't really work with 12-year-olds either, doesn't work with a 45-year-old boyfriend either,
but that's a different story. So, I mean, we do need to bring these different layers together,
and I think we can find wisdom and ways of communicating, being together, and organizing
things better if we have all the layers, so that will be my take on meta-modernity.
Okay, thanks a lot, Lena, and Dan, I've been very patient, I'm just going to sum up very briefly
that my sense is, given the question was, partly why does it matter, and David was also keen to
get to that, my sense here from Greg was, it matters about protecting interiority,
it's something to do with the kind of meaning that we need to feel, but also create, it matters
because that's what art does to some extent, it helps to make sense of the world through
these creative ventures, and that the meta-modern is a particular way of doing that, that's called
for today in some sense, and then Lena, there's a kind of different, more structural analysis,
quite a useful distinction for those listening, you feel a bit lost, this sort of sentiment and
structure or sensibility and structure is quite a useful way to think about it, they can both
be relevant, but you can emphasize one or the other, and Lena's emphasizing structural features,
vis-a-vis institutions and technologies, giving rise to cultural kind of epochs,
and arguing that the reason meta-modernism or meta-modernity matters
is because our sort of curriculum today, our hidden curriculum, our challenge
is to bring the best from the past, but to somehow lose the worst, but not to pretend that we could
somehow wish away our Stone Age inheritance or our modernist impulses or our post-modern
perspectives, that we have to somehow carry all of them with us in order to fashion a new world,
and that's why meta-modernism matters, because it speaks to that. Now, with that said, Daniel,
I can see, I know that you're a father of a young child and no doubt difficult to wait
for so long to speak, so I'm very grateful, but now you are sort of Mr. Meta-modernism for lots
of people, so tell me what is it and why does it matter? Ah, wait one second, you're actually not
connected anymore, Mute. Let's see, am I connected? Yeah, you're okay now, you're okay now. I guess I'm
Mute. Yeah, you're fine now, yeah. Yes, for a lot of people, I would be Mr. Meta-modernism, but actually
that's, I think that's sort of what it feels like for you and me in certain networks, if you look
around the world, or you Google Meta-modernism, you get a lot more of the, let's say, Dutch
school, Bermuda, Madanak, or Greg Denver's work, etc. And of course, I think in terms of just your
readership, the Linus pamphlet is probably outstripping minor hour books fairly well, given a lot of people
read the shorter introduction, which overlaps a lot, but it's not the same thing. I guess you
could do a bend diagram with all three, or even all four, I mean, Jonathan Rosen's positions,
and I hear myself leaning in a lot, or I feel myself leaning in a lot when you speak, Greg,
then I feel myself like, oh yeah, I also think like that. And yeah, obviously I have my own
tape or version, and there are a few things worth mentioning as background to that. So,
one thing is, one thing is this term integralism, this is in a way, I think the original idea for
this rebel wisdom thing was to follow up to the state of integral, so people had discussed a
panel of four, I believe, had been discussing, or a panel of three, had discussed the state of
integral theory. And I was really interested in that for a number of years, and there were certain
things that that stuff brought to my life. One thing was, while I was a sociologist,
or studied sociology and wanted to pursue a career in that field, or someone within
the social sciences, or at least the humanities, and the whole thing was about critique. That was
often literally said by the professors, like what we offer society is critique. So it seemed sort of,
and also I wanted to be part of some sort of meaningful political movement. Well,
okay, things aren't good in the world in so many ways. What can you do? Okay, I hang around at the
Anarchist Café, but then I get this sense of hypocrisy around it, or I would sit down with
the libertarians, and it's like, pretty tunnel visioned. I couldn't commit to any of these things,
right? So I wanted to do something positive, but I was too critically minded, maybe by training,
and maybe by, or just skeptical by nature or personality. So I couldn't really commit to
anything. So I had this lack within me, as I think both of you also mentioned.
So that was from a social science perspective, but also I suppose from an existential perspective
that while I had this lack, I really wanted to work to change stuff by, in many ways,
even the way I had a good upbringing. Yeah, I was, wasn't entirely happy during my,
my young years and had, had anxieties and so forth. So, well, you know, and if you think
about that as a, as a sociologist or social psychologist, you, well, obviously you start
thinking about, well, there are structural, structural things going on. There are things
about society that could be different, and life could feel different. So in comes around age 25,
this, this stuff, integral theory, and it does several things for me that puts together a lot of,
like it has, it works with these metamaps, or where you put together different ways of view in
the world. Some of the ways are a little bit clunky, but they're so much better than not having
the maps that was my experience. They bring in, within these maps, they also relate
all the interiors, our interior experience, they are another side of everything that we experience
as, as objects out there in the world, you can't really have one without the other. So it's okay
to explore. It's, it's okay to explore things that aren't necessarily things. It's, it's okay
to explore, you know, just being, just your awareness, just how things arise within you,
your inner depths. It's okay to cultivate introspection, or you'll never bust your own
bullshit. That's not going to happen as to that, as the cognitive scientists tell us again, again,
but, but at least there is something like coming to terms with that. There is at least,
well, I guess it opened up, it gave me, it gave a legitimacy to the inner dimension, right? And
through plunging into that, a lot of the anxieties that have been in my life sort of cleared up,
it's really, and at the same time I had these maps for putting together all this social science,
etc. And there was also this idea of development, right? Development, from developmental psychology
that made its way into integral theory. There's, there's a direction even if it's not necessary,
well, for integral theorists, it's often a teleological direction, you believe that God is
like manifesting new ways or forms. I'm not sure I ever felt that way, but, but at least that aha,
in theorists such as Piaget, for instance, if given the right circumstances,
it is likely that, that a person can mature in recognizable, in recognizable
matters. And, and that, that sort of gives hope kind of gives an inner compass, you can ask yourself
like, okay, so what's the problem right now? And instead of like, where's the evil, how do we
destroy it, how do we remove it, right? There's the sense of like, how do we
help gently cultivate scaffolds, etc. Something, the next thing to emerge that would redefine
the situation so that the thing that seemed insoluble or an awful conflict or,
or anxiety provoking or something else would feel different, right? And it's, I suppose
we had a few rounds negotiating the terms even greater this call, right? And in situations
like that, it's oftentimes about redefining, redefining what the whole thing is about,
finding new angles. And, and voila, there is actually where there seem to be a conflict there,
or, or conflicting interests or lack of mutual trust or something, you actually have something
extra valuable on something, the case, right? And then the more I actually, the more troublesome
the other, the deeper the inside about myself that they'll have, etc. All of those things, right?
So, so, I mean, so those, those ingredients show up, right? Like, aha, again, you can map
different perspectives, if you understand the property spaces within which you, you, you,
you understand the world, you can, you can actually, it's okay to cultivate the spiritual
sides of life, including the aesthetic, and, or existential or philosophical, and, or even religious,
if you, if you want. And it's, and there might be some, whatever, however hopeless, whatever
cost your fuck, where you happen to be in at the moment, they usually is some sort of,
they're usually some sort of higher solution, even if you can't see it right now, right?
So, and, and that, and then there's some kind of directionality and that those
directionalities are, are, are recognizable. So I got really interested in using this
integral perspective. So, however, I also got very disappointed with it, because it, I, yeah, I,
you've been pointing this out, Leona, like the, the integral perspective oftentimes
begs in too much. Yeah, I mean, basically, basically, one way or another, back to the
Vedic roots of Eastern religion. And though, and it's sort of never shakes off that heritage.
And that, that leads to a lot of magical thinking sneaking in here and there. There was even a cult
or actually now two cults that came out of the integral movement.
And the second cult was smaller, but yet more awful than the first one. It's still ongoing.
And, and also, you know, I just, I just thought, as a framework wasn't, I noticed when I tried to
organize politics and stuff, political party in Sweden, around it, noticed it wasn't so good
as a social theory. And, you know, it's kitschy also, just like you always have these
Alex Gray paintings, and they're all from, from some kind of psychedelic trip or something, or,
or a very, very high cost experience. And I mean, I, you can have experiences, there are people
who have experiences that correspond to those to, to, to the, you know, sheer colorfulness,
energy and vibrancy of such images. But you're inappropriate in most contexts, and for most
people, and they will look hysterical and kitschy, and that will repel people. And more and more
people are repelled, except the folks who are attracted to that stuff, who then become more
and more magical in their thinking, and they're called like what I call the astrology precariat,
like tendencies that show up. So metamodernism shows up as another term for, because integralism
wanted to be an answer to metam, to postmodernity, postmodernity, which I had experienced within
the frames of social science. So metamodernism was kind of, well, Thomas Steininger once said this
German professor, he said, aha. So metamodernism is, is a design intervention, in a sense,
in integralism. Well, yeah, it's, I wanted to bring that term in, and marry to the good stuff from,
from, from, integral theory. So as to make integral theory safe for democracy, so to speak,
because it wasn't safe for democracy, it explodes it, it exploded into totalitarian bullshit again
and again. That's sort of where, where I founded and where I wanted to use it. And it has those
things, right, irony, sincerity. But when you like, when you're getting too kitschy, make a joke about
back again, like, okay. So, yeah, I, and I don't actually disagree with you,
なんだ, when you say that could be metamodernism, modernism is an integration of modern
progress and hope, and we're oscillation between Daniel, just one, just one second, just
I hope it might help rather than interrupt you. But just, just because I'm thinking of
as you were speaking, that I remember coming across this view to try and make sense of Hansi,
that it was necessary to do the relationship to integral, which I think will be familiar to most
rebel wisdom viewers. So we don't need to lay it out, but it principally through the work of Ken
Wilbur, many books, many developmental models, often with quite a strong spiritual theme,
often giving rise to a sort of four quadrant map of reality. So the, the, the integral world was,
was seen as a sort of toolkit to get beyond postmodernism. And you were saying that
it didn't quite work for you for various reasons, partly for the reasons you've laid out. But I
wanted to just read this bit to you because the way I put it here is to make sense of your work,
to put it straightforwardly, the subtext of Hansi's books is that he is saying integral theory has
failed and metamodernism is now called for. In that quest, Hansi attempts to use the sensibility
of cultural metamodernism that he has kidnapped to usurp integral theory and to subsume it within
political metamodernism. And that's the sort of, sort of, you're using the sort of cultural code
from the metamodernism that Greg sort of described to create something that goes beyond
integral theory, but somehow transcends and includes it in some way and makes it more
political and more, more developed, well, more sort of injunctive, more like, let's do this,
not just describing the world, but actually more like a programmatic. Is that how you'd see it?
Have I got that right? There were a couple of loaded words there, to be fair, but, but sure.
But couldn't that, by the way, was, you know, Shanghai was the word you use, which is that.
I also use it. And as, that's sort of where, well, I was, I suppose I was closing up to
saying that that's where a more political metamodernism came from. And then the
metamodern sentiment seemed to have what, what integralism lacked. Oh, and yes, this is where
I was going. I don't necessarily disagree with you, Lehmne, when you say metamodernism is the
integration of these two things, modernity, postmodernism, and postmodernism, because
ism then is, of course, a striving towards or, or, or, well, something that is ish ish as something
that looks like something or tries to become something like something metamodernism.
Looks like metamodern, smells like metamodern, or wants to go towards metamodern,
where metamodernity would be something more established, a state of affairs, right?
And if you think about that, it kind of makes sense that the, that first the ism
would do, would integrate the first two elements, the two dominant elements of our day and age,
as I speak, modernism and postmodernism. But to fully manifest, it really needs to go back
farther into deeper layers of the psyche, I suppose, and collective psyche, and it also,
and farther back in history. And then it would integrate, integrate
traditionalism and, and the indigenous insight as well. So that's, however, it should be pointed
out that that's what, what integralism in many ways was already trying to do. And many ways,
why I opted for what I saw as a more conservative integralism, let's at least try and get this
part right. Because when integralism did try to integrate tradition or traditional religion,
it did, you know, go magical and so forth, right? Which did lead to its collapse. So I do view it as
as a maturation towards that attractor point. And I would want to call that attractor point
modernity. I suppose I'm just from this experience of the with integralism and so forth.
I just want to be a little bit conservative about it. And that's why I for now use the term
metamodernism for particularly modernity and postmodernity. All right. Thank you. Is that,
Daniel, thank you very much. And I mean, again, as I sort of tried to summarize
with Greg and Lena, what came through for me there was your sense of,
well, first of all, helpfully grounding it in the personal, which I always find useful when
you're speaking of theory, like, where does this come from? Certain challenges in life,
anxieties, trying to make sense of the world, noticing that you were caught up in systems
and structures. You're disappearing visually, Daniel. There we go. And noticing that that was
the case. And then reaching for theory to make sense of it, find coming upon integral theory,
and feeling that it was somehow lacking that it as you put it lapsed into magical thinking,
and simultaneously observe this new kid on the block of some kind, metamodernism, noticing the
ethos, the vibe, noticing a somewhat more mature, arguably, perspective, and you thought,
I can make sense of that and make use of it vis-a-vis the other work that I want to do politically.
And that's what led to the listening society and so forth. So that's kind of laying it out. I'm
feeling curious, you know, I'm sort of going to imagine what David would say here rather than ask
him, even though he is there. But I'm not sure we've really convinced people that it matters yet.
Like, I want to use the remaining time just to kind of hammer that home, because we've
described it. I've just, you know, summarized, you've all tried, we've all tried our best to make
sense of why it matters. But I'm wondering if the audience feels it. If, you know, do you need,
if, you know, if metamodernism is the answer, what is the question, would be one way of looking at it.
Or if I don't have metamodernism, what do I lack? Would be another. Can any of you
try and speak to that? Yeah, I would, I would, I mean, we are in a time where things are,
a lot of things are up in the air. We've had a financial crash in 2008. We have technologies
that are wreaking havoc on, on job markets. We have a war now in Ukraine. And, and so
there are structures that are breaking up. And we're brought together with people from around the
globe, online. And so we are confronted with very different viewpoints. And there's also more,
more migration than we've ever had before. So the natural, and I would call that a natural
inclination to identify with an in group and think that there is one truth in the world
is constantly challenged. And we need to deal with that. And, and postmodernism has tried that for,
I guess, one or two generations. And we create anxiety, because if you can't connect
honestly, deeply emotionally to and with other people and cultural heritage and language
and symbolic worlds, and I can refer back to Eric from who talked about the escape from freedom.
And he said that moral aloneness is when you are, you can be around other people, but you're not
sharing a symbolic world, which is way worse than being physically alone and feeling that you have
all these people out there that you're actually emotionally and morally connected with. And so
if we have a civilization where whenever you say, oh, I like this, and somebody says, yeah, but you
could also not like it, or somebody else likes something better in a different way. If you have
your honest emotions deconstructed all the time, you end up with, I mean, then you'll never even
be able to feel yourself. And so we've reached a point where I think a lot of people, particularly
young people who grew up with this, have suffered and do suffer. And, and, and they have a really
hard time finding communities where people actually care about them. And they have a hard time
connecting with people, they have a hard time finding friends, they have a hard time finding
commitment and love, they have a hard time. I mean, look at Pender, I mean, the sex has become
a commodity. I mean, it's like, you just, you know, switch people one way or the other. And so the
deep connection, the intimacy is something that we, we've almost lost the words for the language
for it. And so we need to reconnect with that. And we can't do that with postmodernism, and we
can't skip postmodernism either, because then we lose an analytical tool. So we do need all of that.
And we do need the religious heritage and to go into, I mean, that's why sports play such a huge
role. And if we don't have animism, and we don't have that contact to nature, then we got conspiracy
theories. Because we need that idea, oh, something is behind it and is in charge of everything.
And they are doing it. And that used to be the spirits and nature. Now it's, I don't know,
Hillary Clinton and some alien reptiles in a pizza joint. So where we don't give our minds
this heritage and meaningful connection, it's got to go out and create it and make it on its own.
All of that sounds like it makes sense. The challenge though I still feel is, and I have
noticed this from some of the questions from the audience. And I don't think people doubt,
or at least if you do, that the world is struggling in certain ways and that we're struggling to make
sense of it, because we seem to seem to be a mismatch between the conceptual resources available,
and the world as we experience it. What remains to be proven is that metamodernism
helps us to do that. Now you've tried to say that postmodernism doesn't do it and we need
something else, and you've also explained why metamodernism is that thing, and all of us in
our own ways try to do that. What I suppose I'm looking for in this last bit before we take the
other questions is, you know, concepts at all, you know, like the whole notion that someone,
like, I don't know, who isn't philosophically inclined, doesn't get high on conceptual distinctions.
And why would they feel the need for this? Like, can they not go about their business without it?
Greg? I agree with, yeah, I agree with Lena's depiction of the problem that we face, of course,
and Daniel's as well. I think where I differ and where the kind of community of scholars and arts
critics or whatever that I'm kind of affiliated with is we don't see metamodernism as much of an
aspirational thing that we're working towards as we see it as something that's actually already
happening in society, whether people have the word for it or not. And it's easiest, of course, to,
you know, to locate it and talk about it when you're talking about things in the arts,
because you have specific cultural products and you can analyze them and interpret them and stuff.
But it's also present in the style of humor that regular everyday people use when they're
communicating with each other and even just kind of in our slang terms and, you know, in all kind,
and it shows up in the ways that people appreciate and get behind the political leaders that they
like. And so on the one hand, I think metamodernism is already doing that job, you know, to an extent
of giving us a room and a space, you know, a safe space for meaningfulness and a dignity about our
interiority. Why, so on that level, it's already doing a job. And then the value in having a word
for it and having discussions about it among the kind of people who think that way, not everybody,
you know, the majority of humans don't care about the word postmodernism or modernism either,
they just live their lives. But among those of us who kind of do tell stories about the stories,
to have the name metamodernism is kind of like a flag that helps us recognize
that this motion is taking place, that there's a need for it, that there might be a need for more of
it. And, you know, you mentioned Jason Josephson Storm who put out a book called Metamodernism
and he's bringing this approach to the way that scholars and theorists do their work.
So he's suggesting a correction for the excesses of the kind of postmodern academic style that
does often leave everybody in the dust and suggesting a way that that can be done that
is more humane and human and things like that. So I guess the short answer is
metamodernism is a solution that's already happening and by naming it and seeing it and
understanding it, we can have it happen more. Okay, got it. So listen, there are some questions on the
list. Lenev, give me a second. You both want to speak. Okay, well, that's good. Let's speak,
then. You go first, Daniel. Yeah, I mean, I'd like to reply as well to the whole
why metamodernism question. First of all, dodge or avoid the question. I mean,
it's sort of a trap question. Sort of a what's sorry? Sort of a trap question. Right. It
trends who have like, how would you want to sell? Like, aha, so then then you automatically go into
Carl Salesman's mode or whatever. And the person on the other side, then by reverse,
psychology automatically doesn't want to buy what you're saying, because, hey, I'm being
talking into something, right? So, so numeruno is metamodernism doesn't have to talk anything,
anyone into anything, right? It's a tool. First of all, it's just a word, right? So then people
attach five or six different meanings to it. Those have been mapped out. It's a topic. It's
a discipline. So if you study a topic or discipline, there will be different fruits in your life,
depending on which take you have on it. I can tell from my perspective, it's a cheat code,
basically, you walk around in society, you, you can basically see around corners. That's what it
does, right? If you actually study it hard, and you see, well, see, wow, there's a cultural logic
to this, there, there are patterns that people aren't seeing. It opens doors. Okay. Et cetera,
et cetera. And then that is fun to play with. So then you go into playful struggle. This is one
like we, we like these oscillations, right? So sincere irony, no sincerity, or, or,
let's say, pragmatic romanticism, playful struggle is a good one. That, okay, the better
analytical tools you have to see how the world works, the better you see, well, this is going to
more likely going to go that way than this way. And then the best bet for us together is probably
this way. For instance, many years ago, you wrote Jonathan, before you know the term metamodernism,
but you were a metamodernally minded person, you wrote a, wrote a pamphlet called spiritualized,
and it was about inner development. If you wrote about a similar stuff, Lenin, what happens today,
inner development goals is exploding from, from networks that people you at that point
didn't even know. And it's taking over, this idea is taking over as a complement to,
to a sustainable development goals. The whole administration, the whole public sector of Costa
Rica, we had a huge, huge conference in Stockholm and where they have the
Nobel Prize ceremony, etc. It's happening now. If you saw it before, it was cool. And you invested
in these ideas, and you were part indirectly, if anything else, of making that happen. That's the
whole point of having good social theory, that you can do stuff with it. And doing stuff is fun
and meaningful. I think that's a good enough reason. And then like, beyond that, I don't want to,
I don't want to talk anybody into, into buying the particular term or something like I want
enough friends who are on the same page or wavelength, so that we can do cool stuff together.
That's all. Okay, got it. Lena, thank you, then. Yeah.
So we get one time for a question. So like two minutes.
But I would like to say one thing, because I mean, we got three versions of metamodernism,
metamodernity here. And I think it's, it's a great thing that we have several, I mean,
this is an ecosystem of people struggling with making sense of the time that we're in,
and where we could, where we might want to go. And I don't, I don't want us to agree. I actually
like that we, that we have three different ways of looking at this. And there are more people out
there, and we're exploring this from different angles, and we're looking at different things.
So if you look at the arts and what's going on right now, you see one thing. If you see there
is this, these structures that are changing, and we need to make sure that eight billion people
have food and safety, then you look at something else. And so, and that's good. That's the both
hand, but it's good. So, so we don't have to, we don't have to, you know, say who's right,
or which is the right version of metamodernism or metamodernity. But I do want us to be specific
in what way we're using the word when we're using it. Because that if we don't, it's going to be a
mess. And I was actually, there was a Finnish university that held a pre-conference event
about our organization Nordic Bildung and associated us with tons of, with tons of stuff
we do not do, because they apparently had found something that linked to something on the internet.
It was very uncomfortable. So we should, we should be very specific in what ways we're using
these words. But apart from that, I think it's, it's great that we disagree. Okay, great. And I,
I am glad that we have a little time to take a question from the audience. Sorry to be brisk
there. And just to say that that feeling of coming to know it was some of the happiest intellectual
time of my life, that three months of like, okay, I bet again, I've been talking about
metamodernism for months now, people keep calling me it. The word is kind of on this,
you know, in amongst our network. I suppose I'd better invest some time figuring out what it means.
And it was really rewarding. But it did take time. It was a lot to read, a lot to think,
a lot to question, and then to find one's own position and then to write it.
But really rewarding. By the end of it, I felt like something good had happened. So anyway,
I want to, and I hear you, Clay Kilgore, I guess, that this is really rich and we
should go over, but that's David's call. But I can take one question. And I think the
question we should take is from, let me see here, we'll go back to the list and see if we're still
top of the pops. Oh, sorry, that's gone. Is that right? David, maybe you could help me. Oh, here
we go. Yeah. So actually, Greg, you've been asked to say again, which is interesting, top of the
pops is a question to ask Greg to reiterate this line you had about the nature of metamodernism
being about protecting the interiority from the degradation of postmodernism, that line,
can you find that to reiterate it? It seems to be something that more than one person wants to
hear. Sure. So, first of all, I don't think postmodernism was or is a mistake.
As kind of everybody has mentioned, it's an important intellectual and even emotional
structure and tool. But the whole purpose of postmodernism is to take attention away from
the center, whether the center is the mainstream, whether the center is like the dominant white
male patriarchy, whether and whether the center is the self. Postmodernism challenges the very idea
of the subject and the self. And that was an important thing to do. But when that's all you're
doing, and when it's kind of made to be sort of like you consider it either uncool or kind of
not very bright or whatever, to take the self seriously and to take feelings seriously and to
take earnest appreciation of beauty, seriously, when none of that stuff is permitted,
none of us are really participating in life because what we are is selves. And so that's the
degradation that postmodern can can cause as a side effect of the good stuff that it does.
And so, you know, and to me, metamodernism is motivated to be a course correction
for that bad side effect that postmodernism engenders. And without going on too long,
what the metamodern artistic and cultural products tend to do is incorporate the postmodern
games and playfulness as kind of like a spoonful of sugar to help the serious earnestness go down
without people having to feel embarrassed about it or feel naive about it. And, you know, if I
had the chance to talk for hours, I could give you example after example, after example, in all
different areas of culture where you can see people coming up with this approach themselves, but
you just have to, I guess, look and see if you can find it yourself.
Thank you. Listen, I actually got that wrong, that last question, but we're glad we got that
iteration. And David, if you'll permit me a couple more minutes, there was actually a question from
Brandon, would we, and this is a good one for all of us, actually, would we, and we're gonna,
I'm gonna give it one minute each, roughly, and we're gonna end, okay. Would we benefit by
metamodernizing, another version of that term, metamodernizing some of our institutions, public,
private and civil society? If so, how might we begin to do this? Now, I'm quite sure Daniel has an
answer for that, and a whole book that answers it really. But quickly, Lena and Rachel, then give
them the chance at the end. Okay, so I mean, let's take a municipality, I would go with the group
sizes. And so whenever you have, say, a city of, I don't know, three million people, its relationships
to other cities, towns, group sizes of three million people could be postmodern. I mean,
that's where we need to take multiple perspectives. Inside the municipality, we can use the modern
world, and the rule of law and democracy. Once we get down to individual companies or departments
or offices or, like, a thousand people, that's where we can ritualize interactions and have a
rich symbolic world. And we have a hierarchy of source. And then when we go back down to the group
size of maybe 10 people or so forth, we should not keep track of everything, because we need to
regulate our interactions person to person. And so you can take a, what do you call it, a home nurse
taking care of old people in their own home. I mean, you shouldn't register everything and have
everything registered. You should actually trust people and leave it to the home nurses to figure
out what kind of service are we going to provide to Mrs. Jones and what are we going to provide to
Mr. Smith and how are we going to let them figure it out themselves and negotiate it and see what
happens. So we could structure according to group sizes and governance, I guess you would call it.
That would be one way of doing it. Okay, thank you. And Greg, I'm curious if the question makes
sense to you. You know, does it, you might say it's already there. You don't have to
metamodernize. That doesn't actually make sense. Or how would you see it? I think that it's already
there in the arts and an informal cultural products. It's not all that much very there in
institutions. And I will say that I am a little more cautious than probably the others on this
panel are about like really trying to intentionally implement that because we're talking about
people's state of mind. And so it starts to scarily sound to me like we're talking about
engineering people's state of mind. And I want to kind of leave that a little bit more up to
chance and people's true nature. So I'm more comfortable in this kind of happening on a more
informal level. But I have seen institutions use the metamodern style in their marketing and in
their self presentation and things like that. And that is exciting to me. Great, great, great, great.
So Daniel, I think you're all about metamodernizing society in a sense. So tell me.
I mean, in a sense, I think I'm too big a question to break the answer. So I mean,
generally speaking, let's not fall into the trap. So to speak, that well,
like Soviet Union, we're now a socialist country, everything's socialist or socials are its next
level. It's socialist this socialist that and before, and within two or three or four years,
people are already losing faith and it wasn't fun anymore. And people were, no,
our artists were hating themselves, were selling out to, to power, etc, etc. Right. So and of course,
when everything push came to shove, it wasn't actually better, it's actually worse.
The question was, what would it mean? What would actually look like, I suppose,
you have given some thought to that. Metamodernizing, the only answer I can give in a good enough time
would be there's greater focus on inner dimensions. And the logic, social logic pertaining to
metamodernism would somehow be reflected or manifested in the relationships between human
beings. However, how do we begin? I actually agree very much with you, Greg. We do begin
by the arts through buying through the arts, actually applying for human as today, right until I
gone to this call for events in that, that realm. Given that the arts are intuitive, they come
first, they're free, they're safer, safe space in many ways. Institutions are the most dangerous
and they come last in this, like, first arts and then philosophy, then I suppose science, etc. Right.
So, I do have a very small kid and she didn't sleep her for very well during her first couple
of months. So I was up all night and you know what I did? I watched Bojack Horseman, all six,
all six seasons two, just to get to know what the fuss was about. And I could definitely see it,
right. There's something about the first season, I thought, well, this is just a remake of The
Simpsons, but it wasn't. They got me, right? They really got me. Like, I started hearing about what
happened to this tragic, pathetic horse character. And then there was lots of hope and beauty in
the tragedy and nastiness and futility of the story. And I really feel it resonates, right? There
really is some kind of structure. If something like that can make it that big, I think on some level,
we are engineering minds. And it is, as you say, Greg, happening fairly spontaneously.
We're just helping spontaneity with a bit of analysis, with a bit of pointing in directions.
Also, when I point in prophetic or directions like, oh, societies should develop like this and
that, it is also in this spirit of playful struggle or fact-meeting fiction. It's not,
well, it's not Marxist dialectic materialism or something like that, right? So in that way,
I believe such things stimulate one another, right? Those futures that we imagine,
which we know are fictional, but we think are important nonetheless. And because we're trying
to move past postmodernity or postmodernism, we allow ourselves such dreams. That would be my
hand note. Okay. Wow, great. And we've made it to the end, I believe. And
much more to say. Like, overall, just starting. Atlanta disappeared, looks like she did.
We're just, you know, there's so much more to say. And I would encourage those of you who are
interested or are still watching to look at some of the written materials that are mentioned earlier
in the discussion. If you don't know how to save the chat, there are three dots on the right-hand
side of the chat near the bottom. Click on that and press Save this discussion and you
have all the links. You won't have to scramble to photograph them or anything.
Yeah, all of us here have written more about this. Look into that. But equally, go and watch
Metta Modern Artifacts and see where it takes you, spiritually and politically.
So this remains for me to thank David and Rebel Wisdom for making this session possible,
to thank Lenny Rachel Anderson for joining us, to thank Greg Denver for joining us,
Daniel Gortz for joining us. And yeah, we all believe it's worthwhile. It's a concept and one
can only expect so much from that. But it's a concept that can help you perceive context,
can help you feel differently, think differently, maybe helps create new cultural codes,
maybe helps point the way politically. But certainly, if you sit with it and try to make
sense of what it means for you, I'm confident that it will be good for you and lead to broadly
good things. So with that thought, I will leave you.
