Welcome back to philosophy battle, today we will be paying witness to a great series of
battles in philosophy, where we're going to cover an attempt to show a universal conception
of rationality.
But first, who would even believe there can be alternative rationalities in the first
place?
That rationality could be relative, and what does that even mean?
We will discuss the major sources from where relativism about rationality even comes from.
And we'll show how philosopher Paul O. Grady will accommodate the relativism that
is from these sources away from being about rationality to showing they really just show
support for relativism in other areas of philosophy where he has already demonstrated being quite
open to relativism, such as conceptual relativity or on palogical relativity.
So because he's going to do that kind of thing in the first section of this video,
I think it's pretty important to explain something first, I hope you don't mind.
But if you don't know, this video is actually the final big battle Paul O. Grady is going
to have after covering relativism in many different areas of philosophy.
In cognitive areas.
Not things like moral relativism, whether something's right or wrong, or beauty, if
that's relative or not.
If they are, that's fine, that's not what we're even talking about.
We're trying to be concerned with whether or not things like knowledge and truth are
relative.
So here are the prior areas, his different chapters before we even got to rationality.
Now you don't have to watch all of these to enjoy this video, it will definitely be
a video where you can still enjoy and understand some of the great battles here, it will still
be fun and great and exciting, I promise you this.
But I've actually already made a video for each of those areas.
First explaining the power of relativism, how modern relativism is empowered, namely
by five great philosophers, and the failing of two dichotomies, the fact-value dichotomy
and the theory-practice dichotomy, and it really pays to understand this for why we
cannot simply offhand reject relativism, with some kind of naive appeal to so-called
objective observation, or something like literalism.
If you really are insistent that we can objectively just see things and evaluate things with some
literal sense of language, then it really would pay for you to check out that video
first.
But after that, we did a video on truth, where despite the powers emphasized in chapter
one, of this great weapon, he still defends against relativizing truth, that truth cannot
be relative, and that's what I called a limit of relativism.
Or at least in a lower sense, we can have truth relative to different linguistic frameworks,
but not in the general sense, and the general sense of truth he argues is always necessary
to have.
But also in that same chapter, he also had a discussion covering logic, because he kind
of used the principle of logic to defend truth, namely the principle of non-contradiction.
In that chapter, we kind of showed that actually we could have very different logics, even
deviant ones too.
And while the use of them may be relative to our different purposes, we've shown that
they kind of are still governed in by a higher order system which still operates with the
principle of non-contradiction.
Then there were these middle chapters, which initially I wasn't going to do, but it seemed
like I needed to do them, and for the same reason I'm covering this kind of quick outline
right now.
But basically, I then made a video on ontology, which is relativism about how we conceive
of the world, on what even exists, what is out there you could say.
And he actually allowed for a great deal of relativism there, not that he endorsed it,
but he allowed it because they didn't seem able to conclusively rule against it.
But then in epistemology, which is a study of knowledge, we also allowed for a great
deal of relativism but still kind of limited.
We allowed for it not just in the ways that everyone already knows and accepts, like the
fact that different people know different things because they're in different places
and have different experiences, but it was even allowed for more seemingly universal
things we know, like math or even logic.
But it turned out it was not completely relative, in that while we can have different models
of different maths, logics and geometries, different a priori systems, still they all
have one shared element among all of them.
Kind of like what we saw in logic, but what is that thing that is shared, and what was
that system governing in the logic video?
That's what we're covering today, a universal conception of rationality that still therefore
allows a great deal of relativism, even allowing for them to be different various beliefs,
different views of the world, different geometries, maths, logics, yet some still limited by rationality,
which I call the second limit to relativism.
Also by the way, I did make a couple of supplementary videos about Wiccanshine and Quine that I added
in here and here because I didn't like his explanation of Wiccanshine in the first chapter,
so I just made one more off the top of my head without even any proper citation or anything,
but I promise it's still super helpful.
There's no need to be afraid of Wiccanshine to think he's kind of spooky or mystical
or anything like that, and it would pay to get a better understanding of his philosophy
of different language games.
I also then made a video on Quine, and I made it separate because I didn't want to have
to explain what Ogrady thinks of Quine twice, and he talks about him in both of these chapters,
so I just made one video so that I can refer to it in both of these areas.
I figured that would be easier.
Again, you really don't have to watch all of those videos if you really don't want
to, but you may end up having to stick with some of what's being said while not fully
understanding, and I'm going to be referring to a lot of those previous videos not to pester
you to tell you, oh you really gotta watch more of my stuff and give me more views, even
though you definitely should watch more of my stuff and give me more views, you know,
please subscribe, but that's not the point.
The point is I'm going to be suggesting and referring to other videos because that's part
of the technique, especially for the first section of this video, to make sure that you
understand what the relativism is really about, how it's actually about relativism about
other things, and I'm also going to be suggesting them in different places, kind of more as
a signpost for people who want to get more details about what's going on here can click
on them and check out in greater detail if they feel kind of skeptical about something,
you know, it's not me constantly forcing you to watch other videos, it's more of a signpost
type of thing if not actually part of O'Grady's technique.
But importantly today, I gotta ask you one thing, that while watching, let's be careful
not to jump into agreeing with or disagreeing with something on the basis of what merely
at first it seems to advance.
You'll find that O'Grady's argument is actually well-nuanced, versatile, and open,
and that it actually allows for a great deal of sensitivities even while opposing arguments
that may come from the social sciences such as the sociology of knowledge, feminism, anthropology
of different people's cultures including eastern cultures and the cultures of indigenous
people and so on.
Remember, he is not going to deny that there is good empirical evidence for relativism
that comes from these fields, but that the support isn't relativism about rationality
rather that it is just support for one or more of these other relativisms previously
discussed.
So now let's finally get to the discussion itself.
Alternative rationality.
What are the sources of it and who's suggesting it?
He says, and oh, whenever I'm interpreting or paraphrasing what he says I will give proper
citation down to the line in the corner of the screen and whenever that citation disappears
then it's coming from me, not from him.
He says that those that are for alternative rationality are often not even clear about
what that even means and they come from the sociology of knowledge, anthropology, feminist
theory, and theology.
That's right, the religious who may indeed disagree with the great many things that these
former believe, but I'll argue that many of them can be accommodated with other forms
of relativism rather than rationality.
After that I'll give you my account of a non-relative rationality and defend it, but
also will address three particular major lines of attack against even giving an account.
Then I'll explain how my strategy is different from another non-relativist, Donald Davidson.
Well, actually for our sake we don't really need to discuss Davidson so I've decided
not to cover that or at least not in this video.
But maybe in my next video when I'm giving a kind of general overview of this book of
Paulo Grady's then I might talk about how he differs from Donald Davidson and what his
final position is on that difference.
Anyway, so first we're going to set up all of these positions one by one and then we're
going to discuss how to approach them.
First, from the sociology of knowledge, Barry Barnes and David Bloor defended relativism
about rationality from the sociology of knowledge.
These by the way are the SSK, or from the Strong program.
They were actually our motivation to even come here to the battlefield of metaphysics
to talk about this weapon, relativism, because they were using it to extreme degrees and in
order to challenge and discredit science.
So we don't even have to technically go back to the battlefield of the philosophy of science
in particular to take on these guys at least.
Why?
Because today, O Grady himself will take them on.
Today, the SSK members will be defeated.
At least these ones in my opinion.
Anyway, they reject a universal conception of rationality and instead hold that there's
only local ones relative to context, culture and historical epoch and so on.
Now it seems to me that they do this in two parts.
One is in challenging beliefs and the other is in challenging inferences.
So for the first one, they do this by emphasizing the empirical conditions under which beliefs
arise.
Like your senses and the environment, your surroundings when you first got those ideas
and beliefs about rationality.
And those are always local and particular.
Now first we may want to say, those are just local causes, not exactly the reasons we
give as agents for our beliefs.
So this doesn't really have to do with rationality and it's confusing causes with reasons.
Well, they actually challenged that distinction anyway.
They all are connected to local empirical conditions.
There aren't any universal beliefs, ideas or concepts, not even ones that come as if
directly from the world.
We've already seen this because of theory-ladenness.
Local basic beliefs or observation from the world are also shaped by our theories.
Despite what the naive may think, as the argument goes, there isn't objective ideas that come
directly from observation of a globally available world for us to go by you could say.
So there's always actually just local conditions, even if it's just biological, from where beliefs
arise.
Coupled with this is also how they point to the failures of philosophers to establish
a universal core conception of rationality.
But also for the second part of their move, they kind of point to an argument that is
similarly used by the theologians, which is about deductive inferences, reasoning as if
in a sort of universal way.
Which is what philosophers like to do, kind of like math, but really let me represent it
here in a kind of formal symbolic fashion.
It's just a way of arguing that a conclusion will be true so long as the premises that
lead to them are true too.
So the conclusion gets a justification based on the justification of the premises.
And this provides a certain rational justification of which philosophers try to achieve a similar
level of certainty in their arguments when we make them.
So to preserve this kind of rationally certain way we try to be as deductive as possible.
But they say, and this is a pretty cool move I admit, they say that actually arguing for
the use of deduction requires a deductive argument, so that's actually circular.
And circular is bad, because that means it's not really justified.
You can't use something as if it is justified in order to justify it, because you assumed
it was justified in the first place.
Like saying you can't use reason to support why we should listen to reason, it's circular.
So because of this, according to them, since circular reasoning is unjustified, then it's
not justification, it's just basically faith in deductive arguments, a blind faith in rationality.
Which well, you know what, I'll be honest, that did use to sound like a very good move
to me when I was much younger.
But can you see the counter?
Don't worry if you can't right now, just keep it in mind, we are after all just setting
up these positions first and we will actually deal with them later.
But they pretty much liken this faith in deduction or reasoning as similar to the same kind of
dogma in religion.
So clearly here we can kind of see how these particular sociologists' arguments will loan
themselves to the theological position as well.
Anyway, that's Barnes and Bloor for now.
Now these guys also rely on some anthropological work, but nobody's work is more famous than
Benjamin Lee Worf's, and his analysis of the Hopi-Indian language drawing on the conclusion
that they have a different metaphysical scheme, that there isn't one universal structure
of language.
Now back in the ancient times, Aristotle thought that the subject predicate structure
of Greek was actually reflective of the substance-accident nature of reality.
But Worf showed that the Hopi have a very different linguistic structure and a different
metaphysical system underpinning it.
Basically, the Hopi-Indian, who by the way are not Indians, it's just an antiquated
way of speaking.
But they are indigenous Native Americans or First Nation people if you will, currently
for the most part in the reserves of northeastern Arizona.
So please don't actually call them Indian unless you're willing to make this kind of
clarification at some point in time that I am now at very least.
I wouldn't normally do that at all even, but I am going to be following the text as
much as possible, so that's why I prefer to do this clarification right now instead.
Anyway, the Hopi have this distinction, right, of the manifested and the manifesting.
The manifested is all that is evident to the senses, not just in the present, but anything
in the past too.
The manifesting is everything in the future, but also everything that is just mental.
And Ogrady has it with a quite pan-psychist view of the mental, and indeed a quasi-religious
sense of the awesomeness of the cosmos.
Now that's pretty interesting, to kind of double interpret this again if you will with
my own kind of interpretation, I think this is like saying that thoughts and dreams and
ideas that we have in our head are actually a part of the vast cosmos of the universe,
of infinite things that actually do very much exist in a very real fashion as material
stuff before us, that these things aren't merely created in our own head, but are a
part of the universe itself, except these things are simply yet to actually manifest.
Almost as if they will naturally manifest at some point, they're still just simply manifesting,
leaving them for now at this point still in the future, and also mental, but mental in
a way that the individual is sort of connecting to actual things beyond just their own imagination
like I explained.
Things that actually did manifest actually before us, so in a way that we can detect
them with our senses, we can see it and touch it, those manifest things are both temporally
in the present and also in the past having been sensed.
That's the kind of picture that we have here, and so they claim this is very different from
the way typically westerners view the world.
But that's my interpretation of what the Hopi mean, based off what Ogrady is saying,
off of what Worf is saying, and maybe even kind of influenced by what Patrick Phillips
says later, I don't really know, I need to check that book out and I will in the next
sort of episode.
Anyway, Worf himself says he believes he can only give a rough approximation of it, and
that the translations of it will completely fail unless we take into account the different
metaphysical structure underpinning their language.
Now there are some other examples from anthropology that suggest cognitive diversity, like Bruce
Chatwin in his The Song Lines, described how the Australian Aboriginals believe the landscape
came into being through the agency of the ancestor animals who sang the world into existence.
Or the beliefs of traditional Chinese culture about energy, Qi, that permeates all things
and is also a big part of their traditional way of life, involved in traditional Chinese
medicine, martial arts, even philosophical religious doctrines like the Tao Te Ching
or the Yi Ching.
But anyway, a lot of the discussion focuses on the Azandei.
Despite the many examples, it's really the Hopi and the Azandei that I find most frequently
cited as if to support the idea of radical diversity to the point of disconnect even.
But anyway, based on the work of anthropologist E.E. Evans-Pitchard-
Oh, upon editing, I realized that throughout this entire video, I've been calling him
Pitchard instead of Prichard.
It's Prichard.
Sorry about that.
Names.
Subscribe.
The Azandei believed basically there's witchcraft and that it is transmitted from mother to
daughter or father to son.
But also that after they have died, a post-mortem inspection can be done on their intestines
to show conclusively if they were actually a witch or not.
So this is pretty different from typical Western thought.
But yo, that's not even the main point.
The point is that despite this post-mortem inspection that is supposed to be conclusive,
people can still go on acting like the person was in fact a witch.
And as Lawrence Simon says, the Azandei may treat somebody as a witch despite clear deduction
to the contrary conclusion from facts they accept.
Yet the Azandei do not appear to be aware of much less concerned about this apparent
contradiction in their beliefs.
So they apparently accept contradiction.
A major break from Western modes of thought.
Again, so remember these two in particular, the Hopi and the Azandei.
Social scientists use anthropological studies of both of them to support the idea of very
different metaphysical systems but also as an example to show that people can exist without
the principle of non-contradiction that they seem to have radically different rationality
therefore.
So that's anthropology.
But now let's move on to feminism, which is actually a special case and you'll see
why.
A challenge to the standard model of rationality comes from feminism as O'Grady writes of
that position that our ideas about rationality may be affected by gender issues and biased
in important ways.
Now Professor Lorraine Colde, who I address as Professor O'Grady doesn't but that's
my personal preference, please note that.
Anyway, Professor Colde notes that feminists have tried not to be labeled as relativists
because that label can actually get them ignored.
But it's time for them to come out and stand by being labeled as relativists.
It is important as part of their interest is to contextualize, historicize and localize
the epistemological project.
That is, they want to put the study of knowledge to account for local factors like the time
period and the geography, indeed, even as I believe it, even to consider the gendered
makeup of the people who claim to know things.
Calling that kind of work relativist could silence it, but Professor Colde really wishes
to challenge the whole opposition between universalism and relativism in the same way
that other dichotomies have been challenged from many different fields, not just feminism.
Dichotomies of it's just one or the other thing, such as the fact value or theory practice
dichotomy.
Again, here's where if you want a deeper understanding about these things and how they've
been challenged, I've done that in the first video covering the power of relativism that
goes into explaining what these are and how they failed historically, or, you know, at
least were challenged, and it's pretty important to grasp that.
Anyway, challenging this would allow for positions in between universal and relative.
And Colde actually notes that using a specific conception of rationality as if universal historically
has tended to be used to discredit women's knowledge, or knowledge produced by different
races or cultures than those of the epistemology makers.
So in a way, it's similar to the non-western case, but perhaps unlike others, and this
is why I said this, that this is a special case, O'Grady says that Professor Colde
is not an extreme relativist.
And it's pretty clear here if we take what O'Grady said earlier at face value, that if
her aim is to challenge this dichotomy, then she isn't siding on just one side, she's
kind of wanting to take a more middle position, and is actually in a position kind of like
the one O'Grady himself took on the epistemology chapter.
Again, please go check that out.
But he's actually saying this in terms of ontology, not epistemology, because he says,
Professor Colde believes relativism is compatible with realism, that there is a real world to
which we must answer.
So it seems O'Grady is describing her position as what we would call, if you have seen the
ontology video, a sophisticated realist position, that she believes we do face irreducible facts
in our experience and that we don't invent the world at will.
So I'm actually really interested to see where Colde herself talks about things like
this and takes this stance, and O'Grady cites her book, so you know, I saved up some money
and I bought her book, but geez, O'Grady, I wish you would have given some like page
citation for this stuff, now I gots to read this whole book and just find out that realism
stuff in there.
Anyway, it's going to take some time to get to it, unless there's some massive support
from you guys to go through Colde's work, which I'm definitely still kind of interested
to do, but it just seems like it may take a while given the amount of support I have
now, and I don't really know if anybody's even interested in it.
I mean, I can barely even afford philosophy books right now.
So I'm just saying, I'll go where there's massive support to do that.
Anyway, she thinks a big problem is just the narrow view we have on rationality, because
of the more traditional examples of it.
So she suggests looking at a wider context of the knower, their social and political
role, the place science and technology has in a capitalistic society, the cultural impacts
of what we deem knowledge or not, for example.
Feminists have brought up issues of imperialism in claiming some kind of universal sameness,
how it can actually merely just center certain ethnicities, men, or a class, or be Eurocentric,
for example.
Which yo, that kind of makes total sense.
Think about how unilingual English-speaking Americans just think that English is somehow
universally normal and that everything else is weird.
That kind of makes me laugh, laugh, laugh.
Anyway, sensitivity to this type of thing has begun to change in Western culture, and
it's starting to show in the laws and social interaction as well.
Yo, keep in mind this book is actually written about 20 odd years ago, which is starting
to get a hard pill to swallow, because I think of this as recent work, but I guess compared
to these 5 philosophers it is, let alone counter, oh my god Aristotle, that's ancient stuff.
Anyway, it's also beginning to affect epistemology, the study of knowledge, and so it may lead
people to hesitate in writing off the beliefs of others no matter how radical and eccentric.
Well, speaking of eccentric theology, and it seems specifically Christian theology,
here's where we have Wittgensteinian Fideism, from Rush Ries and D.Z. Philip.
These are people that are trying to use Wittgenstein's philosophy of different language games to
defend religion.
They feel that rationality of religion is its own thing, so it cannot be judged from the
outside, in a similar fashion that we have explained language games, that one cannot
mix language games, and there is no super language game.
And so you certainly can't go into Darsh's wood shop and try to correct him according
to what you believe science says, and tell him that block of wood is mostly empty space.
What?
No, Ayo, this is a solid block of wood.
I'm not lying, I'm not trying to be metaphorical, I'm literally saying this is solid.
This was an example that I brought up in my rough loose video about Wittgenstein, again
if you'd like please go check it out, it's a very good video and it really explains the
importance of how language games work, it's not simply that some people are trying to
be poetic and others are trying to be metaphorical and some people are trying to be literal,
that's not what's going on when you talk about different people having different language
games.
Anyway, so they claim that you cannot judge the rationality of religious belief, with
a rationality from other language games or other practices, namely science.
And other philosophers of religion have also been heavily influenced mainly by postmodernists
to argue for radical diversity by pointing to the failings of the moderns to establish
a universal count of rationality.
This kind of sounds like the error O'Grady points out in Rorty in our epistemology video,
saying that just cuz certain projects in philosophy have failed doesn't mean all of philosophy
has failed.
Anyway, this is often called the collapse of foundationalism and it's actually conflating
a number of issues that O'Grady has also written about, but regardless, these philosophers
in their reaction to this failure, they kind of push a religious worldview based on aesthetics.
What really?
Yeah, things that are non-rational, even non-cognitive grounds.
So not things like truth, logic, science, knowledge, or reason.
A standard way of presenting this is the idea of incommensurability of many facets of culture,
so there is no single core rationality among all of them.
The point is, they feel we should not even be looking for a standard of rationality that
can be used universally.
And here we have that similar point that was made by Barnes & Blurr earlier, that it's
all based on faith anyway, because even rationality is just regarded as a competing faith.
So before you get lost, basically the point is that all four positions say there's a
need for alternative conceptions of rationality, but I mean it is pretty obvy if you've been
watching this series up until now, that many of these aren't even about actually different
ways of fundamentally thinking, you know, like the way we think itself.
They're just about how we think different things, that we believe different things.
He says none of them are clear on what alternative rationality even means, that many of them
can be explained with other forms of relativism we have covered, which we're acceptable
according to a Grady, and that don't threaten the possibility of a universal rationality.
So like Worf's examples are clear cases of conceptual relativity, where different categories
yielded different ontologies.
Right, that's fine, that makes sense, we argued for that.
Or how Professor Code is actually arguing for widening the scope of epistemology, not
really a new rationality.
Now the Zande example and the Chinese example involves beliefs about reality, and whether
we consider them true or false, that doesn't even have to do with different rationality.
We're not saying they're false, but even if we did, that doesn't mean we're saying
they're irrational.
According to the epistemology video, it's actually perfectly acceptable to be justified
in believing what you do, and still not know the truth.
According to an internalist picture, which is indeed the one O'Grady claims to be using
here, but there's a further discussion about this that we'll see soon.
O'Grady points out that it is possible that two different belief systems could also be
empirically adequate, so that they don't contradict the empirical evidence.
In this way, it's like saying that neither of them even have to be kind of wrong in a
technical sense with the empirical evidence.
They can both be consistent with the evidence.
Now he makes a couple of points about how some think that theories are just meaningless
anyway, even if they are empirically adequate, if we can't verify or falsify them.
But it says that doctrine itself is charged with dogma, and I'm unclear if he means it
like this or not, but I guess he's saying that doctrine itself isn't sufficiently
verifiable or falsifiable too.
But anyway listen, the real point O'Grady wants to make is that even if a belief system
is different but not wrong because it's also empirically adequate, that doesn't mean
there's a different rationality that needs to be invoked in order to understand them.
He gives the example contrasting Aristotle and Berkeley as having contrasting metaphysics.
Both we can say were empirically adequate so neither were wrong in that sense, but importantly
we don't take them to indicate different rationalities.
Different metaphysical systems doesn't imply different rationalities.
Okay, so they don't really seem clear on what alternative rationality even means, so
I guess why don't we first clarify what we mean by rationality first, then O'Grady
will show his conception of what rationality must at least include, what he means by it
at least, and then we'll see if any of these really meant an alternative to it.
So rationality, what is it?
Now if you need a break, like, don't worry, you can take it now, look, look, it's a
doggie, somehow familiar, aww, it's super cute and cuddly isn't it?
What?
It's not?
Okay, don't worry about it though, cause it doesn't exist, anyway, that was a metaphysical
dog.
Let's move on to core rationality.
Calling something rational can be applied to a lot of things, like an action can be called
rational, where given a certain belief an appropriate action is taken that is then considered
a rational action, it's goal directed, it doesn't have to do with if the belief is
true or not, just that a certain action is the best to bring about a desire given one's
beliefs, it's just instrumental.
But this isn't about that instrumental kind of rationality, it's not about appropriate
action's given beliefs, this chapter is about whether holding that belief itself is either
rational or not, based on a universal criteria regardless of culture or historical epoch.
But before trying to present this universal criteria, let's be clear about a few things.
Now these are some details for those more attuned right now, but if you don't get it,
don't worry about these, the battles will still be awesome regardless afterwards.
First, internalism versus externalism.
In terms of epistemology, this is an internalist rather than externalist picture.
And if you are unfamiliar with those are again, you can check out that video about epistemology
if you really want to.
This means that rationality is not necessarily connected to truth, so one can rationally believe
something that turns out to be false.
Just because you believe something that wasn't true doesn't mean you were being irrational,
you can still be reasonable within the context of what you do know.
Second, substantive versus methodological.
Beliefs aren't just judged as rational in of itself, like a single belief isn't on
its own rational depending on its own content, so it's not a matter of substance of belief.
Hence this is not what we would call a substantive conception of rationality, instead it's about
how those beliefs are acquired, what the reasoning is for that belief, and how it connects to
other beliefs, and what does one do with them that's judged as rational or not.
So this is a methodological conception of rationality.
To be clear, this is not if your belief is true or false, it's about how your belief
connects with other beliefs, like in argumentation or deduction, how you infer some beliefs
from other beliefs.
That's the how in why we're calling this method, methodological.
The third important note is that there's a distinction between core and localized notions
of rationality.
The core notion of rationality is universal in all our treatments of belief, but local
notions have specific features that are not universal.
For example, the core has a principle of non-contradiction, that we must avoid contradictions.
But local could be that you just discount a certain person's testimony because they
are unreliable, so it's rational to do so, but that's not universally so.
These local things are relative to context of discussion, goals, or concepts we are using,
for example.
Even the methods we choose may be different for law than it is in physics, say.
Seeking out precedent might be more important than one than in the other.
Using stats may be important in certain ways when studying psychology, which are not as
important when studying art.
Using deductive logic that demands certainty isn't as appropriate in probabilistic contexts.
So to be clear, O'Grady is not arguing that all rationality is universal, but that some
aspect of what it means to be rational, a core conception, is universal.
And in terms of this, core mentioned, it's internalist and methodological, mmkay?
So what is this core though?
Tell us already O'Grady, we're tired of your clarifications.
So the core rationality has two components, logical coherence and evidence, and each
component has a negative in the sense of restriction and a positive requirement.
So there's four principles, we're gonna go over those principles now.
Principle one, non-contradiction.
So here is the place to where he went from what I had called his setup in chapter two
on truth.
Basically in chapter two, he did what I called a setup.
And from that setup, he takes it to here and here, as I pictured it.
And the setup is just that he explained and detailed why we must avoid contradiction.
And briefly it's because contradiction would prevent us from saying, thinking, or putting
forth anything substantive.
So if you're interested in exact detailed discussion about that and why we have to avoid
contradiction, why the principle of non-contradiction is so important, then please check out my video
on truth, the first area that O'Grady defends against relativization.
And here in rationality it is being invoked presumably on the same basis.
He says even if in certain very particular situations we can make use of a logic that
is para-consistent or deviant, still these are governed by a general criteria that does
work on the principle of non-contradiction.
So Paulo Grady is saying that while okay there could be certain special limited local cases
where we may perhaps use a logic that is deviant enough to drop this principle, when we are
deliberating, thinking about, or assessing that particular logic or any other for particular
cases, for example while doing quantum physics, still those assessments, criteria, or judgments
themselves will be governed by a rationality that does always have this principle of non-contradiction,
sort of up here in the more general sense.
Contradictions are bad.
So there's a general presumption for all discourse that contradiction must be avoided.
He says sure, we do sometimes make contradictions, we're not perfect humans.
Sometimes things only superficially appear like a contradiction but on closer inspection
it isn't.
Or maybe there are some other beliefs involved that would explain why it's not really a
contradiction.
Or it could be that some concepts are just vague enough not to be contradictions.
Heck, maybe we don't even realize it's a contradiction.
What this principle holds is that we cannot be rational and consciously accept what we
know to be a genuine contradiction.
To do so would not be rational.
Principle two, coherence among beliefs.
This is just a stronger version of that first principle.
The first one was just denying having contradictory beliefs but this one actually seeks more
positive connection between beliefs.
And Ogrity also points this out with coherentism in that epistemology video, that this isn't
just non-contradiction because you could have a bunch of beliefs that don't even connect
to each other and technically they therefore don't contradict each other but the idea
here is to have beliefs that actually do connect to each other inferentially.
That some beliefs stand as reason for other beliefs.
And also like he points out, sometimes certain beliefs don't cohere well despite the fact
that they're not contradictory.
Like it's unlikely that P and P. Both of these don't technically contradict but they
don't cohere well and what we mean is to make our beliefs a coherent whole.
And yeah, of course, it's going to be hard if not impossible given our limited resources
of time and attention and memory to get all of our beliefs to fully cohere.
But this is just more of an ideal to strive for.
It's a goal of the methodology of our rationality.
Remember we were talking about how this rationality is evaluating how beliefs connect to each other.
Not about evaluating the belief itself.
In this way the principle is saying that they should cohere, they should connect as much
as we can make them.
Principle 3 is the non-avoidance of evidence.
This is basically don't avoid evidence if it's possible that it would impact what
you take to be true.
To use all evidence available to you, even if what you argue for still ends up being
not true.
So under this principle, avoiding evidence that is pertinent to your position is not
rational.
Principle 4, intellectual honesty.
So just like one was avoiding contradiction and two was to increase coherence, since
three was to not avoid evidence on the positive side, four is to maximize evidence.
And he calls this intellectual honesty.
Because he means not only to look for the maximum evidence of one's own view, but also
to be fair and honest in evaluating competing views, to assess and be fair with the opposition.
Now he phrased it this way, but I kind of feel like he should have stated maximize evidence
not only for your own view, but views opposing you.
I think that's what he means by being fair.
But in a technical sense, maybe he did not want to be saying it that way, because it
might give credence to the idea that it is evidence contrary to you.
And in accordance to our own philosophical understanding now, you would actually interpret
all evidence with your paradigm, your view.
That is, in your position, you should also be able to explain how the opposition's evidence
is not really opposing your own view anyway.
So I think that's kind of why he didn't say it like that.
Anyway, these are the four principles that are the core model of rationality.
These are about coherence, and these are about evidence.
These are more negative, not to make contradiction or avoid evidence, and these are more positive,
to be as coherent as possible and use all evidence as possible.
Note, I'm leaving open what even counts as evidence here, and I'm open to the fact that
the need for coherence can be tempered by our limited resources.
So this leaves a great deal still open for relativists, but the core conception itself
applies everywhere we can call beliefs rational.
So does this core hold up against these so-called examples of alternative rationality?
Well let's see if these are actually opposing this core in some way.
Let's start with Barnes & Bloor.
They claim that all evaluation, even what counts as rational or not, is just local and
non-universal.
Now the initial move to counter this is something we must be familiar with by now, is basically
to press self-defeat, asking what's the status of that claim then?
Is that just local?
Because it seems like you want it to be universal.
Well Barnes & Bloor bite the bullet on this, as a means to throw it off what they know
is pending self-defeat.
They say no no, it's just local too, yeah, we're also just being local.
But that's deeply problematic, it's deeply problematic in a way that I don't think most
on the battlefield that wield this weapon to extreme degrees truly appreciate.
Why is it a problem?
Because if you take that to be just local too, then it fails to engage in even disagreeing,
and we already saw this type of thing happening, even and explicitly in the Kirk videos against
the true for me relativist.
Anyone who disagrees is by the fact that they're disagreeing in a different intellectual location,
and so it makes a situation where disagreement is impossible.
So it's not an adequate characterization of intellectual exchange if you can't even
disagree.
Based on their own view, they can't really engage let alone convince others other than
those that are already committed to the exact same views as them.
So the principle of non-contradiction is actually essential to debate an argument.
And we've gone to some good details of exactly why this principle is inherent to assertion
in the truth video, so could pay to really check that out.
But anyway, holding to a core universal rationality can still allow for us to be contextualized
in important ways in epistemology and various logics and hold many categorizations of reality.
But it seems it still allows us to hold each other accountable to being non-contradictory.
So I think he's just trying to proclaim that their position actually prevents any real
engagement while O'Grady's picture allows for engagement, because it works while even
justification can be contextualized, we can have different models of logic and even different
sets of the a priori and have different ontologies.
And if that's true, it kinda still feels a little bit out of place here for me.
But anyway, I love pointing out or developing this fork situation of my visual and strategy
of capturing these relativists.
Where on the one side, either they are making a universal claim in order to universally deny
that one can make a universal claim and thus commit self-defeat, which is terrible, or
there is the other place where they are effectively being silenced.
And actually there are different degrees of effort required by us who oppose them to see
they are silenced.
One is just that they realize their philosophical situation properly themselves and choose to
actually say nothing, in which case that's actual silence.
But O'Grady is actually pointing out one of the other two where they end up effectively
saying nothing even though they're trying to say something, of which we already came
across two of those in our journey from Kirk and O'Grady.
One is the idea happening right now that O'Grady is pointing to, that if they still wish to
say something, but claim that what they say, to use Barnes and Bluers language, that what
they say too is just local, that they aren't being universal, so it means that they can
avoid self-defeat, then they aren't engaging beyond their own local context or paradigm
anyway either.
They can't really correct or deny or oppose anything outside of them anyway.
They cannot oppose those who do make universal claims.
But we'll talk about this more when it comes again.
While I do have this image up though, the other effective silence is when they try to
remain local, but we push them into an infinite regress, forcing them forever into qualifying
their own position to be careful to avoid making universal claim, but then never being
able to actually make their case or say anything.
Nothing is universal and objective.
Well, is that universal and objective?
No, it's relative and local.
And is that description of it being relative and local an objective description?
No, that too is relative to our paradigm.
And is that claim that it is relative to your paradigm an objective claim?
No, that's just relative to me also.
And that's relative to me.
And that's just relative to me.
And so on and so on.
And so a good philosophic warrior can push them into an infinite abyss, an eternal condemnation
of effectively never being able to say finally something at all, while forever trying to.
And we saw this in the Kirk episode.
It was one of Kirk's cool moves that I covered in my bonus video.
It was also a quick move that Ogrady used to point out how a general non-relative claim
is always going to be required.
But I'll talk about this fork again later, which is my visual description, not Ogrady's
nor Kirk's, even though we all do seem to know the kind of situation the relativist
is in, which hopefully you will really understand by the end of this video.
But for now, let's talk about Ogrady, cause this video isn't about me, I'm just a shadowy
internet nobody here, unless you subscribe then I'll be on my way to being a real person
anyway.
He then deals with anthropological examples, which can be treated as he pointed out earlier
as just having different categories, different sets of concepts used to make sense of the
world.
Whether it's the Hopi or the Azandei, they can still be considered rational if they
are holding to these principles.
But wait, Ogrady, it seemed like the Azandei were, and often are, used as proof that they
act with contradictory beliefs.
So that should mean they are not rational according to your core rationality, right?
It mandates the principle of non-contradiction, isn't it?
Well if you remember what Ogrady said in that section, it is similar to what he's going
to say here, that it could be argued that the Azandei don't actually accept contradiction.
It could be that they really just don't care about the apparent contradiction in the example,
but that doesn't mean that they actually endorse contradiction everywhere else.
Or maybe there are some beliefs that we aren't aware of that explain why they don't actually
accept contradiction.
Such as maybe if the inspection proves the parent wasn't a witch, but the son or the
daughter is still suspected as witches, it's only because they begin to believe that that
wasn't their real parent.
Or maybe it's just nuanced in certain ways that we aren't aware of, like there could
actually be two different kinds of witchcraft, one that has to do with the parents and the
other one that has to do with this post-mortem inspection.
There are ways of absolving the Azandei from apparently accepting contradictions.
But the cases with the Hopi and the traditional Chinese examples are actually much more clear.
They actually are obviously coherent worldviews.
You know, I find it kind of interesting here that it seems that Ogrady has actually placed
the anthropologist relativist about rationality in a position where they're the ones who
have to present these other cultures as being somehow incoherent and contradictory, as if
they would have to do that in order to support the idea that they have a different rationality.
Anyway, both the manifest manifesting and the concept of chi are involved important ways
in dealing with the world, and they can perhaps be perfectly empirically adequate, kind of
like we spoke about earlier, they may lead to no contradiction with empirical evidence.
So that also means they wouldn't be avoiding evidence, now it's true their system could
contradict a materialist or a physicalist metaphysical conception, but just cause two
metaphysical systems are in competition doesn't mean one or both is irrational.
It could just be that one is false, say mistaken about some things, or just underdeveloped.
In fact, when it comes to things like chi, one might argue that it is involved with and explains
a broader range of phenomena than just a physical, like emotional, moral, social, and so on.
So in that way, one might hold the Taoist as superior because it explains a wider range of
phenomena.
Actually, this fits pretty well with what Professor Code's feminist position was,
to widen the range of epistemological investigation.
That doesn't mean changing the conception of rationality though,
just changing our focus and the use of this important tool of ours, rationality.
Now when it comes to that theology stuff though, we really see the teeth of this core.
Just because there are different domains, like arts and science and theologies,
that doesn't mean they are completely cut off from each other.
But also, and I would say more importantly in my books, their position seems contradictory.
It uses what it wants to deny.
Now we'll talk about this I think more closely since I think he's referencing the argument
as being the same one used by Barnes and Bloor, that whole, you can't use logic to support
logic thing, that because of that it's just faith anyway.
He says it lightly deploys a general criteria of rational acceptability
to reject the notion of rational acceptability.
So like I said, we'll talk more about challenging this type of thing later.
But also, it doesn't really engage with the relevant evidence,
cause there's a lot of material about theism if it is even defensible.
And even if one says the debate based on evidence is inconclusive,
that itself is a conclusion reached using an argument.
To argue that there is not enough evidence is still an argument based on the evidence.
So Ogrity here says none of these arguments are actually able to dislodge,
or opposes with their examples, what he suggests is the core conception of rationality.
So it stands still, it's still there.
But he says there are three initial objections he quickly wants to address
against this core conception that he presents.
One is a potential criticism that it's just formal, that it doesn't really say much at all.
Two is that there's too much stress on the evidence,
that there are contexts where maximizing evidence and weighing out counters won't really apply
when you're running from a bear, you ain't got time for that.
Three is that it's just too ideal, people don't actually reason like this,
we often fail to reach the standard set out by this model.
So it seems empty, not generally applicable, only applicable in certain contexts anyway,
thus not universal, and is just an unrealistic ideal.
Okay, to quickly deal with these first off relatives about rationality,
say there's no universal standards or features at all.
So compared to that, just on the basis that my model opposes that,
shows it definitely has content.
And in fact, it's got four principles that hold across all local differences,
like legal versus physics.
And using it, you can accuse someone of being irrational if they oppose these principles,
like if they're being inconsistent or purposely ignoring something that would matter.
So yeah, it's super broad, not in small part because it's open to what we can even count
as evidence, but it's not empty, and they do work.
Secondly, the model is meant for when we are deliberating,
not while we're running from a freaking bear, but yeah, afterwards we can still think about
and wonder about if running from the bear was the most appropriate.
So it is applicable in all contexts of deliberation.
The model isn't meant to be descriptive of all psychology,
like acting on instinct, just the basics of what makes deliberation rational in all cases.
Remember, as a minimal criteria.
Thirdly, like someone already given these caveats for, no one is saying that humans are ideal,
or that we could live up to this model perfectly in all cases,
as we have already admitted, we have limited resources.
We can't always afford to be totally consistent with our beliefs,
that could take massive amount of time going through every little thing that we believe,
even to make minute adjustments.
And not all of our beliefs can connect to each other in an inferential way.
Some things definitely won't have to do with each other.
Heck, even with evidence, there's a point at which amassing even more has gone beyond usefulness.
But being limited creatures doesn't amount to abandoning this model,
it's just an aim or an aspiration while we deliberate.
It's more a guide of our cognitive activity.
Sure, there's going to be trade-offs between, say, consistency and time available,
but even in that trade-off those principles are still functioning.
So again, our limitation isn't reason to deny a model of core rationality,
or suggest there's some massive diversity in rationality.
So despite all these defenses, an ally to the relativists might point out
that yeah, we have shown some claims of alternative rationality
can be accommodated with other forms of relativism.
Cool.
And a core model, a universal model of rationality has been presented.
Cool.
But that was just assertion.
We haven't actually shown an argument against the relative rationality yet.
Specifically, there are a few issues that have been neglected,
like the question-begging nature of the absolutist claims,
or the problem of incommensurability.
So, woo, woo, so.
I think this is a good place for ending this section of my video,
because the real battle of this video is in the next section.
It will be him taking on what I call the three major lines of attack.
Of these three, the first is especially important in our journey.
It's where he will be taking on these opponents,
Barnes and Bloor of the Strong Program, DSSK,
and also I get to visualize this fork of mine,
while still sticking to what O'Grady is actually saying.
So put on your hat, or take off your hat, or burn it.
But let's get ready.
When you are, then we'll start.
The causal challenge.
So, we've already shown B&B's claims earlier.
If you forgot, you can go back if you need to,
but crudely said, basically it's about how all your beliefs,
even your beliefs about what counts as rational,
are connected to your local environment, where they came from,
and also you can't use supposed universal reasons or arguments or anything,
as if supporting using reason.
Because that would be circular and therefore it's just kind of taken on faith,
rather than proper justification.
But anyway, there is what O'Grady calls four issues,
when it comes to their arguments that he wants to go through.
The first is their defense against being accused of self-defeat.
And as O'Grady says, which is true for our purposes as well,
this will be the most important issue.
Second is their attack on the importance of evidence,
principles three and four, with that locally derived stuff.
Third is their attack on the need for logical inferencing,
their attack on one and two.
With that thing about not using reasons to use reason,
because then that's just faith.
You know what I mean.
Fourth also has to do with translation and incommensurability,
but incommensurability has its own challenge section,
so we'll talk about that there.
But of these three then, first on the question of
do relativists about rationality commit self-defeat?
I've straight up said on the face of it, yeah, they do.
When they try to argue for their own case,
they actually presuppose universal conceptions
of evidence and rationality,
and so that cuts against what they are saying,
that there is no such universal conception.
Now if they choose not to argue, great,
then they can just be ignored.
But the relativists say back, no,
we aren't using a universal conception to argue.
Even in our own argument,
we are just using local conceptions of rationality.
So according to them,
we can't just accuse them of being self-defeating
just because they are making an argument.
Now Ogrity does kind of describe this as a good move.
You see, they think this is sort of pushing the burden
on the universalist.
A burden to prove that all arguments
have to have universal rationality,
which is a problem firstly,
because if we insist that it's a premise for all arguments
that it use a universal conception of rationality,
then we can't ourselves conclude and make an argument
for a universal conception of rationality,
because that would be circular.
That's why they would accuse us of question begging.
But also if not a premise,
but say a precondition, so it's not circular,
but a precondition for asserting any content,
well Ogrity says that's too strong,
because it would mean everything asserted
is by the nature of having been asserted rational.
So we're going to need something else.
But don't worry about these,
some relativists may think the battle ends there
and declare themselves victors,
claiming that the universalist can only beg the question against them,
but the battle actually goes on.
So in response to this is what I call not Ogrity just my term,
but it is to identify this move of claiming
that they themselves are not being universal
but local and relative in their own claim,
is just one of failure to engage.
But let's listen to Ogrity.
He says a powerful intuition is how the relativist
about rationality makes even disagreement
difficult if not impossible.
Imagine I'm opposing Barnes and Bloor
and their relativist account.
According to them there's no shared standard
to resolve this issue.
So we are in an intellectual impasse according to them.
But while they are defending their view
they seem to themselves be universalists
and he gives some quotes as an example
from their relativism,
rationalism and sociology of knowledge.
We'll look at them now but with my commentary.
Numbers may favor the opposite position,
but we shall show that the balance of argument,
oh, argument, I wonder what kind of argument.
The balance of argument favors the relativist
theory of knowledge.
Far from being a threat to scientific understanding
of forms of knowledge,
relativism is required by it.
On the level of empirical investigation,
there is more evidence,
oh evidence, what is this empirical investigation?
There is more evidence to be cited
for relativism than against it.
Hmm, right, so we're evaluating something
above relativism and its opposition
that favors relativism.
Eh, I see.
The relativist, like everyone else,
is under the necessity to sort out beliefs,
accepting some and rejecting others.
Look, these are just really good fun, aren't they?
We're just like pointing out how they're inconsistent,
that they themselves are universalists
and I'm having fun.
If you're having fun too, please let me know
in the comments below.
Let me know that you're having fun.
This is great fun.
Anyway, you see Barnes & Bloor also cite Mary Hess,
who I wanted to possibly cover about a year ago,
but anyway, they cite her as to defend them
against charges of self-defeat.
And again, it's just the idea that they're
using their own local standards when they argue as well.
She points out, you know,
what I actually did in the ontology video,
that relativist redefine terms from truth
and rational and cognitive grounds
to truth relative to local culture,
rational relative to local culture,
and cognitive grounds relative to local culture, etc.
So culture determines all of this junk for them.
This means presumably when they say
balance of argument or empirical investigations or evidence,
they mean this just as local notions of those things.
So local to who then?
Does that mean they're allowing for in a different context
that there could be more evidence against them?
By this way of arguing,
the relativist allows for the opposite of what they say to be true.
It's the funny or horrible situation relativists are in.
When they say relativism is true,
but try to proclaim that even that too
is just relative to me or to us.
So then you are actually allowing others to say
relativism is false for everyone.
And that is acceptable according to the relativist.
The relativist will not be able to engage with that.
They wouldn't be able to say hey that's not true,
other than that it's not true for them.
So they aren't even going to be able to engage
in opposing the universalist.
But because it seems like they really are still trying to say something,
they are trying to engage in order to deny the universalist,
or how we make sense of the whole idea of them defending relativism,
as if it is being opposed,
that it seems pretty clear that when they are using these kind of terms
to defend their position,
they mean them also in a universal way.
Now Hesse's defense also unites a concept of rationality with that of truth,
saying that it would only be self-referential
if they were using a universal concept of truth as well.
But because even their sense of truth and rationality is relative,
that means it's not actually self-referential either.
But we've already seen in chapter 2 on truth
that the relative notion must be rejected.
So relativism about rationality too would thus also be.
The arguments presented by Barnes, Bloor and Hesse,
if interpreted relativistically,
have no strength against opponents of their views.
If not interpreted relativistically, they're self-refuting.
To be clear here, he is pointing out that either they engage with others
outside of their bubble to oppose others or to make their case
and commit to self-defeat.
Or they stay in their own bubble,
don't commit self-defeat, but then can't really oppose anyone,
in which case they have been effectively silenced.
That those who are universalist or objectivist
can actually go around unopposed by them anyway,
so their response to self-defeat in a way
does damage to them also, effectively silencing them.
What a tight situation.
Anyway, so that solution to avoid self-defeat isn't all that good.
But let's move on, like what about the second issue then,
about the locally relative beliefs?
These guys are saying that all criteria of evidence is context-dependent.
They make a distinction between absolute or context-independent judgments
and local or context-dependent judgments.
But the distinction between these two things
isn't the same as the distinction between these two things.
One can actually have an absolute judgment that is context-dependent.
We saw this kind of thing in the epistemology video
and like there again, Ogrady uses this example of indexicals,
like saying, I am in Paris.
Yeah, the truth of that statement is relative to who is saying it.
There's a context of who is saying it.
But once we know, once that context is made clear,
we can still say in an absolute sense whether it is true or false.
So just because it's context-dependent
doesn't mean we can't have an absolute judgment about it.
But Ogrady says the relativists ignore this kind of potentiality
for still being absolute,
as they think once you show something is context-dependent in any way,
that it can't be absolute.
But this kind of relative absoluteness,
if we're even allowed to call it that,
is an important part of our beliefs
and that itself is not relative to anything further.
He says that he brings up this point
that these relativists point out that any belief
is relative to some background set of beliefs
and that the background set isn't necessarily true,
not fixed by nature, since it could be different.
But the non-relativist about rationality
doesn't need to show that those background beliefs are universal.
As we would say in epistemology,
they aren't or don't need to endorse foundationalism.
When it comes to rationality,
they aren't saying that a certain set of beliefs is universal.
What they are being absolute about
is the relation of our foreground beliefs to the background.
It's about how our beliefs are connected to each other.
Remember this is methodological rationality
and it's on the basis of how they are connected
that we judge if something is rational or not.
So just cause relativists can point out
that meters are arbitrary unit of measurement
and we can have whatever sort of units we want
and what led to a meter being a certain length
has some social and historical context,
maybe even political and gender roots.
But that doesn't deny the absolute judgment
that my home is 8,000 meters from my work.
8 kilometers or 8k as I would say when I do runs.
At least I'll start saying that when I start running.
Anyway, sure 8k being described that way has a context
and it could be interesting or even helpful
to understand why that is.
But given that background the distance is 8k
or I could have five miles instead.
But that's a case of conceptual relativity.
It's a different set of concepts.
But given them my house is still judged
in an absolute sense to be five miles from my work.
Now I'm going to say this part really fast
because it's just my own opinion
and I don't want to take too much time with it.
But O'Grady says the relativists ignore this kind of thing
and I think it's really easy to see both how in a sense
yeah every belief is sort of relative
in the way that every measurement
is also relative to a unit of measurement.
And this in addition to the philosophical difficulty
in trying to explain or describe
what objective things are beyond conceptualization
these together lead the relativists to the erroneous conclusion
that some kind of mind independent reality
plays little to no role at all in what we believe.
And I think that's ridiculous for the many reasons
we are covering in this video series on relativism.
And it was actually the source of why we addressed the SSK
including these members Barnes and Bloor
as the enemy on the battlefield of the philosophy of science.
Did you get that?
If not don't worry about it.
I know I said it super quick.
Barnes and Bloor have good arguments
against a more traditional foundation list
or naive empiricist you know older ways of doing philosophy
because they show how our background beliefs
are themselves based in local causes.
Beliefs based on them are not necessarily so
and can even be wrong.
But that doesn't do anything to the new level
of philosophical warrior out here
just because something has local or causal connection
doesn't mean it can't be the reason for a belief
in a fallible way.
And we saw a similar thing with the externalist
in epistemology.
But anyway getting rid of the need to have infallible reasons
to believe things based on things that can't be otherwise.
Getting rid of that doesn't mean we get rid
of needing reasons for our beliefs
even if those reasons are fallible and contextual.
So they have failed to attack universal rationality on this basis.
Okay that's about beliefs right?
But what about issue three?
That seems to address rationality more directly
against the universality of using inferences
against using logic right?
But that argument actually leads to skepticism
for using reason or argumentation.
Not really relativism.
Not the idea that there are different fundamental
logics that we could use.
As a reminder they say you can't justify deduction
using deduction.
Like justifying logic using logic.
Because of course that's circular.
So they claim there can't be a justification of logic
that isn't circular.
Now like I said I used to think this was an awesome
cool move when I was younger.
But then like some 10 months later I guess as Ogredi says
ignore for the moment the irony of the fact that
that itself is an argument.
While I couldn't just ignore it when I was young
when I realized this too I found it also pretty cool
to note that this is itself an argument.
So it is assuming the efficacy of argumentation.
But then this takes me down a path that may need
another video in order to be most fair
to the opposing opposition.
But anyway Ogredi doesn't even need this move.
He says it pretty clearly that it implies there is no
real logical justification at all.
Not that there can be multiple.
He says like with the empirical foundationalist thing
their argument is good against those who want to
take a strong defense of logic in its foundation.
But he says a post-quinian view of logic can
accommodate their qualms.
The idea is that hey logic is integrated into our
web of beliefs.
It isn't the foundation of all of our beliefs
and isn't justified in some special way
outside of the other beliefs within our web.
But without it we just don't make sense.
Yeah we can have slightly different versions of it
but they all obey the principle of non-contradiction.
So just because logic isn't justified in a special way
doesn't mean it's held on faith or is irrational to hold.
Understanding what Ogredi is kind of saying here
actually may take a viewing both of the logic video
and the quine video if you're up to it.
But suffice to say with this move it's over
for these enemies of ours.
Finally philosopher Paul Ogredi has in this sense
of our journey at least for my narrative
has defeated this enemy.
This was a great battle against a tough enemy
and it's been a long time since I left the battlefield
of philosophy of science where we first encountered
enemies of their kind.
Oh by the way Patrick J.J. Phillips is specifically
going to focus on the ways in which Wittgenstein is used
and focus on taking on Winch and Rorty even to a much
greater degree than I think Ogredi does here.
So please keep that in mind that all these warriors
Barnes, Bloor, Rorty, Winch, Norsetina, Latour and so on
they are and have been taken on or battled by many philosophers.
It's not just one or two here and there.
It's like many many that have responded
philosophers, historians and even scientists.
This is just Ogredi's response but anyway.
But there are a few battles left for Ogredi now
and if you need a break you can sit by the bonfire for a bit
and if not just take a phoenix down and heck we'll go.
I mean I think I really my room is so hot right now
while I'm recording this.
Ah. Anyway. Okay let me grab a drink and we'll continue.
Okay.
The cultural challenge.
So the argument is that different cultures can have
different rationality and it isn't universal and the examples offered
of a culture with different notions of rationality to western
liberal post-enlightenment democracy of them the most notable is the Zande tribe
that we kind of spoke about earlier with that witchery stuff remember?
And to note if I have it yet they are the Azandei but to say it as singular and as an
adjective to describe something you say Zandei.
So Zandei language or Zandei culture of the Azandei.
And sorry if I've already kind of screwed that up.
You know I make lots of mistakes in my videos spelling mistakes and if I don't
say things properly sometimes but that ain't stopping my philosophic passion you know it.
Anyway.
So this dude E.E. Evans pitcher right he lived among the Azandei in what was called at the time
the southern part of Anglo-Egyptian Sudan in the 1920s.
It's been dissolved now I think the area is just meant to be what we would now call South
Sudan anyway so he gave an account of his day and their people in witchcraft,
oracles and magic among the Azandei in 1937.
Now they have been studied independently also by French Dominican and the British
and E.E. Evans pitcher is British if that matters to you.
Anyway for the Azandei witchcraft and magic is intertwined in their everyday
workings inseparable from their culture like seeking witch doctors to counteract magic
or seeking oracles about the future.
So it was an elaborate set of beliefs with no basis in a scientific view.
But also and more importantly they apparently accepted contradiction.
They believe that witchcraft goes from father to son and mother to daughter
and even kin is treated as witches.
But in practice they only treat close paternal link
of a suspected witch as also a witch.
So they accepted both sides of this contradiction.
Sorry I just have to interject here because I found it a little bit unclear.
There seems to be multiple possible claims of contradiction not just that in practice
it's the paternal relation that actually has them treat another as a witch
but also Paulo Grady described it differently in an earlier part if you remember
or maybe I didn't understand it.
Anyway it seemed actually like he was describing the contradiction
as in them suspecting someone was a witch despite evidence of a post-mortem inspection
and really that too was a bit unclear if he meant that it was the same person
or if it's that someone's offspring is still thought of as a witch because of the lineage thing
even when the inspection has shown that the parent was not a witch.
So I'm unsure which of these cases it was but anyway I guess that doesn't really matter.
The point is this is claimed to be an example of a culture with an alternative rationality
as if they're accepting contradictions but many think this is way too quick a conclusion.
But hey we're not going to go down the path of just saying oh they are irrational
instead oh Grady identifies five interpretations of what's going on here.
The first one is the intellectual one where they are rational
but just mistaken about their beliefs mistaken about grandma or even about witches
either way they are mistaken but maybe not unlike westerners in the middle ages
that doesn't mean they are irrational.
The second interpretation is a mystery position where we will never know or understand anything
about them at all because they are so different from us that there's no real contact here anyway
so I guess that means we can't even judge either way.
Three is the pre-logical position that such tribes have mythical or pre-logical thought
that it's not an alternative rationality but a different kind of thought.
Four is a symbolic position basically they don't really mean literally it's just symbolic
an expressive way of speaking so I guess we're not even supposed to be judging them as if it is
rational or not.
The fifth is the final and the actual relativist one
where they actually have an alternative rationality than the western liberal one
so they can't be judged based on the standards of a different system.
Now this last one is the one that we're most interested in but first about these other ones
the mystery one is obviously way too strong because if it were true the whole account of
Evan's picture that he gave itself wouldn't have even been possible and given that he gave
a lot of details about those other things too this just can't be right.
Next is the pre-logical one that was actually withdrawn now Ogrady doesn't say exactly why
but I think it's because of the political impact of still pretty much claiming that other cultures
are irrational so instead for now because it is still suggesting that they are alternative
ways of thinking it gets assimilated into their relativist position.
Now the symbolic one I find this one to be personally pretty popular among many people
but anyway it seems to make unimportant what the azandei actually do believe.
The azandei really do believe in the power of witches.
The symbolic interpretation is a position that says it doesn't matter what they feel
the real reasons are just that these beliefs are an expression of dealing with forces beyond
one's control like disease and death so it seems to actually remove what the actual people intend
and it's more of a causal explanation of why they believe these things but that doesn't
actually account for the reasons given from the agent's point of view for their beliefs
which is what we're talking about here anyway when we talk about rationality so because of that
we really only have one and five left and our account given earlier is the intellectualist
that they aren't irrational they are just mistaken.
Remember as we explained perhaps they just don't care in this regard or being inattentive
or they have beliefs that we aren't aware of that would remove the contradiction
and I want to talk about this later because I have a real big problem with those who bring
up the azandei or even the hopi to suggest alternative rationalities versus western liberal
post-enlightenment democracies or whatever have you but I'm not going to get into it right now
but please just note it if you will I just find something disturbing here in the way
relativists use the azandei as an example of alternative rationality maybe it comes up with
phillips I can't remember so that's why I don't want to cover it now we'll check out phillips
first and then maybe I'll talk about these two tribes anyway so it's one versus five
now how does the relativists argue for their interpretation as the correct one then
enter peter winch now winch basically makes a point that natural science doesn't grasp
motivations in the way that social sciences does and he says that it's tied into the understanding
of different standards governing different ways of life listen more importantly for us I think the
point here is that he takes vikinstein's arguments about language games how the meaning of our words
come from their use and practice within different language games and there is no overarching language
game and uses this in a broader sense to argue that different societies can be considered using
or being different language games and even science and religion can be considered different
language games and again please take a gander at that vikinstein video before you think that this
is just the symbolic position again it's definitely not it would be a major error if you think saying
they're using different language games means that someone is just being poetic and mythical
and others are trying to be literal that's not at all what's going on here when people
talk about different language games so this video will help you a lot if you think that's
sort of what's going on but anyway when it comes to winch doing like dem relativists do
he says even the notion of reality is relative so then reality is not what gives language sense
and it's not that european modes of thoughts are right and the azandei are wrong so winch relates
the rituals of the azandei their magic rights to the significance of human life which is the
motivations part that science doesn't always account for if at all there's some supporting critique
also from simone wheels on the means of production in western technological society and also is
similarly in line with robin horton's comparison of african thought and western science and why
he chooses to live in africa but you know what even horton didn't find a need to suggest
alternative rationality ogrady says winch is right in pointing out the differences in natural
science and social science that takes a greater account for motivations emphasizing the need for
sensitivity to different cultures warning against prejudices of our own culture but
he doesn't have to defend these by alternative systems of rationality so the argument for cultural
relativism is great but it doesn't necessitate relativism about rationality in particular
but now let's try to switch gears let's look at some arguments that are actually against
relativism of rationality in a cultural context first a couple of minor empirical things to note
when it comes to the work of anthropologists they tend to highlight the ways other cultures are
different from our own rather than look at the vast majority of ways that another culture acts in a
way we would consider mundane or ordinary ways that would fit exactly our own conception of
rationality or ways of thinking let's say evan pitchard's own work shows that while the talk
of the witches is important the vast majority of what they talk about isn't witch related the second
empirical note that we have here is that if each culture really couldn't be challenged from the
outside of it and there was nothing of reality to answer to then change wouldn't have happened but
we can empirically historically see a pattern of old beliefs dying out in face of a new system
like how ghost stories in rural ireland waned out after electrification but more importantly now
some philosophical points against alternative rationality in a cultural context firstly to
understand another culture one has to translate their language into one's own to be familiar
and all the anthropologists is hearing are verbal utterances while in a certain perceptual situation
of the translator the translator has to figure out utterances for assent and dissent yes and no
i think as if to confirm or disconfirm and even thinking about yes and no the translator thus
has to project their understanding of that of logic and inference and also has to assume that
the other is generally seeing more or less what the translator is imagine how impossibly it would
be as a translator if we could think that the other is having a radically different perceptual
experience at the exact time that we are trying to understand and translate what they are saying
also the translator has to assume that what is being uttered more or less is connected to the
environment these are presuppositions of the translation process they can be subsequently
fine-tuned but are required for the very possibility of translation to understand the native language
one has to presuppose that they share a great deal of our way of thinking about the world
this cuts against the claim that there are radically divergent rationalities
ogre says finally winch is right that understanding meaning is context specific what counts as sharp
what is solid what that even means depends on context or like how we saw the importance of
context with indexicals i am in paris once we had that context though we can establish the truth
and we don't have to establish that on a different rationality it is true that western
interaction with traditional cultures have generally been to disadvantage those cultures
it is also true that anthropologists in the past have been guilty of cultural prejudices
about the objects of their study assuming uncritically their superiority and that of their
culture however a swing through the opposite pole of denying any possibility of critical
evaluation of such cultures is too extreme i'm not claiming here that winch's actual position
involves such a strong claim although it could be pushed in that direction it is important to be able
to make a call on the relative truth claims of such cultures the task of a core model of rationality
is to allow for such critical engagement without necessarily prejudging the issue on one side or
the other but the important point here is that the data from alien cultures and the philosophical
arguments about them are not at all compelling on the possibility of alternative systems of
rationality so that is the cultural challenge done wow what a long battle i mean maybe it wasn't as
philosophically difficult as other ones but you know what do you think anyway again if you
need a rest uh watch this loading screen it's uh it's for your brain anyway we've finally
gotten to one of the five great philosophers credited to empowering this weapon to the modern
philosophic warfare by ogready and whose philosophy i along with others including stefan kohl credit
the most to creating a sort of gateway allowing radical relativists onto the battlefield of the
philosophy of science to attack and discredit science this is going to be the final challenge
the incommensurability challenge drop that coon coon's idea of incommensurability has
become a major weapon in the relativists arsenal loaning his work to a strong relativistic reading
even though coon himself never wanted this and as ogready says has been at pains to temper that
interpretation in subsequent work now the actual word came from the discussions of pathetic Pythagoras
Pythagoras now the actual word came from discussions about Pythagoras theorem and how it works how
with certain numbers you can actually have whole numbers all the way around this right triangle
and with others you can't have them whole all the way around with the same unit of measurement that
is so in that case it would be incommensurable but whatever don't worry we're in here to talk
about math and geometry we're here for philosophy and the point is that there is no shared measurement
the numbers don't really fit together and in coon's philosophy he means that different scientific
paradigms don't fit together like say newtonian and einsteins or taiko and keplar this has two
major implications one is that you can't translate between two languages you know if we're thinking
of languages as being different paradigms they are instead sort of cut off from each other and two
that you can't judge one from another paradigm and there's no neutral judgment as if outside from
some super paradigm to judge both now we'll call this first one meaning incommensurability because
what you mean can't really be translated and we'll call this one knowledge incommensurability
because you can't really make a knowledge judgment between one or the other now mi entails ki but
ki does not entail mi meaning if we can't mutually understand terms then the knowledge judgments
can't be made either but sometimes we can mutually understand terms and still not be able to make
knowledge judgments anyway there's also a distinction of global and local as in do you mean
that all of the language can't be translated or just parts of it can't be translated from one to
another or do you mean that we can't have a judgment of the knowledge claims in one to another
that none of it can be like that or just that certain claims or just that certain parts can't be
judged so that's what we mean by is it global or local just so we're clear on what's going to happen
here basically for alternative rationality we need global ki we need to make sure that there's no
knowledge judgments in one that can be connected to the other that can fit with knowledge judgments
in the other that's what needs to be shown and there's two ways to do it one is to show just
global ki the other is to show global mi because it would lead to global ki but of these four which
one did kuhn mean though well kuhn's actual thoughts and then he describes kuhn's philosophy
but let me do that i actually made a video on kuhn from his own words so we don't even have to take
it from ogready and i also made a video as to how this impacted and led into relativism but i'll
describe it now for what we kind of need basically a scientific paradigm is a period of a scientific
community working in a specific way with a certain general theory in place like newton's theory or
einstein as i mentioned in a paradigm all observation or evidence what it means we could say is
interpreted with that general theory of the paradigm so like the observation of seeing the sun move
across the sky in one paradigm it counts as evidence that the earth stays in its place
and that the sun moves around us and in another paradigm the same observation is evidence that
the earth is moving around the sun with the part of the earth facing the sun changing as we rotate
so it's not really evidence that gets us from going from one to another in fact the same observation
counts as evidence for both in fact even if in one paradigm we find something that we shouldn't
have or shouldn't have been there it doesn't prove that the theory is false instead we blame
ourselves for maybe doing the experiment wrong somehow or try to explain it away but if it's
gone through enough of the community and nobody can really explain it away properly then it just
counts as an anomaly and if there's enough of these anomalies to shake our confidence in our
general theory and practice then we have a crisis and switch like superfast over to another new theory
that doesn't have those same problems and explains it all the exact same observations
so since that switch wasn't based on evidence where there was a super or neutral paradigm in
between and it has to do with how the scientific community feels this paradigm shift is considered
by many to be not rational but anyway that's just a crude explanation of it so again if you are
interested in science definitely please do check that out the important thing here as Ogrady puts
is that if paradigms encompasses all that counts as being rational in a given situation
and if there are different paradigms with no overriding system of adjudication then it seems
to establish global k i or in other words relativism about rationality oh also again
here what we are concerned about is global k i that relativism about rationality is specifically
when we have global k i the other ones don't seem to imply it so what about m i the idea that we
can't translate well remember if we can't have a shared understanding of terms that also implies
k i so we're really going to be concerned if the m i is global or not and it does seem like
coon is saying that a term's meaning changes in a different paradigm so it leads to k i then
but is it global or local for that respect Ogrady points to how some statements coon makes
implies that the m i is global like working in a different world but also there's some statements
indicating he means local the world of his research will seem here and there incommensurable
with the one he inhabited before now remember incommensibility of both kinds is one of those
things that relativists use to defend themselves and they mean it globally so they want these
but coon's own work itself shows that it is not global m i or k i or also would have undermined
his own work we saw this with wartian stitch and bnb coon's work is describing different paradigms
as if from the outside of them if the claim is that terms cannot be understood outside the
paradigm in which they are used then one cannot compare paradigms in the way coon has done for
example the story of the competing views of levosie and priestly couldn't be described in the aftermath
of levosie's triumph if global m i were true furthermore it would be impossible to tell if
theories were genuine rivals or not if the thesis held to establish rivalry some common ground is
required if claims of global k i were true then it would be impossible to tell whether a new paradigm
was more successful than another at answering anomalies of the old paradigm to even count
different paradigms as competitors there must be something shared so despite how relativists use
or perhaps rather abuse coon's philosophy it itself cannot be taken that way and indeed it
seems coon didn't intend for it to be taken for use by extreme relativists now some respond well
coon's work is possible because it works within a broader paradigm of western science itself that
science itself is its own paradigm so that's how those comparisons could be made but there are other
paradigms in a broader sense too like say ones of non-western culture or religion now to take on
this kind of move ogredi then gives some brief history ogredi says despite how the philosophic
lore tells us that coon and quine took down the positivists in the 1950s the positives were actually
more nuanced than people take like how they actually did know about theory lateness for example and some
of their ways continued into these later guys too ogredi is showing this because he wants to show how
one such positivist carnapp his ideas about linguistic frameworks actually prefigured coon's
discussion of paradigms and when it came to carnapp he thought questions about truth in philosophy
are clarified within a linguistic framework and outside of it we shouldn't even be doing philosophy
we can't then say one linguistic framework is universally better or more true or something
the only question we should be concerned about is one of pragmatics a pragmatic choice of which
framework is the most convenient to use and the same is thought of with coon's paradigms since
there is no general one outside to judge between them that rationality is only within and outside
it's well it's taken to be irrational now in the truth video ogredi did actually challenges by
showing how questions of truth in a more general sense still actually persist up here outside
because it still matters to ask is it true that this linguistic framework is useful or not and in
the logic episode he showed how we still seem to need some criteria to evaluate different
logics or linguistic frameworks to judge the systems not as inherently right or wrong better or worse
but still to judge which system is best to use where and when which is what we're doing now
discussing that upper level thing that governs which is rationality and so the same applies to coon
core rationality does govern even between paradigms they do govern the paradigm changes within science
and similarly we can see that with different modes of thinking as well like non-western cultures
theology and feminism also hold these minimal standards remember just being coherent and not
avoiding evidence like these may seem not that substantive but again the enemy is saying there
is nothing that persist ogredi says that different modes of thinking non-western culture theology
feminism also hold to these minimum standards then he points again to a self-defeat that the very idea
of global ki which is the idea that there is no universal way of judging or evaluating can't be
articulated or defended without someone using the minimum universal standards in order to articulate
it he says then basically yeah there are local incommensurabilities that some parts of our practice
can be incommensurable maybe there's no common way of judging or translating how much i love
olives and you hate them maybe there's no way of comparing from the outside what career path is the
best in a kind of objective sense but that's fine the real issue when it comes to rationality which
is what we are only ever concerned about here anyway was with the global ones now david wong
may suggest that there are certain values in traditional chinese culture that are incommensurable
with western culture maybe we can call that value incommensurability while sympathetic to this view
i do not believe it implies any doctrine of alternative rationality different values different
worldview all of that is compatible with having a universal standard for rationality now in this
next figure for this challenge it gets personal sort of remember this is going to be the final
final battle allister macintire ogre says a significant challenge to universalism about
rationality comes from macintire who espouses that there are different traditions of thought
that embody their own criteria of rationality and no neutral ground to evaluate them first off
the self-defeat like we have seen many times now a quick response is to wonder which tradition
macintire inhabits and how he manages to discuss and evaluate the ideas of so many people from
other apparently incommensurable traditions it should seem like such an obvious move now how
incredibly unacceptable it is to claim that nobody can judge different cultures while at the same
time judging different cultures as being not judgeable a longer response has to do with
accepting that there are many big differences but that it isn't actually a difference of
rationality macintire uses a huge number of historical examples of cultures that come into
conflict and he criticizes the defenders of universal rationality as lacking social imagination
one example he uses which ogready describes as close to his heart oh my god are we gonna do
an organ attack is the difference between the irish galic speakers and the english settlers
of the 1700 and i'm focusing on this one as i am a speaker of both those languages so macintire
says that different languages are incommensurable because they embody values and a large complex
of social relations as well so indeed there are many differences but the point is how do you
characterize those differences ogready then uses what he calls a less politically fraught example
how two universities could use different terms like in one you're a senior freshman and in
another you're considered a second year they can also have different methods of organization in one
there might be a three-year degree in another it might be a four-year degree there could be even
different decision-making procedures in one a staff member can accept late papers if they decide in
another you have to ask the head of the department to accept late papers so different vocabulary
different social structures and different justification procedure but no one would claim
that this is different rationality so 18th century ireland right the native population
have a distinct religion bardic system agriculture which classes with the new system which by the way
even that native system was a mix of kelthick norse norman elizabethan spanish and italian but i
guess they weren't incommensurable huh anyway funny little remark there by ogready anyway
irish and english were different but it wasn't a clash of rational exchange it was force coercion
of a cultural takeover no need to suggest the irish reasoned differently than the english
and here i think he makes a beautiful point and i'm gonna highlight it indeed one of the main
propagandist planks of cultural clashes such as this is to claim that such differences do exist
that one culture is dramatically inferior to the other with regards to rationality as a
propagandist cartoon such as those of punch illustrated differences can be articulated as
having different vocabularies different systems of concepts and different systems of justification
but there are also underlying common features beneath the differences the irish of mackentire's
example had elaborate systems of argument that obeyed the universal principles of rationality
so i love what's being said here what's being made clear here at least for me so i would like
to take this as an opportunity for a point i would like to make working off something that is being
said in this quote because many as we have seen of these relativists from the social sciences are
motivated by being weary and skeptical of any claims to universal anything in part because
historically claims of universal many things including science logic truth and rationality
were used as a way for an oppressor to justify their oppressive actions but the relativist
rather than challenge that claim seem to actually accept these as we call them now propagandist lies
including that others are somehow fundamentally different that we as others are in radically
different worlds have our own sciences our own truths our own logics our own rationality and
thus the relativist not only accepts but supports being segregated in the deepest and widest ranging
philosophic sense the extreme relativists who reacts to both the failings of philosophy to
establish what was presumed to be universal and to the abuses done with claims to the universal
end up supporting the idea of alternative everything however i think this is a major error
we have seen but i will cover it more in my next video why doing this philosophically is a terrible
strategy you will end up being caught in a fork a fork of self-defeat or effective silence further
they continue to accept both the abusers claim that the abusers belief is somehow based on these
things and the belief that others are radically divergent from them as ogrady is pointing out
that radical divergence is itself a part of their propaganda and so both of these narratives from the
oppressor are actually accepted by the extreme relativist as i am trying to explain they accept
these things in order to act as if there are alternatives to them rather than challenge the
claims that they make the oppressor makes that their beliefs are somehow rooted in science and
logic truth or rationality now i find when it comes to modern online discussion with big figures
out here that are quite popular which i'm actually currently too afraid to even name as the as an
internet nobody yet uh that when it comes to confronting a debunking oppressor propaganda
and hate arguments even those that seem to proclaim a more relativist conception as if to be perceived
of as more open-minded and tolerant still actually nevertheless use this strategy of challenging
their claims that the oppressors beliefs is based in science or logic for example now we'll talk
about this more in a next video or episode maybe with that next book patrick jj phillips who gives
a wonderful discussion of applying what we learned from ogrady to a wide range of what i would call
enemies but that too i'll talk about in that next episode episode 10 for now though we have
finally seen here that while we can have different beliefs and we can even be justified in having those
very different beliefs while our concepts shape how we see the world even when it comes to very
basic observations that that too can be different and relative to our culture or gendered or have
a political framework still this weapon even empowered by five great philosophers has its
limits and ogrady marks them out this is our second pillar the second limit we cannot accept
relativism about truth or rationality upon the second pillar is supported what i will speak of
as the power of the philosophic or metaphysical eye this is our lighthouse we can keep track of
ourselves anywhere in any philosophic field with it in mind it will become the power by which we
understand philosophy itself what this power is is one you will have achieved after watching this
series of ogrady but also kirk maybe certainly if you include patrick phillips so in the next video
i will go over ogrady's final commentary about relativism and what his deal is with david sin
but then i will go over what i feel is actually lacking in ogrady and from that criticism i will
offer to you this power by which you will wield this philosophic eye in your journey forever so
join me and to join you must subscribe to my channel if you can please offer some effort
into trying to support me in some way i do this for passion but also i think there's a great need
for this kind of philosophy to be visualized and exist on the internet you can help me on patreon
or send me a one-time donation on paypal but if you are not comfortable financially yet and helping
support me please then just share my videos at very least if you have twitter follow my twitter
because if i'm ever abused by youtube or this streaming video streaming service that you're
watching this on then perhaps another social platform will allow me to have enough voice
to get some justice for my concerns if anything ever goes wrong okay thank you oh before you go
though keep in mind victories can be had progress in philosophy is possible there are
philosophic champions but all of philosophy cannot be won there will be no end to philosophy
philosophers keep battle
you
