Philosophy Battle, the most entertaining presentation of philosophy you'll ever find on the internet, probably.
Now, entering the battlefield of metaphysics.
Welcome back. Today on Philosophy Battle, we are covering one of the greatest battles that has ever influenced me.
And namely, it's actually the setup for the battle that'll finally allow us to gain the philosophic powers of this metaphysical eye that I've been promising.
The setup will lay the groundwork for the eternal traction in the slippery, perilous battlefields of philosophy.
The awesome battle that we'll be covering, though, is from this green book, the second of three books that I may cover on relativism.
A book simply titled, Relativism, by Paul O'Grady, a philosophy lecturer at Trinity College in Dublin.
While there are a number of different battles in this green book, the one we'll be covering today involves Paul O'Grady defending truth
against the attacks of the extreme relativist. That is, the relativist who believes everything is relative.
Not just matters of taste or beauty, or even what counts as right and wrong, but for them, even things like knowledge, truth, logic, and reality are relative.
For them, everything is relative. Nothing is objective. Nothing is absolute.
And that is what we would call the extreme relativist.
It may sound a little bit out there, but we're dealing with a sophisticated relativist whose weapon has been empowered by three trends,
and namely five philosophers that Paul O'Grady himself noted for us in his introductory chapter,
where he helped explain the powers of this wickedly awesome weapon, and how it came into being, especially in modern philosophic warfare.
So if you'd like to see how it is possible that even a reasonable person may come to feel that even things like truth or knowledge or facts are relative,
please check out the previous video, The Powers of Relativism.
Why are we considering the concerns of these relativists that make the charges that even facts, truth, or logic is relative?
It's important for a good philosopher to understand that one cannot simply defeat an enemy like this, an extreme relativist,
who wishes to use relativism everywhere, not just because they say so, but as empowered by actual philosophic writing, namely those five philosophers,
by simply proclaiming, hey, there's no problem, we could just literally objectively describe things how they are and we have scientific facts and so on, you know, facts and logic.
So they aren't relative.
Well, you may actually have to deal with them, rather than try to offhand dismiss them.
Because if science doesn't maintain its legitimacy and authority, you may have religious fanatics teaching extreme spiritual beliefs in science class,
you may have corporations or politicians disregard scientific findings, and many other terrible things that happen sometimes simply to spite scientific evidence.
And the arguments of the SSK, a particular group of sociologists that studied science that used these powerful philosophic weapons to attack the authority and legitimacy of science,
or arguments of their academic descendants, can be used to do such things, even perhaps pull funding away from the sciences.
Thinking all of this isn't really a problem because we could just describe reality objectively with literalism, and so that's not relative.
Against this extreme relativist, with this sophisticated weaponry, is a very rudimentary attack that will be blown out of the water by this powerful enemy.
Again, to understand the main staples of how they could even do that, we covered that in our last video covering the power of relativism.
So please check that out if you'd like to see how exactly this weapon can be so powerful.
Or check this out if you would like more detail on who these SSK are and what happened in what was called the science wars.
But if you're more interested in the battle against this enemy, how we can defeat them, that's what we got for you today.
That will show the limits of this weapon.
Well, actually, Paul Grady first makes a wonderful setup, from which he is able to then go and defend against charges of relativism on two fronts, the two limits, here and here.
As I said, this setup will be used for me to explain the powers of the philosophic eye, or at least what I mean by that in my own theatic way of describing things.
In any case, he defends truth and rationality from charges of relativism.
Those are the battles we're going to cover, but as I said for today, we'll just be covering both that setup and the first battle, defending truth.
Now, in this chapter on truth, he also discusses whether logic can be relative, so we will look at logic as well in this video, if not an additional one, you know, if this one gets too long.
By the way, Ogrady does accept relativism in ontology, of which ontology is a topic about what there is, what kind of things there are in the world.
And he also accepts it sort of to a certain degree in epistemology, which is the study of knowledge.
Here, however, it is limited by how much relativism there can be in rationality, because rationality plays an important role in knowledge.
Again, though, he actually still defends rationality against the charges of relativism by the extreme relativists, which is the other awesome battle in this book which we will definitely eventually cover in a different video, in the next one, hopefully.
After we cover both these battles though, perhaps I may make a video of an overall assessment of the book talking about some of the other chapters maybe, you know, if you subscribe, hehe.
But enough about me, let's listen to Paul Ogrady to get that first important setup.
But let me point out whenever I am speaking for Ogrady, which will actually still be my interpretation of paraphrasing of what he said, I will still cite it down through the line in the corner of the screen.
And when I speak more for myself, the citation will disappear, and that way you'll know what's from him sort of, and what's from me.
Also, you can then check if I misinterpreted any of his lines and identify exactly where I have failed, and that I always credit others, in honesty, if I'm covering their work.
And though I may just be a shadowy nobody on the internet here, please still mention me, not as an academic source, but in a footnote or something if any of my videos have given you formulation to your own thought.
You should do the same, even if it's a conversation you've had with your professor and received a clear idea from another person or something.
Be as honest and credit as much as possible. Academic honesty and citation work hand in hand in improving your battle stance and philosophy, helping to shelter you and support you by diverting attacks to others that you have cited if certain attacks are inbound,
but also allowing others to help correct your stance if they can spot the sources of misunderstanding.
Wow, now that sounded like a big ethics lecture.
But anyway, so for today, our battle is going to focus specifically on Paul O'Grady's setup, and then ultimately his defense of truth against the charges of relativism by the illithic relativist.
Illithic meaning about truth, and relative being that which is dependent on something else.
He says,
Illithic relativism has often been invoked as a way of avoiding contradiction.
So his first section is going to be about how illithic relativism is motivated by wanting to avoid contradiction, then all the different ways to relativize truth, all of which will be rejected.
In the second section, we'll look at different theories of truth that might defend and relativize version of truth, though actually that for the most part counts against those theories, not for it.
In any case, the third section is going to be about logic, whether it is relative, and whether there can be alternative logics.
So it's true, people have different beliefs on politics, morals, religion, music, etc.
One of the motivations is to accommodate this diversity, so as if to say that though there are different views, they can all be true.
Think about this, remember we have already attacked their organs in a previous episode, and videos for you are here if you followed my journey, so let's hope they know that we're coming from a good place ourselves as well.
Anyway, because of this, they reject both positions of a non-relativist.
Those positions are first, dogmatism, that one view can be true and the rest must be false, denying diversity,
and the other of non-cognitivism, that no one has the truth because what they're saying can't even be said to be true or false.
For this, because truth isn't that issue, diversity can easily exist.
It's kind of like saying some things can be true or false like in science, but these things, values, moral views, religious views, etc.
They aren't the type of things that can even be true or false, and diversity can flourish when truth isn't in the picture.
So truth relativists, allithic relativists, hold that some competing views can both be legitimate candidates for truth, and competing views, as legit candidates, can both be true despite them being opposing.
To accept opposing positions as both being true simultaneously is on the face of it to accept contradiction, and to do such a thing is unacceptable.
So I said in a previous video while dealing with Robert Kirk, to forgive me for not showing how Kirk explained how contradictions are bad and just to trust me that he actually did show us that.
I didn't show it because I really wanted to get to and show how O'Grady does it.
And this is that important setup that I wanted to show, which will work for him to defend in different places against a relativist,
but also maybe ultimately the basis for one of the coolest things that it will ever show on the show, that metaphysical eye.
It has a number of implications, but starting it out, it may seem super simple.
So if it's simple for you and obvious, still be patient with it.
Only later will we really begin to use what he sets up here in battle, then we will truly see how awesome it is.
But for now, let's just take a look.
Let's see why contradictions are bad.
This is gonna be awesome.
Contradiction is the assertion of a statement or proposition and the negation of that same assertion or proposition at the same time in the same understanding.
And this is an important point, because it's like changing your mind over time, that really isn't a contradiction.
People may say I believe something then and I don't believe it now because now I know it's wrong.
So there's a now versus then distinction, showing that it's not a legitimate contradiction.
And for what we're talking about, it has to be a legitimate contradiction, P and not P.
Oh, so P is a proposition, which is a statement about what is or not, the state of affairs as they are or not.
And a proposition doesn't have to be represented or presented with the letter P, it could be represented with Q or R or S,
it's just a kind of variable, like in math, how we can use X or Y or Z to represent consistent numerical variables.
Also for your sake, this symbol is the negation symbol in logic, it means not, or the negative of what is expressed after it.
But I'll try to keep it simple for you and try to write it like this whenever I can at first, but anyway, so about being a genuine contradiction.
Someone saying this is black and this is white isn't a legitimate or genuine contradiction, something can be black and white.
A legitimate contradiction would be more like to say this is black and this is not black.
Well, I kinda don't like this example too much, because in normal everyday language, if we are saying about, say, a soccer ball,
we wouldn't actually just say it's black, we would say it's black and white, just because we know it's kind of misleading to say just it's black.
That our general way of speaking would allow us to assume that it's not also white, because you would have said black and white if it were also white.
It would be kind of unusual to leave out white if your point was to say what color is the ball is, you know?
But anyway, his point here is that there should be no sneaky way of showing that it's not really a contradiction.
So it's black and it is not black is a very clear case of a contradiction, and that's what he's trying to get at.
But to be a true relativist, they have to be willing to accept even these legitimate contradictions.
And what's the problem with accepting genuine cases of contradictions as possible?
The basic problem is that the notion of contradiction is essentially connected to the notion of assertion and negation.
This, this point here is one of the two main reasons I'm talking about O'Grady.
If you can grasp the essential nature of all assertion, you will have developed what I call a metaphysical eye,
a deeper philosophic understanding that allows you to catch enemies who lack that understanding and end up committed to devastating and crippling positions.
So what comes next may on the one hand seem super obvious, but its implication we will show later as being incredibly important.
You see, to make an assertion, you are expressing some content that something is the case, something is a certain way.
In doing that, you are at the same time denying its negation.
For example, the sun is shining at a certain time or place.
This rules out or denies the sun is not shining at that exact time or place, or understanding that is meant in the first proposition.
This is also a logical move called double negation here.
To say P is also equivalent to say not not P.
Now that's more of a formal logic way of expressing this rational principle.
Many of us learn in studying math, say we're multiplying two negatives make a positive,
or simply in English when we use the double negatives.
For example, someone that says it isn't true that we're not here means that it is true that we are.
Or for example, it's not true that it's not raining means that it is true that it is raining.
So you see, double negatives make a positive, but also a positive can be a double negative.
And that means a positive is like negating a negative.
Assertion implies the rejection of the negation of that assertion.
This is going to sound funny, so for those of you who are listening to this and not watching this,
it might make more sense to watch this at the same time, but asserting P,
which is logically equal to not not P, shows it is not not P.
P denies not P.
This is really simple logic that we're familiar with.
But again, to be talking about it like this can feel a bit weird to someone new in philosophy.
So I hope I'm not actually confusing anyone by talking about something super basic,
but in more formal logical ways.
But anyway, when it comes to contradiction, it is to assert and endorse both the assertion and its negation.
P and not P.
This is kind of like cutting off its own legs, maybe that's the way of saying it,
because P should imply not not P, which denies not P.
And yet, not P also denies P.
So a contradiction undermines the very process of asserting.
To accept a contradiction means to render empty the very act of asserting.
Two sides attacking each other in the same unit is nothing,
like one part negative and one part positive cancelling each other out in math or perhaps in physics, let's say.
Since some basic math is plenty easier to grasp for many people I believe than maybe my earlier logical stuff,
let's look at it like this.
Plus one and negative one equals zero.
True, right?
So it's like you might as well say nothing.
It's equal to saying you have no knowledge, no claim to anything at all.
Also then, a positive assertion, like a plus one, is equal to denying a negative, or, you know, minus a negative one.
Saying plus one minus one is to say nothing at all.
And then I would wonder, why did you waste my time telling me something that yields nothing?
No claim, no stance, no belief, no anything.
To assert anything of substance that has a purpose, meaning, a stance,
requires that it also denies the opposite of what is being asserted,
lest it be rendered meaningless or even false.
So this is a law of non-contradiction.
A law against contradiction.
The law of non-contradiction is so basic and necessary that one cannot even argue for or against it
on the basis of anything more fundamental, because it's so fundamental.
In fact, it is the very basis of how we do argumentation in the first place.
This makes it an insurmountable problem for anyone that tries to deny non-contradiction.
Even denying the principle, insofar as denying has any meaning whatsoever,
must have a determinate content that is not undermined by simultaneously affirming the principle.
So that is why contradictions must be avoided.
This is it.
If you get anything from this video, I hope it is this,
and it is tied to the very nature of making any assertion.
With it, you will see clearly what many have already begun to see in the previous Kirk video series,
and what I spoke about as a crippling problem, which O'Grady now calls insurmountable.
Let me explain it like this.
It is self-defeat.
You see, this principle that contradictions are bad, let's say,
it is actually the very basis of arguing against something.
So to argue against this principle assumes this principle, that the principle works.
Thus cutting off one's own legs, in a way.
Again, so we don't miss it.
Arguing for or asserting anything, no matter what,
has a meaning insofar as you are denying the opposite of what you are saying, as we stated earlier.
So an argument against this principle also requires it,
in order for that argument to have any meaning.
How can one contradict that contradictions happen?
It's an insurmountable problem for them, who deny it?
And we saw this actually already in the Kirk video as I pointed it out for us,
and we'll talk about this again in my final talk about relativism before I'm done with this whole topic.
But let me give it some more timeless, some very easy things that we may have encountered in our lives that highlight this.
If one tries to deny that denial is possible, then how are you denying?
That is incoherent.
The TFM, true for me, relativist in the Kirk videos, disagreed that disagreement happens.
How can you disagree that disagreement happens?
That's self-defeating.
If you try to say no one can say anything with any authority, then how did you say that?
In fact, how can you say with authority, or even just substantively, what your own position is,
unless it means to deny the opposite of that position?
I mean, trying to say no one can talk is self-defeating, and that you've just proven by what you're doing that you are wrong.
One cannot deny that denial exists, or claim that no one can make a claim, nor say that they know that there is no knowledge.
One should not be able to tell everyone to shut up, that no one has the right to talk,
because then that person too should have kept quiet, if that were true.
While I always say philosophers keep battling, philosophers do battle about anything they can,
but it takes short time for a philosopher to realize certain positions are terrible,
either because they have more arguments against them than can have defending them,
but also because it may be a self-defeating position, and those must be avoided at all costs.
So, Immanuel Kant once said, and I quoted,
Metaphysics is a dark ocean, without shores or lighthouse,
strewn with many a philosophic wreck.
Man, eff that ship, let me tell you, this is from me, not O'Grady, not anyone else,
but metaphysics, epistemology, philosophy of mind, anywhere you are, there is a lighthouse.
There is always a lighthouse, and it stands on the pillar of non-contribution,
a pillar of rationality and connecting to another pillar, the nature of assertion,
and thus the necessity of truth.
This will be our lighthouse.
And I will talk more about this lighthouse in the future, and what my organs are perhaps,
but there is enough to understand, to really see, with what I theatrically call your metaphysical eye,
when self-defeat is happening.
This is the philosophic eye that will allow you to defeat your philosophic enemies from working within their own system.
But there is a commitment here, further, that O'Grady will talk about later when he defends rationality,
when he defends rationality itself against attack in the next battle,
but also something metaphysical that I feel is actually left out from O'Grady's discussion,
that perhaps I will address at the end.
But how exactly then does this seeming obvious point become very useful on the battlefield?
How does this really help us in a way to conduct our lives or our society?
And how deep does it impact philosophy or the world?
Well, this star allows me to speak enough, but maybe not enough to elaborate or visualize my metaphors here.
If you subscribe though, maybe I will gain more power to speak myself.
But we're here not for some shadowy nobody like me, but for a real human being,
Paulo Grady, so let's get back to him.
So, you can't actually argue for or against non-contradiction, for doing that would assume it.
So, to avoid contradiction, because now we know contradictions are bad,
the relativist denies that there is a real contradiction, because truth itself is just relative.
Something is either true for you, or true for me.
For some of them, that's their distinction, like now and then, except they're not using now and then,
they're using for me or for you, so it's opposing views, but not in the same sense,
thus it's not a real contradiction for them.
And this is what we covered in the last episode, episode 6.
We saw Robert Kirk battle this kind of relativist, the true for me relativist, the TFM relativist, in the last episode.
But O'Grady makes kind of quicker work of them than Kirk did.
O'Grady, however, asks a bunch of questions that we all would of someone that claims truth is relative,
but I guess I'd only highlight this question in particular.
If all truth is relative, is that itself relatively true or absolutely true?
Pointing to the incoherence of relativists once again in a way, can you see it?
But anyway, leaving that for now, O'Grady then says something that is more true in our common lives,
which is why I spent so much time emphasizing it in the previous episode with Kirk.
He says that at the crudest level, saying something is like true for me,
is just a way of being polite and non-confrontational, like saying God exists is true for me.
But this doesn't actually stop us from judging whether something is true or false,
just that we're no longer judging the true or false whether God exists,
instead it is changed to merely if it is true or false whether or not you actually do believe one way or another.
This is common, but is not actually a way of relativizing truth, so it's a non-starter.
Whoa, actually I really love this, this is a great point that makes quick work of the TFM relativists.
Many relativists believe they are not making objective statements about how things are
if they put in qualifiers like to person X, Y is true.
Well okay, Y is true is now relative to person X,
but it's still a proposition that reports the truth of to person X, Y is true.
Now is this non-relatively true?
Perhaps here's where we covered another cool thing that I think Kirk did
about how there could be an infinite regress with this.
But to be clear, simply saying I think science is good,
doesn't mean you're not making an objective claim,
just that your objective claim now isn't about science.
It is about the truth of what you think, and so we could ask about the objective truth of
whether you actually think that about science or not, and it would ascertain the truth of your
statement in a way that is for us and for everyone and not just for you.
Simply saying to me or for me or in my opinion or I believe doesn't mean one isn't making
an objective claim actually.
All it's doing is just reducing or preserving the space to where we feel more entitled to be objective,
where we are less likely to be opposed or questioned.
To speak about what I think or how I feel, one is more entitled to objectively take a stance
on what is the case with these qualifiers.
Again, think about how every assertion still nevertheless needs to be substantive
to say something and thus to oppose its opposite.
Anyway, so as Ogrady says, there's got to be a better way to philosophically
relativize truth, because this actually is a non-starter.
Well, I'm going to talk about three ways.
These are going to be the three better, more philosophically empowered ways to try and
relativize truth that the relativists may choose other than just stating that everything
is simply true for me or true for you.
We're going to call these at least three attacks.
The first attack is going to be artificial languages, associated with Tarski and Karnap.
That truth is relative to a language or a system and there can be many languages,
so truth is actually just relative to the pragmatic reasons we have to which system we decide upon.
The second attack is going to be about how true and false aren't the only options,
associated with Joseph Margolis.
The third attack is an account that is given by Chris Sawyer,
but one that shifts the relativization away from being about truth, really.
So this is the battle.
So this is the battle.
Since ordinary natural language were vague and imprecise for scientific use,
and could lead to philosophical problems, Gottlieb Frege championed the construction
of special languages for philosophy called Burgerschrift.
Okay, so I can't pronounce it despite having read it thousands of times in many different places,
but hey, I don't really have German philosophy friends to, you know, have a quick talk about for
this video, you know, so I could have learned how to pronounce it properly.
I also don't have German friends to ask.
I also don't have friends.
Anyway, the idea was that if you made language clear and precise enough,
like math, you could clear away many philosophical problems,
just by being clear about what is said to be and what is therefore implied by it,
and philosophers could make these languages for scientists' use.
We sort of already have been talking about this in the last video,
when we discussed Carnap.
Again, check it out if you like.
But one of Frege's students, Rudolf Carnap, as I just mentioned, took up the project.
Various philosophical issues there in ordinary language could actually be solved in these
specially constructed, precise languages.
Things like the analytic-synthetic distinction, logical consequence, and even
truth could be clearly defined in such artificially constructed languages.
Which language was chosen to be used and therefore which definition of truth it entailed
was a matter of pragmatic choice for the scientists that philosophers would make these languages for.
You see, Carnap at the time felt in normal language the notion of truth is a sloppy concept
that just ends up in unnecessary philosophical debate about correspondence between appearance
and reality.
In the new languages, however, truth could be given clear and strict definitions,
but only holds within that language.
Now, when Polish-American Alfred Tarski made his celebrated account of truth,
he followed Carnap in dealing with only artificial languages,
and his account of truth didn't work in natural language.
So, the general universal notions of truth began to be replaced with the notion of
true in L, where L is the artificial language.
Keep in mind that from the philosophic point of view, the traditional philosophic discussions
about, say, what is the nature of truth were thought of as pseudo-debates arising from the
confusion over language.
So, really, it became more preferable that truth was thought of as merely a term with
a clear definition that depends on which language you choose.
In this way, truth becomes relativized to each artificial language.
And in fact, contradiction can happen within a language,
but each language gets to set out its own criteria of what counts as a contradiction too.
And so, contradiction only happens within a particular language,
not across different languages.
So, the relativist employs the Tarski-Carnap argument that truth is just whatever is true
in L, and different languages can actually be set so something doesn't count as a
contradiction within it, and discussions of truth generally beyond what is true in L
is just confusions.
Truth, thus relativized.
Well, now Paulo Grady defends against this attack.
Firstly, he points out what's the real relevance of artificial languages and definitions concerning
real beliefs.
Genuine disputes between people about beliefs can't be sidestepped,
because of the employment of artificial languages.
That seems kind of like a common sense philosophy here,
but Paulo Grady has an even more philosophic response to this issue.
Check it out as he points out.
Remember, choice between artificial language is a pragmatic issue,
which shouldn't itself be a discussion of truth.
It's just a matter of whether one versus another is more useful or not, right?
But even to say, even to make the judgment that this language is useful,
requires the notion of truth.
That it's true that that language is useful.
This judgment of truth, that a language is indeed useful or not,
stands outside the particular artificial language themselves,
not relativized to them.
And it's that notion of the truth in a general theoretical sense
that this artificial language's attack tried to remove.
Well, see, it didn't.
Such use seems unavoidable.
Wow, what a move.
That was awesome.
Paulo Grady did something awesome here.
Like, I love this because it challenges that naive notion
that pragmatics somehow dissolves philosophic issues in all cases,
such as discussions of truth and knowledge.
Now, you maybe perhaps don't do philosophy in academia,
but there's no field of knowledge, whether medicine,
sports science, law, or business analyst or something like that,
where the discussion of how do we know something in that field isn't important.
Or in this case, it helps to show that if you have a concern about is it true that,
trying to replace it with it's pragmatic that, or it's practical that,
doesn't actually really remove the philosophic concern,
because someone with that concern would just move on to concerns of,
well, is it true that it is pragmatic and such and such?
This is a kind of similar move though, isn't it, to something we've already seen.
Saying true for me didn't stop our concern of objective claims,
nor does saying, oh, it's pragmatic that,
stop our concerns with, is it true that, in a similar fashion.
Do you see it?
Trying to say, hey, discussions about truth can be made to not count down here, across languages,
at the artificial level, doesn't remove how they do happen up here,
because the notion of truth can't be avoided,
so long as any judgment is happening from a kind of above position,
above position, I say.
Hopefully my visuals are helping here, and we will continue to use them to show how,
in a sense, we go high or above to speak about things, anything,
when we are stating how things are in a capital T truth way,
even when we qualify our statements with, to me, or to them, or in science,
or it's practical that, or it's pragmatic that, and hopefully by the end of this video,
you will come to realize the necessity of this, and it will actually build the power of this
philosophic eye that I promised, so maybe it's worth rewatching this video twice,
to get what I'm kind of saying here if it sounds a little confusing,
but don't worry about it, like, it will really become much more clear once we covered both these
battles. In any case, attack one has failed, but the wicked, illithic relativist isn't done yet,
another far more spooky attack comes about. Attack two, multiple truth values.
Conflicting views produce a contradiction in classical logic in which there are two truth
values, either the truth value of true or false. Two, now relativists are accused of
self-refutation, this is the self-defeat that we saw earlier with that circle,
also sometimes called incoherence, but to avoid that problem, some say there is more than just
two truth values, that there could be three or more, which means they drop the classical logic
law of the excluded middle, a law that states that there's only truth and false, no third value.
So just to re-explain this sort of, sorry if this is repetitive, but it's important to be
clear about what the strategy is here. If you remember, the relativists wanted to use something,
the principle of non-contradiction, because they needed it in order to express a content,
but the content that they wanted to express was to deny that principle, P and not P.
That itself is a contradiction, both of these cannot be true, or perhaps another way to look at it
is P cannot be both true and false. But anyway, looking at the example of P and not P,
because both cannot be true, then if one is true, the other must be false. This relied on the
principle of non-contradiction as we saw before, if this is true, then this has to be false.
But also the other way around, if one is false, the other must be true. Easy enough, right?
So choosing one of the two options forces the opposite proposition to be the other option.
But this isn't just because of non-contradiction, it's also because there isn't a third option here,
and that's called the law of the excluded middle. Things are either true or false,
no middle, no new option. But if we drop that law, and we had like a third option,
then saying this is false doesn't necessarily mean that this one has to be true. It could also
possibly be this other thing, whatever it is. So dropping the excluded middle law may save the
relativist from self-defeat in this way. That way they can deny P, the principle of non-contradiction,
while not necessarily asserting P as true. It would be this new thing. What would that
third value even look like? Well, some say indeterminate. So like T, F, and question mark,
maybe? Or others say like mostly mainly or half truth, and mostly mainly false. Well,
that's like seven different values there, but if you think of it, if you can do something like that,
you can even do it using more numbers for probability, like between 0 and 1, 0.1 true,
or 0.56 true. Doing this kind of thing instead of just T and F doesn't necessarily make you a
relativist, but it can be helpful to relativists in diffusing what could have been a contradiction
if we had only a two-valued system. P may be very probable, or 0.96 true, while not P could be half,
or 0.5 true, and so it is claimed a classical contradiction is avoided.
Joseph Margulis makes a detailed relativist position that demands the rejection of the
principle of excluded middle, rejecting the two-values-only systems. Because using a two-value-only
system could lead to a contradiction for relativists if they try to use this classical logic to defend
ontological relativism or incommensurability. Incommensurability is another thing that happens
to appear to promote relativism as it means there is no shared value or shared position from which
you can measure two different things, so they can't be compared. So to avoid contradiction,
they move to a multi-valued logic instead. But that might be the motivation behind why the
relativists want to drop the law of the excluded middle. But Margulis also had reasons presented
in that he links his rejection to what he calls cognitive intrap- intrap- intrap- what intrap-
to what he calls cognitive intrap- ah shoot. He links his rejection to what he calls cognitive
intransparency. We don't really know the world in itself. The world is always mediated to us in
historical and context-laden ways. So how does Paulo Grady deal with this multiple-truth-values
attack? It seems pretty radical out there to say that there's more than just truth and falsehood.
Well first off, is it really a new third value we're talking about here? Like look at this one.
Like just because you don't know what the value is, and maybe you never can,
thus calling it indeterminate, that doesn't mean it's a new value. It just means that you recognize
that you don't know that it's a truth gap. And they've already been systems that developed with
this truth gap in mind, and they don't act like this is some kind of new value somehow.
Secondly, just because you add modifiers like most, or sometimes, or 0.33 to a classic two-value
system, hardly means that you actually made new values. One obviously can see that these things
as merely saying probability of something, but it isn't actually a new kind of fundamental
truth value being introduced here. Seems to be an epistemic issue, that is an issue about knowledge,
of how likely something is to be true, rather than importing a new conception of truth.
Thirdly, just like with the case with artificial languages, is it really helpful to our cases
of contradiction? It could be after all merely still relying on a two-valued system anyway.
Thus, the second attack, attack two, while it seemed pretty radical, still, nevertheless, failed.
Now, O'Grady just makes a quick point for himself. He says, look, one of the main reasons for
ontological relativity is to avoid contradiction in anthropology. Anyway, what he's saying is that
relativists want to avoid contradiction even as they espouse the way the world is can be different
and relative. But O'Grady says, we can have that without having to alter our conception of the truth.
There are alternatives to get to ontological relativism without having to come up with a
new truth values, and presumably he will explain what those ways are in his chapter on ontology,
where he himself allows for relativism. And so, as a larger strategy, trying to go at it like this
and figure new ways to make new truth values is not necessary. And Paul O'Grady then advocates for
what Quine calls a policy of minimum mutilation. This is like O'Grady saying that if you want
relativism in ontology, we can figure out a way to do that without having to do this massive change
when it's completely unnecessary to do, so we should do the minimum amount of changing.
So I guess the question then remains how, how do we get that? And wait, what exactly is ontological
relativity? Because really, I mean I really really didn't in detail explain it in this video yet,
but neither did he, so I guess we kind of have to wait to check out his chapter in ontology
to really see what's going on there, and how we can get ontological relativity without massive
changes to truth. But for now, let's move on to the third attack. Attack 3. Strong and weak distinction.
Chris Sawyer also investigated relativism. While charging most arguments against relativism as
unfairly assuming absolutism in the first place, he ultimately, at least in this argument,
defends against a kind of ellithic relativism, as we shall see, even while accepting a few of
their premises. In any case, he says the typical version of ellithic relativism employs a notion
of frameworks. As we have seen in the previous video about the power of relativism, similarly
with terms like paradigm, framework, language games, conceptual scheme, while all can come from
different places, they function in much the same way as to the arguments employed by relativists
and against, I guess objectivists, who think that there is some kind of direct or unmediated access
or observation or descriptive ability of reality itself. Relative truth is truth that is relative
to some framework. This framework may be of different kinds, historical, cultural, linguistic,
or biological, for example. So like everything that makes up how you interpret or mediate the
world. So the issue is something that is true in one framework, but false in a different framework.
Because it's relativized to different frameworks, it avoids the contradiction that would have happened
if it was the same framework. Ogrady points out, as we can tell, it's basically the same thing as
true in L, where L was for an artificial language, but now it's just replaced with the notion of
frameworks. Ogrady then goes on to use an example of the Hopi Indian tribe. Now the Hopi Indian tribe
is one of the most widely cited examples by relativists, you know, along with the Azandei I
guess, and relativists of many stripes, pushing relativism into whichever field of investigation
they desire. The Hopi Indian do appear to have different worldview, and we'll talk about what
that is in the next battle. But Ogrady will argue that that means they have different ontology,
not therefore different everything, which some extreme relativists might insist that they do
have also different logic therefore, and different rationality, and different truths even. That is,
for the relativists, their language is proof of relativism about truth. Anyway, this little note
of mine here is kind of spilling the beans behind what Ogrady will say, as he puts it in brackets
on a paragraph 13, line 67. A source of confusion here is that the Hopi do in fact have a different
ontology. Sawyer is exploring the possibility about relativism about truth, but it seems better to
explain the difference in the Hopi and the standard scientific view with relativized ontology,
but keeping an absolute conception of truth. Sawyer makes a distinction between strong and
weak relativism, where in strong relativism the same sentence can be true in one framework,
but false in another. So like, spirits live in trees, true in the Hopi framework, but false
translated to normal English. And then there is weak relativism, where one sentence cannot even be
expressed in another framework, where translation is not possible. Sawyer decides he's gonna focus
on the strong one, because he says that's where most relativists are at anyway, thinking that
translation is possible. But the way he sees it is that there are two premises. The world as
experienced is partially constituted by frameworks, and translation is possible between frameworks.
And somehow this is supposed to conclude to truth is relative in the strong sense.
But Sawyer doesn't think three follows. Two is questionable, especially if the statement becomes
contradictory, false in one and true in another. How could they have anything in common? If the
worlds, the frameworks, are so different, then in what sense can the sentence even mean the same
thing? In what sense are they the same sentence or equivalence? If the ontology is different
between the frameworks, that is if the world is different expressed by the two different frameworks,
then it seems that the meaning of the sentence must be different. As Sawyer pithly puts it,
and pithly means brief or sharp or forcefully, like straight up, Sawyer straight up says it like,
a change of world entails a change of meaning. So to encapsulate that, saying that something can
be false in another framework, it shows that it's not really the same thing then, if you're really
trying to say that the other framework can be so radically different that can lead it to being
false. Because of this, attack three, strong, failed. So if you didn't get that strong relativism
won't work, or at least it seems if the worlds are so different that the same sentence can be
false in one, yet true in another, the sentence doesn't really mean the same thing then. The
meaning of the sentence is changing if the worlds are so radically different, that we could even
consider one thing false while true in another. And our focus, as per O'Grady, has been much more
to do with seeing how the idea of worlds can be different doesn't necessarily need to include
that truth is relative. Okay, so the strong attack failed, but what about the weak attack,
weak-alithic relativism, where a sentence is inexpressible in another framework.
Remember, we kind of had that condition earlier about how legitimate relativism about truth would
allow for contradiction. In a different context, different sentences become candidates for truth
and false, like a context of math, taxonomy, or genetic history, etc. In a different context,
a sentence may not even appear. So to make that easier to explain, I guess while playing basketball,
the truth of whether light is really the universal speed limit would not even show up. It wouldn't
even be a candidate for truth or false while playing basketball. Is it 299,792,458 meters per
second? Like, I can't even ask such a question in basketball type of language. So whether that's
true or false doesn't even register in basketball language, let's say. And therefore, the truth
of that sentence is relative to languages where they would be even a candidate for truth and false.
But O'Grady says that ain't really relativism about truth, though. For relativism, we need
something to be true and false in different contexts. But just because something isn't
expressible in another language doesn't mean there is a threat of contradiction.
It seems like these different contexts or different styles of reasoning here,
whatever you'd like to call it, can still nevertheless be perfectly compatible.
Different things are being discussed, which can be lumped together in a larger account with no
contradiction. So relativism about truth isn't defensible in that way either. Attack 3, weak, failed.
Wow, that was an awesome battle, wasn't it? Well, O'Grady did some good work there, I think.
But there's still more room, more attack left in the relativist, for those that believe that
different theories of truth can allow for more openness to a relativized version of truth.
So now O'Grady has a section where he talks about correspondence theory of truth, epistemic
theory of truth, and a deflationist theory of truth, the former two being what he calls substantive.
He discusses how depending on which theory you use, it has different impacts for relativism in
other places. But because I'm currently not thinking I'm necessarily going to be covering his entire
book, or at least not sure to what depth I'm going to be doing that, I'm just going to cover it
quickly with this kind of graph, and then we'll go on to the second battle. Basically the ones that
are substantive are saying that truth is substantively important, that it's a kind of property of some
sentences or belief that makes it explanatorily important. The deflationist ones are where truth
is insignificant and just a kind of grammatical thing we say. He talks about Alfred, he gives an
example using Tarski here, but I'm just going to skip that part. Anyway, of the substantive ones
he discusses too, the first one being correspondence theory, where truth is when propositions
correspond to reality. He brings up a few reasons why this is actually untenable, like how the best
ones really still entail how larger propositions rely on the truth of basic elements, but there
aren't basic propositions in a natural language, and how it's not actually well explained how there
is a structure in a proposition that is the same one in reality, how they can both share that same
structure. Anyway, if you like a detailed discussion of this kind of criticism of correspondence
theory, just let me know in the comments below. But the point is that correspondence theory doesn't
leave room open for relativism on ontology, nor in epistemology, or at least technically it can
still be connected to ontological relativism, you know, relativism about what there is, or what kind
of things there are in the world, but that would kind of defeat the whole purpose of being a
correspondence theorist in the first place, because it makes correspondence theory not all
that substantive if language could connect to multiple realities. Then he talks about how
there's an epistemological theory of truth, where truth is just the best of what we know.
This kind of has a problem of, well, you know, we can be wrong about things, so truth seems to
change as we adjust. And the answer back to that concern is usually like, cool, whatever, truth is
an ideal anyway, like a goal that we just never reach, because we never truly finish
investigating everything. But we always will try, and the best of our trying is what we'll just call
truth. It makes it kind of grammatical, I guess, in that sense. Responding to that, however, critics
are often like, you're just conflating issues with knowledge and how or if we can have certainty
with what the truth is. But they respond back, well, that's not much of a criticism, you're just
inherently assuming or stipulating that truth is something other than what we propose here.
In any case, this one, though, does leave the doors open for relativism in ontology and in
epistemology, the study of knowledge. But just because it leaves doors open for relativism in
ontology and in epistemology, well, does that really mean that it can leave doors open for
relativizing truth as well? Well, O'Grady will argue that the amount of relativism in
epistemology is actually limited by rationality, which is another place he battles to defend
against relativism. And the result of that kind of has a trickleback effect, I guess you could say,
to ensure that ultimately there is one absolute truth. And that's what we're gonna see next.
So let's see now how he defends against charges of relativism in rationality. Oh wait, before we
do that, we should look at logic. Logic in some sense already seems to be much of the discussion
in defending against relativism for O'Grady. It's a part of his whole setup anyway. Also,
it's often the go-to move for people to push back against claims of something being relative.
They just say, hey, it's logic. Anyway, so let's check that out. The link for the next video will
be below. I think you deserve a break, but if you don't need a break and you're ready to go,
ready to get that next thing on, then let's go now and see logic versus relativism.
By the way, thank you for watching this video. Give it a like and a comment too.
The comments I have received over the years actually, as well as my Patreon supporters,
Slickpockets, are ultimately the greatest motivating thing I see. Comments of support
mentally really help me. And honestly, there are things that I find in those comments that are
sometimes so touching, even though I don't reply like I really do read all of them. And I know
I'm doing something good things here and maybe even with my life because of those comments.
You know, I don't even know if I've mentioned before, but writing the script for this episode,
episode 7, like I literally heard gunshots out of my window while writing philosophy,
it's caught me really questioning sometimes why I'm doing this. So they help.
So if you can, please socially or financially help me. You can support me on Patreon,
or if you have PayPal, you can send me money and a one-time direct donation.
And I understand that may not be easy for many, so if not those, let's try to just get me to
a thousand subs maybe. Then perhaps my creator will grant me a neck finally. Also, remember, philosophers keep battling.
