Ladies and gentlemen, it is my great privilege on this occasion to present Edward Whitten
for his plenary address, string theory, and geometry.
As you may have noticed, the program of this Congress, the Berkeley Mathematical Congress
of 1986, differs from its predecessors in the much greater emphasis given to the relationship
of mathematics to the sciences, both natural and artificial, to physics and to computer
science.
This is true particularly of the plenary addresses, but also of the remainder of the
program.
And it reflects, in my view, a profound change which has taken place in the structure of
mathematics at its cutting edge, what has been described by some of my equatness as
a profound reconvergence of mathematics for the sciences.
Edward Whitten epitomizes this tendency in his sharpest form.
By training in profession, he is a physicist, he is a professor in the Department of Physics
at Princeton, and by achievement, he is a physicist at the highest level and a mathematician
at the highest level.
He has been one of the leading workers in recent years in the ongoing development of
string theory.
He has been one of the, perhaps, the leader in introducing ideas of conceptual originality
and mathematical sophistication in that theory, and he has also used those ideas in a very
remarkable way to get important mathematical results of a high degree of originality, both
in concept and execution.
In their lectures, both Richard Schoen and Izzy Singer have referred to some of these
results.
Another one to which they have not referred is his highly original proof of the Morrison
inequalities using the eigenvalues of Laplacians on manifolds, the first original proof of
that set of ideas in 50 years.
The material of which he is going to speak reflects one of the most powerful trends
in contemporary mathematics, and the most powerful and sometimes controversial trend
in theoretical physics, the development of fundamental ideas concerning the unity of
the theory of fundamental particles and of gravitation in a highly sophisticated and
elaborated mathematical form.
We welcome him here as a symbol of this movement, which will continue, I am sure, in even sharper
forms in the decades to come.
Professor Whitten.
Thank you.
In 20th century physics, there have been two really basic ingredients, which are, first
of all, general relativity, which is Einstein's theory of gravity, and secondly, quantum field
theory, which is the basic framework for our understanding of essentially everything else
in physics other than gravitation.
Though they both play a role in a description of the same natural world, these two theories
enjoy their successes in very different realms.
General relativity has its successes in the realm of astronomy, and quantum field theory
is the framework for successful descriptions of many aspects of the properties of Adam's
molecules and subatomic particles.
Most of the really important developments in fundamental physics since about 1930 have
been developments in quantum field theory, or certainly in quantum mechanics.
And for much of this time, physics and mathematics had relatively little interaction compared
to that in many previous epics.
One obvious reason for this, perhaps, is that in the 20th century, mathematics advanced
into seemingly abstract realms unrelated, perhaps it would seem, to the humdrum world
of the theoretical physicist, but I think in large part the reason that the interaction
of mathematics and physics was more limited in the last half century than in previous
epics, was because the physical problems that arose in quantum field theory, which was the
central framework for most progress in physics, did not seem to give rise to many interesting
mathematical structures.
By the mid-1970s, this changed mainly because of developments in physics.
By the mid-1970s, the quantum field theories which had emerged to play a central role in
physics were the so-called non-ibillion gauge theories, theories in which one of the main
ingredients is a vector bundle over space-time with a non-ibillion structure group.
These theories raised more interesting and significant issues in geometry and topology,
causing a more significant interaction of physics and geometry starting about ten years
ago, perhaps, than had been possible during most of the epic in which quantum field theory
played its central role in physics.
In fact, one of many strands leading to Donaldson's work, which we heard about a couple of days
ago, originated from this interaction of physics and geometry.
Now, progress in quantum field theory, led by perhaps a decade ago, to the beginning
of an enriched interaction of physics and geometry, but I believe that all the same
this interaction would remain relatively limited if it were only a question of quantum
field theory.
It's really in trying to go beyond the limits of quantum field theory that physicists have
come upon mathematical frontiers.
Perhaps the fundamental limitation of quantum field theory is the one I've already alluded
to.
It's only one of two fundamental theories in physics, and in fact, quantum field theory
turns out to be incompatible with that other basic ingredient in 20th century physics,
which is general relativity.
You can attempt formally to combine these two theories by so-called quantization of
general relativity, but this leads to all kinds of nonsensical formulas.
Now, in the early days of quantum field theory, it was not at all obvious that this was a
central problem.
Quantum field theory faced many problems in its early days.
It wasn't even obvious at the outset that the quantum theory of electricity, which
was the original quantum field theory, really made any sense.
In time, though, the other difficulties of quantum field theory were overcome, and it
became clear that quantum field theory was an adequate framework for describing all of
the forces of nature except gravity.
Though in the course of learning how to do so, physicists were led to develop quantum
field theories with a richer geometrical content, such as the non-abillion-gauge theories
I alluded to previously.
As the other difficulties of quantum field theory were overcome, the incompatibility
with general relativity emerged as the limitation of this framework.
Now, general relativity is based, of course, on Riemannian geometry, which is certainly
one of the richest frameworks for our understanding of ordinary geometry.
Asserting that general relativity, which is based on Riemannian geometry, is incompatible
with quantum field theory, must mean that some proper physical theory, which will successfully
generalize general relativity and reconcile it with quantum field theory, must in some
way be based on some generalization of Riemannian geometry, compatible with the requirement of
quantum mechanics.
Now, experiments can only provide us with indirect clues about how we should go beyond
ordinary Riemannian geometry as a framework in physics.
The reason for this is that, to our great regret, gravitational effects are unmeasurably
small in experiments that probe quantum field theory, and the same is true the other way
around.
There is actually only one example in the previous history of physics in which a theory
was invented even though the experimental clues were only indirect.
The one other success of that nature was general relativity itself.
It was discovered in what we might call a logical way, Einstein first beginning only
with a very general clue, which was that special relativity was incompatible with gravity.
Einstein first formulated the physical ideas for reconciling two inconsistent theories,
then found the right mathematical framework, which was general Riemannian geometry, and
finally he invented the theory.
Now, of course we'd like to emulate this history, but that is easily said than done.
Many ambitious physicists and mathematicians have gone off into the wilderness in search
of some fundamental generalization of geometry that would reconcile gravity with quantum
mechanics.
By general thinking, they've come back empty handed, if at all.
While direct assaults on this problem have yielded little, progress seems to have fallen
from the sky, essentially, through the largely chance discovery of something called string
theory.
Now, the people who invented string theory, beginning in the late 1960s, weren't aspiring
to reconcile general relativity with quantum mechanics.
They weren't hoping to generalize Riemannian geometry.
In fact, the ambitions were not in the realm of our discussion at all.
String theory was originally developed as a theory of the so-called strong interactions,
the nuclear forces that keep nuclei together despite the electric repulsion among protons.
Even as a theory of strong interactions, string theory was discovered largely by accident.
Following its discovery, which essentially occurred when one of the formulas in string
theory was written down by Veneziano with very slender motivation in 1968, following the
essentially accidental discovery it was vigorously developed in this early period, drawing which
upwards of 500 papers were written, led to an extremely rich mathematical structure,
which fascinated people by its richness, yet never advanced toward solving the original
problem which motivated this work of strong interactions.
In fact, this whole line of development was abruptly abandoned by most physicists around
1974 when it became clear that it was not the correct approach to strong interactions.
While it was generally abandoned because of not being the solution of the original physical
problem, the structure retained its fascination, provoking work in various areas, and eventually
being revived in the 1980s as an approach to quantum gravity.
This subject has already an extremely long and complex history, and I fear that if I
tried to survey even the high points of this history, it would take the rest of the lecture.
I've written here some of the dates and names of some of the main developments, but it would
be impractical to explain even a few of them completely.
I will be talking about some ingredients from some of these developments, but I'm not going
to attempt to explain this history.
Now, as I've indicated, string theory essentially fell from the sky by chance with some special
formulas of this theory being discovered with a rather strange motivation, and it gradually
being learned that these formulas were special cases of a richer structure in which one has
penetrated and tying to deeper levels, but probably not very far toward the deepest levels
that underlie this theory.
The situation in string theory is roughly as if general relativity had been invented
without having first invented the logical framework for this theory, which is Riemannian
geometry.
Einstein happens to have followed Riemann, but it's imaginable to have conceived of a
planet where the problem that Einstein posed of reconciling gravity with special relativity
would have existed on a planet where general relativity was unknown.
Conceivably on such a planet, general relativity would somehow be invented in some obscure
way without its logical underpinnings, Riemannian geometry being clear.
Whether or not that's happened on some planets in the universe in which theoretical physics
may have been developed, it certainly has happened on planet Earth in the case of string
theory.
Because of the peculiar way that string theory has been discovered, I cannot do what I would
dearly love to do, and a lot of hope will be done by some speaker at some future Congress
of the International Congress of Mathematicians, which is to explain the basic concepts of
curvature connections and Riemannian manifolds, which should play in string theory the role
that Riemannian geometry plays in general relativity.
I can try to explain some of what presumably are the preliminaries for this theory, and
in sketching what I mean by these preliminaries, perhaps I'll give you an analogy with general
relativity.
In Riemannian geometry, one has some curved manifold, and if you consider at a point the
tangent space to this curved manifold, of course the tangent space is a linear space.
And one thing you certainly have to be able to do in order to work with Riemannian geometry
is to understand a little bit of elementary linear algebra so that you can carry out linear
operations in the tangent space.
Roughly speaking, our present understanding of string theory was as if we were trapped
in the tangent space of Riemannian manifold, not understanding the basic frameworks that
we would need, the basic logical concepts that we would need, to go coherently beyond
linear operations in the tangent space.
So the analog in string theory, the role which is played by linear algebra as a preliminary
to work in the tangent space of Riemannian manifold, the analogous role is played in
string theory by much richer mathematical structures, which are the theory of Riemann
surfaces, modular forms, and what I will loosely describe as infinite dimensional representation
theory.
Roughly speaking, just as one needs a little linear algebra before trying to learn Riemannian
geometry, so one needs to know something about Riemann surfaces and infinite dimensional
representation theory before trying to learn string theory.
So we could say that general relativity requires linear algebra for its linear approximation,
but the fundamental ideas in the theory are really connections, curvature, and Riemannian
geometry.
String theory requires Riemann surfaces and infinite dimensional representation theory
for its linear approximation, and what should really belong in the lower right hand corner
of that square is, I think, to my thinking, and the thinking of many other physicists,
really the central problem in theoretical physics.
Now I've stressed the incompatibility of quantum field theory with gravity, but in fact there
are certain other problems in our understanding of physics that we would like to overcome,
and one of the most fundamental problems is simply that there are too many conceivable
theories permitted by the general principles that we have.
Quantum field theory would permit an infinity of theories, and the logical framework of
general relativity would also permit an infinity of theories of which Einstein's is only the
prototype.
Of course, if you try combining these two frameworks, you have not an infinity of theories
but zero, which is the assertion that they're incompatible, but if you could have combined
quantum field theory with general relativity with no particular difficulties, then you
actually would have had an infinity of possible descriptions of the natural world, which certainly
would mean some basic gaps in your understanding.
So in a sense, there might be a blessing in disguise in the difficulty of reconciling
these two frameworks, either would separately permit an infinity of theories, together they
seem to permit none, and hopefully the proper understanding will lead to a finite set of
theories that reconcile them.
To briefly illustrate what I mean in saying that the general ideas of Riemannian geometry
would permit an infinity of theories, the basic concept in general relativity is really
that spacetime, which I'll call M, is a pseudo-Riemannian manifold.
It has a metric tensor, G, and Riemann tensor, the Ritchie scalar, is what I've called R.
Einstein's basic principle was to describe nature by some geometrical action principle,
some geometrical integral over spacetime was to be the action of this theory, and while
he wrote the simplest action, there are an infinity of more general action principles,
more general geometrical invariance, integrated over M, that would give conceivable generalizations
of general relativity within the logical framework.
In some sense, you might consider this to be the most elementary member of the clan,
but when you consider another point which I'm about to allude to presently, in fact
one has an infinity of theories without a evident most elementary example.
So apart from the inconsistency of quantum field theory and general relativity, we would
certainly like to overcome the fact that either of those separately leave us with too many
theories, in fact with an infinity of conceivable theories.
To illustrate the other deficiency of general relativity, let me briefly discuss almost
flat solutions of this theory.
Of course in everyday life, we don't notice that spacetime is curved.
Spacetime is flat in everyday life, and of course you can do a better job of probing
for curvature if you measure over larger and larger scales.
Every Ramonian manifold is almost flat on a small scale, Gauss as many of you know measured
the angles between three high mountains, and found pi as the sum, confirming that on the
scale of the alps, spacetime is roughly flat, and astronomers do much better on even larger
scales.
So we introduce, as a good approximate description, the flat metric eta, the diagonal metric with
these eigenvalues.
We imagine a small deviation h from a flat metric.
We write the spacetime metric as the Minkowski metric plus a small fluctuation.
Well, if we insert this form of the metric in the Einstein equations, we'll get a nonlinear
equation, but since spacetime is nearly flat, let's linearize it.
If we linearize it, we will get some linear equation for h, which will be some perturbation
of the Laplace operator acting on h, giving zero.
Well this equation has wave-like solutions, the simplest being the plane wave I've written
here, and these wave-like solutions are quite analogous to the corresponding wave-like solutions
of Maxwell's equations, which are light waves.
So in this way, we learn that general relativity predicts gravitational waves, a prediction
of that theory which emerged clearly when the theory was formulated in 1915, though
it had been conjectured by Poincare some 10 years earlier, and incidentally a prediction
which was finally tested indirectly by observations of radio waves from pulsars just a few years
ago.
Now when this prediction was made, it was a prediction of new type of wave, not a new
type of particle, but in fact, in quantum mechanics, waves and particles are two facets
of the same thing.
So this prediction of a new kind of wave is actually a prediction of a new kind of particle.
Einstein merely aspired to reconcile gravitational forces with special relativity, but in trying
to do so, he actually predicted a unified, not just a theory of gravitational forces,
but a unified theory of gravity and matter.
Gravitational forces were unified with this peculiar new kind of matter which was predicted,
namely gravitational waves.
Now Einstein wasn't satisfied with his unifications since he eventually hoped to unify gravitational
forces, not with some exotic form of matter that he predicted, but unknown at the time,
but with the forms of matter that were known about.
So this is often described by saying that Einstein didn't succeed in unifying gravity
with matter, but a better statement would be to say that on a logical plane, he unified
gravitational forces with matter, but wasn't satisfied with the form of matter that the
resulting theory predicted.
So on a conceptual plane, it's a great triumph that merely trying to describe gravitational
forces, finding a logical framework which is Riemannian geometry, writing down the simplest
equations in that framework which are nonlinear equations, one then found that one had not
merely a theory of gravitational forces, but a unified theory that unified gravitational
forces with matter.
However, this wonderful unified theory has a couple of flaws.
It's incompatible with quantum field theory.
That of course wasn't known at the time since quantum field theory was invented later, but
evident even at the time was that the forms of matter predicted in this theory were less
rich than those that we observe.
Now I would next like to give a heuristic account of what string theory is and why it
might be hoped to improve upon general relativity.
The framework for this really does require some preliminaries about quantum field theory,
and I do hope to give a brief comment about quantum field theory later.
But without developing all the requisite preliminaries of quantum field theory, I would like to at
least explain heuristically how one stumbles upon some generalization of general relativity
in the form of string theory.
And in doing so, I will be explaining conventional things in quantum field theory in a way which
is closely related essentially to the viewpoint introduced by Polyakov some years ago.
Well, in quantum field theory, the scattering of particles such as the gravitons of general
relativity are described by Feynman diagrams.
Now a Feynman diagram is a space-time history of a scattering process.
In this transparency, I've sketched a space-time history.
Time runs vertically on the diagram.
Space or one of the space dimensions at least runs horizontally.
Particles have been emitted and absorbed at these points A, B, C, and D.
The solid lines are actually curves in space-time along which a particle traveled, and x, y,
z, and w denote points in space-time at which one particle split into two or in which two
particles recombined into one.
So this actually is a sketch of a sequence of events in space-time.
And if you start with some theory like general relativity, then the rules of quantum field
theory will give you algorithms for associating probabilities with space-time history such
as that one.
Actually, you start with some abstract graph gamma, and then you imagine some map of gamma
into space-time, which I'll call capital X.
X denotes a map of gamma into space-time.
Of course, this graph gamma is a collection of intervals.
If we map such an interval into space-time, we can compute its arc length.
And the sums of those arc lengths is what I'll call I of X, the length of the image
of this graph gamma in space-time under some map in which gamma is mapped into X of gamma.
So let omega of gamma be the space of all maps of the graph gamma into space-time.
Now in conventional quantum field theory of the last 50 years, even though this isn't
quite the conventional way of describing the usual structures, one almost-dangered way
to describe usual Thiemann diagrams is as integrals over this path space omega of gamma.
So we have an abstract graph gamma.
We map it into space-time.
Here I've sketched the image of that graph, but I don't have such a map.
Omega of gamma is the base of all such maps.
I is the length of the image of the graph under that map.
We try to integrate over omega of gamma e to the minus the length of the image of the
map.
There are some facts I'll explain presently, vehicle factors at the branch points in the
graph.
Now one thing you'll note here is that infinite dimensional integral, the integral over the
space omega of gamma of all conceivable maps of this graph into space-time, all conceivable
continuous maps of gamma into space-time.
That's a characteristic infinite dimensional integral that appears in Feynman-Path integral
formulations of quantum mechanics and quantum field theory.
Now one thing which we'll notice here is that when we're mapping this graph gamma into space-time,
gamma is not a manifold.
It's almost a one-dimensional manifold, but actually it's a one-dimensional manifold with
singularities P, Q, R, and S. And the ills of quantum field theory all come about because
gamma isn't a one-dimensional, isn't a manifold, but has singularities.
We're taking this graph which is a one-manifold with singularities, we're mapping it into
space-time, and two bad things happen because of the fact that gamma isn't a manifold.
First of all, well we have to define this infinite dimensional integral.
But in fact, there's a lot of experience and even some theorems in constructive field
theory about defining such infinite dimensional integrals.
One thing we know about it is that it will work a lot more nicely if you tried mapping
a smooth one-manifold into space-time rather than a graph with singularities.
When we map such a graph into space-time, we encounter the possibility that the image
of P, Q, R, and S in space-time may kill inside.
And in fact, after we've learned to define such infinite dimensional integrals in the
first place, we learned that this integration is badly behaved near the region where X of
P, X of Q, up to X of S all coincide.
This bad behavior makes all quantum field theories difficult to define, but actually
impossible in the case of general relativity.
So our first problem in quantum field theory, its overall mathematical difficulty, and in
particular its incompatibility with gravity, arises because gamma isn't a manifold.
Secondly, because gamma isn't a manifold, we have these special points P, Q, R, and S.
And we had a nice simple factor in the integrand, the exponential of minus the length of the
image of gamma in space-time.
But since there are these special points P, Q, R, and S, it makes sense, as those points
are singled out, to take some local functional of the behavior of X near one of those points.
Phi here is a local functional of X of P and the derivatives of X near P. It makes sense
to pick such a local functional and introduce a factor in the integrand at each of those
singular points, P, Q, R, and S. And in fact, with certain very simple limitations, each
choice of this local functional, Phi of P, gives you a different quantum field theory.
The infinity of quantum field theories corresponds to the infinity of local factors that can
be introduced at those branch points.
Well, of course, you might think that we're straining things a bit and that there would
be a minimal model where we don't introduce these factors.
But one of the surprises perhaps is that that isn't true.
If you take a nice geometrical theory like general relativity and Yang-Mills theory and
transform it into this framework, you'll definitely need some suitable local factors
at those points.
And on the contrary, the theories that wouldn't have those local factors or would have simple
local factors turn out to be quantum field theories that don't have interesting geometrical
content.
So this is the freedom, not only it exists in principle, but we have to use it and we
do use it for the quantum field theories that are of most interest in physics.
So we have a variety of problems which have their origin in the fact that gamma isn't
de-manifold.
Suppose, though, that we wish to ask an engineering shop, let's say, to make a physical model
of the graph gamma.
While we probably define this graph as consisting of mathematical lines, but the craftsman doesn't
have mathematical lines at his disposal, so perhaps if we're lucky, he uses thin tubes.
And if he uses hollow tubes and joins them smoothly as a plumber does, then we can replace
this graph by something for which it's more easy to make a physical model, which looks
very similar from a big distance, and that is actually why string theory, if you'd coarsely,
looks rather like quantum field theory.
But there's a fundamental difference.
In replacing these mathematical lines with little tubes, we've replaced the one manifold
with singularity gamma by the smooth remun surface sigma.
Now, in some sense, the graph gamma may be an approximation to sigma, but the fundamental
difference is that sigma is a smooth manifold, which gamma isn't, and as a result, in replacing
gamma with sigma, we, in fact, overcome both the infinities in quantum field theory and
also the lack of uniqueness.
The lack of uniqueness came from the ability to attribute special factors with these points
upon losing those special points.
We, in fact, encounter a situation in string theory where we replace gamma with sigma in
which there are very few theories that can be formulated.
Now, the other main occurrence which arises when we replace gamma with sigma, let's take
a close-up of this picture, which I won't draw completely.
Remember, this is actually a picture of a process occurring in space-time, so time is
running upwards in the picture, and this graph gamma, which I've drawn, is actually happening
in space-time.
It actually describes the propagation in space-time of point particles, which for general relativity
are the quantum counterparts of the waves that I sketched earlier.
So I'm going to take a blow-up of a little piece of that picture.
Our blow-up is the propagation of a particle in time, in space-time.
If we take its locus at given time, we get a single point, or at most a finite set of
points.
The fact that we might get a finite set of points instead of a single point leads to
the fascinating story of creation of matter and antimatter, or perhaps it would take us
too far a field to discuss it.
So I'll imagine that we find the locus at a given time to be a single point, and that
corresponds to saying that this graph is a theory of a point particle propagating in
space-time.
If, in the same way, we take the locus at fixed time of one of these tubes, it consists of
a circle, or perhaps a finite collection thereof.
So we've actually replaced the point particle of field theory with the oscillating circle.
You see, I remarked that on a conceptual plane, Einstein had unified gravitational forces
with some kind of matter, but the matter, in question, wasn't rich enough.
And it wasn't rich enough, essentially, because that point particle, which was the locus of
a curve at given time, didn't have enough freedom.
When we replace our graph with a Riemann surface sigma, the locus at given time isn't
a point or finite collection of points, but consists of circles, and one of those circles,
or in that case closed strings, will be rather like a violin string, except without fixed
endpoints.
Physically, it will oscillate in time, and like a violin string, it will have an infinite
set of harmonics, which will correspond to different forms of matter.
So in fact, replacing gamma with the Riemann surface sigma means that one is dealing with
a theory with much richer forms of matter.
It's not at all obvious from what I've said that these richer forms of matter will be
at all like what we find in the real world, but upon closer investigation, it turns out
that they are.
So, the seemingly innocent step of replacing gamma by sigma leads us to a more unique theory
with also a much richer form of matter, and it leads us at the same time into the world
of Riemann surfaces and modular forms, and representation theory of certain infinite
dimensionally algebras such as Diff S1, the group of diffe morphisms of S1, which will
act on this circle.
Now, I have another transparency which aims at recapitulating what I've been saying.
So in a theory like general relativity, we have really basic formulas like the geometrical
action principle, the integral over spacetime of the Ritchie scalar.
The beauty or lack of beauty of such a theory should be judged by the beauty of its fundamental
principles.
Our aspiration would be to generalize this elegant action, geometrical action principle
to some richer structure that will be compatible with quantum field three, a direct and even
indirect attempts to do so haven't been successful.
On the other hand, if we consider not the really fundamental formulas of Riemannian geometry,
but some derived formulas such as the ones I've been discussing involving maps of graphs
gamma into spacetime, then it turns out that some of the derived formulas can be generalized.
Now of course, if at the top of everyone's mind was that we think of general relativity
in terms of maps of graphs into spacetime, then this generalization would be more obvious
and perhaps would have happened sooner.
What makes it less obvious is that although this is closely related to standard descriptions
of what one gets from quantum field theory, it's not the most standard description by
any means.
I haven't explained the steps in quantum field theory which lead from fundamental formulas
to less fundamental formulas involving these graphs.
It's possible to explain it, but it would have taken an excessively long exposition.
If we work on this less refined plane, we find we can generalize the less fundamental formulas
of quantum field theory, getting something called string theory, which overcomes many
of the difficulties.
For instance, the lack of uniqueness of quantum field theory, which in this framework arose
from the fact that the Ritchie scalar is only one of many possible geometrical action principles,
in this less refined framework is associated with the fact that gamma is a graph, but not
a manifold, and that is eliminated in going to Riemann surfaces, and so on with other
points I've already illustrated.
What has happened in the invention of string theory is that in a peculiar process of trial
and error with many historical stages, one has succeeded in generalizing not the truly
fundamental formulas of older physical theories, but some of the derived formulas.
Just as this picture with the graph gamma is to be derived from some much more fundamental
viewpoints, the same ought to be true with our generalization of it involving Riemann
surfaces, and elucidating what lies above the Riemann surface in the sense that general
relativity lies above these graphs is what I've alluded to as the mystery of unraveling
the logical structure behind string theory, and I personally believe that it's a very
fundamental problem for both mathematics and physics.
One peculiarity is that ordinarily the beauty of a theory is to be judged by its fundamental
principles and not to be looked for in these derived formulas. Derived formulas like the
ones involving graphs and maps of graphs into spacetime are necessary tools if you want
to determine the quantitative predictions of a beautiful theory like general relativity,
but they're not the basic formulas and they're not necessarily beautiful. In fact, they're
ordinarily not beautiful. One of the surprises in string theory is that the Riemann surface
generalization of the theory of those graphs is very beautiful, involves fascinating properties
of Riemann surfaces, modular forms, infinite dimensional representation theory, algebraic
geometry. Some of the many beautiful aspects of this were described in a marvelous article
by Manin, which was submitted to this conference, but which regrettably he wasn't able to deliver
here because of not being allowed to attend the conference, but Singer presented them
very elegantly in a talk on Tuesday afternoon. It comes, one shouldn't expect beauty in
trying to generalize a secondary formula, but actually in the case of string theory,
one finds that the generalization of this picture with the graphs leads to very fascinating
and beautiful mathematics. I personally would get conjecture that what lies above here will
in some sense stand in the same relation to general relativity, that the marvelous automorphic
forms and algebraic geometry that enters in Riemann surfaces, pathentacles or Riemann
surfaces, compares to the Euler-Fleinman diagrams of field theory. Now I haven't been able to
explain how one goes from here to here, that would be rather too time consuming. I do want
to use the remaining terms to, the remaining time, to explain briefly a little bit of the
flavor of what it means when we talk about the maps over into infinite dimensional spaces
that are involved in dealing with these graphs gamma or the Riemann surface sigma in their
own terms. So in the rest of this talk, we're going to be working on this lower half of
the page without discussing how this one is associated with conventional field theory.
Now in doing this, I will be giving a very brief introduction to quantum field theory
since I will have to attempt to extract one or two ideas in about 15 minutes. You see,
quantum field theory exists on the upper half of this page because we started with quantum
gravity or attempted quantum gravity in going here, but quantum field theory lives again
at the lower half of this page because these infinite dimensional integrals are really
formulas in quantum field theory. Now quantum field theory has been for most of its 60 years
almost the private preserver physicists. And even now, it has not yet emerged as a mathematical
tool. But there are reasons to believe that quantum field theory might emerge as a mathematical
tool in the near future. Reasons independent of string theory for believing that because
there are at least two areas where progress in mathematics has come to the brink of quantum
field theory. That is, areas of mathematics where some characteristic features of quantum
field theory have begun to be recognized as significant. One of these is the representation
theory of Affine-Lee Algebras, which Frankel reviewed yesterday, and which is closely related
to the Hamiltonian picture of certain quantum field theories. And the other involves recent
work in arithmetic geometry, which we will hear about in the next lecture, where the
Dirac determinant, which is one of the really fundamental characteristic ingredients in
quantum field theory, has begun to play an important role. So in a choice of topics for
an extremely brief comment on quantum field theory, I'm going to talk about points that
are involved in string theory, but also might prove to be related in further developments
to the areas of mathematics I've just mentioned. Let then sigma be a Riemann surface, perhaps
with boundary. Let phi taking sigma into the real numbers r be a real-valued function.
And then let's define an action, very natural action, which is called the action functional
of free boson field theory, the integral over sigma of this two form, del phi wedged
del bar phi, where del and del bar are the natural operators associated with a complex
structure on sigma. Let f be a real-valued function on the boundary of sigma, and let
omega sub f of sigma be the space of real-valued functions on sigma, whose restriction to the
boundary coincides with f. Now we didn't need a Riemannian metric on sigma in defining
the action i, but if sigma is endowed with a Riemannian metric, and not just with a
conformal structure, then this affine space omega f of sigma likewise has a natural metric,
which I've defined here by giving the distance between two functions phi and phi prime. Now
in finite dimensions, a Riemannian metric certainly induces a measure, the so-called
square root of the determinant, if you wish to write it in formulas. And hoping that that
works in infinite dimensions, we might try to define what I call z sub f of sigma, which
is the integral of e to the minus the action over the space of functions whose restriction
to the boundary coincides with f. That's what I called omega f of sigma. The integration
measure is the one which we hope was induced by that Riemannian metric on sigma. Well,
how are we going to integrate in infinite dimensions? Well, physicists actually deal
with infinite dimensional integrals that are very difficult to define mathematically in
which you can't write explicit formulas, but I happen, for practice, to have given you one
for which we can write an explicit formula. i, in this case, was a quadratic functional
of phi. So we're integrating the exponential of minus a quadratic functional. That's a
Gaussian integral. And we know that Gaussian integrals are integrals which are easy to
evaluate in finite dimensions. Let a be a quadratic form in finite dimensions. If we're
integrating in finite dimensions the exponential of minus a quadratic form, we can carry out
that explicitly in terms of the square root of the determinant of a, or if we have a natural
basis in phi. So it makes sense to speak of eigenvalues of a. We can write the answer
in terms of eigenvalues of a. So we can try to interpret Gaussian integrals in infinite
dimensions in a similar way. First, consider the case where the boundary of sigma is 0.
The same action I wrote earlier can be written like so in a way that makes the conformal
invariance less obvious, but some of the differential geometry more obvious, perhaps.
The operator that appears here is the ordinary Laplacian. And delta plays the role of our
quadratic form in finite dimensions. So we should study the eigenvalue problem. Delta
phi equals lambda phi. It's a nice eigenvalue problem, a nice discrete set of eigenvalues.
And formally, we would like to define our integral as the product of the minus half
powers of the eigenvalues. Well, of course, this has a zero eigenvalue which we should
throw away. And it also is a little bit divergent because of the infinite factor. But nonetheless,
there are many natural ways of regularizing this. One elegant way of doing it is so-called
zeta function regularization. We introduce the zeta function as sum over eigenvalues
lambda to the minus s. And then we write a formula which would be correct in finite dimensions
if this were a finite sum. With an infinite set of eigenvalues, the zeta function converges
for a large enough real part of s. And we take here its analytic continuation to s equals
zero. This would be our zeta function definition. And there are many other definitions such
as the Pauli-Vellar's method used in quantum field theories some 40 years ago. If now the
boundary of sigma is not empty and we're given a real valued function on the boundary, we'd
like more generally to define the integral not over all maps of a segment of spacetime,
but only maps of segments are, but only maps which coincide with f on the boundary. Well,
for f equals zero, what we've already said is quite adequate. For f equals zero, we're
still integrating a Gaussian integral on a linear space. We study the eigenvalue problem
with boundary conditions that the eigenvalue vanishes on the boundary. And we make again
the same definition. If f isn't zero, then by classical theorems, we find there's a unique
minimum of this functional subject to the condition that the boundary value is equal
to phi. Let phi not be the extremizing function and that our integration variable phi be phi
not plus m correction. Then we can easily work out by manipulations that would be valid
in finite dimensions, the appropriate formulas. It turns out in this case that the action
because it's quadratic for phi is the sum of the separate pieces. And if phi has boundary
value f, then phi prime has boundary value zero. Show shifting the integration variable
from phi to phi prime, we would work out a formula. Now, in reaching this point, we've
needed a metric on sigma. We needed to claim that these spaces, omega of sigma, had measures
and we induced the measures from Riemannian structures on sigma. So since we need metrics
on sigma to reach this point, these formulas are actually not conformally invariant. If
we make a conformal rescaling of the metric of sigma, which of course won't change its
conformal structure as Riemann surface, then this formula won't be invariant. However,
it's possible to work out simple formulas for how it transforms under conformal transformations.
To physicists, those simple formulas involve the so-called theory of anomalies. And to
mathematicians, they involve the theory of the determinant line bundle as it is entered
in the work of Faulting's DeLine and the T. N. Singer, and more recently Fried and
Bismuth and others. I've given a case, more generally, if one considers simple generalizations
of this, one will be led to generalizations of these formulas. His behavior under conformal
rescalings of the metric involve a quite rich theory, which involves the theory of certain
homomorphic line bundles over the modular space of Riemann surfaces in its mathematical
exposition. But it wouldn't be practical to enter into that here. I'll contend myself
simply with saying that I've tried to give a prototype of some of the manipulations by
which were led to investigating determinants of operators such as the Laplacian. And for
surfaces without boundary such that we wouldn't have that factor here, this is a simpler prototype
of some of the things that enter in the next lecture. Now, I'd like to conclude by returning
to our more general themes. I suppose it would be plausible to conjecture that in some suitable
sense the number of really fundamental problems in mathematics is infinite. But I personally
believe that the number of really fundamental physics problems is finite, and therefore
by definition a physicist who has the privilege of working on such problems is lucky. Since
in the course of time, progress will slow. Either by solving them or by failing to make
further progress. If it's true that the number of really fundamental physics problems is
finite, then the number of episodes in the future in which there will be really fundamental
interaction of mathematics and physics will likewise be finite. However, there are reasons
for believing that the next few decades will be one of those epochs.
So let us begin informal seminar on which Professor Witten will speak on Gage's theories
and John's polynomials. Professor Witten's work was already introduced to you in the
first day, so he needs no more introduction. So I give floor to Professor Witten, please.
Thank you. I'm very glad this is an informal talk as a result of which my wife hasn't
required me to wear a suit. So I will be describing a particular three-dimensional quantum gauge
theory which puts the John's polynomial and its in a manifestly three-dimensional form
exhibiting its symmetries which are not obvious from the original definitions. And also, although
I won't have a chance to talk about this, exhibits its formal analogies to modular moonshine
that is moonshine in the theory of the monster group and the theory of alfine algebra, modular
invariance in those theories, Donaldson theory and other things. And also gives a context
in which the quantum group, quantization of an ordinary group arises from ordinary geometry.
For special gauge groups, this theory is also related to some other things including three-dimensional
quantum gravity, the Casin invariant, and some of the fashionable models of high-temperature
superconductivity. So I thought that, well, I'd begin the talk with a little bit of the end,
just as an inducement. So remember that on the first day in explaining von Jones' work,
Joan Brumman explains a bit about skein theory and also indicated the history of the skein theory
and the idea that I'm about to summarize and the people who contributed to it. So this is a very
pretty picture where you have three pieces of knots. These pictures are meant as pieces of very
complicated knots, which I won't draw, but you have some complicated knot and inside the data
line it just looks like this, this or this. And you consider three knots which are the same outside
the data lines of some projection, but inside a little sphere, which has been projected onto the
plane, you have these three different pictures and you have three complex numbers, alpha,
beta, and gamma, and you define an invariant of a knot by saying that the invariants of three
pictures that are the same outside and look like this inside, weighted by complex numbers,
alpha, beta, and gamma add up to zero. By an elementary induction, it can be seen that this
property uniquely defines a knot invariant if it exists, but the fact that it does exist is
considerably deeper and in a way is this part of the surprise of the Jones polynomial and its
generalizations, the Humphrey and Praticki, Traček and Kaufman polynomials and others.
Now, the explanation we will get for this beautiful picture is as follows. You see the
boundary of this sphere has four marked points where the knots pass through the sphere. And we
will find a natural way to associate a two-dimensional vector space, which I call h sub s, to every
sphere s with four marked points. It's a two-dimensional vector space and that's why there
are three terms in this scalarization. The association of the vector space through every
sphere has the property that every bordism determines a vector in this space. Now, by a
bordism, I mean a three-manifold, which has for boundary this sphere and in which the
marked points are boundaries of bits of knots. The knot, these lines are only permitted to
end at those four points. So this picture here, we have the same boundary in the three cases,
but the interiors are three different bordisms. And in this theory, every bordism determines a
vector in h sub s. And we will have in this theory a knot invariant in which the details of the
interior of s don't matter. All that matters from the mess that might be inside s is this vector
size of b in the Hilbert space on the boundary. Now, a simple fact of linear algebra is that any
three vectors in a two-dimensional space obey a linear relation. Alpha psi 1 plus beta psi 2 plus
gamma psi 3 is 0. For some complex numbers, alpha, beta and gamma, in this case, we make the three
vectors determined by these three bordisms, and they obey some linear relation. And if you glue
them into some more complicated picture so that these are little pieces of knots, which are
constant outside the sphere and look like this inside, then this relation is a relation between
the values of the invariant for three different knots. So the existence of this theory, now,
the characteristic of the theory will be the values of alpha, beta and gamma. And such a theory
predicts the validity of skein theory, that is the ability to define a knot invariant this way,
for a particular value of alpha, beta and gamma. To explain skein theory in general, we need a two
parameter family of such constructions, so that the ratios of alpha, beta and gamma are variable.
So that's the answer we will eventually get, although perhaps not completely explained today,
for the validity of skein theory. It comes fundamentally from the existence of a knot invariant,
which can be computed where the details of what's inside any little sphere don't matter,
all that matters is the vector that that boredism determines in the two-dimensional vector space.
Now put this way, it's an elementary topological idea, but its geometrical realization will bring
us into matters that may seem either far afield at first sight in the realm of quantum field theory.
While we will be doing quantum gauge theory, so we pick a gauge group G. G is a V group,
which for economy of exposition, we take to be connected and simply connected. This simplifies
the discussion, it's not essential, but it simplifies the discussion, because then every G
bundle on a three-man hold is trivial. We don't necessarily assume that G is compact,
although we will sometimes assume it. Again, for simplicity only, we assume that G is simple.
In that case, up to a scalar multiple, there is a unique invariant quadratic form on the
le algebra of G. And we denote it as the trace, we denote the pairing of two elements as the trace
of their product, the motivation being that it can actually be realized as the trace in
some representation. And the normalization I'll give in a second is such that for SUN,
this scalar product is the trace in the n-dimensional representation.
Now, a G bundle E on a four-man hold X has a characteristic number which can be computed
by taking the curvature of any connection and integrating trace of f wedge f. And our normalization
of the trace is such that this is integer-valued. So that's a topological invariant or in a
four-man hold. The corresponding secondary term, Simon's invariant, isn't a topological
invariant, but is an invariant that depends on a connection. If we have a three-man hold M
and a G bundle over it and a connection on that bundle, then there is a corresponding secondary
invariant. So the bundle is called E. We extend the bundle and the connection over some four-man
hold B. And we define the three-dimensional secondary invariant is the integral over the
bounding four-man hold of the object which on a closed four-man hold would have two pi
times integer periods. The fact that for closed manifolds, the periods are two pi times integers
means that for a manifold of fixed boundary, this depends on the extension only up to a
multiple of two pi, integral multiple of two pi. So this is well defined with values in real
numbers modulo two pi times integers. Or in other words, it's exponential times the square
root of minus one is well defined with values in U1. Now, we're going to be studying a certain
quantum gauge theory in which the Lagrangian is a positive integer K times this functional
I of A. And this integer K is related, as it turns out, to the level in the theory of
affine-leoguers. Now, as is standard in quantum field theory, the discussion has two halves.
One is the construction of Hilbert spaces and in this case, they will be generalizations of
the Jones representations of the Bragg group. And the second part are path integrals. Although
it's hard to explain this just in one lecture, the questions we will ask and the methods we use
are not dreamed up on an ad hoc basis for this particular problem. There are the techniques
of quantum field theory adapted to this situation, albeit a somewhat unusual situation in which some
steps that are usually relatively trivial become non-trivial. Now, the goal of the first step
of the discussion is to associate a Hilbert space H to every two manifold sigma, every closed
Riemann surface sigma. And this is accomplished in general in quantum field theory. So we're in
three dimensions, but in the Hamiltonian version, we are in one dimension less, here two dimensions.
We consider manifolds without boundary and for every such we wish to find a Hilbert space. And this
Hilbert space is constructed by quantizing a suitable, suitable syntactic manifold, which in
general is the modular space of critical points of the Lagrangian on a particular three manifold,
which is the surface times R1, that being time. Now, Fleur discussed the same functional in
another context. And as he explained, a critical point of this functional is a fault connection.
Or in other words, a representation of the fundamental group of M into G.
Now, since P1 of M is the same as P1 of sigma, the modular space of such representations is the
same as the modular space of fault connections on sigma. And this is the space we will quantize.
Now, this space is often studied by people studying Riemann surfaces. But here, in principle,
it's arising as a representation space of a certain three manifold. It happens that that
degenerates to representations of the fundamental group of sigma because M is contractible to sigma.
But in principle, this space is originating with a three-dimensional origin, which is the
beginnings in a very elementary level of the three-dimensional explanation of the Jones
polynomial. Now, as a preliminary, which is usually trivial in quantum theory, but here
non-trivial, we have to consider what kind of object is the Lagrangian on a three manifold
with boundary. And here I will be explaining what constant and serial call pre-quantization in
this context. But I'll be explaining it in some detail when we actually get to quantization.
I won't go into such detail. So remember how we defined the action functional. We had a
three-manifold without boundary. Then we regarded it as the boundary of some poor
manifold B. And the action was defined as an integral over B. So implicit in this is that
the boundary of M was zero so that M was the boundary of some B. Now we want to let the
boundary of M be non-zero. And this definition, therefore, doesn't make sense. And therefore,
we don't have any. We, in fact, no longer have this Chern-Simons functional as an R mod 2 pi
z-valued functional. However, what is the nature of the obstruction? That a curly a will be the
space of connections on the surface sigma. Then we can't define this exponential of the
Chern-Simons function as a number, but we will define it as a section of a line bundle over
the space of connections. Or more precisely, a connection on the three-manifold has boundary
values in A. And for every point in A, we have a one-dimensional complex vector space, the
fiber of a line bundle at that point. And those things will not be a number, but will take
values in the fiber of that line bundle. So the line bundle is really defined just by asking
what's the obstruction to defining this as a number? Well, the obstruction was that we had an
open three-manifold, and if we knew how to close it, we could get a number again. So we just
explored that systematically. We have this space of connections to describe a line bundle over the
space of connections. We must, for every point in that space, describe a one-dimensional complex
vector space, V sub A. And we declare that V sub A has a basis, which we call A prime, for every
extension of A over any three-manifold Z. Z has any three-manifold, and A prime has any extension
of the connection over Z. Actually, we also extended the bundle and connection over Z. And for
every such extension, this line has a basis A prime. Well, I need to tell you how to compare two
different basis elements, and I can do this because if A prime and A double prime are two such
extensions, individually, they don't have A turn-symons invariant, but they have a relative
turn-symons invariant, because they have the same boundary by definition. So if I glue them
together with opposite orientation, we get a closed three-manifold. And then the connection on the
closed three-manifold has a number, a complex number, valued invariant. And we just say that A
prime is A double prime times this number. So now, although we have no natural basis in this
one-dimensional vector space, we've defined a one-dimensional vector space for every connection
on the surface. And thus, as the connection on the surface varies in the space of all such
connections, we get a line bundle L over the space of connections on sigma. Now, this line bundle
has an actual unitary connection. In fact, they're forgiven a path in the space of connections. So A1
and A2 are connections on sigma, on the surface sigma, and guide us a path between them in the
space of connections. That path gives us a connection on a certain three-manifold. The three-manifold
is sigma times the unit interval. And on sigma times the unit interval, we take the connection,
which is trivial in this direction, and which in this direction is A1 at this end and A2 at
this end and interpolates between them by the given path. So that's a connection on a particular
three-manifold. And now, if you tell me how to extend A1 over some three-manifold, then I know how
to extend A2 over some three-manifold, because the interpolation from A1 to A2, which we just
discussed, can be glued onto your interpolation. And that gives a unitary connection on this line
bundle. In other words, if you give me a trivialization of the fiber at A1, I've given you
a trivialization of the fiber at A2, which depends on this path. And we interpret that
as parallel transport of the trivialization here to a trivialization here along that path.
Now, let G hat be the gauge group of maps of this surface into G. Then, G hat acts on the space of
connection along sigma. And with a small effort that actually requires a slight elaboration of
what I've said, the G hat action lifts to an action on this line bundle preserving the connection.
Now, we have a projection from the space of connections to connections modular gauge transformations.
We can ask whether the line bundle with connection descends and they don't. The standard criteria
are in debate. If you take a little loop downstairs and lift it to a loop upstairs,
the whole anomaly around the loop will depend on the left. And therefore, there's no way to make
these things descends. But if we restrict ourselves to fault connections, the space of
fault connections on sigma, then by elementary considerations, you see that this line bundle
and connection do descend to a line bundle and connection over the space of fault connections
divided by gauge transformations. And that was the modular space of fault connections
on the surface, which I indicated earlier was going to enter.
So, we get a line bundle with connection over the space of fault connections on sigma.
Its curvature can be computed in an elementary fashion and is the standard sympathetic structure
which was first provided to gauge theories by Atiyah and Bat in a paper that Karen Owen
Beck mentioned is the standard sympathetic structure on this manifold.
Now, these things have been studied in the past in other methods. And in particular,
this line bundle and connection in special cases are usually constructed by picking a
complex structure on sigma and using algebraic geometry. If you pick a complex structure on
sigma, so that sigma is a complex Riemann surface, then by the Nassimchen-Sachadri theorem,
this modular space is a modular space of holomorphic bundles on sigma.
And then one has the determinant line bundle with its racing or Quillen metric,
and its curvature as computed by Quillen is precisely the same curvature as this thing.
So, there's a holomorphic construction in special cases like the unitary group
or for any group for special values of K, there's a holomorphic construction
of this line bundle that depends on picking a complex structure on sigma.
What we've achieved by the construction I've given is that we've given a purely topological
construction. It doesn't depend on any complex structure, the mapping class group acts in a
fashion which is visible essentially. And at the same time, we've related the construction to
three manifolds. What we've achieved is actually what Karlsson and Surya call pre-quantization
in this problem. We've constructed what is called the pre-quantum line bundle, and we've constructed
it in a way that doesn't break this topological invariance of the problem. And you see the
construction was naturally related to thinking of it in relation to three manifolds, which is
what we want because we wanted it a three-dimensional problem. Now, going back to the original question
I raised of what is the term Simons and Barian i of a, if a is a connection on a three manifold
with boundary, well, we see that total logically, it makes sense as a section of this line bundle
that we introduced, or more exactly a vector in the appropriate fiber of that line bundle, because
any trivialization of the line bundle, which is an extension, a bounding three manifold and
extension of the connection, enables us to make sense of that thing as a number.
So, this is pre-quantization in this situation. Now, not only have we pre-quantized, that is,
we've constructed the appropriate line bundle over the right modular space, which has the right
unitary connection and the right curvature, and without breaking any of the symmetries of the
problem, but we're in a very good situation because this modular space is the sympathetic
quotient of an affine space. The affine space is the space of connections, and you see, we took
two steps, we restricted to five connections and we divided by the gauge group. And although I want
to explain it, those compound steps, mathematicians call them the sympathetic quotient, and for
physicists, they go back to Newton's use of symmetries to reduce a problem in mechanics.
But anyway, this rather complicated modular space of fault connections were seeing it in relation
to an affine space A with a group action. And this relation, of course, between the two,
is what was exploited by Atea and Bach to compute the chronology of this modular space.
But here, we will be using the same relation in a different way that's appropriate to this
particular quantum field theory. Now, we want to quantize, and I won't have time to explain
quantization in as much detail as I gave for pre-quantization, but quantization means associating
a hybrid space H, which should be chronically associated with the data, and the data are a
modular space and a line bundle with connection. But these data were canonically determined by
the surface sigma as we saw. So we will really be canonically associating a hybrid space with
the surface sigma. Now, what quantization means in general is a long story, but if there were a
natural complex structure J on this mod's life space M, obeying certain conditions, most importantly,
that the symplectic structure, the curvature of this connection, should be of type 1, 1,
so that the line bundle would get a natural homomorphic structure. And in addition, the
symplectic structure should be positive relative to that complex structure. If there were a natural
complex structure, then the quantum hybrid space would be, you see, if we had such a
complex structure, then our mod's life space we take as a complex manifold, and the conditions
mean that the line bundle is a homomorphic line bundle, and that level K, we would take the kth
power of that line bundle and take its homomorphic sections. And that would be our hybrid space for
the level K theory with this gauge group and associated with this surface sigma.
Well, there isn't a natural complex structure on M, but for every choice of complex structure
on this underlying surface sigma, we have a hydrogen decomposition of cohomology. You see,
the tangent space for this mod's life space is the Durand cohomology of sigma with values in a twisted
bundle, and if we complexify it, then it has a hydrogen decomposition. And that hydrogen
decomposition is really, then, a complex structure on this mod's life space. In fact, it's precisely
the complex structure predicted by the Narsimhan-Sashadri theorem. And I will call it by the same
name J. So for every complex structure J on the surface, we get a complex structure J on this
mod's life space, and thus, by the definition on the last transparency. For every complex
structure J, we can make this definition, but if J is not natural, then neither is curly H.
So we have a definition of curly H, but it depended on J, so I'll call it curly H sub J.
And because of the J dependence, well, this situation to begin with is fibred over the
space of all complex structures on sigma, but it trivially reduces to the space of complex
structures up to isotope, or in other words, to take more space. So we really have a situation
that's fibred over take more space. We have this family of hybrid spaces fibred over take more space.
Actually, without mentioning it, I started to assume a transparency or two ago that this
Bob, I didn't prove that the hajji composition gave a complex structure. That really, at that
point, was assuming the case of a compact group. For other classes of E groups, we'd get something,
but not quite this. So we're now assuming for the moment that we're dealing with a compact group.
Now, we wanted a single Hilbert space, and we have a family of them. And of course, to get back to
the situation of a single Hilbert space, what we wanted is a natural fault connection on this bundle.
Such a fault connection, since the base take more space is contractible,
such a fault connection would give us a natural identification of the fibres.
Such a connection can be explicitly and rigorously constructed,
as I did along these lines with x, y and del Piatra, using two facts.
The first fact is that if we were quantizing an affine space, such a
fact connection exists because of the Stone von Neumann theorem on the unique representation
of the Heisenberg group. And physicists think of this fact connection as the infinitesimal
generator of what we call bugle-ruboff transformations. And then one can push down
from an affine space to a sympathetic portion by restricting to the G invariant subspace.
Now, for finite-dimensional affine spaces, these two facts will give the result a priori.
Here, the affine space is infinitesimensional, only the sympathetic portion is finite-dimensional.
So what one has to do is to take the formulas which would be valid a priori
in the finite-dimensional case, and do a little bit of geometry to verify them, and in fact,
modify them slightly, so that they make sense in this case for only downstairs. You have a finite
dimensional story. Now, the fact connection one gets this way, or I've written it in the plural
because there were different groups and levels. These fact connections, since the mapping class
group acts here, one really gets representations of the mapping class group, and as was first
perceived by Tsuchiya and Kanya in a work that was part of what made possible the Sol developments,
these are generalizations of the Jones representations of the braid group.
To get precisely the Jones representations, you would take sigma, the surface, to have
genus zero, and you would have to include knots and mark points in a way that I haven't indicated.
Moreover, the equations that define this fact connection are the generalizations to genus G
of the Keynesian examological equation, which we've heard so much about in so many different
talks at this Congress, starting with Jim Bo's talk explaining part of the work of
Drinfed, and including unexpected applications to number theory that were mentioned in one of
the primary addresses yesterday. Now, this construction of this particular fact connection
for Kanpa G has been obtained in other ways, where the original results came from conformal
field theory about six years ago by Konishnikin, Zymolchikov, and Genozov, and Eguchi, and Ugari
some years later in genus one. And these authors were studying the, well, what's sometimes called
the Westimino Novikov-Witton model of conformal field theory. And then these constructions were
formatted rigorously at an arbitrary genus by Tsuchiya at all, Tsuchiya talked about it yesterday,
and there's a simple argument, well, there's a simple sketch of an argument by Siegel in the
Swansea proceedings from two years ago. Also, it's possible to construct this connection by pure
algebraic geometry, and this has been done by Hitchin and by Bellenson and Karzhin.
The construction I've indicated
is natural in relation to three dimensions, in the sense that it's the one that arises naturally
as the solution to a quantization of this pre-quantized syntactic manifold. And
it extends to other classes of gauge group, which we hope may also be the case for some of the other
approaches ultimately. In fact, with some minor, relatively minor modifications of what I've said,
it's possible to carry out a similar construction if G is a complex semi-simple e-group.
Now, perhaps I'll denote one transparency to a site regression. So far, there are no results
about this problem for other classes of e-group, which we'll like to study, and notably for non-compact
real forms, even in the simple case of SL2R. Now, in a very precise sense, which would take us far
afield to really explain, this subject is a generalization of representation theory, and from
that point of view, the facts I've stated aren't too surprising. So in representation, you know
well that compact groups are the easiest, followed by complex groups, and that the non-compact real
forms are an order of magnitude harder and difficult to study in a unified fashion. So I've
told you that again in this context. I had a transparency alluding to different approaches
for the compact groups, and the corresponding problem for the complex groups is definitely harder
and is much less well understood, but it is tractable. It's the next case after the compact
groups. It leads, of course, to infinite-dimensional Hilbert spaces, just as in representation
theory, where the unitary representations are infinite-dimensional. And the solution of this
problem for complex groups is related to compact groups, much as in the case of representation
theory. Since there are no results for the non-compact real forms, one doesn't know what will happen,
but either there's some reasonable way to solve this problem, which might well lead to some new
viewpoint in representation theory, or this problem might be affected with
more elaborate versions of the usual difficulties in representation theory.
Well, we now come to the deeper part of the story, and I wish to emphasize that what I've said up
until this point is very precise mathematically. In proceeding, we will have to base ourselves
for a while on the massive experience in theoretical physics in the last 40 years.
But at the very end, we will get back to the realm of, per se, rigorous mathematics as of our
period. So I might say, as a general rule, I'm explaining a particular quantum field theory,
and in this particular quantum field theory, the deeper results are based on the ideas that I
will indicate. But there's a similar statement that can be made about other quantum field theories
of geometrical interest. For instance, if one is interested in what was called by Conway and
Calbert as monster moonshine in the theory of the monster simplee group, the quantum field theory
explanation for it is based on the same Feynman-Pathensical that I'm about to tell you about,
together with the conformal field theory constructed by Frank Lepasky and Merman.
So in general, I'm about to tell you the aspect which Fadeev stressed in his
in his lecture on the opening day, the aspect of quantum field theory ideas,
which is perhaps most indigestible mathematically, but which usually leads to the deepest results.
So the heuristic motivation for this, well, we've made an association of Hilbert spaces with
surfaces by picking a gauge group on a level K and quantizing. And this association is somewhat
analogous to the association of a surface with its, let's say, complex co-amology,
first co-amology. In each case, a diffe morphism of surfaces induces some map on these spaces.
And in the case of co-amology, if you pick a bounding three manifold, that actually determines
a Lagrangian subspace in the first co-amology group, namely the subspace of things that extend
over the three manifold. And you may ask whether there's some analog here.
A surface is sitting there with its H1, but if you give a three manifold,
suddenly that determines a subspace, a preferred subspace of H1. You can ask what's the analog here.
And now, just for fun, let's guess what it might be. Of course, I'll make a slightly biased guess.
If for every connection on sigma, we had a natural extension a prime over m. So we're given a three
manifold sigma, and we're given a surface sigma, and we constructed a Hilbert space by quantizing
the space of connections on sigma. And if for every connection on sigma, we knew how to extend it over m.
So if every connection had a natural extension, then since an extended connection has an
a churned Simon's invariant, not as a number, but as a vector in some line, then if we had a
natural extension of every connection, then we could define a natural section of this line bundle
we've been talking about. Well, there's no natural way to extend connections. In fact,
there isn't even a continuous engaged invariant way to extend connections.
But in what many regard us as greatest insight, Richard Feynman taught us
more than 40 years ago what to do. Since there isn't a natural extension, we average over extensions.
And every extension determines some vector in the corresponding line. So the average
over connections is a vector in the line. And as the boundary data vary,
so we consider for a given connection on the surface, all its extensions. And averaging
over extensions gives us a vector. And letting a vary, we get a section of that line bundle that
I've told you about. And this is Feynman's recipe for computing transition amplitudes.
Now, of course, I've made it sound like a possibly naive idea there wasn't a
natural extension, so we averaged over them, but a not very deep one. In Feynman's context,
the problem of how he wasn't set up in such a way as to make that sound so much like the obvious
thing to try. On the other hand, what Feynman was trying to do is similar to what we're trying to
do in understanding the Jones-Panon law. In those days, there was a theory called quantum
macho dynamics that was really a four-dimensional theory, but it was only formulated with three
dimensional symmetry. Now, Feynman was trying to exhibit quantum macho dynamics in an obviously
four-dimensionally inverted fashion. Here, we have a theory, the Jones-Panon
law and its generalizations, which is really a three-dimensional theory, but the known
formulations at most have two-dimensional symmetry, or even less in the original versions,
and we're trying to exhibit it as a three-dimensional theory. And we're simply following in
Feynman's enormously successful and influential footsteps.
Now, I'll in a bit try to make the notion that there is a way to average over this infinite
dimensional space of extensions. It sounds a little more palatable, but first let's indicate
a few of the consequences. Well, first of all, if you believe you can average over connections,
you can do it even on a three-manifold without boundary, or at least you can try to consider
the case where the boundary is empty. So, if we're given a closed three-manifold,
well, we consider the space of all connections, or really connections in modular gauge transformations,
one M, and we want to average over connections in modular gauge transformations.
Or more conveniently, we usually average over all connections,
including the Fadea of Popov ghosts, to account for the volume of the gauge group.
Anyway, we want to average over all connections, and now since we have a closed manifold,
the Chern-Siemann's invariant is really a number, so the answer is a number,
and it's a numerical invariant of the three-manifold.
Now, this is a very big integral, and maybe it's too big for one graduate student to do,
but we might have two graduate students. So, we split the problem into two pieces.
We take what's called a Higard splitting of the three-manifold. So, we have a three-manifold X
now, I've called it, regarded as a union of M and N. M and N are three-manifolds with a common
boundary with opposite orientation. So, they fit together to make a nice three-manifold X,
and we fix the boundary values of the connection on sigma, and we ask one student to integrate
over connections here, while the other student integrates over extensions here.
And one student gets one functional of the boundary data, and of course the other student
gets the other functional of the boundary data. And, of course, if we fix the boundary data and
integrate over all extensions, then we've integrated over everything except the values
of the connection on sigma, and maybe the student's advisor, and we should do at least
part of the work, we'll then do the final integral over that. So, the two students have
constructed these two functionals of boundary data, and then perhaps the advisor integrates
over the boundary data, and that final integral means that we finish the job and we have the
invariant of this three-manifold, but we've obtained that invariant by pairing two pieces,
one functional of boundary data obtained by one student and the other functional obtained by
the other student. Now, these two functionals were sections of our favorite line bundle,
so what we found is that while each three-manifold determines a vector in this space, or the other
one because of opposite orientation determines a vector in the dual, the pairing of the vector
in the dual vector is our desired three-manifold invariant. And therefore, we have learned that
we are dealing with invariants that are computable from e-guard splittings, and more general
considerations along these lines lead to a nice formula for the behavior under game surgery.
So, I haven't quite explicitly introduced not invariants, but not invariants are introduced
similarly by considering a three-manifold with knots and considering holonomies of connections
around those knots. And after formulating the problem for the not invariants, then one can push
a little farther on this formula by which we compute from e-guard splittings and get a formula
for the behavior under game surgery. And that formula is really what makes the theory computable,
because any two three-manifolds are related by game surgery. And for instance, if you want,
you can use game surgery to reduce anything you want to know about any three-manifold,
to knots in S3, or in some ways it's even simpler to reduce them to braids in S2 times S1.
Because if you get to the braids in S2 times S1, then you really have reduced this more general
picture to the original Jones representations of the braid group, essentially, and their
presence for higher representations in groups. And so ultimately, you get combinatorial formulas
based on game surgery. And these formulas have been adopted as the definition in combinatorial
approaches. Rajatikan lectured on the work that Rajatikan and Troyev did to rigorously justify
the combinatorial formula, you get this way, by checking the generators in relations of essentially
Kirby calculus in an elegant fashion that depends on the relations involving quantum groups.
Of course, the tool that they used, but the ingredients that come in and doing so are the
so-called quantum 6j symbols. And the quantum 6j symbols themselves have a natural representation
in three dimensions in terms of these path integrals, which again is related to the essential
properties. And as another side of what I mentioned earlier, when I noticed that we were getting the
condition exam logic of the question, which one knows is related to quantum groups. So different
ways of looking at this make different aspects of deriving quantum groups from quantum filter.
You see, I might remark that to physicists, quantum groups are rather funny things,
because you might say that the name quantum makes it sound like physics, and perhaps it does,
but what quantum is here being used in a rather loose sense? Quantum means that an algebra,
in this sense, quantum is being used to mean that an algebra which is commutative or co-commutative
is being deformed so that it doesn't have those properties anyway. But quantum mechanics is really
a little bit more specific than just deforming commutative algebras to non-commutative algebras.
Quantum mechanics really has to do with quantization of symplectic manifolds. The algebra
which is being deformed is the algebra of functions on a symplectic manifold, and it's deformed to
a non-commuting algebra of operators on Hilbert space. Quantum groups, as formulated so elegantly,
involve the deformations of a cross on manifold, but not of a symplectic manifold.
And as such, they're really a bit outside the conventional framework for quantum mechanics
and quantum field theory. If you wish to take the quantum group and reduce it to a more standard
object, which is quantization of symplectic manifolds, or once a complex structure is picked,
algebraic geometry, sections of line bundles over that modular space m sub j,
this much bigger story with the space of connections on the three-dimensional quantum field theory,
puts the quantum group in a framework that really is quantum mechanics and quantum theory.
Of course, the drawback is that we're in a much bigger picture, which is less obviously computable,
as so often happens in mathematics and physics, the more computable version, which is the quantum
group, doesn't exhibit all the symmetries which are exhibited in the three-dimensional story.
One should think of this as one of many instances where there is an invariant definition, which is
the definition involving quantum field theory on three manifolds, and there is a computable
definition, a manifestly computable definition that doesn't manifestly have all the symmetries,
which is the one that involves the reduction to quantum groups and the combinatorial approaches.
Now, I think I should spend the last few minutes to give you a favor of what path integrals are,
and here I shall be following, as I should have said at the beginning,
in the first steps of Albert Schwartz, who considered the Abelian version of this theory
many years ago in the 70s, writing it to Reiter-Meister Racing Retortion.
So, I want to say something which is mathematically precise about path integrals,
though it doesn't give the complete story, and it's a challenge to give the complete story.
So, what I'll tell you is, if you give a physicist, say it unseen, a quantum field theory
that was found behind a bush and has no particular redeeming virtues, I will tell you all that can
be said about it, that that path integral is based on general ideas. So, the only general
thing that you can say, in terms of really computing them, I mean. So, of course, even if you've
reduced an integral to quadrature and finite dimensions, you usually can't compute it,
and you look for some asymptotic expansions, and we will make an asymptotic expansion here,
which is an expansion in powers of 1 over k. So, the situation we're in is we have a big infinite
dimensional manifold and we're integrating something, and the same thing we're integrating
is the expansion of i times something else times k. So, the prototype for this problem,
I'm going to simplify it. So, we really have the gauge group, and we should worry about the ghosts,
the idea of proper of ghosts, but pretending they weren't there. The prototype is a finite
dimensional manifold with a measure and a Morse function. It doesn't have to be a Morse function,
in general, it's a larger class of functions. But let's think for simplicity of a smooth function
with isolated critical points, and then we have a real number, and then we want to compute this
integral. And, of course, we can't compute it in closed form. We can prove it exists,
but we can't compute it. But we can compute it in an asymptotic expansion in powers of 1 over 2.
And that's essentially classical. The asymptotics of such an integral is given by stationary phase.
In fact, if f were not a function, but had values in r mod 2 pi z, and t was an integer,
so there were no critical points, this would vanish exponentially for large t because of oscillations.
So, the failure to vanish exponentially due to oscillations comes because of critical
points where there aren't oscillations. The asymptotics are given by stationary phase.
If pi are the critical points, then this has a systematic expansion involving a sum over
critical points, where the leading term is the value of the integrand at the earth critical
points times a power of t that depends on the dimension, and then multiplied by a local expansion
determined by local data at the critical points. So, these are the coefficients here are local
invariants at the earth critical point. And, for instance, if near a given critical point you
make an expansion, so I pick some local coordinates and I want them to be adapted to the measure
so that d mu is dx1 up to dxn. And then, since it's a critical point, the function has its value,
and then the next term is a quadratic term involving the so-called Hessian.
Then, by studying the integral, the idealized integral, we find that the leading term is this
animal, and that animal involves the determinant of the Hessian, while this thing has a determinant
because of the existence of a measure here and the condition on the coordinates involves the
determinant of Hessian and involves the signature of that quadratic form. So, the leading contribution
here involves these nice invariants of the behavior near the critical point, and then
you can compute the higher order corrections involving local behavior near the critical points.
You need to, the only new thing you'll really need is you'll need to invert this
invertible matrix, and then the expansion can be described diagrammatically in terms of what
physicists call Feynman diagrams. Now, this can be imitated systematically in our problem,
in fact that's where they're called Feynman diagrams. Well, there's no problem with the
notion of a critical point. Fuller explained that a critical point of this functional is a
thought connection up to gauge transformation, and for a large class of three manifolds,
they'll be isolated. In general, we need to understand how to generalize the previous story,
which will involve certain integrals of measures that you'll construct. Well, what will happen in
fact is that if the critical point isn't isolated, this determinant isn't a number
but is naturally a measure on the space of critical points. So, after proper understanding
the finite dimensional story, you can imitate it here. There's no problem with the notion of a
critical point. There's of course no problem with the notion of the value of deterrence
Hyman's functional at a critical point. That's one of these standard invariants of a thought
connection. While the Hessian makes sense after including the ghosts, the Hessian is a certain
elliptic differential operator, which I call L. Well, then we need the determinant of L,
but that's essentially what Ray and Singer defined, and Schwartz interpreted in quantum
theory. So, the determinant of L is the Ray-Singer torsion, and then we also need the signature
of L. While L is a quadratic form in infinite dimensions, so has infinitely many positive
and negative eigenvalues. So, we need to define its signature, and we need to regularize that,
but Tia, Patode and Singer told us how to do that in the so-called eta invariant,
and in this problem the eta invariant is the right notion of the signature of L.
So, I've explained the leading contribution for large k to this path integral, so we've actually,
if you like, evaluated the path integral in the leading approximation of stationary phase,
and it involves invariants that are classical, namely the more recent of them were defined in
the early 70s, but they're still fairly sophisticated things like the torsion and the eta invariant.
And the corrections, which are only beginning to be systematically
investigated mathematically, involve what physicists call Feynman diagrams.
My student, Droll-Born-Altin, has worked at, rather precisely, the through-loop
correction to the non-invariant, and has shown that it's equal to the, again, classical non-invariant,
which is the derivative of the Jones-Ponyl at q equals 1, as was the second derivative, right,
as was expected. So, then the story is that we can carry out the Hamiltonian picture more or
less rigorously, getting the Jones representations and their generalizations. The deeper side of
the story is certainly the Hamiltonian picture, which is a challenge, perhaps, to understand it
comprehensively. In perturbation theory, it leads, in leading approximation, to these classical
but slightly subtle invariants with a systematic prescription for generalizing them and computing
moral-library corrections, perhaps rather as in some fashion, which, in some, perhaps, rather
fashion, in the province, primarily of experts, I certainly couldn't claim to grasp it,
a block explained in the first lecture some generalizations of more classical invariants.
Thank you.
Yes. Thank you very much, Professor Burton, and the inform of seminar is finished. Thank you for
your attention.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Now, the Professor Fatieff will speak on the work of Whitten for Michael Atia.
It's a duty of the Chairman of Fields Committee to ask speakers for that session. So, as soon as
become clear that Whitten got medal, I asked Atia, approached Atia, asking to speak for him.
I wanted kind of cover up from a mathematician in the very philosophical domain to explain to you
why it was so natural to give a Fields medal to a mathematical physicist. And Atia was very
enthusiastic in this, but he told me that, unfortunately, he cannot come to Tokyo in the
end of August. So, we decided on the following way, that he will send me some text, and I will use it
in describing of Whitten work at this session. So, I had got this text, and I will read you some
excerpts out of it, but it contains no formulas at all. So, just to read it, maybe it will be a
little bit too dull, you have seen transparencies before. So, in a way, it will be a mixture of
Atia's text and some general comments, which I will give to you myself, and some explanations.
So, mathematical physics must be considered as a legitimate, it's my belief, must be considered
as a legitimate part of mathematics. It was always stimulating, it was always a source of
stimulus and inspiration for more theoretical branches of mathematics, and we know very many
classical examples. But until recent time, it was stimulating mostly analysis, or in general,
or part of analysis, such like partial differential equations, especially non-linear equations,
nowadays, and so on and so forth. We could call it classical mathematical physics, but in more
recent time, we witnessed development, another type of mathematical physics, which could be
in contradiction with previous one called quantum mathematical physics. And this mathematical physics
differs mainly, also differs from classical mathematical physics in the use of different
domains of mathematics in it, or in other words, also stimulating different parts of
classical mathematics. Algebra, geometry, topology, algebraic geometry, complex analysis, all these
traditional fields of mathematics now come to modern mathematical physics. And vice versa,
mathematical physics problems arising there in quantum mathematical physics are sources
of new problems for this part of theoretical mathematics. And now I read first citation from
Atiyah. In all this large and exciting field, which involves many of leading physicists and
mathematicians in the world, Edward Whitten stands out clearly as the most influential
and dominating figure. Although he is definitely a physicist, here I would add mathematical
physicist. His command of mathematics is rivaled by few mathematicians, and his ability to interpret
physical ideas in mathematical form is quite unique. Time and again, he has surprised the
mathematical community by brilliant application of physical insight leading to new and deep
mathematical theorems. Now in Atiyah's text, there is a liberation on this general statement,
and usually the reference is to an important tool of modern theoretical and mathematical physics,
which is called Feynman integral. Feynman integral allows us to write down explicit
in quotation marks solution of very complicated problems arising in quantum field theory,
quantum mechanics, and so on. Quotation marks means that this tool is still heuristic and not
not made rigorous, rigorous to the standards which are supposed to be used now. They would
certainly satisfy, I would think, more mathematicians in previous century, but or even such people
like Eli Cartan, but without more standards of, more high standards of rigor, they are still
non-rigorous, of course. On the other hand, as I'll try to explain with the help of Atiyah also,
it's really a very important tool to find out new mathematical theorems.
So the ingredient in the Feynman integral is a functional of some fields. Fields means functions
on the some manifold domain, so functions could be not necessary functions, but sections of the
bundle and so on, so could have geometrical origin. And this function is called action,
and that function x to the i, where i squared minus y times action is Feynman functional. And the
Feynman integral is kind of averaging over, of this functional over all possible fields
in consideration. It's significant value that integral over measure, of course not measure,
is strict extent. This local which is a product over all points in the domain or manifold
of differentials of these fields, so to say. So the answer is a number, of course, depending on
what problem we have in consideration. For instance, we have a domain, the boundary,
or we have some asymptotic conditions. Then, so there are some which characterize the
domain of this geometrical object, where every over the function would be also functional of this
and so quite a rich object. So the example, well, of course physicists after Feynman,
after 48, use it mostly for their own needs. And then the final aid was action in the
statistical theory of mechanics, some particular Hamiltonian system. But in more general use,
which gradually developed in this quantum mathematical physics and especially by the
influence of very modern things there, in particular what's called Sting theory,
people began to use more geometrical objects in these actions and fields. So examples of possible
fields could be loops or connections. It's called Young wheels field in physics or matrix.
In physics it would be most useful in the case of gravity and so on and so forth.
So Witten have shown a very
ingenious way of using functional integral to produce purely mathematical theorems.
Now I cite from here in his paper on supersymmetry and Morse theory,
yes excuse me, Witten's paper on supersymmetry and Morse theory is obligatory reading for
geometries interested in understanding modern quantum field theory. It also contains a brilliant
proof of classical Morse inequalities relating critical points to homology. The main point
is that homology is defined via Hodge harmonic forms. So the Laplacian will play a role of the
Schrodinger operator of quantum mechanics and you can write down Feynman integral using this
action.
