Woo! Woo! Woo! Woo! Woo! Woo! Woo! Woo! Woo! Woo! Woo!
All right, boy. Oh boy. All right, where did we start here?
Let's pre-establish how much of a fan I am of the first film.
A couple years ago, I actually was driving through Oklahoma and I had the opportunity and visited
Wakita, the actual town from the first film. There's a memorabilia store there.
There's a storefront that has props from the movie that was actually donated by Bill Paxton,
a man who was revered as being one of the nicest men in Hollywood. And even still today,
when I see a film with him, I just think how much he's missed. And I wish you were still in films.
Yeah. We're going to get into this film. We're going to get into Twisters, the 2024 remake.
That's what it is. Let's call it what it is. It is a remake. It is not a sequel.
If it were a sequel, you wouldn't have these younger characters using the device of Dorothy at
the offset of the film and the opening scene. And there's no mention in the dialogue that this is
from particular people that they knew that developed Dorothy. It has no connection to
characters from the first film implementing that into this remake. Alright, let's talk about this
for a second. Alright, the first film has often been referred to as a dumb film. Wait, no, wait, why?
I resent that statement. I resent that comment. That movie has intelligently written characters
with backstory that Twisters does not have. The level of well rounded characters cannot be outmatched
by the writing in Twisters. Look, I may have walked out, but at least I showed up in the first
place. You never had the slightest idea of that commitment, but being married means like stability
and sportiveness. Twister is a greatly acted film by Paxton, Hunt and all the other tertiary characters
and actors that are involved in the movie. It's beautifully shot. It has iconic cinematography
that wasn't done before in that way. I mean, that was something that was interesting about the film
is that movies had never shown tornadoes in that way before. Yeah, you have Wizard of Oz showing
to it, but this is like that was a static shot and the Twister was in the background and it's not a
main antagonist in the film like this one. Ten Commandments would be the other cinematic example
that got the closest to a tornado slash whirlwind, but it's made of fire, so not really. Among other
props I want to give Twister is Mark Mancina's score is fucking glorious. That score is in circulation
and has been for years at this point for me and it's directed terrifically well. The visual effects,
a lot of them, they still hold up. The only one that really doesn't is when Jonas's car gets
flung into the air in the third act and it comes down, which is a funny sound effect that they
decided to use. You're going to make the villain's death a comedic beat. All right, fine. And then
it's like the, it didn't look like it belonged, didn't blend well with the environment and the
Twister. That one is the did not age well. Okay, let's acknowledge some things that are weaknesses
in the first film. Okay, one of them is the simplicity of labeling Jonas, played by Carrie
Elwes, as a corporate shill and he's a bad guy because he's in it for the money. He's a corporate,
corporate kiss butt, man. Corporate kiss butt, man. So he wasn't that much a villain. Who is the
villain in Twister? It is the tornado. There is a huge examination that needs to be looked into
when it comes to the antagonists of both the original and the sequel. I keep saying sequel.
It's not a fucking sequel. It's a remake. Calm down, crazy. Do the tornadoes work as antagonists
in Twisters? I say no. Part of the reason is the visual effects of how they animate them is they
don't stand out in a defined way. They kind of intermix and blend in with the sky and the grayness
around the clouds and all that. With Twister, they had defined tornadoes. They were different colors,
especially in the third act. You had the EF5. You had the definition and the dimensions defined
of how big this thing is. The original treats them as if they're these serial killers. They never
used the term monster and all that stuff, but they might as well. I mean, even Paxton said that if
he were to do a sequel, which by the way, it's a shame that that never happened. 10 years ago,
we could have had a sequel that involved Paxton and it's a shame that that never happened.
Yeah, I always thought there was a kind of a Jaws version of that movie, a little bit of a darker,
more even more suspenseful version. And Helen and I, I think we'd have to have a teenage daughter
who's run off with a college guy and they're out storm chasing. I don't know. I have to do something.
He possibly could have directed it as well. When Paxton directed Frailty, he showed how
gothic and dark he can get. And he could have brought that essence to a Twister sequel,
which would have been probably fantastic. Oh, that would have the what ifs of life. The original
had this anticipation prior to leading up to the tornadoes appearing. They were these killers
in waiting coming out and you don't know like a slasher film. There's a buildup. There's a suspense
that the original had. There's none of that here in Twisters and it's a shame and it's a letdown
and they should have done that differently. Damn. Another aspect that makes them less
characters is that there aren't animal sounds enough. Apparently, the director says that they
use different kind of animal sounds. And I think his line that he said in the interview was,
I hope that you can hear them. So it was wolves seals and it was horses. Hopefully people feel
it in some visceral way that this tornado has a voice. You hoped as a chance that audiences
will pick up on the sound effects that are hidden underneath all the wind and the yelling and vehicles
growling, etc. Yeah, speaking of growling. It showed this menacing persona that the Twisters had.
I didn't get any of that here. The tornadoes came off as this indifferent occurrence that
had no presence. It was just this thing that was happening in the background.
Part of it had to do with the way it was shot. They weren't shot in a way as if they were characters.
They were just this, oh, this thing that's happening on the periphery and the characters
are chasing after them. I didn't get it. I didn't feel it. The director Lee Isaac Chung does a great
job at pacing. The film is not slow. It doesn't overstay its welcome. I think it's under two
hours. The film moves very well. He did a great job when it comes to that. Okay, so what is this
remake about? Structure is very similar to the first film, to the original. There you go.
Twisters is the meeting of two sides of the same coin. One is a thrill seeking team led by
Glenn Piles Tyler and the other is Storm Stoppers led by Daisy Edgar Jones Kate, who wants to use
polymers to dispel the supercell's activity and wants to save small towns in Tornado Alley.
So let's look at that for a second. Coming up with the idea of using sodium polycarbonate to
dispel a tornado, I really think is a creative idea. Some people are going to call it stupid.
Like they accused the original being, which I mean, the sensors that go up in the original,
basically they just put on cut up pieces of garbage onto the top of them and expected them to suddenly
that makes them fly. You're just putting an extra weight on top of them that has no aerodynamics to
it whatsoever. They're just shards of metal. Anyway, that part is silly in execution. So the
thought of using polymers to stop a tornado, I think is a great concept. It's something that
advances the ideas of the original kudos to that person who came up with that idea. Yes. Yes. Yes.
When it comes to Glenn Powell, listen, I like that guy, but it's not that interesting to watch him
hooting and hollering for the beginning scenes that he's involved in, which he does. He does that
quite a bit and it becomes kind of irksome for him to be hooting and hollering.
This is something I do want to bring up since I bring up music right there.
There's a contrast here when it comes to the tonality that the music has in the original.
What is it? Okay. So whenever there's sourced music, it was always like rock and roll,
80s, 90s hair metal, squealing guitars in the midst of also Mancina's traditionally beautiful
epic anthemic score with themes. Imagine that people, a movie with themes that you can actually hum.
Yeah, I can whistle the theme from Twister. I can whistle that. Can, can, okay, please,
anyone tell me, please? Anyone offer? Is there a theme in Twisters that you can hum,
that you can whistle? Not talking about the, ain't no hooping all the way home. Not that song,
not talking about the soundtrack, the songs from the movie. I'm talking about the score.
Please let me know. Can we bring that back, by the way? Can we bring back themes to films? Can,
can you composers, please do beautiful scores again? I'll try. So Glenn Powell as Tyler,
he's essentially playing Hangman from Top Gun 2, just with a cowboy hat this time.
There's not a lot of dynamism to his performance. He's doing a lot of grinning and smiling.
Yeah, he has a tip of the cap. Okay, girl. Okay, Kate. Hi, Kate.
It's that type of stuff. And first of all, he doesn't have an arc. There's no arc. He's the
same throughout the film. It's just that Powell grin and good for him. The thing that I encourage
and wish he would have is the, this nuance in between his lines. And I, you know, he showed
some dynamism in Hitman. And I appreciated his performance in that. When it comes to
summer blockbusters and that type of stuff, he's really going to have to grow. And hopefully with
Top Gun 3, which I have a theory, I have a sense that it's going to place him as the lead. And
crews, they're going to have a storyline together. And I'm up for that. When it comes to him in
Twisters, it's just, he doesn't have the dynamism of a performance that say Bill Paxton did in the
original. Paxton played so many different shades of that character in a combination with the writing
and the situations that play out. When you compare Paxton and Powell, I'm sorry, but Powell has not
matched near the likability and the idiosyncrasies, the charm and charisma that Paxton had. Yes,
he had the everyday man looks, but that's the point. That's part of the appeal of Paxton
of what he had. I mean, he started off as a quirky character actor,
thick weed, and then came in to starring in a hundred plus million dollar
summer blockbuster from Steven Spielberg produced by him. He fucking owned that film. He and Hunt
did such a great job. It's a shame that he didn't get to star in a lot of other films. One underrated
movie that I loved as a kid, that he did star in more while he co-started is Mighty Joe Young.
He's really fun. And then I wanted to, I wanted to be that character too. And it didn't hurt that
he got to kiss Charlie Stern, you know, that was as a kid. That was certainly an aspiration.
Paxton was vulnerable. He was stoic. He was sometimes even quirky. And he had, you remember
his character, he's called the extreme. Like he has this backstory of possibly being this drunk,
you know, and they met him as Philip Seymour Hoffman's character Dusty. He talks about seeing
him throw a Jack Daniels bottle into a twister and he's naked. I mean, that's, that implies that,
okay, maybe there's a reason why he got out of this group because he was a little bit too wild.
And they don't play into that heaviness because there's already the heaviness of Joe Helen Hunt's
character having the trauma from her past with her dad dying from a twister. Point is Bill
Paxton had more to play with. Glenn Powell has little to nothing. He's a YouTuber who likes to
Oh, Kate. Oh, she's hot. Oh, she's smart. I gotta go after her. Yeah. It's like,
yeah, he stalks her. He just shows up to Kate's mom's barn uninvited. He explains away how he knew
she was there. I heard about this incident that happened years ago when your friends died.
Oh, so he had to look into it even further then. I mean, hey, when you look like Powell,
you can get away with stuff like that, stalker tendencies. Don't ignore me. Because Tyler is
a thrill seeker and doesn't have any scientific ambitions, the scenes where we're watching him
chase after tornadoes are not as interesting. I'm going to shoot up some fireworks. Okay,
that's cool for like one scene. Okay, the coolest thing about that character, though, that I love
that they did underneath the truck side skirts that he could drill into the ground when the
tornado was coming through their path. I thought that idea was fantastic. And it actually brought
about my favorite moments in the film. And it doesn't involve a tornado. We'll get to that.
Daisy Edgar Jones, she's fine. She she's not a standout. She's not a standout like how Helen Hunt
was. Hunt came from working on TV and then was bolstered by a twister into a list. And then
soon afterwards won an Academy Award for as good as it gets. Twisters showed that she had
she had the wildness. She had the charisma on screen. She had an everyday woman quality,
but yet was beautiful and had a feistiness wasn't trying to overpower her team trying to show oh,
I'm better than you because I'm a woman didn't have that shit. There's a little bit of that here.
And I don't know if you guys noticed the ones who have seen this film, but there is a beat in
twisters that shows there's a little bit of neo feminism going on here. Who's the standout? Is
there a standout actor in twisters? Yes. And it was a surprise to me. I think it's Anthony Ramos.
He brings nuance to the scenes that he's in that surprised me. He brought like a gravitas and a
naturalism to his performance that I really appreciate it. He's very good in the film. Yeah,
so one of the issues with twisters is that it doesn't have the rich history that Joe and Bill
had in the first film. You believed it. I love the texture. Tyler and Kate are meeting up for the
first time ever. So they don't have a past that they can share. Even if they didn't have a past,
Tyler and Kate, what you could have done was create a harder animosity between them. As it is,
the movie is just like dislike for each other and a little bit of banter back and forth and
oh, she gives him a comeback to something that was said to her and he just, that was good.
That's passable. It's not as interesting as it could have been though. You really want to show
a little bit. I mean, similar to what happens in his own film earlier this year with anyone,
but you, they actively dislike each other and that's a more fun dynamic to watch.
So you could have brought a little bit of that to twister. Come on, come on guys. It's just
like competitive verbal sparring. That's all it is. And it only lasts for like a third of the film
and it's over. Then they're buddy, buddy afterwards. Their chemistry is fine. It's the writing that's
lacking to provide moments that in which they could play out that chemistry. It's just not
enough. You needed more, you needed a little more flirtation, some sensuality between those
characters. It's kind of platonic. Anyone but you did it well. That's what made that film sizzle.
Paxton and Hunt in Twister got their asses handed to them. Powell and Edgar Jones,
they walk through this film squeaky clean most of the way to the point where they could have
done an Abercrombie and Fitch commercial in between shots. They needed to get down and dirty,
muddy, dusty, cuts and scrapes. Not enough happened here, okay? As it comes to cinematography,
that's another story. There are shots in the film that are composed oddly. The tornado is kind of
on this side of the frame and you have the road that's in the middle. It's kind of some of that
is awkward. Some compositions, the framing is too close in some instances. I've talked about how
action sequencers are filmed too closely when I talked about the Fall Guy and it sometimes happens
here where the truck is the cameras at a low angle outside of the truck, nearly underneath it and
the tornado is in the background. We're too close to the truck. The truck is taking up so much of
the frame you're not seeing enough of the space where the tornado is and what's around it. You
didn't have that problem in the original. Shots in the film that are too close to vehicles, too close
to people's faces, too close to the tornadoes. Where are the wide vistas in the iconic cinematography
that the original had? People that didn't grow up with the original are going to enjoy Twisters. At
this point the film is a success at the box office and that's good. The movie's okay. I don't think
I want to watch this movie again. I can watch the original back to back and not get bored with it.
Why? It's the chemistry. It's the actors in the film. It's the banter. It's the mood, the environment,
the score, the direction. It's top notch summer blockbuster filmmaking. You're damn right. I'm
gonna get to the climax of the film. The third act involves a town about to be hit by a giant
tornado. Kate and Tyler go to try and help people. Okay. I'll look past how a metal beam falls
onto Powell's legs and all he gets from it is a light limp. Okay. The thing that made me realize
how egregious the way that it plays out is because, let's look at this for a second,
right as they're hiding out in the movie theater in town to get away from the storm,
Kate decides on her own to run out to Tyler's truck and steal it. She doesn't say,
hey Tyler, anyone? Hello? I need to do this. Tyler, you can't walk. No, he can because he's
got a light limp. So he could have gone with her. No, she steals his truck and essentially the entire
climax plays out on her own, which is really uninteresting because she has no one to interact
with. Meanwhile, Powell's Tyler is standing by the double doors of the movie theater as the rain
and wind crash against his face and he's, as he's being pulled back as my friends at Hard Cut would
say, the extreme cucking of your main character. He gets to save like one person, but you just don't
get to participate in the fulfillment of all this work that you've been doing with the main
character of Kate. No, she gets to steal the truck, not tell him about it and she knows all the gizmos
and the gadgets in the truck. She struggles a little bit like apparently maybe they don't open,
right? This is how I think they should have done this. You have Powell go with her.
So they can work together. Why? Because you need the leads of your movie to be together in the third
act of the action sequence, the climax of the movie. You need someone to open the barrels in the
back for the polymers to get released because the remote doesn't work anymore. That's why you
need a second person. They didn't do that. No, it's Kate on her own. Sisters are doing it for
themselves. I'm going to do it myself. I'm not going to tell anyone where I'm going. No. And I
don't care that they're now friends. Okay. Friends don't do that. Friends tell each other things,
especially when it involves the other person's property. And everyone comes running. Oh, that
was a close one. Oh, you, you did it. You did it, Kate. Good job. You're so awesome. You gave a
substandard, less effective third act. The ending, the very last scene when they're at, you know,
they've saved the day. Well, Kate saved the day. Tyler didn't do shit. When they're at the airport,
Kate's going back to New York to look at all this data and look at what we can do now to
tornadoes and all that. Great. Tyler is about to let her go, but he has a hesitation. He's in
his truck and he's about to leave. There's a parking attendant at the airport that tells him to
fuck off, get out of here. He activates the augurs and it drills into the concrete. I
love this moment. I think it's the best moment in the film. It's badass. It's romantic. It's,
it's fantastic writing. It's the best fucking scene in the movie. And it didn't involve
any twisters. That's what's unfortunate about that. The best moment of the film had to occur in
at the very last scene. I think you guys needed to do some rewrites here and the talks of that kiss
that they originally had a kiss and they did film it. There's footage of it. Okay. It kind of
doesn't matter if they kissed or not because of all the other stuff that I explained. They don't
delve into enough of the chemistry between them with the scenes that are written for them. The
fact that that was left off the table is a symptom of the underdeveloped relationship that they had.
Yes, they could have done both. You have the kiss and after the kiss, the sirens go off and they see...
There's, there's another twister. We gotta go chase. Let's do it, babe. Oh, it's, it's not important.
It's not, it's not about them kissing. It's about the shared love of the chase of the storm.
Yeah, I get it. You can do more than one thing, guys. Audiences are not that slow. We can still
pick up on the subtext of things, of visual conveyances, and we can also
see the hero kissing the girl. Yeah, that can happen too. The thing that I can say that's
an upside to the way that this one came out is that I'm grateful that this version of it exists.
One of the reasons that pushed me to want to go see it is this headline I read that the director
said he's not going to put any climate change messaging into the film, and that actually pushed
me to the point of wanting to go see the film. Other than that, I'm going to go watch the first
one probably. It's not the first one. It's the original. It's not a sequel, guys. I don't agree
with that. If you can convince me that Twisters is a sequel to the original, by all means.
But I don't see any proof so far. And that's it. I'll just leave it at that. Man, the 90s were a
different time. They were so much better.
