This might be a long video.
You never know.
And I got a massive onslaught of people asking me about Dr. Amon Hillman, as if I didn't
know about a fellow Greek translator.
I've been translating ancient Pali a lot longer than that, used to be a Russian translator.
Russian-English translator, lived in Soviet Russia and post-Soviet Russia.
Really good.
Doesn't pay anything.
I've written nine books and an enormous amount of articles and a tremendous amount of translations,
most of which, by the way, are free in the description below.
So I'd like to discuss Amon Hillman, but a significant portion of this video is about
a lot of parallels.
It's the same things I've been encountering.
And of course, I'm heavily tattooed and bald, and it turns out he is, too.
That's probably where the similarities kind of end, not really, but I know a lot of people
want me to comment on Hillman's translation of specific passages and the interview that
he actually did with another person I want name.
It was muted like every five seconds.
I noticed in the comments people were really upset over the fact of the terms he was discussing
in the Greek, specifically in Matthew 26, 46 through 56, and Mark 1451, and some other
places.
They were really upset because the words that were being used, I mean, the whole video
was like bleep, bleep, bleep, bleep, bleep, and the guy that's actually interviewing
Dr. Amon Hillman.
He was interrupting Hillman like every five seconds, and that really upset people.
But I can see through all of that, but that's not what this video is about, but I mean,
that really upset a lot of people.
He just wanted to get his point across.
It was very unfortunate that he was interrupted so much.
He's correct in what he says, Hillman, that, of course, Hebrew was not a living language
at the time of the historical Jesus, rather Greek and Aramaic, and something that I've
literally been pounding the table about for decades, literally decades, and I've been
debating these so-called Buddhist scholars for decades, literally.
And Dr. Hillman is a quote that he says that I've been saying for decades.
He says, my loyalty is to the texts and to the actual scriptures themselves.
What do they actually say?
If you actually brush away the giant mound of manure that's been deposited upon these
by clergy and religious nonsense, and religious nonsense 2.0, and religious nonsense 3.0,
and get back to the original, what does it actually say?
And they're saying the same things about him, his mannerisms.
He could tell his mind was off in another dimension, and I do that too, especially translating
ancient Pali is, I mean, it's been a dead language for over 2,000 years.
I mean, this is some tough stuff.
My college professors, I was taking college classes while I was in high school, I'd go
to high school and get off, and three days a week I'd go down and meet with the professors.
They said it was a prodigy on language, and stuff doesn't bring you any glamour, and it
certainly doesn't bring you any money, but if you've got a really, really good gift for
it, and you have a great love of wisdom, and what I can tell from Dr. Hillman he does as
well, he mentions at the end of the interview, and I've been on his YouTube page, and I've
read through part of his book, there's only one book of his that I know about, and there's
some other odd articles out there, but I mean, he's interested, you know, I said deep love
of what did the actual texts say, and when you get to that, it's absolutely nothing that
passes itself off for what exists today.
I should have brought that stamp in, he was on the stamp of India, his son was my friend
of mine, Dr. Ramapiekumraswamy, he was the son of Anand Kichishkumraswamy, who knew twenty-seven
languages, wrote more books than you could dare imagine, countless thousands of articles,
and one of the best quotes about original Buddhism, and the term Buddhism is a rather
modern invention, he says, Buddhism today is most famous, for everything it originally
never taught, and the clergy in the nonsense, like either religious manure that's been
heaped upon the original texts, is completely unoriginal to what the actual original texts
say, and Christianity and so-called Buddhism, which is a term that really didn't exist until
the sixteenth century, are absolutely identical.
Now since I'm not interested in bleeping my own videos, and going on to, and you could
look up Matthew twenty-six, forty-six through fifty-one, and Mark fourteen fifty-one, I mean
that video is bleeped like every five or ten seconds, and he's actually focusing in on
that, what the New Testament says, and the situations I'll say that Jesus was in, but
he said, Hillman, and this is true of Buddhism as well, he said Bible scholars, essentially
he said this, Bible scholars don't read anything other than the Bible and what they're told
to believe in, and this is true of all these translations.
When certain texts are locked onto a dogma, a religious pile of nonsense, which of course
religion is the lowest form of metaphysics, it's almost entirely the opposite of metaphysics,
something that's even lower than that, is of course atomism, or atheism specifically,
and atheism is not actually about the denial of God, true atheism is called metaphysical
atheism, you should look that up, that's even lower than religion, so you get metaphysics
here and nearly the opposite of metaphysics way down here, which is religion, you have
something completely below that, but when these are locked onto these belief systems,
then there's just a mountain of dogma and trash that is attached to it, and if you really
love the truth, logic, and rationality, you're interested in what the original texts say,
and you're not interested in any of these horrifically mistranslated texts, and I've
been dealing with this for decades, literally been translating ancient poly now for nearly
25 plus years, ancient Greek for, well, what is it now, 18 plus years, yeah, he has videos
muted every five seconds, once again, Hebrew is not a living language at the time, so he's
interested in the Greek texts, he's got a lot of Greek, I have Greek actually tattooed
on my knuckles here and some other Greek tattooed on me, which I thought was humorous, he's
got a coin of Greek tattooed on the side of his head and all over his arms, so I thought
it was interesting, this guy's a translator, and he's bold, and he's got Greek stuff tattooed
on him the same way I do, I don't have anywhere near as much Greek tattooed on me, not that
that is of any importance on this video, by the way, like a week or so after that Hillman
interview, the same guy, I don't want to mention his name, that interview Dr. Emmett
Hillman, he brought on another guy that's in a very, very nutty religion, I'm not going
to say which one, to refute, and this guy is supposed to be a biblical scholar, he brought
him on to refute Hillman, but he failed so horrifically and so laughably, oh look it started,
so horrifically and so laughably, miserably, it's just, and I thought, yeah I got to read
the comments on this, because this guy didn't say anything, and they brought him on to refute
Dr. Emmett Hillman, and he did absolutely zero percent of that, not my opinion or feeling
belief, he absolutely did nothing, whether it's the Bible or the stuff that I've probably
been interested in translating, like the principle of punishments, but very specifically
the Nikkei's, and I've got a lot of free and Nikkei translations in the description
below, a link to a lot of texts that are written, a lot of translations that I've written,
the church, the clergy, no matter what sort of silly religion it's attached to, you know
you can only translate it the way they want, people say, hey so and so is a great Bible
scholar, you know this can't be wrong, it's like, you know that a bunch of religious academicians
are completely brain locked in to the purposeful mistranslation, some of these people know
what the original says, but they mistranslate it on purpose, I've come across thousands
of such examples in the ancient poly, I myself have never ever been interested for very logical
and hyper-rational reasons to translate any part of the New Testament, and I've made several
discoveries by the way, and revelations, I mean people think you know it's like 666 is
reference to the beast, it's actually a reference to the number of man, actually certain numbers
in ancient Greek and also to an Aramaic and same in English are words, you actually put
in a number and if you say that number you're saying a word, like say for example the English
number 1022, if I said 1022, oh you're saying a number, so I am, but just say that whole
thing together meant something, like 1022, just an arbitrary number, 666 in ancient Greek
is exicius and Latin is nearly the same, exicius, and in English it's nearly the exact same
word, excess, every form of ancient metaphysics says the same thing, excess is evil, evil
is excess, it doesn't actually say the number of evil, it says exicius, 666, talents of
gold by, I forget which guy, he had 686, but he actually embraced materialism, therefore
he was attached to excess and excess of course led him into the path of hell, and religious
so called scholars and people attached to the Catholic Church and other churches, they
all interpret this as, you know, the number for evil, I mean there's just one example
in Revolta, I can't believe I'm the one that discovered that, there's no mention of it
anywhere else, but I found thousands of such occurrences, in the Nakeas, the Dg. Nakea,
Mejima Nakea, Anglitaran Nakea, Kodakon Nakea, these ancient Pali passages that have been
purposefully mistranslated, I thought everybody kind of knew that Jesus's disciples were
not men with beards as depicted by a Catholic and Roman Catholic imagery, these were very,
very, very young men, specifically I don't want to give the translation because that's
the reason why that interview with Dr. Robin Hillman is bleep bleep bleep bleep every ten
seconds, the Greek word nianikos, it is a hundred percent mistranslated on purpose,
by Christian translators, I mean do you really think anybody directly attached to any church
or denomination, specifically the Catholic Church, would translate this accurately such
as one word, there's a lot of words I don't even want to say in the Greek, because the
algorithm that listens to everything, it not only understands English, it understands Greek,
but one word for example nianikos, I can tell you definitively, whatever you think about
the mannerisms or the fact that he's bald and tattooed, which I'm bald and heavily
tattooed, that Amon Hillman's synopsis and conclusions, as he said, you know my loyalty
is the text, to the text, and I've been saying the same thing for a decade, that his position
is correct, he's not interested in what XYZ denomination or church or clergy has to say
about what they want people to believe that that text says, this is what the text actually
says, and it's so controversial once again that video interview with him is bleeped out
every five to ten seconds, and it was really upsetting people, I mean there's just a few
words bleep, a few words bleep, his translations and his conclusions are accurate, he's not
interested in XYZ religion and I never was either, the original is metaphysics, but
I was never interested in translating any Greek from the New Testament because there
are a million things infinitely above that of far, far, far greater value as far as metaphysics
than the liberation ontology thereof, I never had any interest in it at all, I did focus
in on a few things like this Greek number 666, like listen, in Greek that word is exisius,
that means exis, exis is evil, I mean this is very, very simple, this is child's play
translation, but you won't read that from any Christian commentator, you know, you suppose
that experts in the text, I mean that was just giving me a superficial glance, this
is translated wrong, the Pali translations that I deal with the same way as him in the
Greek, I don't think he knows Aramaic, in the Greek are 100 percent a scam, the most
prolific Pali translator who ever lived was Caroline Augustus Foley Reeves Davis, one
of the co-founders of the Pali text society, I'm also too a member, at least I used to
be the Pali text society, all these translations are wrong, they're just false, by the way
this is something that you don't know, of course Jesus was betrayed by Judas, right,
well Gotama, the psychophysical person made of flesh and blood was betrayed by a person
called Mahakashapa, he actually murdered Gotama, what you call the historical Buddha,
which is not a psychophysical being, he was betrayed and poisoned by same, it's unfortunately
translated in the ancient Pali to English as Sukkara Madhava, which would be pig's
flesh, and of course the original so called Buddhists, Sakya Putta actually is what they
referred to themselves as disciples of Sakya, Sakya Muni by the way is also too not a name
of a person, neither is Buddha, Sakya Muni means in Pali Scythian Sage, Sakya is Scythian,
Muni means Sage or Guru, so it would be Scythian Guru, I don't know if you know who the Scythians
are but you could certainly look those up, by the way regarding Dr. Aman Hillman and the
position of the Old Testament and the New Testament Christianity, a great video that
you should look at and I watched it a few times, it's called Hidden Faith of Our Founding
Fathers, it gives you an enormous amount of quotations from George Washington and Benjamin
Franklin and all the people you consider to be Founding Fathers, they did go to church
and they did communion with their fellow people as was necessary to hold society together
but they were not ones that were believers in the literalism as put forth either by
Protestantism or the Catholic Church, it's actually really really great, it's not a position
of feelings or opinion, well this is what we think, no these are direct quotes from
our Founding Fathers, they did not believe in that religiosity, it's kind of a jingoistic
word of the collective absurdity where you just need to believe it, of course it's completely
insane, illogical and absurd but if you turn your brain off and just believe in it then
you know you're okay and this is why religion is the lowest form of metaphysics, specifically
religion is secularized metaphysics and that is keeping it really simple, sometimes that
confuses people when I say it's a secularized metaphysics, it's as far as like Christianity
and original Buddhism which actually, it calls it in Seminary into K of 5.4, the only time
he actually gives his teachings a name was he called it Brahmayana which means the path
of the Absolute but so-called Buddhism was not original at all, it was just a neo-synomonic
movement of what had been lost, there's no evidence that the historical Jesus taught
anything different than what the Torah taught but I'm not interested in Judea-Christianity
at all and I was never interested once again in any Greek translations from the New Testament
because metaphysically it's just about the most inferior thing I could think whether
you like me saying that or not, I'm sorry but I mean that with all my heart it's just
a metaphysically inferior, there's a million things a million times better, Sinianus, the
Maceous, Proclus, Iamblichus, very specifically, Platinus, very, very specifically Sinianus,
we're talking about serious hardcore metaphysics and the liberation ontology of disobjectification
from the psychophysicality of false identity, you know, seeing yourself in the fear's attachments
and desires, I mean that's what the original article of Brahmajana or what we call Buddhism
was, it was a liberation ontology based on wisdom, it had nothing to do with morality
or being good to your neighbor and that's not my opinion, that's a fact and that is
as I will quote Dr. Aman Hillman once again, my loyalty is to the texts, that in Caius by
the way are the only pre-sectarian corpus, they were known to exist in the 4th century
BC, long before those yellow robe guys in Southeast Asia came along, long before Mahayana,
on and on and on, the original article, what did it say, once again loyalty to the original
texts, but he was actually poisoned by Gotama and today it's called sarbara odolam or it's
a fruit that will actually very, very quickly cause you to perish but he was betrayed by
and murdered by Mahakashapa, so Judas was betrayed by, excuse me, Jesus was betrayed
by Judas and Gotama was betrayed by Mahakashapa who fed him and what is the mistranslation,
they translated sukara madaba as pig's flesh but they would never a disciple intentionally
feed him meat, if you went begging house to house they gave you meat, you had to eat it
because it was given as a donation and there was actually nothing in the original saying
you had to be a vegetarian but the original translation, excuse me the original text says
su which means juice of or extract of the katama daba plant which is this green orange
looking fruit that is extremely poisonous that has a milky like a secretion and it will
very quickly cause you to keel over permanently and that's what Glutton was doing in his final
hours, he was wretched, doubled over in pain, he was up chucking, twitching and very shortly
after it was lights out and he was betrayed, in the bible this is where religion destroys
everything, Buddhism does the same thing as original Christianity, Jesus in the desert
how he was tempted by Satan, do this, do that and I will give you the, no, no, no, no, no,
as if Jesus and Satan were two different people in the desert, they are not, they are the
exact same person, they are the exact same thing found in the chaos where Gotama is
tempted over and over and over again by Mara, Satan of course is the adversary, the adversary
there is two within us, the psychophysical which is at war with the spiritual, the spirit
is always at war with what is not spirit, that's an ancient passage from ancient Egypt,
countless metaphysics but Gotama, Mara dama by the way means the prakriti or the nature
of the psychophysical, Mara is not a separate entity from Gotama for example, one is the
spiritual self and one is the psychophysical self, so this idea of Gotama and Mara, Mara
basically is the ancient poly word for Satan, those two different entities is laughable,
is ridiculous, it is the only the trash and filth that you find being pushed by clergy
and religions but it is completely non doctrinal, Jesus and Satan, this is where everybody is
going to get upset but this is a doctrinal fact, Satan and Jesus were not two different
entities or the same ones, it was the internal struggle between the spiritual, that's not
my opinion, that's right there in the text, period, the struggle between the psychophysical
self and the transcendent self, Gotama and the Buddhists so called, they actually do
the same thing the Christians do, Mara and Mara's over here is the embodiment of evil,
basically the ancient prakrit term for Satan, you have Gotama over here, the pure and you
are doing this number, they are not the exact same person, this is called spiritual polarization,
a stupid person is not polarized at all, what is evil and what is good is in perfect balance
it is like mixing two ingredients together, it is one thing now, even though it is made
of two or more ingredients, spiritual polarization is when you separate, kind of like my peanut
butter, excuse me, my sunflower butter or my almond butter, you let it sit, the oil
starts to rise and it gets separated, yes you got the buttery almond butter, the sunflower
butter down here and you got the oil up here, that would be the polarization, you mix it
together, it is all one single homogenous mix, right, they are not two things, they are
one thing, spiritual polarization in the light and beings causes serious struggle, the fool
who is in love with evil, there is no internal conflict, they are all one thing, when spiritual
polarization occurs, you have the spiritual self here and you have the psychophysical self
and its desires and fears, because it is temporal and it is constantly in flux, then you have
this number going on, spiritual polarization, so this idea that Satan and Jesus are two
different entities is metaphysical poppycock, it is not what the scripture says, the same
thing is true of the Nikkei is regarding Gautama and Mara, Gautama is battling Mara, all these,
this religious clergy based poppycock, twaddle, absolute nonsense is purposely mistranslating,
that is just the way it should be, you got to translate it this way or we are going to
excommunicate you, these can be great religious scholars of the Greek, of biblical Greek or
of scriptural poly, it doesn't mean anything, they do this on purpose, these are really
good translators, one of them, I don't want to say his name, his initials are BB, he actually
translated Mara Dhamma, which means the Dhamma or Prakriti of Mara, basically Satan is subject
to, because since they are soul denying nihilists, they don't think that something escapes the
psychophysical, like there is pure psychophysicality, which is not found doctrinally, but since
they are soul denying nihilists, they still translate, intentionally mistranslate Mara
Dhamma as subject to, so translating Dhamma as subject to, rather than Prakriti or the
nature of Mara, it refers to the psychophysicality as Mara Dhamma, in other words the nature
of evil, but they can't believe that because they think there is a pure filth or pure psychophysicality
since they are soul denying nihilists, and so they are so self-contradictory, and this
is why all religions are an evil trap, Amin Helman, whether it's the Greek, the New Testament,
or whether it's the stuff that I mostly do of the poly, and of course I also do Greek,
but I'm just saying, you have this manure pile over top of the original diamond that's
been buried, and that's all people look at, that's all they see, anybody with a half
of brain would look at so-called Buddhism and be disgusted, it's just like, well there's
this morality-based soul denying oblivionism, you know, like liberation is like flesh and
yourself spiritually down some sort of cosmic toilet into oblivion, nobody would want that
unless you were mentally ill, it's like, well that's not what the original says, and there's
nobody on this earth that's more of an expert on that topic than I am, and specifically
the Terminara or the Natman, Sanskrit or Pali, makes no difference, it's just a common via
negativa, neti neti, not this, not that, subjective affirmation through objective negile, objective
denial, because you can't point to the subject, what you do is you self-assimilate to the subject,
which of course is what wisdom is, through objective negation, this is called apophoticism
via negativa, it is the dialectic of true theurgy, and this is where I'm complete agreement
with him, and his translations are correct, I have looked, and actually checked out Matthew
26, 46 through 51, and Mark 14 through 50, Mark 14, chapter 14, verse 51, they do say
what he says, and every aspect of the Catholic Church or Protestant doesn't matter which
nomination, they're all in agreement, you know, we can't translate this stuff accurately
because that would really call into question, you know, the legitimacy of this, you know,
kooky religion, my friend decades ago stuck with me, he actually summed up what original
Christianity is, and whether you like it or not, I don't care, but he's accurate, okay,
he called it a Jewish mystery cult, you know, did he rise, didn't he rise, did he rise or
didn't he, it's a mystery cult, and it blossomed from there due to the uplifting of Constantine,
I mean, none of these religions would prosper without some great personage, in the case
of Buddhism, it should be called Brahmajana, it was King Ashok, without King Ashok there's
not one person on this earth that had any idea what Buddhism is, never heard of it,
there's like some sort of like blip on the radar screen 2,500 years ago, we really don't
have any surviving texts of it, without King Ashok there is nobody on this earth that would
have a single clue about this thing that we call Buddhism, the same is true of Christianity,
if we hadn't brainwashed some incredibly rich and powerful people, you know, to uplift it
and put it on the pedestal, I daresay there's, I don't know if anybody would know what Christianity
is or ever heard of it, we'd have no clue about that at all, let's go on to section
two of this video, okay, thank you, you came upon in medieval times, you know, somebody
was selling you classes and dragon fighting, and he's like, you know, you with your wisdom
and intellects, you know, dragons don't exist, you've been wasting many years and a lot of
money learning how to fight dragons, these things don't exist, and you know, the first
thing that would happen is they jump upon you and they would destroy you and tear you
apart, I don't know about one of my favorite books I recommended to you, the Pidefusion,
written by John the Scott, but he essentially did the same thing, I don't know if you know
how he met his end, but his students whipped out their pens, yeah, not these kind of pens
of course, and they took him out, they took him out, telling the truth, like my analogy
of the dragon fighting school, you know, you're in danger, you just can't talk about this
kind of stuff, because people have closed minds and they don't want to hear that they've
been wasting your lives with nonsense, you know, I don't like to talk about these things
because it really upsets people, most people don't have, you know, rational, logical minds,
I mean they just don't, religion by definition of course is profanity, what it is is that
which is most base and crude, hence the term, anything that's popular is profane, religion
by definition is profane, the ancient Pali word for it is pathugena, it's translated
as commoner, but what it means is profane, because what's common is profane, it sounds
like you're spitting when you actually say that ancient Pali word pathugena, it's profane,
well it's common, you know, a lot of people, yeah I know, but it's profane, but you can't
say that because you have this heard mentality, will will take you out, the same way the author
of the pedophusion was taken out by his own students with their own pins, we need to have
and Dr. Hillman said this towards the end of that interview that was like bleeped every
five seconds and the interviewer kept interrupting him like every ten seconds which ticked everybody
off, so we need to have a renaissance of true idealism, of thought, of facts, of logic
and rational metaphysics, way below that of religion of course is something that teaches
nihilex nihilo which is the cornerstone of atheism, the term atheism is not about the
denial of God which of course is what you think it is, the term is athios in the Greek,
it is not athios, yeah that sounds Spanish doesn't it, athios amigo, right, it is not
the denial of God, true atheism, you could go look this up, don't take my word for it,
is metaphysical atheism, it teaches nihilex nihilo or nothing from nothing comes nothing
and they believe that they have one divine prayer, it's like oh let us start out with
energy, they replace the word God with energy and they think the complexity of life is just
a happenstance of like a thousand rabid monkeys pounding away thoughtlessly on a thousand
typewriters, like you give a thousand rabid monkeys and a thousand typewriters four billion
years, you'll end up with complexity in nature and life and beauty and of course if anything
is more crazy than the very basis of what is antithetical to metaphysics, that being
religion, the only thing that is crazier than that is atheism, once again true atheism is
metaphysical atheism, people think that atheism is just a denial of God, it's not whatever
you do, don't ever ever accuse me of being atheist, I mean that is kind of like the ultimate
insult to me, but I can't actually talk about any of these words like neonuqos in the Greek
and what Amon Hillman is talking about that interview because it is bleeped out every
ten seconds and you can go watch that interview and you'll read his lips and you know what
of course is being bleeped out and I found it really funny that the same guy that interviewed
him like a week or two later brought on that guy to try to refute him, this guy is a brilliant
biblical scholar and everybody appreciates him and his whole job was to refute Dr. Amon
Hillman and he does the opposite of that, he did no way shape or form, refutes Dr. Amon
Hillman because he can't, he absolutely can't. Here's something else too, the turn of Buddha
and Christ are not names at all, people think well there's a Buddha statue, it's like no
Buddha is in scripture, sticking to what the texts say is akimkana, a non-person, it's
a spiritual appellation, you know this person could be a Buddha, I mean not the physical
person, that person is attained to buddhi, you know true objectification through the
cultivation and perfection of wisdom, that you can't point to a Buddha anymore than you
could point to Christ and Christ is not a name and it is not a person, a psychophysical
being that you could point to, I mean it's just completely ridiculous but this is what
religions do, they destroy things. I've come across and like I said I got them in the translations
below, you know the countless things that I've found that are just completely ridiculous,
this doesn't make any sense, like well every polytranslator, and it's like no, like kakravartan,
they translate it as wheel turner, you know gotama is the wheel turner, it's like that's
really stupid, it doesn't make any sense metaphysically, well the original poly doesn't say that, it
says he is that which turns the wheel, i.e. the unmoved mover, i.e. the axle, of course
modern axles move on modern vehicles, ancient axles on chariots and wagons, you know they
were a solid piece of cylindrical wood and they did not move, so what the original poly
says is he is the axle, the unmoved mover, that hole in the middle of the wheel, right,
in the case of the hourglass it would be, of course sand does fall through it but you
have to imagine a zero point non-cartesian nexus of pure potential, it would be saying
that gotama is this part of the hourglass, he's not this part of the hourglass, he's
not that part, he's the part here that the sand emanates from, of course the sand is
an emanating from the middle on the hourglass, but to take the true metaphysical analogy
of the kakravartan of the hourglass instead of the wheel, the sand would be emanating from
the center but you couldn't see it at all and there would be no center to be visible,
you know it's a tiny pinprick here on this hourglass, but to take that analogy to its
metaphysical fruition that's what we'll be talking about, i.e. that one mistranslation
after another mistranslation after another this idea once again of mara and satan, it's
like well here's jesus and here's satan, it's like no, look at this, you know jesus is
not having a fight, not a physical fight, with satan in the desert, you know or satan
is trying to tempt him, that is the psychophysical jesus having war with the metaphysical or spiritual
jesus, the exact same thing exists in the diginike, majiminike specifically between
gotama and mara, like mara basically being the parley order for satan, no it's not mara
over here in gotama, no they're the exact same thing, not exactly, i mean not in the
absolute sense, once a psychophysical self that is at war with the spiritual self, and
this spiritual polarization, the only person i know of that's talked about or got a youtube
video or book talking about spiritual polarization, but that's what wisdom is, you know it's
the separation of two things from each other so there isn't a mix, this is where evil stupid
people you know have a great life, of course it will eventually burn them in the end, but
while they're alive there's no polarization between the stupid or evil person, you know
the good side and that which they are psychophysically are one thing, and they're happy in their
own ignorance and stupidity to be bopped down the street licking ice cream cones, there
is no internal struggle of an ignorant person, and wise people however there is, and this
is the exact same story of jesus and satan which are not these two things, rather this
one thing, and gotama and mara, and that's not my opinion, that is a hard core fact,
good, yeah i love that quote from Dr. Anandakitesh Kumar Swamy, once again 27 languages, thousands
of articles, dozens and dozens and dozens and dozens of books, they even wrote a book
to just list all the books and articles that he wrote, he said modern buddhism is most famous
for everything it originally never taught, here's another thing people think, well original
buddhism is against that hindu stuff, well hindu refers to people, not religions, everybody
is completely brain dead, here's a quote from the encyclopedia of religion and ethics,
6 page 712, hinduism is never prepared, a body of conical scriptures or common prayer
book, it has never held a general counsel, convocation, yada yada yada, the Vedas, new
punishads and the Bhagavad Gita, these are not hindu texts, in your mind they might be
but there's no such thing as a religion of hinduism, it's just not, that's not, it refers
to a people, not a religion, well buddhism, and every time you type in a nātara nātman
which is what they think is the denial of the transcendent soul, well buddhism differed
from that hindu stuff, it didn't teach there was a soul, it's like there's no, and same
page is Dr. Aman Hillman here, let's see what the texts actually say, I know all 662 occurrences
of the term nātā, I know every time it's used, how it's used, why it's used, all 22
compounds of the term nātā, it is never a refutation of the soul, what if I said this
is not a soul, that's not a soul, that's not a soul, and you stupidly concluded, well
you said there's no such thing as a soul, no you did not, he engaged in apophotosism
via negativa, objective negation, which of course culminates in subjective synthesis,
i.e. true theology, i.e. proximity to wisdom, of course wisdom itself is one of the same
thing, i.e. the transcendent self, this is all hyper-logical, hyper-rational, the same
thing Dr. Aman Hillman is doing with the New Testament, and with the interview, the one
thing the interviewer does get right amongst his countless bumbling heirs, is that over
and over again when Dr. Aman Hillman says something, the guy goes, well this makes a
lot of sense, all of a sudden, when he talks about like what the original polly says, it
all moves together very synchronously, you know, a ties to b, ties to c, it's all very
simple, everything is connected to everything else, the center holds, you know, if it's
illogical and irrational, the center doesn't hold at all, yeah, well it can hold at all.
Here's the passage, they hate hearing stuff like this, wood than the 81, there is an unbored
and un-originated and unmade and unformed, if there were not, oh followers, this unborn,
un-originated and unformed, there would be no way out for the born, the originated and
the formed, here's the most paraphrasable core in the Nikkei's, by the way, whatever forms,
feelings, perceptions, impulses, or consciousness, i.e. rupa vedama, samas, sankara and vinyana,
i.e. it's psychophysical, these he sees to be without permanence, anicha, as suffering,
bhukha, as ill, plague, boil, sting, pain, affliction, for and otherness, as empty, shinyata, something
is empty of something else, ain't no such thing as emptiness, there's no such passage
by the way, this idea of emptiness, no, this is empty of that, there ain't no such thing
as, yeah, no, ain't's not a word, no such thing as emptiness in the Nikkei's, as empty
as selfless, capital S, anathati, so he turns the, the spirit, the sanctum, the chitta,
the nus, pick your language, i.e. the non-aggregate, away from these, and therein gathers the spirit,
i.e. the chit, within the realm of immortality, amataya dhataya, amata, immortales, dhatu,
realm of, the realm of immortality, this is tranquility, this is that which is most
excellent, that's Majumina K, 1.436, I am never, ever interested in religions, I'm interested
in what? I'm gonna quote Dr. Amon Hillman here again, my loyalty is to the texts, what
did the texts say? Unfortunately, even in the texts, the New Testament holds no wonder
for me, because I, I have no interest in, in inferior metaphysics. With the correct
translation, whether that be Amon Hillman's, then Amon Hillman, in conclusion, is right.
People will comment on his mannerisms, or how his eyes will like, you know, he's talking,
you think he's, you know, he's thinking about like, 10 things at once, and you know, people,
they notice those mannerisms, but I'm, I'm fat, bold, and tattooed, and have, you know,
tons of tattoos like him, I got Greek tattoos like him, we've probably nothing else in common,
well, you know, some of these things, we know that all this religious trash that's been
piled on a diamond, a little nugget at the bottom, when you look at it, if you have a
common sense and wisdom, even just a little bit, you're like, this is trash, it's like,
yes, all that's trash, but while buried underneath that pile of dung is a diamond at the bottom,
and that's diamonds all I'm cared about, that's all I care about. Clergy and religious trash
and nonsense, no, no, no. And Dr. Amon Hillman accurately says, if you knew what the, you
know, like for example, Matthew 26, verse 46 through 56, and Mark 40, if you knew what
it said, you wouldn't, you wouldn't attach yourself to these religions, you know, he,
people want to know, is this translation correct on those and the other things he's talking
about, I don't claim to know about, you know, ancient pharmacology, I make no claim to that
at all, but his translations on what those say are accurate, but no Christian wants to
hear that because they're like the people in dragon fighting school, like, you know,
when you show up and, you know, you're licking your ice cream cones, like, how many years
have you been learning to fight dragons and how much money have you spent on your dragon
foot? Well, you know, 10 years and, you know, dragons don't exist, right? Rather than analyze
that logically, people are irrational and emotional, and they're attached to their silly little
beliefs, and beliefs are opposite of wisdom, like 99.99% of them, they're the total opposite
of wisdom, the opposite. They don't want to hear that, they want to, you know, put up
your dukes, thumbs fighting words, literally. That's the reason why society is so, you know,
corrupt and insane and awful, it's because everybody's attached to their silly little
beliefs. I like Amon Hillman, whether that be the New Testament, which I have no interest
in at all for a million good reasons, because, literally, let me do that again. There's a
mountain of material a thousand thousand times better. Life is short. I'm not interested
in pointing out all the, because Amon Hillman, you know, bless his heart, is pointing out
all the, like, whoa, that's what the original text says. Whoa, that's bad. And it's so bad,
once again, every 10 seconds, that video interview is bleeped out, bleep, bleep, bleep. He's talking
about what the New Testament says. You know, he sums up that interview, bless his heart,
saying, you know, would you really follow this stuff if you know what it actually said?
The answer is no. I've had so many thousands of people, especially in last year, using
that Dr. Amon Hillman video. Like, yes, I have. I know about him before that interview.
Oh, my God, what do you think about Dr. Amon Hillman? Oh, what do you think about that?
I don't know him at all. I don't pretend to know him. I'm not going to say up here I know
him. You know, I don't know him at all. You know, he might collect my little ponies and,
you know, Pokemon cards. I don't know him at all, but his translation of the passages
that he's talking about is accurate. I'm not passing any judgment on this guy one way or
another. I don't care if you like him or don't like him. I mean, the same is true of me. I've
been debating the topic of original, I hate to say, Buddhism because there's no such thing
as Buddhism. That term is invented in the 1600s. By the way, bhikku and bhikkhuni don't mean
monk or nun. That means devotee from the word bhakti meaning to give. A devotee is someone
that gives of themselves towards a teaching. That's what the term means. All the translations
are translated as monk and nun. That's religious trash. That's where you heap dung upon a little
diamond of truth and wisdom. You've got religion 2.0, religion 3.0. That's where all the dung
gets heaped on top of the original article. But everybody can just see the dung. How many
people have it in themselves to devote their life to learning ancient Sanskrit, learning
Pali, originating Koina Greek? Not many. It sure ain't making you any money. It's not
making me any. I've been paid to do translations before. I got paid to write the introduction
to that book, The Monad, about Thomas Taylor's Greek translations. It's a very thankless
job. But the wisdom that's buried a little diamond at the bottom of a hill of manure
that is very beautiful. And when you're the first person to see that stuff, especially
if you're a prodigy of specific ancient dead languages like I am, at least a few of them.
Just a few of them actually. It's brilliant and wisdom is its own reward.
I will point out at a last point here that none of these religions, whether it's so-called
Buddhism or whether it's so-called Christianity, none of these things would exist if it weren't
we'd have no idea they ever existed if it were not for wealthy and famous and or wealthy
and famous and powerful people in ancient times that weren't brainwashed into believing
it. Now the original article of Brahmayana, Path to the Absolute, it's just a neoceramonic
movement. There is nothing in the teachings of original Buddha, I hate to say that word,
you can't find in the principle of Panishads, none of it. What in the Vedas, Lirikveda,
Athuraveda, Samaveda? It's all there. This idea that Buddhism was a refutation of Hinduism
which isn't even a religion, it refers to people, it's just absolutely baseless. It's
religious poppycock. The truth is the truth is the truth and that's the truth. Whether
people like it or accept it or not, it doesn't matter. It's like, well that's what it actually
says, what you believe or I don't care. You haven't refuted me, like that person that
they brought on to refute Amon Hillman is an expert biblical scholar. He asks all these
questions trying to refute Dr. Amon Hillman and he doesn't do it. He very, very, very
miserably doesn't do it, epically doesn't do it. Anyway, thank you so much for watching.
A lot of my translations are free and books below, not all my books are free but they're
below and many countless articles and lots of translations and that's my conclusion on
Dr. Amon Hillman since you've asked me to talk about him. His conclusions and his statements
regarding what the original says is accurate. I don't know him, I don't pretend to know
him but what he said about Sam is accurate. I don't pretend to know about the pharmacology
thereof but the actual translation, what it says, correct.
