So, do me the favor of saying your name so that I don't mispronounce it.
Yep.
Balapile.
Balapile.
Yes, and I am Darren Stevenson so we are here in a conversation together that I wanted
to record because it was becoming, as I expected it to, very interesting.
Bala had been discussing something in ideas from a specific person whose name you can
say.
Actually, maybe you could just go over briefly.
Yeah.
Okay, I'll do that.
What I was talking about is the notion of network state, as in any TWRK, second word
state, S-T-A-T-E, network state.
A chap called Balaji Srimivasan, quite a personality, known personality online, used to be CTO of
Coinbase.
But, you know, he's not just a crypto guy, he happens to know crypto, very well read,
you know, history, background, people.
You could summarize him as a pro-anarchy guy, right, who doesn't take limits of government
and all that as limits.
So, what the network state means is, right, you can form enough of the ethos.
And the common, call it the commonwealth of a group of people online, and then later,
right, enough of the cohorts can, you know, could have agreed to where they want to stay
and live in a place where they get along.
They're physically approximate, yeah, where they're physically approximate so that they
can collaborate in each other's life development, right, so that this is much more, it's not
impossible to do at a distance, but it's much more difficult.
Well, there are more challenges.
Yeah, it's just, it's a different space of challenge for those who are not proximal.
But you said something that I thought was hilarious, you were like, I'm brilliant.
Go ahead, you were talking about somebody buying a house.
Okay, the background to it is this, right, I've gone through all those states.
What do I mean by all those states, you know, living in grew up in a semi rural village,
you know, where everybody knew everybody and, you know, it's a tropical place so that you're
never worried about money because it seemed like why do you, you know, food was available
all over the place and you could go and sleep in anybody's house.
So what's your problem, you know, right.
That was, and then, but my parents have moved from India to Malaysia, Darren, right.
My father had gone through the struggles of life in India.
And in some in Malaysia, he was continuing it in Malaysia, and he was driven to have,
to have lots more money under the pillow.
Right.
Yeah.
And on that, if we later, he was just full on into like being a stingy guy who saves
and saves and saves and for good reason because of his background, right.
Right.
Many people nearly after that and the British rule in India, right.
It was tough times, right.
There were tough times.
So in Malaysia, it's easier, but he didn't realize it that easier.
So he went on a spree of.
So what he would do is buy one property upon property upon property and including our house
itself, what we call metric, the house that family house.
His only concern was, what's the replay?
You know, if you buy this house, what's the replacement value?
If I were to sell it, how much money would I get?
You know, he didn't care about much anything else.
And then me, right, has to pay for that because it has completely broken up the family as
compared to, you know, now my adopted village Darren is a village in Indonesia in Java.
It's a zero crime village.
Similar to the kind of village my father was born in, right.
They didn't live there on age 18.
And there the values fit with the village.
The people, despite the rest of the world not wanting to have anything to do with zero crime
villages because it's got consequences, right.
It's got consequences.
For example, people won't be fronting wealth because they won't be much wealth.
It'll be culturally communist.
Right.
Yes, yes.
But you will not worry about old age and children being taken care of because the people love
to take care of other people.
Yes, they are living in a traditional, a traditional context where everyone takes care.
Not, not every single person, but most of the people take care of each other.
And they understand.
So this changes their role as a human being.
Right.
Transforms their role as a human being from I am here for me and mine.
Yeah.
Or just I am here for me.
To we are here together.
For each other.
Yeah.
Yep.
If you don't have that, I will argue, if you don't have we are here together for each
other.
Hmm.
You don't have humans yet.
You have something weird.
It's not human.
That's it.
And I want to stamp it even further.
Well, I want to.
Yeah, by all means.
I mean, I've grown up in like a fighting a lot of people, you know, probably post,
you know, post university, even I'm even in university didn't occur to me for many
years, maybe particularly from the 90s onwards.
Okay.
Basically, I'm into unconditional love there.
Hmm.
And I am it again and again, Paula, why are you being made the thing that I find
hilarious about what you said is that linguistically it's backwards.
But it's not that you're into unconditional love.
It's that you didn't defect from it.
All right.
That's the natural position for human beings.
You simply didn't defect.
Right.
In my view, but please continue.
I'm with you.
Yeah.
So exactly because my mother and my, you know, grew up in such a place.
So she didn't know anything, anything else.
And she went, you know, consequences and, but leave all of those cause, you know, talking
to one of the greatest things about talking to Darren is you can talk about things that
are, you might have a long life thought it's a unconventional.
So kind of like censor that a bit, you know, no, you can do whatever you want.
So I love it.
You know, okay.
Yes.
So I loved, you know, my mother was the epitome of unconditional love.
And I love that.
Beautiful.
You know, it didn't occur for long to me at that time, right?
But because awkward enough as in, you know, when the world's became being difficult, there's
one person that you could go to who has got time patients for you.
She listened and she won't, you know, abruptly stop you halfway or say that that's a silly
idea.
She will take it that it's possible that her child may know something that she doesn't,
you know, right.
And that was special.
Right.
And like cruel world, right?
Extremely beautiful.
Yes.
You know, so I want to continue that.
And I was not going to stop, agree with anybody who said it's impossible.
You know, you can't.
And later in life of late, I've realized, no, they, many who say it's impossible are only
saying it because they have our narrative has so much become zero 100 binary.
Like if something is not exact, you know, it's like, can you guarantee me that 100%,
you know, that person who is in your village, you can have unconditional love.
Well, the real answer is why do you even why can't it be fuzzy at the edges?
So I can.
Even when we do math or graphs, you know, we cut off the extremes.
And that's good enough.
If you can manage it 90, but, you know, they are outliers, but you don't need to like spend
your whole lifetime patching that last two percent.
Okay, you've touched on something.
Wait, slow down.
You've touched on something I want to highlight, please.
Nurture your line of thought and where you are going so that you can hold on to it for a second.
But I want to say something, the zero 100 things.
So as children, eventually we attempt things that are at least initially, they are impossible.
It is initially impossible for you to stand up.
It is initially impossible for you to take a step.
It is initially impossible for you to jump or run or walk or speak or swim or hold your breath underwater or ride a bicycle or write language.
All of these things start out initially impossible.
And if we evaluate them on the basis that is usually used in our cultures, pretty much nothing is possible because you can't.
The only things that are possible are things where you go from zero to 100 in one move.
Right.
In a single move never happened.
So we do have this mindset and I was reading I just want to share something from a book called the dawn of everything that I was reading last night.
We're talking about our views of history being wrong and we basically have two views it was wonderful.
We all took care of each other and then we fell from that now it's every man for himself and, you know, and there's no way to change it.
You know, the best you can hope for is slight adjustments to the tyrannical nonsense of human society.
And I say this along as long ago as 1936 the pre historian V Gordon child wrote a book called man makes himself apart from the sexist language.
This is the spirit we wish to invoke.
We are projects of collective self creation. What if we approached human history that way.
What if we treat people from the beginning as imaginative intelligent playful creatures who deserve to be understood as such.
What if, instead of telling a story about how our species fell from some idyllic state of equality.
We can ask how we came to be trapped in such tight conceptual shackles that we no longer even imagine the possibility of reinventing our societies, they say ourselves, but what they mean is our societies.
We can't imagine it because it seems like it's, it's like a task like eating the moon, or drinking the ocean.
No one imagines that it's only possible.
It's necessary.
It's urgent.
The entire history and future of life on this planet may depend on the single on this single pivot right can humans form intelligent aware
collectives with and for each other and with and for the history and future of life on this planet.
Now of course we can on the small scale.
We can do it immediately.
Right.
We can do it.
You and I are not going to have any problem doing that right here right now we'll be doing that together right.
It's immediately if you just shrink the scale from everything to something.
You can do it right now with any few people who are motivated and sincere.
You know, yeah.
Please continue.
Right on right on excellent in a soul so good to hear.
And, you know,
one of it is
self.
It's like self fulfilling prophecy or self created meaning
one of my biggest answer backs has worked right against this notion is against this notion of it can be done and it's impossible it's this this whole hopelessness is, you know, guys,
we're living, you know, before, before the first village, right.
And we would never do the first village would never have happened.
You know, like, often I'll see in online forums, Jared, right.
The ones that you quite a lot in this one, the p2p foundation, right.
Quite a lot of people from around the world.
And often the people are so good at nitpicking, right.
Right. And I'm like, by the way, these are people who probably never accomplish anything other than nitpicking.
But go ahead.
Yeah, yeah.
Yeah, they're professional nitpickers.
Right. What do you do for a living I sit around on a computer screen and pick nets.
So I'm like, saying, Hey, look, right.
You just imagine, you know, if our ancestors with very little, they made the first village happen.
If they could not get along, right.
If they were egotistical, the first village would not have happened.
In all likelihood, it would have taken many attempts for the first village to happen, you know, to stay and be maintained.
Continuous first village.
But we know that it happened.
And then we went on to become a small town and and those language and so if those people can kind of hold their negativity, their pessimism down a bit, right.
To let the blossoming as the blossoming they see in nature, right, despite all the earthquakes and whatever negative, you know, there may be, there still is, you know, flowering and blooming and, you know, joy and aesthetics in nature.
Right.
Why can't we, why can't we look at the good and ignore the bad.
Right. Unless the bad totally, you know, cannot be.
Right. If the house catches on fire, we'll get some water.
Yeah.
Right. Yeah.
It's, it's a matter of, okay, it's not a matter of this. It's a matter.
I think, and by all means, correct me if you see it differently.
It's a matter of the.
Okay, look, we got two different kinds of options, right.
You can put humans together.
You can get them to agree to come together as a group, let's say a small group, seven people.
Okay.
And you can say again.
I said, entirely do about, I mean, nobody would argue.
No same person can argue against that if you said seven people, you know, like, okay,
suddenly they have to.
Right.
You can get seven people together and tell them either one of two things.
Okay.
Either we're just going to learn how to get along and help each other.
And be together as one unit as well as being individuals.
We're either going to learn how to do that, or we're going to give you some principles.
But the fundamental problem is that there has to be a catalyst.
Right. There has to be a profound catalyst that makes the people want to be together.
And to grow together and to learn together. So either the catalyst.
For most people, the catalyst is either the fear of really bad experiences of being human.
Or it's the, it's FOMO.
It's a version of FOMO.
I know that being human can mean so much more than living in this box and watching television, but I don't know how to get to that.
That's fear of missing out. Right. Those are two highly motivated, highly motivating things.
But the third highly motivating thing is a fire.
Right.
Like the village is on fire. Get up. Let's go.
Right.
Or, or, you know, in a city, you will, you will see humans form highly effective cooperative pods.
Little, little groups, right? Pods.
Spontaneously.
If there is a car accident.
If there is an earthquake. Right.
What will happen if there's an earthquake is you will see three things, the people who are sort of neutral, they don't know what the fuck to do so they're kind of milling about the people who are
positive.
These people are looking for opportunities to profit off the situation.
And then people who are, you know, they convert to altruists, right, we're going to help each other get through this right now.
Power to you.
You remind me of something critical I want to ask and I wanted to ask you.
Let me ask you.
Right.
Of course.
I haven't talked along, but I want to ask you this.
You know, I've gone through a tough life situation the last few years, right. And what do you say this for me has been a dog named Benji.
Right.
This is not surprising even slightly.
I'm listening.
Oh, okay.
Yeah.
No surprise there.
This, this one thing, and it, you know, it goes into the granular of unity is diversity.
It's not they don't want people don't have to riddle themselves with finding, you know, we can find unity within diversity or allow for diversity within unity.
What you will find, you always find something like your hand.
Right.
Or you have a bunch of unique members.
And there's, and there's no problem with the index finger being its own finger. No problem.
But they always work together for each other.
And the synergy that the palm right where they come together the synergy where the palm of the hand is.
That's powerful. In fact, that's the stuff that makes most of the trouble for humans is, is we're making the bad form of synergy.
Right.
We're like, Oh, with synergy, you can go faster, you can get more, you can, you know, you can mutate and propagate wildly if you have synergy.
I didn't, I didn't hear your question. You were talking about diversity and unity. Go ahead.
Good, good, good. The small subset within that. Okay.
With my dog, right? The dog love to come and like lick my inside of my mouth.
And, you know, it's a, it's a mix between a golden retriever and a poodle, right?
Medium sized dog. Very humanly, I mean, like very into humans.
Yeah, I have no idea what people listening to our conversation will think when you say that, but keep going because I'm going to go somewhere that I think you're actually going to go to, but let's see.
Anyway, you know, I mean, and, and I have this overall view that, you know, all creatures and plants have been made.
Maybe we don't know like a bed bug, right? We don't know why, what its ecological reason is, but it's got a reason.
So when my dog, when this dog comes and licks me wants to, you know, out of his instinct, I mean, so determined to like what to do it.
I let him, right? So as time goes on, it's fine, you know, you know, because, right?
But now let me go to the, the gist I want to get to you.
He, you know, we have, I think, much later after the first village, right?
I adopted a practice of giving is different from getting and giving can never be as good as taste satisfying as getting.
Oh, that is such bullshit. But I understand that that's the tradition. Yes, go ahead.
But, you know, for, for the dog, it doesn't, it doesn't occur to them.
Yeah, you're right.
It's very happy, number one.
Yeah.
And it's happy more time, much of its happiness comes from it giving.
It's like instantly.
I mean, I would argue that the dog doesn't even make that distinction.
Yeah, that's it.
That's it.
Whatever makes that distinction, it understands receiving.
So to speak, perhaps it differentiates that I'm not sure, but its body understands the difference between he's holding a chunk of meat, and he isn't.
Right. Body understands that.
But the thing about the dog, okay, look, it's doing something crazy.
And, you know, this isn't to suggest that everyone should French kiss their dogs, though, you know, for those of you for whom it's natural, by all means, let them, you know, let them lick your mouth.
I think many in the West would consider that disgusting or dangerous or unhealthy because the dog has a lot of germs, so to speak.
But here's the actual thing that's crazy.
I will argue something really bizarre here, and I'll take responsibility for my argument.
I will argue that your dog is already.
Your dog has senses that sense your mind.
Yeah.
The same way you can smell the dog, the dog can smell your mind.
Right.
Yeah.
You can smell your mind. It has senses that can participate with your mind.
It has senses that are telepathic.
It has senses with which it can bond its intelligence to yours and give something truly astonishingly miraculous to you that the dogs give to humans all the time and the humans don't recognize it at all.
They don't even notice it.
They just feel better when the dogs around.
They can't see what the dogs are actually doing.
And I'm going to argue that what most of the dogs are actually doing is they're trying to trying to do something like the Vulcan mind meld in Star Trek, where Spock becomes another two minds become one mind it's trying to do something like that.
And it's trying to do that for an array of heroic purposes.
But one of the best things it could possibly do if that were its goal would be to get its microbiota into your gut microbiome and your microbiota into it's once you start sharing the digestive microbiota, especially the first, you know,
sort of landing zone for microbiota and humans is one of them anyways the mouth.
So, you know, when dogs are sniffing poop and doing whatever they're doing, presuming they do such things.
They're connoisseurs of bacteria.
It's obvious to me from observing them.
So I would argue that the dog is actually trying to become one fit more.
One organism with you.
So that it's microbiota get into your mouth and your microbiota get into its mouth and some on both sides survive.
And they reproduce and they become families of trillions of organisms trillions.
There's 43 trillion bacteria inside the human body.
And once again, right, you have the same thing you have unity and diversity.
The diversity supports the health of the unity.
Yep.
And especially, you know, Darren, on this part, right, especially if you say, look, what is the reality when people talk about unity and diversity in today's governance world.
When they talk about unity, they're talking about conformity, isn't it?
Conformity does absolutely cannot be that the basis for unity.
No, this is why, yeah, this is why if you're putting a cohort together, you don't want to have to give them rules.
You want them to discover the process together so that it's organic, I think.
But in a dire situation where there's something interfering with them discovering it together, the catalyst should declare the principles.
Yes.
The catalyst should communicate the principles to us.
And what I was going to say is that a long time ago, let me just say something really simple and stupid.
By the time a human collective needs rules, 70% of that collective has gone missing in action for one reason or another and it's offline.
Yep.
By the time you have to tell people what to do, the intimacy is not there.
There's no intimacy between them.
They're not sensing each other and doing predictive analysis for each other's needs and vulnerabilities and things like that, which humans in a tightly knit group do that all day long every day.
They just naturally do that.
They're vigilant in a way.
They're vigilant of everything as if they were the unity.
The concerns of the unity, I don't know, it's really hard to say it in language because it sounds like a rule and it's a game.
It's not a rule.
But once you make it a rule, you're going to have a tough time.
Like by the time God had to write stuff in stone on top of some mountain and send Moses down to his people with what, 10 rules?
You got to imagine like things must have been really bad for something that severe to have to happen.
You got to tell people don't kill each other.
You got to tell them not to steal.
You got to tell them to wear a loincloth.
Or you know what, don't rub your butt on your food.
It's time you have to tell them these things.
Something's gone horribly haywire, like not in a little way, in like an apocalyptically bad way.
It can only go from here to disaster kind of way.
And text, I mean, writing it down, overall, I mean, in a large way has taken us backwards, hasn't it?
Yes.
I mean, as with any technology good and bad, and also unfortunately for humans, pretty much unavoidable,
situations, unavoidable.
I mean, yeah, once, okay, look, the problem with text is you have, okay, if I am speaking with you, or you are speaking with me.
Right?
Yep.
We both have an idea of to whom we are speaking.
And also to whom we are listening.
Once you have text, you have the possibility, which is very dangerous for human cognition, the way human cognition psychologically, it's anatomy.
It's very, very dangerous if you have a thing which is this, speech without someone speaking it to you.
Now you can't tell whether that's an actual person, whether it's a machine, whether it's God, or whether it's a problem in your consciousness.
And since you can't tell which one of these it is, things go badly.
Once you have disembodied speakers, things go badly for humans, generally.
It's also a sign that things have already gotten weird.
I mean, when I think about getting humans together for each other, and this is perhaps the most exciting thought I'm capable of having, I have to admit, it seems almost impossible or wildly unlikely to my pragmatic, you know, mind,
my pragmatic thoughts. How do you tell them? What do you want them to do?
What's so exciting that, you know, we're going to get together and actually go on an on a mission, right?
I mean, I have various answers to those questions, but it sure seems just as we were talking, as we were speaking about earlier in the conversation, it seems to be a zero 100 problem.
It isn't.
It's a zero 100 problem. But it seems that way, until you get a few experiences of making it work, right?
And you can make it work for an hour. You don't have to make it work for the future or the world. You can make it work for two hours for five people.
Now, they will get a taste. You will get a taste. Both of you will realize, oh shit, we can do this.
We can actually do this together. Because I would argue, and I know this is a very dangerous thing to say, but I'm quite certain of the truth of it.
I would argue that a team of five people could transform a nation in 90 days. Any nation.
Probably almost any five people. And if this was ever true in human history, it's more true now than it's ever been because the history and future of life on earth depends on doing like the humans becoming intelligent.
They must the humans must become intelligent or either that or you have to kill off like 97% of them or something.
If you want to keep the world alive, because they'll just keep making machines, not arguing to kill anybody to be clear.
I'm saying, if you want to preserve life on earth, we either have to like the entire history, the meaning of the history of life on this world, and the future of those histories, we have got to get the humans playing a game that isn't lethal.
Together.
Right.
It's the fundamental priority it's more important than any other thing I can think of if we care about, will there be a world for our grandchildren. If we don't care about that it's still really important.
So, so then, then you have the problem of, in this case, in the little toy, you know universe that I'm creating here during our discussion.
In this case what you do is you get five people together and you teach them how to solve an intractable problem locally to where they live.
Right, so that they'd have the experience of taking on a problem that just can't be fucking solved, synergizing, you know, solving the problem.
Now they'd have experience.
This was this topic was related to our agreement to come to listen to talk together today.
Because we were talking about teams, I was talking about teams and that's when you sent me a message on Facebook right.
Yep.
Yes, correct.
Yes, correct.
So there's something about collaboration.
In collaboration, how, how, how can we make it make what you what you are trusting and which is what I'm trusting to in any of your messages. Yeah.
I love that word.
Okay.
You know, that's an alternative.
And, and you put it in such a way that a lot of the usual suspects cannot even object to it, because it's, it's, it's beyond.
Also, look, I don't care.
I want to be really clear. Yes, I don't care about the usual suspects objecting, because here's what's going to happen.
Once you get humans being actually human together.
And the public is able to observe that happening and see the results and see what it's like to be to have the scope of our humanity some portion of that return to us.
Relationally behaviorally.
In terms of our role in our felt sense of role, if you can give him and some of that back.
Those objectors are going to last about six days. And then they're going to be on there and be forming their own teams. Nobody will want to be left out.
No, it is dumb enough that when they see the humans making that nectar of being human together, they're going to be like, yeah, I don't want to be part of that.
That's the original.
That's the original money.
That's what money is a representation of is that nectar.
That's right. That's right. It's the synergistic nectar.
And then the humans can learn things like this, you can teach children this and you're like, look, you know, your parents are doing this thing with money.
And what they're really trying to get is this other stuff that you and your friends make naturally when you play together.
They're not getting any of that. So they're trying really hard to get money.
You don't have to do that. The thing that you and your friends are doing can develop, can grow and can be maintained and and also can like you can get five people together and then five of them split apart to those form new ones.
The other three joint existing ones.
So that there's sort of cross pollination between team and pod groups.
And this is something that works really, really well. The game that I'm talking about is the game that every organism in nature is playing.
And the humans are made to play this game, but they're playing sort of the opposite of it, which is kill the unity and make representations of the dead things and then sell them to each other.
So if you give them a game that's authentic to play and they like it, it's going to become really contagious.
If you give actual humans something to do that's amazing and the other people see, you'll have objectives at first, but it's not going to last long.
And then say that again, you know, I want to process that.
Say the last two sentences again.
Okay, the goal is to do something so momentous and beautiful that nobody can stand to be left out.
Nobody. Everybody wants it.
That's for long. I can sense that because
it's a achievable thing in a way.
Just you and I speaking of such matters is the beginning of that.
Can you see why I say that.
Yeah, yeah, and, and I know 100%.
You know, and I have happened in my background, right, these people who are labeled as poor and whatever in the zero crime villages, but these kids are so rich.
I mean, they are alive.
Yes.
And to be human.
Yeah.
If you get excited with a cockroach up being upside down.
I mean, whatever toys can come from with what the rest of the world might call nothing, but they're excited.
Right.
Because like you were saying, you know, they're walking is impossible, running is impossible, jumping is impossible.
But they're not overwhelmed by all of the text, you know, around the world, I suppose.
Yes, and also, I mean, I'm guessing is the children have phones.
No, they don't.
By the way, this is like an alien comes to earth and good and you know finds your village and looks and says, this is a very unusual village here.
Where are your children's phones and you say, they don't have any and the alien says, Oh, I'd like to raise my children here. Do you think it would be okay.
Can I can we do this together because Wow, yeah, I mean, it's almost like it's almost like asking.
Do your children wear a mechanical parasite that destroys their attention motivation awareness.
It's not the only thing the phones do but
it's a lot of what they do.
They remind me, you know, like I'll be going back that again in a couple of months to the back to the village scene.
Yeah.
And the permanently based that very soon I'm just organizing to do that.
Yeah.
Time something with the urban world.
Okay.
What was beautiful every time I'm there, right.
The kids automatically want to help the mother.
Yeah.
You know, I mean, it was very common right to think it was very common me growing up my sisters would help the mother and I would help the father and then stuff like that right.
There's no, I mean, they didn't have to do too much.
But but now I've played in my kids and to some extent but just generally I noticed that it's they're finding it in very people are finding it very hard to get the kids to do chores.
Yeah.
But when I go to the village, the kids seem to like wow, I'm given a chance to be an adult.
Yes.
Amusement and like wow, they're treating me like an adult now.
They're completely saying I can't do this and I can't do that and stuff.
And so because my brother-in-law's my, sorry, my, yeah, my brother-in-law's children.
Yeah.
Essentially, essentially my nephew's like, right, and nieces bring breakfast.
I'm upstairs and they're downstairs and they're bringing coffee and this and this is like eight years old.
She does a good job.
Right.
I'm so happy with that.
And a mother or my wife doesn't have to push up.
She just she looks forward to doing this.
Right.
It's like.
Okay.
What you'll find is like in our culture, the children are competing to get things.
They want to get things in the village culture.
The children are competing to it's not merely give.
They are competing to participate meaningfully with the family, the village, the planet and the adults and the children.
Participate meaningfully.
And so the chance to bring coffee is better than just sitting there looking at my thumb.
And they don't have a smart phone to defect into.
So they can't, they're not going to defect that way.
So, you know, I could be doing any other thing, but the chance to bring coffee is meaningful.
I'm serving my ancestors.
They are still alive today with me in the same room.
Right.
This is magic.
Right.
We are still alive together.
Yeah.
And then maybe with that, if it's just this right of passage as in.
Right.
You know, one of the things all want to be is like, they don't want to be treated like kids like we know nothing, you know, that's that.
Too often.
Right.
I mean, some of that works in their favor because some of the children respond to that by becoming monumentally intelligent.
Yeah.
Right.
Because they're like that dumb kid, you know, my dad called me dumb.
So I learned quantum physics.
Right.
You know, or I'm just giving a ridiculous example.
But yeah, some of it does sort of help the children.
But it should that shouldn't be the, the cultural, you know,
That shouldn't be the cultural tradition.
I'm listening.
So, so wait, Darren, I want to imprint this into my head, right, which is.
Number one, that there's an issue that's a big problem of getting kids to like do the sensible things.
Right.
So sure.
That's why they don't want to do the same.
What you're saying is, okay, they are lost.
They think they want to get things.
And yeah, they want to also, okay, they want to either get things or they want to defect.
And they're addicted to electronic stimuli and things like that.
Right.
So they're used to constantly referring to an object with their attention.
The children there don't have to do that.
If you have a phone,
If they have a computer, if they have a phone, if they have a video game, if they have a television, you know, if they have even a radio,
It starts to be the same kind of thing.
And also because we've totally, you know,
Okay, I have to say.
I'm sorry.
I have to say.
The thing all those things are replacing is meaningful relation in the village with the others.
All those things, they are replacing that they are the money version of the nectar that's produced naturally.
When the people are there for each other.
This great sweetness.
Combination of silence, laying hopscotch in front of the hall, seeing the kids from the neighbor's house coming, not wearing something different.
All of that is some little sparkles, you know, and talking and learning how to.
It is because you and the children are there together for each other, even the children who aren't yours.
And you know, the children, they like, I mean, know how to put it.
The children are carrying assets that the adults don't recognize and dispose of and punish the children for carrying everywhere around here, mostly a little bit of, you know, there are a few intelligent parents that know better.
But the children are bringing something to the table.
And the adults pretend, since you eat our food, you are dependent on us and since we have to protect you, you are dependent on us.
And this creates a kind of slavery.
Children in the West are sort of conceived of as slaves.
This is why we send them to school, which is basically a slave making process.
This is why, you know, they go to university and get degrees and so forth to function in the representational layer of human culture and society, which is, you know, mostly pretty bad.
Mostly different kinds of slavery.
Children are meant for something else and they can tell the adults are suffering and they have assets that will ease the suffering of the adults if they don't eradicate it.
The children are carrying something like medicine.
Children are living medicine.
The adults are living medicine, especially when they are together for each other, then they naturally make the medicine together.
Does it make sense?
Yes, yes, yes.
In this case, medicine isn't like a pharmaceutical.
Medicine is, medicine is the food and drink of our soul or our heart.
Medicine is what, yeah.
It opens, you know, being ready to learn, you know, as opposed to taking for granted that the representationally sends the wrong signals, you know.
It does.
It completely messes up our thought.
Mistake.
Go on.
Sorry, Darren.
No, no, please.
I'm sorry.
Please continue.
Yeah, no, you, you know, you often I'm not able to, it's kind of like often I'm not able to articulate it, but I understand.
You know, the moderns are captured by a layer of processes that they enact as behaviors like drive the car to the grocery store, get the groceries.
Right.
Go to the job, get the pay.
Take the kid to the doctor, pay the attorney, do the taxes, watch the television show, mind the smartphone, clean the house, chores.
What, what, what we would call chores.
But really those are like, those are all all those processes are mostly vampiric.
They're extractive.
They take something from us.
And they give us a representation.
Now we can negotiate that layer very carefully if we're smart, so that we get actually nourishing food when we go to the grocery store.
And we don't get poison, for example, candy bars and whatever.
Yep.
But the representation layer is powerful. It's well established. It affects everything on earth.
It's lethal.
It steals life.
You know, it, it's an actual vampire would be terrified if it saw the representational layers relationship with humans, because it would, it would realize that that must be its God.
That must be the God of the van.
That's what spawns vampires.
Vampires come from that.
If there are such things.
But yes, the medicine that the village makes together, this medicine is very powerful and it has a unique protective effect.
Vampires bounce off of it.
It makes like a shield.
Right.
And so vampirism doesn't get established in the children or the adults.
And they're busy playing every other beautiful game.
Everybody will be happy even when things are difficult.
They're still going to be way happier.
Yeah.
Everyone will be taking care of each other.
I'm listening.
They're in one way of like maybe peeling away the representation layer just exposed to people.
I've tried that and it works because I, it's true.
To me, it's true.
Okay.
I'll tell you this, right?
Even the people there in the village and stuff, you know, in central Java, right?
It was very famous, you know, spice trade Asia, emergent people were discovering things and all that stuff.
Right from nothing, you know, it just became better and better, right?
As humanity went on, right?
But all of that is kind of like blocked off by modern writing and books and even anthropology and stuff.
They don't write about it that much.
Because we, okay, but okay, this thing I want to tell you.
Once I'm in the village, I realize, you know what?
These people are the richest people on planet Earth, even though they have very little currency.
Sorry.
They have a lot of currency, but very little money.
Yeah.
Why?
Why?
Right?
Yeah.
Because money, money eats.
Money eats the spirit of relation between humans.
It does.
It destroys that shit.
It just eats.
It's like pouring acid there to get rid of it.
Because now there's a single standard to rule all things.
Like the terror in the fantasy story, the Lord of the Rings, one ring to rule them all is that the ring that rules the seven elvish magic rings that keep the world alive.
The ring that rules them is malignant.
And that's money.
The one ring that rules them all in Tolkien's language, cash is the best metaphor for it around here.
It's hard to say, it's hard to say that it isn't objectively evil.
Because it's effect on the humans.
Okay, look, I could show you so many features of this.
Oh, God.
All right.
I used to feed some blue jays.
I met these, met these blue jays.
I'd bring them peanuts.
I had took great joy in feeding them.
And the male would come to my hand.
He'd land on my hand.
Take a peanut.
Female wouldn't.
Okay.
For important reasons.
One day the female got angry with me, and I didn't really understand why.
What I had noticed was this.
The blue jay couple forms a vigilance pair.
The girl stays up high.
The boy can go down an adventure.
Only when the boy is up high, does the girl come down.
Oh, shit.
I just realized that.
Okay.
So I was interfering in that.
And it would have been okay if I'd interfered in it once or twice.
A day.
But it's not okay if I interfere with it for two hours.
And the reason it's not okay is that they live in the terrain of a pair of
Cooper's Hawks and those Hawks hunt blue jays.
Oh.
All right.
So here's what I'm doing.
I'm giving them the effect.
Okay.
Here's why I'm telling the story.
Yeah.
If you put something in front of people or animals.
That's so compelling.
That it not only changes their behavior, it changes what they can be.
Right.
It drags what they can be down to fewer.
And then it becomes much more explicit things.
All decisions become binary.
Identity becomes binary.
When I was throwing those peanuts on the ground for the girl bird,
because she wouldn't come to my hand.
She was having to go to the ground without radar above her.
Because the male was off stashing the peanut.
I'd just given him.
I was paying attention to their vigilance necessities and I was providing
them with a stimulus that was so compelling that they would break
their culture of mutual support.
Right.
That would break that culture.
Yeah.
It's so compelling that their bodies, it's like putting meat in front of a dog.
Right.
The body is going to respond.
You know, if you watch, you know, just put like a stack of $100 bills,
tie it up with a rubber band and put it on a street and watch the humans.
Like it will drag their behavior down to, you know, the most likely.
Yeah.
The violence.
Yeah.
It captures the nervous system.
Can you see that?
It's a representation that's powerful enough to completely capture the
nervous system of an animal.
And for the blue jays, that's peanuts.
And for the humans, that's cash or these days crypto.
And overall, it's because, I mean, if they were enough of what I'm saying,
like the zero crime villages, right?
Meaning there's why do these.
Okay.
I have to ask you.
I'm sorry.
Go ahead.
If there were enough of the zero crime villages.
Okay.
If there was enough of that and people go and live inside there, like say my wife
comes from Indonesia to here, despite all the amount of money, you know,
quite a lot of immigrants who come here to work here want to stay in Malaysia.
You know, they come from around the region.
We've much poorer places, maybe like Nepal or used to be Thailand, Sri Lanka,
country up countries that have got constant political problems and stuff.
So, so people, you know, really have a tough time finding a job and stuff like that.
They want to, when they come here, many of them, they want to stay here because,
you know, life is better for them here.
Right.
This Indonesia, Java, when they come here, they want, they want to go back.
Why do they want to go back?
They see their village as the safety, the security of the village.
That's like a, the nest is too cozy for them want to want to trust anything else.
They want to go back, go to the nest.
So what I'm saying is, and so it's essentially.
Oh, I see.
Wait, their way of life is so familiar that the new way of life, even though it's amazing,
they want to go back to the old one anyway.
Is this what you mean?
Yes.
Or do you mean, is that it?
It's not just old.
You know, it's not just old.
At least one thing is add to the old.
All plus, I won't be sent into an old folks home.
Oh, right.
They just, whatever comfort you may give to them in an old folks home, they don't want it.
They want to be, you know, poor with their kids, their grandkids.
They want to care and be cared for by family members who know their idiosyncrasies.
Not some institution.
Okay.
That was brilliant.
Yes.
That's very, very true.
I would, I would almost go so far as to say that for most of us.
That is a implicit feature of our human experience is that.
As we get older.
Most of us soften.
And we become vulnerable.
And it's loneliness is much more difficult to bear.
And it was when we were younger and we may be in firm and have illnesses and we may need help with certain things so that, you know, if I'm in a house where there's children around, I feel relatively safe.
If there's something I can't handle that they can take care of it.
You know, or my, you know, or my brothers and sisters or, you know, the family and if there's not family, there's the neighbors, and they are family.
Humans naturally do this, they family up, unless something gets in between them first.
And one of the main things that gets in between them, at least where I live is money.
The fact that you guys don't have that.
See, in the village, the lack of the importance of money is almost like saying,
we get water that isn't we get relational water that hasn't been pre poisoned.
You see, it's the same thing you said earlier you say, I am.
What did you say I'm in.
I'm inclined to unconditional love, or something like this right and I said no you just never defected.
They don't defect.
There's nothing that would motivate them to affect a big stack of money they might just laugh at it and say like, no.
You know, I mean, right, you know, to add to what you're saying that, you know, like the helicopter did they kind of like bail out of their village for a while to get some money so they can for example, build a house.
Once they get that minimum amount they're back and they're not they don't want to be in the town anymore they want to be back in the village.
That's hilarious. Do you see how much more intelligent that is than what we do.
Like, yeah, in a situation like that your humanity has a shot at surviving.
And so do the relationships that most matter in your heart.
In the other place where they just to go to the village and they stay there.
I mean they go to the town you know they go to get the money and then they just stay there.
They continue to stay there because they bought extra houses inside.
And as they're going to live after they die, I mean they're not going to die.
Yeah, they must leave so much wealth to the next generation things will be better.
No, they create everybody is doing it crime culture, you know, despite prosperity.
Yeah, it's funny because the I think it's really important when I hear you speak you say we have a zero crime village.
And I'm not sure that a lot of people even know that such things exist at all in the world.
Obviously, yeah, no most people would be like what does that even mean.
Although the statement makes it real you know the language makes it relatively clear what it means there's no crime here.
But and by the way if there's no crime like you probably don't you don't really need cops you might need a fire department.
Yeah, but you don't need cops and you don't need weapons.
But you don't need lawyers.
You don't need guns.
Yeah, you don't need an anti corruption body.
Yeah, right, right, right, right.
Yeah, you don't need courts.
You don't need prisons.
All of the people correctness. Yeah, all the most obvious things is like, you know, cosmeticized dirt, you know, like, it's really dirty, but you put lots of makeup in these top anybody saying the truth about it.
Yes.
Yes, all these things are.
I mean,
I usually don't think in religious terms but when I see the festering malignance of the prisons and the courts and the cops and the armies and the military and so forth.
It's hard for me not to think that they're demons.
They do what they do what actual demons would actually do.
So, it doesn't really matter whether their origin is metaphysical or not. They're the same damn thing.
Now look, here where we live in the West in America, the institutions that
apply our social agreements are governments, which is a big mess of a million little branches.
Our police, the military fire department, the hospitals, the schools, right.
Yeah, those things.
Yeah.
All of them are decent. We couldn't get along without cops because shit would just turn into the wild wild West we think.
So we have to have cops.
And sometimes the cops are an absolute nightmare and sometimes they save your life.
They sort of have both, you know, both valences.
The fire department almost always just does good.
You know, is put out fires. Okay.
That's not of all the single jobs you could pick that one seems pretty virtuous. The hospital is kind of similar.
The schools, the schools start to get sketchy because it's about slave making and stuff, but
what's the worst in the schools?
The intensity of the blight, right, the intensity of the disease in the university is similar to grade schools in high school.
It's just more sophisticated and highly complex.
Right. Let's just call this the malware in the education system.
It's in every step of the system.
So the malware is in the whole staircase, but the way the malware works up near the top of the staircase in the universities is different.
And there's, you know, 15 new kinds as of last year.
That stuff is mutating.
As fast as you could try to eradicate it.
It's emerging in new forms as you watch it.
It's very,
it's highly resistant to technical intervention.
Its primary vulnerability is relational intervention, change the relationships the malware can't function.
Hey, Darren, would the US have less of a problem?
Less of a problem, if it wasn't such a lot, if it was, say, five separate countries.
Not messy.
It's interesting. Okay. The honest answer is, of course, we don't know.
Okay, the simple, simple. Wait, let me finish.
The simple correct answer is any attempt at responding would obviously just be my opinion.
Whereas some of the things that I'm talking about are not merely my opinion. These are, in a sense, obvious features of our situation.
I think
that solution or that transformation would change a lot of things.
We've never really experienced anything much resembling it.
I don't have any data.
It's not like we're just asking in a vacuum. We're asking in the time and context in which we live.
So we're asking, like, if the US split into five bodies in 2024, you know, what effect do you think that would have on malware and education?
One feature of the setup that I like is if you've got five Petri dishes in which to attempt to spawn something more intelligent than our educational system,
you'd have five shots at it instead of one.
But you can actually have as many shots as you want because the fact that, you know,
I mean, anybody who wants to is free to start some kind of new educational system. Most people aren't that bold.
And there have been attempts, you know, in the states we have Waldorf schools, for example,
that are wildly different from standard educational system.
You don't hear much talked about about what happens to Waldorf student. I mean, like, for example, as a cohort, are they better citizens than the others?
You know, because right now I don't know what the data is on that. What is that Rudolph Steiner's game, I think it was.
Yeah, Rudolph Steiner as well. One of my girlfriends had been raised in a Waldorf school, and I'd known a couple of other people who were.
And even when I was young, some of the same ideas were used to build a school that had one classroom for all the ages.
So like a central like, you know, unity, right, will keep all the ages together. They can learn together, help each other instead of segmenting them.
Didn't go very well for who knows 10 reasons to Sunday, but yeah, I don't know.
Did it not go well because the malignancy spread across so many aspects.
Yes, look, look.
You know, I can imagine a science fiction story where we go to
We pick 70 billionaires.
We go to them and we tell them, we will educate your children.
We will give your children an educational experience that they will always be excited about and they will outperform anything you can buy from anyone else.
And so you build the system experimentally that way you learn how to do that.
Right that way.
And then you just attack the whole fucking school system from there with the same with whatever you can produce from that breeder reactor.
How do we actually get children meaningful human experience and at the same time deep representational intelligence.
And one of the best ways to do that is just to teach them the structure of representational cognition.
Once they see that they will never bow to it.
They'll manipulate it from above, just like humans should always do.
It's okay if we have representations we have to manipulate them from above.
We have to not be manipulated.
We have to not be puppeted by our own representations.
Does that make sense.
Yep.
Yep.
And you can teach this this is teachable stuff.
Right.
This is stuff we could discover those features of language and modern thought.
This features simple semantic and linguistic and philosophic features that you could teach to children and adults that would mostly free them.
At least in their minds from, I don't know, 68% of the traps they're going to face in consciousness throughout their lifetime.
We're walking around wearing like iron cages in our minds.
Us humans.
So far, most of us.
I am myself included to the degree that I live in a city. I'm, I'm subject to the same problem. I'm, I'm a, I'm a prisoner dreaming of a jailbreak.
So it sounds like for you, you know, we're outside the jail is and you intend to get there right quick.
Hmm.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Is Benji with you.
Say that again.
Is Benji with you where you are.
Yeah, I mean,
I thought I heard about working.
Oh, not right now.
Earlier he was insisting here.
Before I started talking to you.
Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah, because I heard him.
Okay, okay.
Yeah, it's quite a character once, you know, but you know, it's the same. It's saved my sanity.
So, and has me need to really much better understand the village scene now like, because you get lost.
One of the things is me too.
But I wanted to achieve, you know, you've got this right. So, and if all kinds of people like not just everybody like 10 out of 10 or 100 out of 1000 out of 1000 people only know achievement by hey, how much wealth do you have.
Yes, did you.
That's what I said.
Yeah, it's a sick standard that turns everything to one thing.
So when you ask them, you know, when they determine your value as a person, they want to know what property you own who you're married to.
You know, are you, are you well bred?
Do you come from power? Do you come from money?
Like, for example, you know, I got suspended by LinkedIn, you know, of being forthright, right?
Because fellas were doing a con job in Singapore and stuff. So I was like, stop. I mean, just generally it pisses me off.
Nobody speaks up against a blatant con.
Yeah, okay, I agree. I agree. But let's, let's agree together that we will try to discover how to do things that are effective.
Yep.
Right, so that even if we take on some kind of small mission together, even the mission of this conversation, because this, you know, this works.
And let's just have the some simple agreements. I'm not trying to write these in stone, but we will try to help each other see better.
And if action is required, we will try to find very effective ways to act.
Yeah.
Because LinkedIn is like putting a firecracker in the fire department.
Like they're just waiting for someone to go sideways. It's the same with Facebook. Those, those are battlegrounds. That's enemy owned terrain.
This is part of why I am careful, mostly careful on Facebook.
It's funny, you know, a few days ago, I did something I never, ever do.
I posted some comments from a news source on a political issue.
Okay.
And it wasn't any rowdy. It wasn't any specifically radical statement.
Over the next two weeks that post got to zero views.
None.
No one saw it.
Oh, wow.
Shadow ban.
Yeah, not an accident.
Hmm.
Right.
It's so obvious, isn't it?
Such a devious thing to do.
Well, I'll tell you, there's we could.
We could take that model and flip it over.
That model.
Okay, that thing gives us a model of what not to do.
If you have a really good model of what not to do.
You can flip it over and no one will not want to be there.
Like I have a model of how to build a system on the internet that puts
this back together.
Keeps all our data and communications private.
Okay.
Helps us get smarter every time we make a move with a machine of any kind.
Yep.
And produces a social adventuring system.
So that people form teams to accomplish.
You know, instead of putting a ball through a hoop.
Right.
Hmm.
We accomplish something in the actual world of humans.
Ah.
Good.
You've been developing it.
I have a model.
I can show you a model of how we could do it.
And also, okay, now here's the, here's the thing that's actually a little
more compelling.
Okay.
The way that system works is a model of how we can play together without
machines.
We don't need machines to do it.
We naturally do it together.
Hmm.
If most of the malware isn't running, we naturally do this together.
I'm just trying to demonstrate that there's a way that we could take the
electronic infrastructure of the internet and do something completely the opposite
of what we're doing with it.
And it would be, I mean, it would outcompete everything that currently
exists.
And it would, I mean, there's so many abilities you could have with it that
we don't have.
And look, I'm not a big fan of link the humans to machines.
That's not, that's not my, my favorite game plan by a long shot.
The problem I have is that the humans are linked to machines.
So if we want to capture some humans and give them a shot at liberty, or at
least discovering what that might mean, we might need to capture their
machines.
Yes.
We might need those machines doing something different than what they're
doing, like something non vampiric with the humans.
Right.
These are just thoughts, but I do think very deeply about these matters
because I want, I want the experience of being with other humans doing
meaningful things.
That's what I actually want.
Yep.
That's really same here.
Say that much because I, like, I just, I kind of like, when I've had enough of
these machines and all in the town, I just run away, but you know, like, I
just, yes, you know, bought and go because I kind of like, I don't want to
explain and be politically correct and use the language to, you know, to go,
you know, to just go.
Yeah.
Hey, I, but I hear you 100% on, you know, I got, I do have to do things
more effectively than I have.
Right.
Meaning you, you have to, in the transition, you have to get into the
machines that they are attached to, to get them off the machines.
Like for example, one after another.
If all the kids are going to have phones, we have to give those phones, we
have to give those kids something on their phones that it doesn't eat them
alive.
Right.
And to, to, to, to even, you know, get them to instruct them or I mean, like,
to, to get them to work together to, for, on an offline activity.
And what I, what I have in mind as I talk to you here is confederating and
intense, making a bit more intense, right.
In a village life, in a village and small town life in Indonesia, Darren,
right.
A country of 20 million people.
Right.
One of the last bastions of reality, you know,
you know, but if you, if you, the funny thing is, it's ironic, dude.
If you, one of the questions that I have in our conversation for you that I
haven't asked you yet is, do you want your village to have a voice?
Yes.
With which it speaks to the world?
Yes.
Yes.
Okay.
So I thought perhaps this might be so.
And what I'm trying to tell you is that's not impossible.
But to protect the village, that voice might have to be anonymous.
Sure.
Because if, if, okay, but if something, if, if the world realizes there's a
zero crime village, that's not going to go well, dude.
That will not go well.
Because they, what they'll come over then, you know, they think they can
fast it, is it?
Ah, there's 15 things that can go wrong with that.
But I did have the same idea early in our conversation.
I thought to myself, wait, there's a zero crime village.
Holy cow.
Like we need to get these people on the radio to the other villages.
We need to link the zero crime villages around the world.
We need to, you know, these people need to have a voice.
And then I thought, wait a minute, that sounds like setting up a sky beacon to
15 different kinds of vampires.
Just like, I can't wait to extract whatever nectar they're managing to
produce over there and commodify that and bank the, bank the profit, you know.
Except, you know, I've said that, you know what it is, a whole bunch of things
has it like, it's not that easy.
You know, I'll give you, I'll give you a few examples, right?
If you go to India, if you go to even Malaysia, right?
Pretty much all good sources of natural water from the mountains has been
taken over by a Nestle company like that.
This is what I mean by vampires.
That is straight up vampires, right?
They go after the water, you know.
I'm with you.
I'm with you, go ahead.
They know how to do the TV advertising and the search engines and all that stuff.
Yeah, we'll give you candy bars.
We'll give you some candy bars, you know.
Yeah.
But in Indonesia, right?
The politics is such that it's very hard to, it seems like, you know,
many layers, you know, and it's not, it's not mainstream.
It's not organized so that you can say, ah, this is a layer one.
This is the, you know, exactly.
And all that.
It's just kind of like a bit all over the place.
So it's like, meaning, for example, to get the mountain water, right?
But for Nestle, they have to get 18 different approvals and those,
they're not in four or five camps.
They're like all over the place, you know.
So you can't, people don't try.
It seems like they try and give up and it doesn't go anywhere, you know.
So they go after a few things, maybe like a national telephone,
maybe they can get somewhere.
But not anything that has got some, too much of a regional local footing.
Like water from a river, from a mountain, whatever, whoever.
It's the people in the villages nearby, the people affected by that river
have enough of a sea and somehow have enough of a topic, right?
That doesn't get there.
So yeah, you know, it's, I can't explain exactly.
I can't explain exactly all why, but one big difference between Indonesia
and quite a lot of the rest of the world.
I mean, this just makes me think, Bilal, I'm sorry to say this,
but it just makes me think, Nestle is right now talking to Bard
about how to break that trap, right?
Nestle's going to straight up use AI and go like, okay, this trap has 19 parts.
Can you solve for this?
And then I'll be like, yeah, here's three solutions with a 70% chance of success.
And here's 19 with a, you know, 58.
That will not last.
That safety won't last.
I mean, who knows what's going to happen.
The world is wildly unpredictable.
We could be, we could be living in a, from now on, it might just be like a storm
of black swans, events that we never predicted or thought of.
But there's certainly much, many more of those now that there,
than there ever were.
In our life, let's go ahead.
Somehow, you know, the, you know, the alternative, you know, the alternative,
I mean, like, to me, like life in Malaysia has gone downhill.
And when I sense the US has gone downhill, you know, at a very fundamental,
I mean, give the individual in a soul, you know.
I mean, like, why must, why must there be like virtually no choice except to be,
to go into an old folks home.
Why can't the family unit be together?
I mean, what's.
Yes, yes, because it's the difference between a modern culture and a traditional
culture.
And look, in some, in some nations, there is still traditional culture.
There's even some of it here in the United States where the children just naturally
care for their parents and grandparents and so forth.
But mostly it comes from other countries because for some reason, during the origin
of the nation, that value was not emphasized.
It was much more about the privilege, entitlement, defection and addiction of the individual.
Which, you know, like I said, is basically just malware.
It's relational malware.
Or, you know, perhaps that's one useful way to think about it.
It's not the only way.
But yeah, that tradition wasn't preserved.
If you go to Japan, it's there.
Yeah.
I don't know how much in various places in China it is.
Russia is a bit more like the United States.
France and England, more like the United States.
But some other countries, the tradition is alive.
And in most countries that didn't suffer eradicative colonization, that tradition, you know, lives.
It's naturally, I think it's naturally human.
It's not the only game in town, but I think it's naturally human.
I mean, I mean, the problem in modern countries is we want convenience and grandma and grandpa are wildly inconvenient.
I'd rather defect by watching some comedy channel on TV than deal with, you know, whatever's going on with my ancestors.
But it's a defection based culture.
But there is other ramifications to, you know, like all folks, right?
Yeah.
Like the all folks who like the children.
Oh, sorry.
Go ahead.
No, like the whole 90, they say, like, for example, 90% of medical expenses or something of that sort, right?
Right.
Yeah.
Well, the main reason you don't want to die a year earlier is because there's nothing has been fulfilling in your life.
You've been living a life of just affecting from whatever you might have otherwise participated in.
It's very safe, but it's extremely lonely and boring.
Because I mean, like, you die in your village together with the other people and so you're not drugged onto onto a really hopeless medical system.
You know, you know, supposedly wants to keep you alive, but usually it is actually vampiric.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Literally, it just sucks.
It sucks the life out of you and then it sucks the money out of your family for sucking the life out of you.
It's like a double vampire.
That's I mean, if someone said, Hey, would you want it on this game?
We're going to suck the life out of this person.
You're going to get that life and we're going to suck the money out of their family.
We're going to get the money you want some, you know, a lot of people would just say yes.
So, and, you know, and come on with all the challenges.
And don't you think, you know, don't you think AI would be used to like bring make this explicit and guys, right?
This is not really.
This is a Boston bargain.
It's not a bargain.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I mean, although the problem is that the AI is a curated and it would be just as much of a problem if they weren't like the humans have really invented something very, very dangerous here.
And it's not without promise.
But as we know from looking historically at humans and technology, that shit goes sideways right after the idealism is overcome by piracy.
Wait, Darren, you still taught me today.
Despite all the negatives of the US medical insurance system and how it's wasteful and all that stuff, right?
Enough, you know, let's say at the public intellectual level, enough of us know that, hey, all said and done, Canada seems to be doing it a bit better and enough European countries and okay, leave the Australia seems to be doing it better than the US.
Exactly.
There are examples of countries that do it pretty well, we might imagine.
Okay, but that doesn't seem to be portable into the US, you can't look at a guy who gives an excuse, oh, we have the US and blah, blah, blah, blah.
Okay, look.
Yeah, no, but what you don't.
Okay, look, the problem here is that
And this is an ironic problem.
We actually call this country, the US.
That is the word of us.
And that, along with many.
Yeah, right, that along with many unfortunate features of our history.
Incline the citizens of the United States to think in a way that is fundamentally black and white.
Fundamentalistic, you know, it's fundamental in its fundamentalist in its understanding of us and them, who are we and who are they.
And most of the us's are fake.
Right. The same way most of the thems are.
But if you identify with one of those fake us's you inherit a bunch of them's.
And this is a kind of an us and them economy that the US is amazing at.
It's like being amazing at filling your own organs with cancer or something relationally, it never, it will never work intelligently.
But this is a this is a fundamental problem with us.
Yeah, it's bad.
Despite despite the fact that, I mean, your states and municipalities have enough independent, for example, you know, yeah, I do.
It goes, you know, but Miami goes up.
Yeah.
They can, but they generally don't because the malware.
The influence of the malware is powerful.
Right. Politics in the United States is a lot about what various kinds of theft counterfeiting value counterfeiting value more effectively than your opponent.
Get the money, and then a sort of complex back room favor exchange among politicians.
So, it's like the structure of the system might be sound.
We've never implemented that system. Does that make sense?
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
It's just a layer of pirate. It's like a multi layer cake of seven kinds of piracy floating on top of the structure as it stands as a legal or
you know, sociological agreement system.
Mostly the structure doesn't get implemented.
What gets implemented is piracy and vampirism.
Well, I think Vivek Ramaswamy, you know, was running for a while.
And when he articulates it, you can sense that, for example, you know, you want to, he talks about getting rid of the FBI, right?
Trump couldn't because Trump was essentially conned by the civil servants that you can.
There are too many laws that stop you from firing civil servants, right?
But Ramaswamy was saying that that is the case when you're firing individual civil servants, but if you're having a mass restructuring, you know, the law allows you to do that.
And I think the Supreme Court, as it's stated, as it's constituted, because it's got enough of a majority of Trump appointees or conservatives, right?
Who are really for, I mean, who sees the sense of, yeah, the President has the right to restructure the FBI, you know, by executive order, by, I mean, this guy is.
Yeah, or possibly even the Constitution.
I mean, you know, Trump is basically, okay.
Trump is really dangerous for, in my view, for two reasons.
The first is that he has successfully circumvented regulation in the past.
And the second is that he has, not only does he have no respect for regulation, he's a scoff law, right?
And a scoff law will earn the vote of every male scoff law in the United States just for that one reason.
And, okay, the third thing that's dangerous about him is he has shown much smarter people what is possible.
And what he has shown is possible is as follows, the United States as a nation can be captured by a single male human being.
He's shown them that.
He's basically shined a flashlight on a part of the game that nobody really believed was possible.
He's doing the impossible.
He's going from, he's going to go from zero to 100.
He's going to have a go at the impossible.
And he's old enough that he probably doesn't give much of a shit if he fails.
He's got nothing to lose, right?
It's all, anything he gets done is gravy, right?
Like he can do anything that works.
So, yeah, this is dangerous shit.
He's shown others who are much more intelligent than him that the prize can be had.
You can take the Virgin home with you, for sure, right?
You can have her whole family, you know.
That whole thing, you can just grab that whole damn thing and one fell swoop, right?
And here's how you do it.
You start with these moves over here.
You play some judges on the Supreme Court, Bing Bang Boom, casino payoff, right?
That's really dangerous.
He's shown others that it can be done.
He's relatively stupid, in my view, or at least he plays that face really well.
But, man, what a fucking dangerous idiot.
Oh, my God.
But, Darren, when you had Hillary, you know, running against Hillary Clinton, running against Trump,
didn't it occur to you that, my God, the U.S. has failed with these people running for president?
That's brilliantly said, but, yeah.
No, that occurred to me some...
Okay, I'm pretty sure that occurred to me when I was six and I watched John F. Kennedy being executed in Texas over and over again on TV,
and, you know, juxtaposed with some of his speeches.
No, that dream died in me a long, long time ago, my friend.
I mean, I was born the month after Kennedy was executed, and I've seen that guy speak.
I've never seen anything in politics resembling the appearance of true human virtue that I saw in him.
I note that it's the appearance.
I'm not saying the guy was a saint.
I'm saying, in a room full of demons, he stood out brightly.
And that happened only a couple of times during my lifetime.
You know, Carter might not have been a great president, but he wasn't evil.
Yeah, I mean, so to me, like, if you can allow a contest like that, well, what is your fail?
And what else can expect of a failed system?
Currently, I think most Americans expect that the failure of the United States has to end with a bunch of bloodshed and violence,
preferably as much as possible, maybe even apocalypse level, right?
If we're going to go out, we're not going to switch to a new system.
We're going to take the planet with us, just like any insane psychopath, you know, would do, right?
We're not going to, we're not going to try a new way of doing this.
We're going to blow shit up, you know, because there's a feature in private cognition that can be inflamed enough.
And the human societies resemble the shadow of this problem.
So the kid who, all right, I could probably tell you a lot about what happens when some kid picks up an automatic weapon
and goes to a public place and just opens up on the people there.
Because what's happening in that kid's mind is a reflection of what, of a feature of our society.
And that feature is, I will win, whether I deserve to or not.
And if I don't win, everybody dies.
There's a feature of private cognition that works that way.
There's a feature of our own minds that works that way and it gets reflected in the social cognition of modern humans.
And that's the thing that produces, you know, stuff like, I don't know, Hitler, Putin invading Ukraine.
I mean, maybe there's, maybe there's stuff I don't know about that move, but that looks, you know, insane to me from outside.
Israel pounding Gaza into dust.
Not dissimilar, except in that case, somebody punched them first or so it seems.
I think the people there, just like, I mean, I remember when 9-11 happened in the United States, I had two thoughts.
The first was, oh my God, 15 people just changed the course of the nation in 12 hours.
Wow, I thought it could be done.
And then the second was, oh my God, are we in trouble now?
We're going to go chasing the wrong, we're going to go killing the wrong scapegoat for, yeah, we're going to kill the wrong scapegoat.
And that's going to create a future of enmity and hatred and blood oaths of vengeance and things like this.
Both thoughts.
Now, I'm not an advocate of changing the course of nations with violence.
I want to be very clear about that.
I did notice that a very small group of humans in like the course of, I don't know, 48 hours, they radically altered the course of an entire nation.
That made me realize that the principle was real.
Small number of people.
I just imagine the, you know, I'm trying to figure out what's the opposite of a bomb and how do we make one?
What's the opposite of a bomb?
Yeah, yeah, what's the human relational opposite of a bomb and how do we make one?
I want to make the opposite of a bomb.
I want something that heals things back together explosively and contagiously.
It just starts crystallizing the whole network toward, you know, intelligent unity.
I can imagine it.
I can see it in my mind.
It's possible.
Yes, yes, yes.
It's possible.
It doesn't occur to me right now, but what occurs to me is I come across, you know, such what appears to be opposites, but they may just be complementary at a level that, you know, that I'm not familiar with, you know, because it's not discussed enough.
I mean, you and me are like, what you're writing so rare, you know, but it's so appealing.
Right.
And I would be even better if there are a few more people who could engage at your level so that there can be interaction on it.
You know, not just pedantic interaction as to what do you mean and what do you mean, but like, yes.
You know, people doing their own homework, right?
And then reflecting and then, you know, passing and, you know, weaving.
Or actually, you know, or actually initiating projects.
Ah, even better.
Fantastic.
Like doing stuff together.
Yeah, that's what I want to do.
I mean, I'm good at caroling people together.
A lot of people, because of low confidence, you know, I like to say, oh, I don't understand.
I don't know where to start.
Come, come, come, you know, because how did this village look, we can take them to nursery school.
If that's the case, we can do very simple exploratory stuff together so that they get a taste for the water.
We don't have to throw them in the water.
They don't have to become, you know, mercenaries or something.
Right.
We just introduce them to the water a little bit at a time and say, hey, are you comfortable here?
Okay, let's go to the next step.
Beautiful, you know, we can learn together how to do this in the same way your mother attended the mind of your childhood.
Right, we can start out with the presumption that we're all intelligent, playful, creative human beings together.
And then we can just make simple moves, you know, like a kid learning how to stand up.
Right, we can do it.
We can do it.
You know, it's not hard to do.
Humans naturally are good at this.
You can get them doing this kind of thing.
I think.
Yeah, no, you're right.
You're right.
I do have a small group I experiment with.
You know, we try some actual stuff.
I'm not just talking.
And I'm not, I guess, I'm afraid of being pedantic.
I want to be active, not pedantic.
Okay.
You, you want to be substantial.
I mean, you want to fail.
I want to do it.
I mean, you know, yeah, let's fail.
I was doing something.
No problem.
Yeah.
That's it.
That's it.
And I'm, as you were mentioning it, I was thinking of the school in my village and the kids and the teachers.
I wonder about that.
That must be amazing.
What's that like?
Have you been in there?
Have you been in a classroom?
Do you know how they relate with the children?
The, the school is not good.
The school is not great.
Yeah.
It doesn't open them, but they're not bad compared to other schools as well.
They're not too kind of like a nannish or monitor, you know, like the strict.
They're not that either.
But on the other hand, they don't, they don't allow for any creativity.
They want them to follow the rules and, you know, and then.
That sounds typically Western.
Hmm.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Regimented.
Yeah.
Regimented soul.
But when the kids come out of school, back to their villages and sit back and all that, they play to me.
They're learning a lot when they're playing and when they are with their families.
They imitate their doubts.
They're preparing because, you know, parents are preparing to somebody's wedding or feast.
They're helping out and they're watching, watching more people and parents are also going to the, to the plot of land and in a planting rice.
They're helping parents with planting the rice and handing to the garden and stuff like that.
Overall, the apprenticing, the bigger role for them is not what I go to school and then after school, I was going to get a job.
No, the bigger thing is like, in the case of the girls, right?
Oh, I'll be, I'll be my mother.
Right.
So they become good mothers, right?
And they become good healers of old, taking care of people.
They seem to learn.
Yes, because it is traditional to take care of each other.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Right.
So we, we just need to expand that to because expand that to, hey, whether you choose to do it at home or you choose to do a bigger thing, meaning two in villages, right?
Medical things or even computers or all the other things that you need to do in a, in a, in today's world, right?
It's not, you'll get bullied by countries that do, you know, with weapons, right?
Mm-hmm.
You, you've got to get your act together to a level that you are able to defend yourself to.
You make enough, you're productive enough, like you're making enough returns so that's enough of your people can be soldiers like they were, like societies were.
I know, but now will come the malware.
I'm afraid once it's like it comes with the police and the soldiers to have soldiers, you have money problems, you need money.
Now what will happen to the village?
I am afraid.
I hear you though, please continue with your thought.
I see.
So good, good.
I like, like a candidness because you know what, what it is when you mentioned that, you know, one thing, one, I agree, you know, wow, pay attention to that.
You're right.
What do we do about, how do we anticipate the other thing that comes to me is, you know, when does the societies were very strong, the villagers didn't have police, but they had plain clothes in town.
They didn't need any arms to have the strongest villages because they were able to anticipate somewhat like, you know, in nature, how is it that there is quite a lot of law and order in a tropical forest?
I mean, we think of.
Actually, there's not law and order.
I'm not sure that there's a lot of, well, maybe I'm not understanding you properly yet.
I'm not sure there's a lot of law and order.
There's a lot of non, not defecting.
But go ahead.
Do you mean law and order between the insects and the plants and the animals? Do you mean that, that kind of law or between tribes?
No, I mean, between the 10,000 species.
Okay, yeah, yeah, I just, I mean, there's something there, but I don't think it's law and order.
It's intimacy.
Right.
It's one animal in a billion bodies.
So they don't defect from intimacy.
Therefore, no laws are required and there are no orders.
You see, like, they can share the same, I mean, like you have birds and you have insects, lizards, and the tree.
And they can have like, kind of like unawaresly, share the space.
Yes.
Yep.
But if the lizard get hungry, the insect better move.
If the bird gets hungry.
Yeah.
Yeah, but you know, like, when you're, when you're walking through a forest, whatever, that seems like a minority, you know, like the exception is, right?
Yeah.
Yeah, who do you think and stuff, but that is not the, that's not, in the case of human beings, we've made it like the capital issue and it's not just, we've made it.
It really is a big deal that we've gone downhill.
Yes.
No, we're collapsing toward the worst potentials of our species rapidly together.
We're all contributing to this collapse actively, instead of doing any other thing.
And mostly I think it's because a we don't know what to do.
And be it doesn't pay as well.
Thankfully now I'm old enough.
I don't care.
I want to do something meaningful.
If I have to pay to do something meaningful.
Fine.
Let's go.
Okay, okay.
Yeah, I want to.
I want to run the experiments.
So, Darren, this model that you have, right?
Would you, do you think it has to be done in the US or it can be done in another country or it can be done?
It would be very, be very radical to be done somewhere else.
But yeah, it could be done anywhere.
Okay.
In fact, I argue, I would argue that it's basically what nature usually is up to.
It's observe nature. She's doing this set of things that humans could do really well together.
And they naturally do it really well together wherever that isn't captured or interfered with.
But yeah, the system as a system, it could be done anywhere.
It can be done with existing technology.
I don't think governments would change.
I honestly, I don't believe if we could actually produce what I have in mind.
I don't think governments would last another four years.
We can do something so much better than governments that I'm really shocked nobody's at the idea to do that.
Okay, great, great.
Basically, you can envisage the model that you have in mind.
And I can imagine that the model you have in mind and within it, teams of five, for example, doing problem solving and add it together.
Yeah, they can synergize with other teams easily.
In fact, they're highly motivated to synergize with other teams.
Essentially, there's a kind of money which is something more like fulfillment that we can pay to humans.
And they can also make money with the analytics they produce without those analytics being traced to them personally so that they can have privacy.
Fantastic, fantastic.
Because that's what I mean, in like in Indonesia, they like that.
They pretty much want that because they're not totally free from their military phobia.
Yes, for good reason.
Eventually, the soldiers will come.
They may not be here today, but someday they are coming.
You know, everyone knows this, all the old people know it.
Yes, yes, yes, yes.
So they, I mean, like on Facebook and stuff, all of them don't use their own names.
Right.
Why would you use your own name?
It doesn't make any sense.
For most purposes, it's dangerous.
Darren, were you in the internet when there wasn't any web and stuff that was just mailing lists?
I'm a computer technician.
I've been working with computers since 1981.
I've done some programming.
I watched the birth of the internet.
Long ago, in the beginning, we used to have what were called bulletin board systems.
Yep.
And you would, you know, you would dial, yeah, VBS says you'd dial up with a, you know, you'd have a 1200, 2400 modem.
You'd dial up with a modem.
This would, you know, you'd have some sort of a validation exchange with the server.
And then, you know, you were a user on a VBS.
Most of those were used for sharing cultural objects, art, porn, computer programs, games, particularly media.
Yeah.
Well, why I asked Darren, I was trying to get a full of this.
The early days of the internet, right?
Pretty much there wasn't any pseudonyms, you know, the mailing lists and maybe the sock culture.
Wait, are you sure?
What, in what VBSs were, was it not pseudonymous?
Because you had username.
No, yeah, VBSs had.
Oh, in the beginning of the internet.
Yeah.
Oh, yes.
Mostly true.
Your campus background, maybe because of the academic background, perhaps, because I, because I worked at that time, I was working for a company, IP shop in Toronto.
Yeah.
And, you know, I saw the value of us being able to recognize this guy and I was like, let's go and see, you know.
Yes, yes.
In a trustworthy situation.
Well, you'd still probably want the option of pseudonyms, but in a trustworthy situation, you'd use your, your primary name.
Yep.
I imagine.
Although, you know, with indigenous cultures, they didn't have names like Bob or Tony, I mean, and their names would change under certain conditions.
It seems to me, like if you marry into a new, yeah, there's lots of conditions that would change your name.
And why, why do you mention it?
So, okay, let me make sure I'm hearing you.
So you're saying something like I remember conditions under which it was very useful to know precisely who I'm speaking to.
No masquerading.
Were you saying something like that?
Going, going to the heart of the matter, you know, just when I said, yeah, don't, the speaker should not be, should not be split from the speech.
Right. Yeah.
You know, yeah, I mean, on the other hand, there's 10 different people inside me and it's not because I'm schizophrenic. I'm human.
So now what do all our must all of them bear the responsibility for the voice of any of them.
Well, I don't know, I'm not saying yes or no, I'm just saying.
It's a complicated question, right, like I want to actually entertain the question.
I think what is this is for enough for some for enough things, maybe all, you know, maybe at the ethical things we want to the issue is where do we want accountability and where.
Yeah.
And I would say that
most of the time when we want accountability.
Something has gone really badly wrong already.
Right, like.
Yeah, by the time we need accountability, relational intimacy is broken down dramatically.
Why don't you want the exploratory and why do you want them to wait till they are sure before they open their mouth? Why don't you want them to come in with the nations?
Yes.
And why don't you have language that explicitly allows enables that.
Yes.
Yes.
It's not the old, this isn't the only truth, but a fundamental principle is like, once human cognition becomes oriented toward indicting someone or something.
It breaks down.
It's no longer very intelligent.
It's making a mess.
vulnerability of the space, the space.
Yes.
Yes.
I mean, that's more brilliant than what I would say.
That's really brilliant what you're saying there. You're saying.
It's crucial that we allow the play, the natural play of explorative learning and discovery and making mistakes and getting it wrong.
You know,
all kinds of other things that disappear once.
It should be children ready, you know.
Yeah.
What I mean, what a what a brilliant thing, you know, you, you buy it with your expansion really made it for me.
The brilliant one, you were the one who said this first.
I only tried to see what you were saying. I was like, no, he's saying something even more radical than what you're saying, Darren.
What I was saying was, what I was saying was, by the time you're interested in indictment, you've lost most of your intelligence and I find this to be true of myself.
But you said something crazier. You were like, in an actually trusted relational context, the free play of mistake doesn't lead and, you know, experiment and discovery and learning doesn't lead to judgment.
It leads to mutual benefit or something like this.
Yeah.
Yeah, that's crazy.
You're not allowed to say that.
You can say things like that.
You mustn't go around saying things like that. The humans will get ideas.
So that's it, you know, like, basically, hey there, right, play, essentially allow the kids to teach you.
Yes.
Hey, this is how we do it.
This is how we dig a hole or how we catch a tadpole. Come, you know, the teachers have been stopping us and we, you go inside there and say, you kind of laugh or whatever the teacher.
Can you give us a break? I mean, kind of like, ah, you make the club something, you know, distract her while you go back to learning from the kids and then maybe producing some outcomes and make the tea that the old school teacher happy to.
Yes, exactly. Right. Yeah, you can please the old guard and innovate at the same time.
It doesn't have to be pure rebellion. Right. Yeah, you can please, you can please tradition and still innovate.
Yep. Yep.
And so long as you're becoming patient, you're persistent.
It should yield a better, the better result, the better outcome to everybody.
Absolutely. Yes.
Patience.
This doesn't have to be done in the next 10 seconds.
Yeah.
That would work. Yeah, that would work. Right. Because the kids are smart too, you know, and they're kind of like forced to accept the status quo and the teachers to like finding maybe too difficult because they're all busy to too much of an extent to how they have to do this and kind of the modern world
to build something with too many little details, too many charts in a way.
What do you sense that you sense that is part of the reason why the change is slow and how it doesn't happen.
No, the problem is worse. The problem is that
the new teachers
should be free
to grow along with the children
instead of to dictate the direction of growth to the children.
And they know nothing but to dictate. That's it, you know, they're trained to dictate.
In English, I make a joke about this. I'm like, it's like a person holding a hard penis and they keep pointing it at you. They're dictating.
I know it's a very crude joke. But, but, but yeah, in English, that's a reasonable pun.
And it makes sense. It's like they're hitting you over the head with the hardened member of authority.
No one likes that. And it's a shitty job. Like no teacher would want.
No teacher would ever act that way or want that if they were having the experience of learning and growing with the children.
And there and nobody's going to tell me that we can't produce that.
We have a teacher on site. We got the kids on site. You got them together. You should be able to pull off miracles. It might take you a little while to figure out how but don't tell me you can't.
I've seen it done.
I've participated in it in schools where I had a teacher who was like, we're going to take the one kid in this class you can't write at all.
And we're going to get that kid writing essays that are powerful, blow people away.
I mean, here's, here's a secret that will blow your mind in 1990.
Or something no way to probably I took an English class. I hadn't been in school since I was 12. I never went to high school. I'm a self educated person.
I took an English class and because I'm a writer.
And the teacher asked me to teach the class for them next semester so I did.
And what I discovered was pretty amazing. So, there are about 90 kids they range in age from 16 to 26.
We had three classes of about 30 kids apiece they were mostly upper middle class white kids.
Most of them were like be the plus average coming into junior college from high school.
Okay, of those 90 American kids in a wealthy sub suburban town.
Four of them could reasonably produce a written sentence in their only language.
And two of them could compose a paragraph.
Wow.
Those kids sucked at understanding the old or speaking or writing, the only language they speak.
They were abysmal at it.
And I was blown away because I was, I'm hyperlexic I have a natural affine relationship with language and particularly English.
I've been that way since I was very little.
So for me this was staggering and shocking I could, I was like, I expected them to have more education than I had.
And they had catastrophically less education than I had.
Though they had been right they had been in school, an additional six years compared to me.
And kind of like, you know, somewhat role model parents too.
I suppose, I don't know, I mean, is literacy.
No, my parents weren't, my parents weren't particularly intelligent, but they did read books, and they did read books to me.
And I think my parents were frightened a little bit. I know my mom was, I don't think my dad was, but my mom was scared because I remember.
I mean, I was reading science fiction novels when I was five, maybe earlier.
Who brought them to you.
Well, my parents I told them what I wanted.
Oh, how did you know what.
Like, I had seen advertisements for 2001 and Space Odyssey, when I was watching Star Trek, and I knew what the book was about and I read science fiction stories already, myself, I could read them by myself.
So I asked my mom to get me that book. And she's like, that's a grown up book. I was like, I want that book.
That's the book I want to read.
So then I got it and I read it and my parents ended up reading it. And in a way, I was kind of educating them.
Because I had a lot of books.
Eventually I became a book thief.
That's a story for another time.
I only stole books to read them though I didn't steal like valuable books and sell them.
I stole books to read them.
When I was a runaway.
So I didn't have any access. Yeah, when I was a runaway I used to steal books to read them.
You said earlier that, you know, self told yourself from 12 years old, like, um, that would have been like, almost unheard of, isn't it?
No, there are there are.
Okay, especially these days.
It's different now. There are a lot of children who are, there's a cohort of young people who naturally become self educating to varying degrees, some of them become prodigies.
Some of them become nobody's right some of them just disappear.
Some of them go mad, because they're lonely.
But yeah, there's like, I know a couple other every once in a while someone will sniff me out.
And they'll approach me and they'll go like,
When did you, you know, what were you reading when you were a child?
And I'll say science fiction and they're like, how about when you were little and I'll say science fiction.
And they'll go like, yeah, that's what I thought.
Because like, recently somebody sniffed me out and they were like, you're one of you're just like me, you're a feral.
You're a feral kid who lived in the wilderness and you're someone who's read a few thousand books and not to.
Right.
And they recognize the fingerprint of my mind right and I recognize theirs when we have conversations like I'm talking to my twin or something it's ridiculous.
Yeah, there are kids that are like that.
I imagine all over the world.
But like say if you were like, if you were not going to school.
We still at home.
I ran away from home.
No, I ran away.
I lived in the forest.
I lived in the forest in the Russian River. Yeah.
In California.
Wow.
I mean, you just just find it hard to believe that people would do that in a first world country, you know,
That's what number two is, I would have thought that the comfort and you want a mix of the two not just being the process, but was home that bad that you had that that you didn't miss it.
I would have been killed if I stayed in that town.
Wow.
I became like, I most like the home.
Other young troublemakers like myself hoodlums.
I went from being like a straight A student to being a little bit of a hoodlum.
And where I was living in Stockton things were pretty bad there, even though we lived in the good part of town.
And I eventually ended up in various kinds of trouble with young criminals.
I'm not serious is like gang life is that's it's really serious. This is pretty very minor compared to that.
But, um, yeah, I basically I realized that if I stay there, I was 13.
I realized if I stay here, I will either end up in prison or dead.
So given that belief, anything's better than either of those outcomes, pretty much anything.
So even just like like living outside is better.
So eventually I made it out. It took a few attempts.
Oh, wow.
And then you were able to be out for four years on stress.
Yeah, I came home and like the last half of 17. So I was out for three and a half something like that.
Okay, okay. Wow.
Um, your parents, I mean, your parents would have been like, um,
I mean, both sad and mad.
Especially I mean, this is very personal, but um,
but my mom was relatively indifferent and I ran away to near where she was living.
Because it was by visiting her that I realized that there was this enclave in the forest where it was a bunch of basically old hippies.
So there was like this enclave and it was very richly cultural unlike where I was living,
which was like zero culture, like dead culture.
So yeah, I wanted, I wanted the culture. I couldn't access the culture because I wasn't an adult,
but I didn't want to be in Stockton anymore, you know, trying to figure out how to steal cars with my buddy so we could get some weed or whatever the fucking, you know, agenda was.
Um, yeah, I just, I didn't want to be in that place anymore and I did not get along with my dad who I was living with.
So I went to the forest and, you know, some adults helped me.
I made it through. Okay. Nothing horrible happened to me while I was on the street.
I hitchhiked around, you know, didn't eat much food.
A lot of fasting.
Oh, yeah.
But I hitchhiked through the US.
Really?
Wow.
Wow, that's crazy.
Yeah, it was fun.
Yeah, that's, that's really intense.
In what year were you hitchhiking? I mean, I'm hitchhiking in like the late 70s, early 80s.
Mine was 1980 from January.
Oh, wow. Yeah, not, not at this similar time. Let's see how old was I in 80s.
But, you know, it's quite, it was fun. I mean, it was a different experience. I mean, it was a rich experience.
I stood out, you know, like a sore thumb.
Yeah. Well, in the South, right, it was like impossible to get a ride.
Right. Yeah.
Yeah.
And we learned some chords and stuff. So I said, hmm, how do I overcome this? I've got to find a white guy.
To hitchhike with.
Brilliant. Yeah, you have to hitchhike by first hitch, you have to racially hitchhike before you vehiculatively hitchhike.
Right.
Yeah, that's hilarious. Oh my God. Yeah.
I came across the really solid guy. I mean, my house long, right?
This guy, I was on my way first just to go to a New Orleans for Mardi Gras.
Hey, talk about that. You know, we're talking in a very opportune pertinent time because Mardi Gras is going to be happening soon in now to about this time of the year, right?
1980. Yeah.
Oh, yeah.
Yeah. Okay. So I want to go to New Orleans.
So I, with my buddy, I'd reached up to Atlanta, right, from college, hitchhiking with him to Atlanta.
Wow.
So I went from Atlanta to New Orleans. Three days, day in, day out, I go to the exit, you know, which is a bit of a, it's not that easy to go from downtown Atlanta, like Salvation Army or something like that.
Sure.
To the exit. So anyway, three days and I couldn't get it right. Nobody was stopping me.
So I said, okay, I'll take a greyhound to New Orleans. I go to New Orleans and that was heaven for me.
There was like the hobos and the hippies from everywhere for Mardi Gras.
Yeah.
And that guy looked like Jesus Christ, you know, hair.
Yeah.
And the whole thing started blowing hair and things like that.
Brilliant. Yeah.
He didn't guru for him.
We got along really, really well like, you know, house and fire.
So, yeah, he had been hitchhiking for like 10 years, you know?
So with him, the world was a different world, you know, because people would stop for him, right?
I would be like back back a bit in the back and then when the class top around you know, and people will see
Just safe enough. So it's good, right? I
Went all around quite a bit of time in Boulder, Colorado
and Kansas City where it's home was and then I
Wanted to following that grateful dead. I was wanting to follow
You know to Mount McKinley and then Canada
But got stopped at the border the Canadians wouldn't let me in so
Yeah, no, yeah, my I had a passport
Was best in all that so always good, you know, I went to university in Virginia
Charlottesville, right? Oh, yeah, to my university, but the student visa runs out
after you are a student
You know, the visa has got a termination date. So when I
My plan was I took to go to
To the concert, you know
the last
It's for dead concert happens in like the equinox or something of that sort, you know
No, the I'm with you
One of those dates. Yeah, well the day when there's the largest amount of light
I'm in Alaska. Anyway, and I would come back because the flight was out of Seattle, but the Canadians said no, no your your visa your
Your American visa is
Over so they won't let you back into America. So since it won't let you back into America
We can't let you into Canada. I see. Yeah, I did not need a visa to Canada. Canada being in the Commonwealth
Malaysia is in the
There was no need for a Malaysian to have a visa to enter Canada. I see. Yeah, you know, but
It was on the grounds that I wouldn't be allowed to
Leave I wouldn't be you know, if it my basis was I was flying out of Seattle
I wouldn't be allowed to enter and in that case I would have not had enough money and whatever
It's pretty obvious. Canada can stop me from entering Canada
Not on the grounds that I don't have a visa
Right, but on the grounds that do you have enough money to sustain yourself when you're in Canada?
Yeah, so that's reasonable, you know, pretty much all the world countries all over the world have
firemen, right? And exactly, yeah
I didn't prepare for that because on the thing that you know, I am just going to come
I pretty much put the concert come back right get on my plane now. I'm home. I don't want to be here
I mean
You had a short-term goal
You know, yeah, you have a short-term goal. I'm sorry. Go ahead. Yeah
Yeah, sorry. Yeah me not realizing
Immigration things in a black and white, you know, very strict way
That's pretty much the half tool. Yeah, but me
Um
Didn't fully occur to me, you know, because you know in my head I worked out. I'm still in America because I'm going to last command
Right, but it doesn't
The the red it didn't register in my head that you know, hey, you are doesn't matter what you think
It's so funny you say that
It's really funny that you say that because I was just thinking about when I was a runaway and when I was hitchhiking
I was so naive
That it literally didn't occur to me even slightly
That I might want to be careful
Because what sort of an adult picks up a 13 year old boy on the side of the road
Uh, yes, I never even occurred to me
That I was filtering the adults
Right
And I'm filtering them in a specific direction
Right, which is has some interest in a 13 year old kid
Now thankfully
Um only I don't know how many times I was near trouble
But only twice did I actually get close to trouble
Oh
And both times I was able to
Kind of like avoid them. Yes both times I was able to resolve the situation by acting tough
Okay, okay
Yeah, yeah guys like drives past my stop
And I'm like hey my softs back there and he's not not speaking to me and it's late at night
And we're out in the middle of nowhere
And I just basically said
I will cut your fucking head off with my pocket knife
I will stab you right now in the neck if you don't pull this car over and he was like boop
Car over I got out
Oh, wow
Also, did you did you actually have a knife then? Yes, I did
Oh good. I care. I used to carry a dagger actually
Little dagger
You know that naive that
Uh, I was it's just that in this case
I realized
Like, okay
Yeah, I
This I can still be I can still be very naive
I'm not cunning the way some people are cunning
um
And I honestly it never once occurred to me
That most of the people that would like
That most of the people that would stop for a kid that looked like me
Hmm
Would probably have ulterior motives
Or at least a good lead, you know some portion of the people, right?
Never occurred to me one time
Not once is it
Is it is it because okay? Hey, uh, darin when I was in the u.s. Tool, right like
um
I mean the country was a different country
In the sense that um, I would have thought um
Uh, it's no way as dangerous as it is now maybe
Me I would agree. Yeah
Also, I was in a strange, um
I was in a strange sub context, right I was in the russian river
So there's a lot of basically the three primary is gonna be really bad
Say here, but um, the three primary
Populations there were rednecks homosexuals and hippies
Oh, and the hippies and the homosexuals got along fine the rednecks
hated
Both the other camps pretty much though got along better with the hippies than
The gay people so
That was the context there
And obviously, you know
I
Yeah, I could have gotten a lot of trouble, but I never did I never did no one ever hurt me. Oh
So growing up after the I mean after the age of leaving home
You hadn't been exposed to the dangers of such dangers as much
I know that all I was
You have no idea how naive I was
And your wildest estimations you will underestimate my naivete
I was you know, yeah, I was uh
I I was very intelligent and skillful in certain ways
But my god was I naive it's just one of the failings I've always had yeah
It never okay. Look, let me be really clear about this so you can understand the depth
Not only did it never occur to me that I was attracting the people
Who would have some interest in a 13 year old boy ever?
It never occurred to me not only that
It never occurred to me that it didn't occur to me
until just now
40 something years later 50 years later
right
It never occurred to me that it didn't occur to me until this conversation today
All right, that's how naive I am
I never realized that I didn't realize until just now
Yeah, it's that bad
you know
To me in my when I got right there when I started getting rights and stuff the people who are picking us up was so
Generous that's made a big difference and innocent
You know, usually it'd be like small town somewhere and you know, they're throwing some weed and then
Dears at the back
Yeah, some of that too. Yeah
and um
All beautiful it was right beautiful. It was I mean no nowhere else in the world
I think I I mean
Would you get no because yeah, it's true because the
The counterculture in the united states at that time was still
kind of blossoming
A little bit and how old were you? Were you like 18? Were you like 20 or something?
Yeah, I would have been um 21
Okay. Yeah. Yeah, perfect. So, um
You know you present to the drivers
Obviously
Something they might find fascinating and
Adventurous
To some of them
So that works in your favor, but yeah, it was pretty good like most people were very kind
Some people gave me money or brought me food
And some people asked me, you know, like, how do you survive? They were curious
uh
occasionally
Like if it was raining or something somebody would be like, hey, you can just crash at our place if you want, you know
And obviously that could be very dangerous, but never turned out to be not once
Because I mean I was 22 so it didn't that occurred didn't occur to me, you know
um
And it happened to me that I
I was least
Concerned about and I didn't even get that to me. It's like, how do I get all right? I want to try I don't have the money
Yeah, that's all I was concerned with too. I was just like, how do I get to where I'm going? I wasn't thinking about
Why someone would or wouldn't stop to pick me up
In other words, there was no, um
There was no meta reflection, right
Yeah, there was no meta cognition about yeah
Yeah, no meta cognition about my circumstance
And whereas you must have had some by your age
Yeah, I mean, um
More I mean, um, but you know violence wasn't you know, like you didn't have the school shootings
You didn't
Yeah
Yeah, the malware the malware wasn't concentrated yet
Yeah, you know, um, and
You know say for example, you know people may say, okay, you know the
You know blacks are dangerous or whatever, but
Right, you know
I'm almost black, you know, so right exactly
so, um
You know, what yeah, they're more likely to see you as an ally
than as an enemy or prey
Yeah, and um, and I wanted to try and I desperate like I had to
You know because part of
That was the American equivalent of you being a sadu, you know of you being like
You know
Funny. Yeah, I got you right. Yeah
That's a hilarious way of saying it
Yeah
Like you're uh, you're uh, yeah, it's the American version of you're a holy man or something
Oh, no, you have faith a monk. Oh, you have faith. I see uh-huh
I see that most like yeah. Yeah, don't miss
Yeah, that's what I had actually that that is what I had back then in a way
I had faith
That it was possible to be myself
Without a house without a roof
Without money without food
with nothing
I I I knew that you know money would be an issue so I had to watch out and you know
You know in our places we stopped and
Anyway, we made it because we could get jobs in some places and uh, oh, yeah a little uh short-term jobs
Hmm, especially in in Boulder, Colorado, right?
I remember in in fourth of july I was around around about fourth of july. I was there and it was snowing
Right
In Boulder, Colorado then, you know, it was a bit of a surprise, but that was a good climate. I mean they had a
You know like a job placement for
Tramps and hobos, you know
But because I was with this guy called Bernie
Bernie McBug
Look at his last name now. Wow. Bernie McGraw. Yeah, Bernie McGraw. Yeah
So he knew the ins and outs, you know where you go and get food stamps and where you get, um
Danger jobs right and stuff like that. So I was I went rather quickly got a after four days
I got a job as a dishwasher
Uh in in um
In in Boulder, right? Oh, yeah, and that was you know, that was fun and
The pay you get compared to what you need is like a great because was was staying in like a uh
this in Boulder after a while was staying in like a
Uh abandoned house in the edge of a river kind of like in the forest, right? So
Uh-huh
We had sleeping bags and stuff like rather
Winterproof sleeping bags. So manage that was good. You know, there were other people later we
We got we met some people and we lived in the house for a while
Very liberal. I mean very truly liberal place Boulder was when I was there, you know, oh, yeah
Very very uh very generous, you know
On the first day, I remember to burn. Um, I remember to uh, Darren, I must tell you this, right?
um
I already I had rather little money like 25
Dollars or something like that and I and I had a camera and stuff and my buddy was hitchhiking with me said
Bala, let me borrow your camera. Okay, and then he goes and fonts in fucking
Uh-huh. He's a whole
And so because of that that I remember that one that that day I had no more money
I had no more money and I didn't have a camera and I was like, hmm. How am I going to solve this? Well
This is this I've got to I've got to learn this and I've got to learn how to
Um be without any money. So I walk along
at the street pearl street in um
Boulder, you know, so downtown one street, uh, that is
Uh, walk walk only no cars, right?
So anyway walk and I just signboard right on the side of a building and I said Naropa
Buddhist Institute
Me, you know, wow, this is like
Next to bumfuck u.s. You know, because I've been in
Like I mean, so I'm not even Kansas City. It's a liner Kansas by the highway
Like you know for me, it's like nowhere and how come it's got a Buddhist Institute. This is my thing
This this is my you know, like my culture of my life
The culture. Yeah. Yeah
In the middle of America. So I said I have to go upstairs
So I go up and I see, you know, there's two guys and stuff and I strike a conversation and they're so wonderful
They offered, you know, one of the guys offered his place for me to stay in because his buddy was
Had gone off somewhere so those they can see
Um, so come and stay with me and stay at my place and
It was great, you know, beautiful
All the whole thing was beautiful and Seattle my last stop was fantastic
You know after by the time I reached to like Seattle and stuff. I'm on my own
but
I was walking, you know, I guess I was walking and I and this guy in a pickup truck
You know, uh comes past me swaps
Wines his window down looks at me and says
Are you going somewhere? Yeah, and I can I take you? I was like, wow
because
You know, they were they could see me
And I like wow, it was great. It was because I
I
You know to me
The folks then in Seattle were like a great above the rest of the world. They were like really
Friendly to um, it is actually okay. There is something weird about
um
How to put this
So I have not traveled much
I've mostly only been in central and northern california throughout my entire life
I've been basically nowhere
But a couple times I traveled
A couple times I traveled a little bit
And I went for example to oregon or washington state
uh, and
I don't know I think um
I think that because I'm not well traveled I probably have a
uh
A distorted sense, but the people in oregon were very different
The people in washington were very different. It may be that
It does actually seem to me that places
Have
Something that resembles a personality and that the humans in those places
Reflect that does that make any sense?
Yeah, yeah, yeah, I mean the outside is something like that. Yeah
That's uh, yeah
I'm an echo. Yeah. Yeah, because the man made pretty much, you know, I always say this
I know this quite well because I go to india off and on I have gone to india quite a lot
And they thought I were complaining about the outside, you know places dirty and this and this
Let's say it's a manifestation of
The sum of the minds, you know in
and I
It's true. This is what yeah, I mean in hindi culture. There are words for these things in english. There are not
In sanskrit. There are words for these these matters
Right, you have a culture that's like, I don't know 8 000 years older than ours
And the white people think they're intelligent
What you guys even like you guys are playing with play-doh
Or something works, you know
Yeah
My son uh, he studies Advaita Vedanta
And I he I know there are words for all of these like in sanskrit and in
Uh, indian philosophy there are there's very complex sophisticated language about all the different features of
You know anything you might want to
Refer to in consciousness at all
It's very interesting
Uh compared to how it is in english
It's so much richer and and more intelligent in some ways
You remind me of one thing. I was talking to another
Buddy who might join us right who's a good candidate to join our team
Right, um, I must ask you to hold. I'm getting an important call
Okay, I mean, oh, it's it's too late. I missed it
It's all right. I'm okay
Oh, I see. I see. Okay. Um
Okay, maybe I'll talk about that and and we'll um, we can continue another day, right? We've been
What ah hey the there's a word
Darren
You know the word we are looking for is like um sensibility
meaning, you know
They are saying what is it that we are looking? What is it that we're trying to get artificial intelligence to do intelligence?
What is intelligence?
You know, um acumen, you know
But they seem that the western world
Seems to not want to talk about the world the the word which is even more
Clear in in uh, indian language at Tamil and some of our local languages. It's called booty
booty
You know and Buddha's name comes from that buddha is not his name
in a
No, but they thought
Like mr. Sensible. Yeah
Yeah, so
What I see I mean one word in english is equanimity
Oh
Equanimity is it? Yeah, it means not biased you don't
Um, okay, you don't collapse into extremity
your balance
Oh
Yes, that that says that your balance. Yes. Yeah, what?
The the I guess what to me why the western world my trip already is when we talk about sensibility
And in the context they are thinking of cognition the world. I mean like such a
I mean the western world when he talks about AI you'll not it's like forever going into into cognition
And we are saying no the body and the mind
Must be both taken into account in realizing what is the right sensible thing to see sensible or the right thing to do which is
Which we will say is a sensible thing to do the sensible thing to do
Includes what your body means which means instinct
Right what your instinctive reactions are right because you're dealing with for example indigenous people
And pretty much they're running on instinct
You know, we don't know about what cognition they have or they don't have it doesn't matter
They're functional people on on instinct
So sensibility the word sense immediately implies, you know the five senses for example, right? It does. Yeah
Cognition why had it occurred to you or does it occur to you? Why why does the western world not talk about sensibility?
There's no one the question is very the question is very broad
Meaning like say when in the AI circles and stuff right when you're talking about ethics and whatever
So when why not say hey well
Which of these llm's is more sensible takes into account sensibility?
Which is different from intelligence
And I think enough people would know that yeah because intelligence immediately in a big way kind of like
In a slides or the leans towards academia, you know leans towards
It does and it um, but the the common humans have no
Hmm
Oh, yeah, they are missing what you have they're missing the experience
of coherent
daily life
That
Most of whose rules don't need to be written or declared
All right. Yep. Yep. So what they have is something really weird. They have a thing where
All the rules are written and declared
And you have to either obey
Be ignorant of or reject them
And one of the reasons why trump is about to get elected in this country is because the rejection crowd is really pissy at this point in history
Everybody
All the males all the ignorant poorly educated males who have no fucking
No clue about what it means to be human and yet are anyway
They want somebody who gets away with breaking the rules and they will elect that guy if if we don't you know
If something doesn't stop them
And
It
The the guy so he's the opposite of sensibility, but he masquerades the sensible
Right
I saw some advertising with him
Between masquerading as sensible and having to be sensible to get elected and stay there
In a way from the predator other predators. You're not gonna get elected if you're sensible
There's no chance of that happening. No, no, no, no
Yeah, that's that's no
That's not gonna happen
You know the old you get elected not okay in america you get elected not because you're sensible you get elected because you're sensational
It's a society of spectacles
Right the better your spectacle the better the brand of spectacle that you produce the more likely you are to be elected
That's sick. That's sad. I mean and it's screwed it screwed that up so bad. I mean like
Well, okay. Ah here. Let me ask you this
Kamala Harris should not be there
Should not be up there. She should she
I don't know
How would I tell
I mean supposing I really cared
Right, okay. How would I make the determination?
Um, well, at least do I want a pissed-off parapheminist?
I'm having a voice in the government. Yeah, I probably do her particularly. I'm not sure
I mean like like a noble like a like a fly on the wall
You know
I don't know Kamala Harris's
Talk very much. Maybe I'm actually thinking of AOC
When you said her name at least AOC is you know, I mean I mean like she's um
She's smart
Yeah, I mean yeah smart
She I mean she knows how to get attention
and
It's not just
She used to be good, but I think she's going downhill like by the way, um
I've spent about 27 minutes of my life listening to politicians in 2020
acts
That's something I mostly just ignore to be clear and also to be clear for posterity if anyone listens to this
I'm not okay. We well educated
Okay, so and you're able to um, I guess for whatever you do you you it doesn't affect you too much
Or you you find spots where you're not affected by you know, you operate
I have a simple principle at this um accelerated age that I'm at almost 60 not a kid anymore
The simple principle is try not to actively import suffering from outside
uh
So the news is basically all about importing suffering
Hmm
So I mostly buffer that off. I may glance at it, but I don't take it seriously and I rarely reflect on it
It's mostly just me taking the temperature of modernity is the apocalypse likely to happen today or next week
Hmm
It's mostly that when I do you pay much attention to news. What's your relationship with it like?
Um, not much. I mean I pay attention to the news
in the last five 10 years
um
Some areas I'm a bit interested in a more like world issues
Well, I mean like say India ways that Russia ways that hitting
um
China to some extent of course
You know where it's I want to get a
for orientation, right
Yes
Being a bit more attentive. I'm still uh, I've still more
I'm really I would read news that touches on our area, you know, like
Like what I'm talking to you about, you know getting funding, you know
Or if it's not funding, how do I go to the next step, right?
From where I am and the next step in in your your village
Becoming a voice and making connections the next step in what makes and me
finding a way to
self sustain it so to to to fund it, you know, like when I sent you
The link to um
We we move us or we found us or whatever, right?
Basically aligned with aligned with people who would
Invest in us or finances or help us out, you know, because we've got
We've enough of enough if we have a team enough of us have to be paid, right?
Oh, yes
Yeah, such as the world so
Where can you get funding and who funds them and what what are the requirements and who has been successful?
that kind of
news, right
I I K-pop and then over and above that when you see me
Writing most of my writing is under
the under
There's a substrate of it is how do we why you know, why can't we be?
The same state, you know developer. It's called develop
Where can we be the same state high state? We were 500 or 600 years ago, right in my neck of the woods
and in particular that
Like like I was saying the villages. Yeah, why?
All of the things, you know, zero crime
embodied currency
embodied learning
Right, why can't we have that?
it's like
Why can't we have what I had from zero to seven with an unconditional love mother?
I can go and sleep and I want kids and I want my
I want the work of hundreds of generations of my forefathers to continue
Instead of it going so downhill in one generation
It has gone downhill to
Everybody is doing it meaning you go around with fellas are doing crime and whatever just casually and you're something
What are they doing and they say hey everybody you can't you don't do it everybody's doing it and I said no
Not everybody's doing it. I'm not doing it. Come on, you know, like for example a lawyer
Right who's stealing and cheating and screwing his customer
Hey, don't you have faith in your intellect that you can do something else for example
We stopped, you know emerging. We stopped creating anything new for 600 years. Why didn't we do part of that? That needs law, too
Huh?
Only I mean the young young kids the younger people are a bit ready to listen to that the folks who are
Lawyers and stuff big names. No, they're not interested in them. They they want to screw the system bloody hell
I'm so but I guess they're not born in the kind of
Village and conditional love environment that I was you know
Look whenever you take a cohort like lawyers or doctors or dentists or teachers
You're going to find a large prevalence of what I'll call the worst common denominator
Which is the people who
you know
But what you're actually looking at
Is a topology and as you come to understand the structure of the topology
You will be able to find the people in the cohort who aren't defecting
And those people will be excited to discover you as well
Ah, yes. Yes, right. This is a moment of mutual appreciation, right? That's long been coming
many of us would like the dreams of our ancestors
Not to be flushed down the toilet in a single generation
Hmm. Um, and some of us would like those dreams to be actually fulfilled
So that's those purposes live in the hearts of humans
And if we can awaken them it will be very powerful
And it doesn't have to be a cult
Yep. Yep. It doesn't even have to be political. It can just be human
Yep, and you often you know in your writing you
You know you you say this this is an everyday thing
Yes
This is normal. Yes
I think that's what those guys in the book I quoted from earlier were saying too
They're like we have this narrative that it's impossible to change this and that humans are fundamentally broke
It's not true. They're just trapped in why are they trapped in thinking they're broken?
So, yeah, these are things that I that I want to
Keep exploring and understanding better and get people
Doing something around right experimenting play
Grow learn discover
remember
Remember how we can be yeah
Yeah
I'm trying to you know in my own way
Yeah, yeah, okay. Good. Good. So, you know, um between indonesia and um,
San Francisco
I'll um
on this
You know formulate some more what what's next steps we can take right?
um
Making this happen. Yes, we let us um
Um
Let us bookmark that for our next conversation, but there are some for sure
And I'm I'm absolutely willing to explore them together
I just need to get some food in me
Okay, good on you. Okay, sorry
No, no, it's fine. No, this is wonderful. I'm very I'm very grateful and excited. This has been uh profoundly
Educational for me
Beautiful beautiful beautiful. Yes. Okay. Thank you catch up with you
All right. Our blessings my friend. We will talk again soon. Yes
Yes, yes
Okay. Bye. Bye for now
