Nice to see you.
Nice to see you.
I've got my coffee.
How about you?
I've got some water,
but I'm going to refill it since we might be here for a minute.
I'll be right back.
Sure.
We should be fine.
You look beautiful today.
Thank you.
I'm putting on these.
So I won't get this.
Echo sometimes.
Oh, yeah.
Can you, can you hear me?
Can you hear me well?
Yeah, everything's perfect.
All right.
I'm so excited to have this chance to talk with you today.
Oh, it is.
We should have done this a long time ago, I guess.
Yes.
Yes, we should have.
Yeah, the topic you want to introduce the topic or how,
how do you want to go about this little chit chat?
I think I'm going to just shut my window here.
So there's a little less background noise.
I like the fresh air.
But there's going to be some traffic and stuff and it's raining.
So get the preliminaries out of the way.
And I'd be very grateful if you wouldn't mind introducing the topic.
You want me to introduce the topic.
If you feel comfortable.
Yeah.
Well, you know,
I've been living in Los Angeles.
And under a very weird circumstance back in.
74.
And I wanted to study architecture.
And everybody said, are you crazy? Why are you leaving Los Angeles?
I mean, you could go to the school over there and I was in high school,
but I didn't like the life there.
And some of the things that you've mentioned in your videos,
everything so square, everything so square.
And because of the houses, you know, the, the frames,
the way the houses were built.
I thought people were very paranoid.
And that this whole environment inside the home,
around the homes, around the neighborhoods,
the whole suburbia notion,
there was so many things that I found it weird.
And I would visit my grandmother in Mexico city.
And everything was just hustle and bustle.
And the city's very, very old, very, very old. It's, you know,
like 7,000 years old.
So, so the, the, there's things that I,
I could sense about Mexico.
That we're not in this modern society where I grew up.
So I thought, I thought, no,
I need to study architecture with the pyramid builders.
And that set me off into a path of understanding what people
were thinking when, when they designed things,
when they create things.
And I was very disappointed with the whole aspect of the university
because, well, it trains you to always be on,
on alert for business, you know, business opportunities.
Well, the primary motive is not, is disoriented.
Right. The motive that is supposed to be there,
which we might imagine to be things like learning,
actual developmental efflorescence flowering, right.
Growth development in the, in the virtuous sense of what development
means.
Seeing better together for each other and our ancestors and the future.
All of these things have been paved over with one value cash dollars,
or possibly the preservation and distribution of power in human
hierarchies.
These two things. Yeah.
Exactly. And the thing that always caught me was this phoniness.
And mind you, I was one of those people who I admired a lot of
the movies and storytelling and things that I enjoyed while I was in
elementary school was these times that we went to universal city and,
and we got to see how the movies were made.
And this was something that I was, I just wanted to know how,
how these special effects were done.
And of course, everybody was very shy and very good and everybody behaved
very well, but I had to raise my hand and ask, and they're like,
okay, little girl, what do you want to know?
How do you make those cobwebs on the monsters and,
and all these other things that I loved all these old movies with
monsters, you know, the dripping of the eye and,
and all the, the special effects on makeup.
And, and I knew it was, you know, I could watch the movie, but I was just intrigued.
How do they go, how do they make it so real?
I mean, it's the acting, it's the lighting, it's all everything.
And then, you know, kind of like that early interest of the making of or,
or the back part of who does the decision making?
Which side of the door is the monster going to?
You know, the writer and how they're, they're, they're thinking like, oh,
no, it's too expensive. Let's do this then.
You know, so, so there's this economy added to, to the, to the fakeness because
they can't afford to be too realistic, you know.
I just want to mention something that I think may be both relevant and unexpected.
Like you, I grew up.
Well, I'm not sure we don't have to discuss our actual ages, but I grew, I grew
way back when many moons ago.
Right.
You know, back when there were dinosaurs.
But I grew up watching films in the 60s and 70s.
And we saw things like journey to the center of the earth. There were dinosaurs in there.
Yeah.
Mysterious island. There was some giant, you know, crab monsters and iguana monsters.
The ocean thing. I was very into that.
The sea leagues under the sea.
That was just like, oh, my favorite movie.
Mine too.
I was enchanted by the ocean. I was just an ocean going person. And, you know, talking about homes.
I could feel the moment I stepped into the beach on the ocean. This sense of home.
It was just like entering into a different dimension, but it was so compelling.
And so those movies are the ones that really, you know, stir me up.
That's funny because you picked.
So I was exposed to Jules Verne when I was very young, my parents were reading me.
This is the second I'm going to have to actually grab this since I have it nearby.
We have these books.
Uh huh.
Oh yeah, at the library. I spend a lot of time at the library. I was, I would go on my bicycle and just sit there.
The book is from 1876.
And this is every boy's library. Right.
It's some dust on it, but yeah, so my parents are reading me this book. This is journey to the center of the earth.
When I was, you know, for.
Right.
And I saw journey to the center of the earth on television.
I saw.
Seven voyage, the seventh voyage of Sinbad.
Right. A lot of animated animated skeletons and, you know, genies. I think there was a, and I'm going somewhere here. I think there was a.
A film about.
The Greek adventurer.
Was it Odysseus that meets the Cyclops.
Oh, oh, the, what's it called.
Odyssey.
Yeah, it has to do with the Troy and Helen and this.
Yeah.
Yeah, that's what that's where, where they get lost and they go all over the place and it's just, you know, there was a giant Cyclops that they fought.
Yes, yes, yes, yes. And then when I saw, and the makeup wasn't that good either.
But I still, I've got something to say about all this. So, and then I saw 20,000 weeks under the sea and that completely captured my heart.
Totally. I was like, I want to, I want to be Captain Nemo when I grow up. I want to protect the oceans. Those people shouldn't be doing they shouldn't be using the ocean for war.
That's a bad thing. Captain Nemo is great. He should, he's a true hero. I believe in him. He's right.
Anyway, I don't know if you know this, but his name Nemo.
It comes from the most and he, the mother of the uses the mother of memory, the ocean is the memory of the origins of life.
Exactly. Yeah, the protector of the most and he's womb, essentially, right. So you're not going to make war on this surface of this ever, right.
No. So that was very powerful for me. Those.
That story particularly set me on a path of kind of what I would call like extreme altruism or possibly heroic altruism.
But what I want to get is this.
You know, modern movies.
I cannot watch them.
The effects that are done with computers.
They mess up my brain. I can feel something is wrong. Like if they show the ocean in the background of a ship right.
I can feel that it's wrong. There's something mechanically.
It's like a form of comparison. It doesn't sparkle the right way. Yeah, and the waves are wrong. They don't have the budget to do it right. They got it. They have to let AI fix it for them.
Yeah, I don't know exactly what it is, but I have the same problem with like LED lamps. I can't stand the light that comes out of LEDs. It feels the vibration. You can feel the vibration.
It messes, it messes me up. I have to run from the supermarket or anything that has these stupid lights, blue lights, especially. Oh God, the vibration is just utter no.
I don't know. Here we, for some, some idiot decided to replace all of the street lights with LEDs and they make terrifying shadows from the trees. They're all jagged and multi linear.
And it's just awful. I mean, it just makes me.
It's, it's like physically repulsive to me.
It's, it's, it's actually torture. I think it's torture. It's a form of torture.
It must be really bad for the animals and insects too, because if they're even slightly more sensitive than I am, they must be just miserable.
Because that stuff is just terrible. So we, you know, and we have the same problem where something that's posing as advancement or development is actually torment.
Right. It's very bad.
It is physically.
The whole city, the whole city is designed to eliminate any real stimulus, you know, like the stars.
Why, why do they have so many freaking lights outside? I would always say, well, can't you see it?
No, no, no safety, you know, the name of safety, this idiotic thing that they think that people all they want is to be safe. And I'm thinking,
you know, you've never asked anybody what they want. They just slam it on you. Yeah.
Safety convenience. These are two of the selling points of doom. Right.
It's safety.
Quote unquote that caused our government here to record every single phone call that everyone makes in the entire nation.
And to invade our privacy and to spy on us essentially it's for the sake of safety. Right. We're trying to keep you safe.
No, they're not, they're not giving us any safety and they're not getting safety either. What they're doing is learning because they they're so empty.
And the thing is that they are empty, and they have to suck every bit of information that we might, you know, share.
So, there's a feature here that I think it's important to highlight which is.
And I want to go out with somewhat delicately but also relatively quick quickly so I'm not lecturing.
These are not societies. These are not societies. Also, we did not forge them. We didn't make the agreements and set the motivations that our societies enact.
And we have actually nearly no voice in what they do or how they do it.
The sort of dead ghost of voting.
Pretty much useless. Right.
It's, it's like a, it's sort of like a red herring to distract us from the fact that we have no voice at all. So they give us this, this sort of, you know, more so exactly that they give us like a, like a fake lottery ticket.
Right. Yeah.
We've got one ticket, right. But we never forged actual agreements together so there is no we this we that we hear all the time that I'm going to say this word. It doesn't represent anything.
It's the absence of the possibility of an actual us. Right.
And this is so prevalent in our modernity, absences of society of nations of humanity of intelligence of the university of actual learning and education, these absences present as presences, right.
I want to say a couple of other brief things about this. There is a feature that arises in the absence of human collective awareness and mutual concern and agreement there's a there's a thing that arises there.
And it's, I don't think it's a being. It's like the absence of a being, and the absence of a being is infinitely hungry.
It's also infinitely vulnerable. And the reason it's infinitely vulnerable is because there's nothing there. And if anyone discovers that there's nothing there, they will destroy it right they will fill it with something and it will die the emptiness will die.
And so what it hates. It despises anything that is alive. Anything that is vital. Anything that has relational integrity. It despises love. It despises humanity or organism, or living places, or beings, or actual relationships, or real agreements, because all of those
things are a fundamental threat to its to the necessity of its absolute sovereignty over all phenomena.
And so this, this is what how that's that's why they they they create the control grid, you know because it's, it's important to them that nothing escapes their their their control because you know, if you if you're not
paying attention to them that they feel they feel worse it's like oh it's like stabbing them, you know you're you're actually stabbing them because you're ignoring them.
Right and so fear and outrage and desperation and agony. These are ways to get you to pay attention to them.
Oh yeah, right, if you're terrified will squeeze you and destroy you and do absolutely everything. I mean the first thing they do is take your money, or your, your ability to make money, or to make a living part of how they do that.
They take you off the land, you know, if you have a piece of land, even if you have a outside your door, they don't want your pot to grow anything, they will put a wall so the sun won't get to that little plant you've got, you know they're
going to torture your ability to be independent in any way just breathing is already something they've been polluting non stops, since they created these stupid things with wheels.
We're already things with wheels all over the place, and many of them could, you know, they can work with water, but they had to get rid of those, you know, it's bad for business inventors, or something they kill on a daily basis, you know, how dare you invent something.
And in Tony Perla in Chiapas, which, you know, there's a, I have a little mural.
It's up above my door you can't maybe I can turn this just to see it. I can see. Oh, so like that tiny one. That is a mural from Tony Perla. And the Chiapas and people were being killed there.
They were poisoning, the army was poisoning the river, the river water to try to kill them to take their land because they have land and they can grow things on it. Right.
They can live. Right.
How dare you live.
Exactly one of my close friends Jeff Conan in the 90s, he him and a group of people from countries around the world. They went to Tony Perla to try to help the Chiapas and people there.
They brought them medicine. They brought them medical stuff, all kinds of seeds to grow food.
They brought them water purification systems. They brought them things to teach them how to make aqueducts so that they could get water that wasn't poison.
The army was just sitting upstream from them dumping stuff into the river to kill the Chiapas and Indians right because they need water.
It's really easy just poison the water that all people die.
Eventually, the army surrounded the village tanks like they rolled in there with tanks and they said like, give us the gringos are going to just kill you all right now.
You know, and so they talked with, they talked with my friend and the people who were with them they're about 40 people from different countries that went there.
And my friend and his, you know, his cohort they're like, okay, yeah, don't we don't want them to kill you so we'll go, you know, we'll go with them.
And they put them in a bus, and they chained them to the seats, and they drove them out in the middle of the forest.
And there is a very amount there.
And then at the last moment they got a call from the governor and said, No, we can't. That's going to that's going to cause these people are from like Spain and Germany and the United States, this is going to be a huge incident.
It's going to be.
Yeah.
You just hear them.
Yeah, right. It's not like what you can do with the people of Guatemala or Mexico where you can just bury them and you know the world doesn't really pay attention.
I can't speak. I mean, what a horrible idea.
So, they shipped them out.
And they told them, you know, you can never return to Mexico on any circumstances right.
But this is just an example of, I want to be really clear about something.
The they
is really weird thing because it's an in human it's an array, it's a library of in human processes.
They're enacted by humans that these processes have captured.
It's as if the people who do these things have been internally colonized by money power and some kind of like historical inaction of these functions.
And someone did this before they got away with it we can do it again.
So it's as if these people are internally their soul has been colonized their mind has been colonized, their body has been colonized in the sense that they are now the automatons that carry out the atrocities.
In the name of something that isn't human.
Humans do it, but it's not human. It's very strange.
No, it's, it's, it's in the realm of ideas, you know, so in the realm of ideas, these ideas are so toxic.
It doesn't mean they can't reproduce, you know, they can reproduce just because they're toxic, you know, like deadly poison. They find a substance that that will transform you you've probably heard of transmutation.
You know, the ability of, let's say chickens to produce eggs, you know, that has a lot of calcium. That's more calcium than they actually eat. How do they come up with that much calcium.
Well, the body has this magical power to produce and transform whatever nutrients they have into whatever things are necessary. So this transmutation is also apparent in the ability to stick to to an idea that that it's a belief system.
So this belief system is is just as powerful as our belief system in life. And so the that there's a trigger that it's calling for death. They don't like life, but they're calling somebody come kill me, please come kill me because I hate life.
And so they do all these atrocities and nobody kills them. And they keep doing worse things and nobody comes and kills them they're just like feel pity for them they're like oh this poor soul is lost or whatever you know you make up excuses for this stupid idiot that's doing worse and worse and worse.
atrocities day after day, hour after hour and he he he wants to end his life, but he can't he doesn't have the courage, or the ability to do it himself. He's that small, or that empty, or that useless for all.
All sorts of words that to describe this horror, inner horror that they're living because they don't like themselves, and not just don't like them so they don't like the fact that their life is going to end, but they want to know when it's going to end so they create the situations where they are at risk and it, it becomes like a pedestal, or a crutch that they will use over
and over and over again I mean guns think about guns for a minute guns and and all the stupid things that they've come up with to to create that situation where they can do away with this life that they don't understand and they and they can't appreciate because if they did, they'd be like this.
So, okay, there's some things I want to touch on here first of all, in his book, which I'm also going to grab since I have great here, and it's really very important.
This book. It's one of the most important books I've ever come across and I'm a lover of books in his book the master and his emissary the divided brain making of the Western world.
I have, I have not read that in the Gilchrist talks in, in a deep way about, and I'm so glad he wrote that book because it saved me from having to write it. I was writing about the same topics, you know, over 20 years ago now.
It poses that there are certain features of the style that we associate with the left hemisphere right side of the body. Right.
That it doesn't, it doesn't first of all it doesn't care at all about things that are a lot. Now let me really clear the hemispheres form a unity and they're connected by the corpus colosum.
The corpus colosum also separates them. They have to be kept separate or you get feedback which produces seizures. So that's a very complex job. And, again, this won't be a long lecture.
The right hemisphere can be understood as sort of the, the primeval forest, the origin of the possibility of identity for the left hemisphere, but it, when it's by itself, it would destroy this thing if it could get away with it.
It can't stand the idea that there's any extrinsic authority other than it, and it will lie through its teeth.
And if you, we used to have this thing called the water test where you could anesthetize the right hemisphere left side of the body right, and then you can talk just to the left hemisphere.
And you ask it questions like, can you move your left hand it's like that's not mine. Take that away. My mother left that here tell her to come back and get it right it would just make stuff straight just makes up that's a piece of wood.
That's not me. Make it go away. It can't stand when it's on its own. It hates life. It just lies like crazy. Any threat to its absolute sovereignty is met with devastating intent of destruction right just kill that thing.
Get rid of it. It would literally kill itself just to get rid of the side of the body that isn't it.
Right. Exactly. Yes. Yes. Yes. That's, that's like, you know the story of the two wolves, right.
Feel free.
Yeah, if for people who haven't heard it. The weird thing about the two wolves is that the sort of you tell the story.
Basically, it's a very simple trope. We have two wolves inside you, you know, one is.
It's the grandpa talking to the grandchild or you and the and the grandchild is saying, why are you so quiet grandfather and he says, they're fighting. Who's fighting grandfather.
There's two wolves inside me. They're fighting and and the kids like what the hell's going on.
And so after a while, the kids like, all right, tell me who's winning. I want to know if they're fighting who's winning. And he says, the one I feed.
He describes the wolves. He describes one is kind. One is always there. Always helpful. And it has all the virtues.
And then there's the other one who's nasty and buying and and bitter and constantly bickering about absolutely everything. So he describes the two wolves.
And then he's quiet for a while, you know, and then the kids kind of like, well, yeah, but who's winning. And so he says, well, what I'm feeding, which one am I feeding.
Right.
Right. So what's interesting though about those wolves is that they also have another feature that maybe the grandfather doesn't actually state, which is that the gentle wolf is easily satiated by a small meal.
The other wolf cannot be satiated by any amount of food. It is infinitely hungry. It will eat the world if you let it and still be hungry.
So we live in a world where these forces are at play. And actually, I'm not sure it's the people who are a they. It seems like it's something.
The people get captured just like the Spaniards were colonized before they landed in South America and just started laying waste to the culture there.
They were internally colonized before they became colonizers. I'm not asking that we pity them. Right.
Or even that we have merciful thoughts about them though it could be useful to do so. I'm not asking for that though. I'm trying to get you know about the promised land right.
You know that Columbus was actually Jewish. There's a book. There's a number of books.
About a year ago I did a video. I think you know I do a lot of videos but in Spanish. And I did this research because it was going to be Columbus Day. It was October last year.
And I found this interesting researcher from Spain and she did an expensive and came to the conclusion that he was Jewish because he would write to his son and had these little symbols in in in Hebrew.
Okay, it's it's it's very interesting. It's very interesting the whole. Yeah, the Hebrew.
And so the thing is that they're the story goes that Queen Isabella took her jewels and help them build a ship so that he could go off and and and and explore this.
The possibility of a new route that they were looking for a new route according to Congress.
No, there was these Jewish guys that paid all this money, two of them, and she found the receipts.
He got paid and he was given the money to do get the ships and it's all there it's all there very interesting research and and he he promised the Jewish people that they, you know when he said off the day the Jews were expelled from Spain.
All right, so that's when it was the last day they could be in Spain without getting their throats cut other.
The other Jews turned into Catholics. Yeah, because a lot of people say well I'm not going to leave my business or I'll just switch religions and everything's fine.
And they changed their names and they change everything. And the thing is that by that day they had been expelled from, I don't know 200 different cities all over the place and and and who expelled who they expelled them because they, they were money lenders.
And according to their religion, they don't have to follow God's will they are the chosen ones and they fork and do whatever they can raise your interest then or take your child or, you know, a little bit of that rumpel still skin is in there.
All these things are true that they're all true. And for two or 3000 years, they kept ruining city after city after city because they got them in debt. They promised this they promised that you should you buy this here I'll lend you the money.
And then, next thing you know, everybody owes them money. And so this whole thing keeps repeating and repeating and repeating, but they didn't care how many lives were ruined, wherever they went, you know, because it was a scam, they were scamming people over and over so
they had to move, and they had to move, and they had to move to places that were known. So, so they, they were out. Columbus was was in charge of finding the promise left.
So, one of the reasons all these people were so savage is that, oh, we found our promise left, and you are not welcome, because we just don't want you here.
And so they killed just about as many people as they could. And until somebody says no, no, no, no, no, let's let's be good Jesuits and use them, convince them and find a soul for them because well they're not, maybe they're not savages the way we think.
Anyway, the thing is the story, the story that they believe where they are special where they can do as they please, and they're allowed to kill others is perfect, just perfect for them, not for all the rest of us.
It strikes me that most modern cultures have a kind of a similar story. And I'm cautious about, I just want to say for myself.
I don't I'm not trying to deny what we have records of historically, although the people who write the records are also have motivations.
But let me just be very clear.
Personally, for myself, I'm extremely cautious about indicting whole ethnicities.
I'm sure there were Jews who were money lenders and I'm also certain that there were Jews who were not. Right, so I don't want myself I don't want to say, for example, well the Jews are just bad people, but that's not.
Oh, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, this to be clear right because some of that. No, no, no, of course not. And mind you, I have a cousin who's married to a rabbi lives in Nazareth.
Many of my close friends.
And dear, dear friends, I love the Jewish culture. Yeah.
Yes, yes, yes, yes, we have to clarify.
So in Washington confused this little thing about Columbus was a big eye opener for me as well, because he didn't speak Latin.
He didn't speak Spanish, because he grew up in Spain. He was actually from the Spanish Peninsula, and he had nothing to do with with Italy, or any of the things beneath he wasn't Venetian the way they said he was Venetian, and all these things that were made up
Well, it turns out wasn't true. So, you know, and and and that's not the only book written by these and their Spanish, of course, and they wanted to get to the bottom of the whole thing.
A lot of researchers have done a lot of stuff on Columbus. Anyway, but what I'm saying is to back up what we were saying about being colonized.
The word colon means Columbus.
Okay, so that's how famous Columbus was that he got to have this whole idea idea, the idea of colonization.
That's the way of giving him this this special notion he became a notion from coming from being a person to being a hero to becoming this whole notion of colonizing.
So now that we colonize our everything is really, really interesting. I've always been fascinated how you you use words. And because I was an interpreter for my mother, since I was, I don't know, three years old.
I started dealing with a lot of words as well. So, to make my mother understand what things were going on, because she couldn't speak any English. I had to learn a lot of vocabulary and a lot of ways to make her understand what was going on.
So I've paid a lot of attention to words as well. I haven't read as much as you, but I've been very observant I observe things and I do, you know, like life gives you the opportunity to be in the right place with the right person.
You know, for some unknown reason, and certain books fall into your hand and you're like, Oh, where did this come from.
That's been like so much in my life. And, and so I never questioned the fact that today I'm going to learn something new today I'm going to something happen.
Um, I want to talk a little bit about what it is that captures people because we, when we first recently, we conceived of getting together and making this recording.
I think the idea was that we would kind of the idea was that we would talk about ideas.
Yes.
And, you know, I had an experience that was very profound and quite shocking and it lasted a long time. It lasted for many months during 2002.
And that experience began with me writing. I was writing an essay. I was sort of on fire out of the blue where I was inspired and just started writing.
And I thought for the first time.
I had sort of a vision, if you will, or or an idea.
And the idea was that the network of human minds on our world is an environment. Just like the earth is an environment. Right. This network is an invisible environment.
It's a layer of what's going on here that we can't see directly.
But we see its effects.
And in that environment, there are things a bit like organisms except they're not alive.
And unlike organisms.
They are extremely Darwinistically competitive.
And they compete for dominance over terrain in this in this network of minds and they competed for dominance over the transports between minds.
The transports that connect humans to ideas.
And they compete for reproductive resources.
Just like you were talking about earlier. Right.
And they are really most of them. They're not all malignant.
But the dominant ones are malignant. They're not like organisms. They're more like cancer. Right. They want to metastasize and mutate and just can continue their dominance.
And this is one way of thinking about it's not the only way. I'm not even saying this is real.
I'm just saying it's useful to think like this.
It's one way to think about what it is that captures humans and creates the monumental problems that we face in modernity these things we call nations corporations, the military industrial complex.
You know,
political and religious ideologies. These are these things which I have, you know, I call them thrifts.
And when I had this idea, the moment that I had this idea about the thrifts.
At that moment, something touched my mind and just started teaching me incredible things about language and knowledge and history of human minds and all these things.
I'm not going to launch into a long discussion about.
I just want us to notice that
certain forms of ideological structure.
Dominate the network of human minds, and they capture he they colonize the humans, and then those humans go and colonize living places and human peoples and destroy them.
Right, and turn them into slaves, graves, banknotes, gold, you know, square things, cars, war, guns, pornography, advertising, you name.
Oh yeah. Oh yeah. So, so the thing with me is this
bridge between languages, and then I finally, you know, I get the courage to move and learn as much as I can about civilizations and what was here before before
the Spaniards because well they they did their utterly best to erase as much as the old civilization.
But guess what, the people are still here, they're still here, they're breathing, they're walking, and they have
their baggage with it, including my grandmother, my uncles and all these other people that I have been very privileged to
enjoy. And that in that move was like the best thing I could have done and so many people criticized me and said like,
How can you disdain modernity and all the the comforts of life that the United States works really hard to provide their citizens and you, you, how dare you go off into the wilderness and that, you know,
who knows what the hell's going on in the other side of the Colorado River, the Leo Bravo, they don't care, they're just scared, that's where the world ends.
And I would, I would talk to people because my mother and my sisters and everybody stayed in Los Angeles, except me, I decided no, no, no, no, no, let's go explore, let's go find out, let's, let's learn, let's learn.
And then I found the language, the native language, and then I keep discovering things that are just fantastic.
And of course, the spirits in everything, you know, people here have the habit of talking to things, you know, they'll say like, Where are you, I know you're here, I know I left you here somewhere,
I'm talking to the broom or something, you know, and I realized that there we go again, the transmutation, I can turn into the broom and appear to the person and say, I'm outside, come outside and I can hear the broom calling me.
You're looking in the wrong place, I can hear the broom calling me, hey, no, you're looking in the wrong place, I'm outside.
That is communication, that idea that it's possible really bothers a lot of people.
They don't want to know, oh no, you must be some sort of witch, how dare you, you can't communicate with things.
Not with rocks, not with water, nothing, you are just this blob of amino acids and small extremities, that's it, that's what you are, don't try to beat anything other than that.
You see that, that's part of the, that's part of the domination strategy of this thing, right, and it's not the left hemisphere, it's weird, it's like, it's like the ghost of the left hemisphere's origin in the right hemisphere in its nature, right, it's like this, it's like a ghost.
And part of what it does is it tells you what's impossible.
And what's impossible is anything it can't control, commodify, enslave, grip and manipulate like a tool, all that stuff is impossible.
So, telepathy is impossible, healing each other is impossible, right, dreaming, you really shouldn't do that, don't do that.
What are you doing, that's crazy making, don't be dreaming, don't have vision.
How dare you, how dare you, don't stop.
I call it perception, that's something I studied very much because, mind you, architecture was something, you know, there's these huge churches here, and every single church here.
Cathedral size, there was a whole civilization around that.
They just split the stones and turned it into a church, but right there, there was a whole civilization and it didn't go away.
They just tore it apart and created their cathedrals and what happened.
And so people would not run from these miners and all these people that were mining places and they needed the people to provide for them, whatever.
So that they needed to keep the people under control and so they said, okay, well, we'll just let things go in a certain point where we can manipulate them to the point where they're not harassing us back,
and they will kill us, but they were always suspicious that we did not want to be conquered, we did not want to be colonized, we did not want to be invaded by the silliness of looking for gold and silver and thinking that's it.
That's what you do, that's that's it, that's what you do, accumulate this stuff.
And so it's very bizarre to do our culture, yet a lot of people start taking on the same habits, the habits of lying, the habits of pretending they're better than the other ones.
Well, you're, you're poor, you know, you can't afford this or you can't afford that.
And so this thing, it starts growing in the middle of everything in this in the jungles and, and they're being poisoned by these freaking mercenaries have no skills, no ideas, no personal ideas, of course, because they're disconnected.
And for the rest of people like you and me who have a connection, especially to creatures like birds and animals and little things.
Insects.
We feel rich, we feel incredibly well and the wellness comes from just being open.
And there's another feature of the perverse shadow that dominates the world.
And it is the idea of an individual.
Right. You're a separate person.
You're the important thing.
Your soul is at risk. And we've got the formula for immortality for your soul we're going to keep, we can keep you alive forever.
Upstairs in God after death. Right. If you just, you know, it's weird because they've got, they've got this thing that that reinforce they've got a sort of a
program that reinforces our separateness as an our value is Darren, which is the worst part of me right the Darren part of me the part that's really concerned with Darren and Darren this and all the stuff.
That's nothing like what the goodness of me is right the goodness of me is way beyond Darren.
I don't care much about Darren. Darren is a sort of a peripheral thing like, I don't know, like the dustpan is to my kitchen or something right the dustpan has a purpose but it's not the kitchen.
Anyway, so the first thing is the separate thing and then the second thing is you're either us or them, either with us, the enemy.
If you the enemy, you're going to burn right you're going to go to hell. So their version of collectivity is fundamentally poisonous. I just want to mention one brief thing about this bizarre people of the book problem.
Right. And particularly, I mean the Jew, you know the Torah is one thing. The New Testament, we can think of it as a separate thing.
A New Testament thing is very, very strange and there's a bunch of weird interpretations that thing. But one of the things that happened is, there were a bunch of traditions in Greece.
Right in Greece, and in other places in the Middle East that had to do with undergoing death while you were alive.
And so that your passions, right, your capacity to be captured by desire died, and you were introduced to the virtues of origin.
So that when you were resurrected in this lifetime, while you're still you.
Now you would be oriented by this relationship with these virtues, and you could not be frightened by human authorities. You could not be frightened by war or death or threats of any kind because you had seen beyond the veil of life.
You knew what you knew essentially what we come from why we're here and where we go and how that happens, each person perhaps uniquely.
And for these mystery religions like the Ellisonian religions of Greece right where they would literally take you through an initiation.
You would have an experience of death, and just at the at the edge when you could, you know, when if you're left alone you're going to you're going to actually die.
They can resurrect you and bring you back into your human experience.
And this was stolen by the idea of Christianity and projected into after you died. Right, you only get resurrection. If you accept the blood of Jesus and you become a Christian.
They switch the word eternity.
You will, you will. This is this life is nothing.
You're here to be tested for the next life.
Right. Right. That's where that's that's where they play the tricky part. The tricky part is, we decide if you will be a candidate candidate because we can, we can situate you in limbo for eternity.
Yeah, never go beyond that limbo because that's part of your punishment for not being just like we want you right.
So there's these conditions always creating the conditions to obliterate your possibilities. There is no possible. We decide the possibilities. You just get to obey and wish for, you know, that other eternity.
Who knows when, because maybe you might be dumped and, you know, the Dante situation of all these infernos. It's not just one little place it's like seven different.
Right.
Cheers.
So, this is the other thing right.
These religions utilize fear and judgment.
Now I'm not saying there's nothing resembling evaluation in the in the sort of origin world there's nothing resembling. I don't know karma. I don't claim to know about that.
But what I do know is that it's very unlikely that if there's something like God.
That it's like a fiercely, severe, jealous, judging, hateful, punishing, vicious, evil being. That just seems wild.
Right.
How convenient. How convenient. Right. Right. How convenient.
When I look at nature, that's not what I see. That's not what the sun does. That's not what the moon does the forest is not doing that. The animals are not doing that. I'm not saying they don't eat each other and stuff like that they do.
But overall, if I just look in nature, I rarely see violence. When I look at humans, I always see violence. So there's a big difference there.
The point is, they made the divine into something terrifying and terrible and something you should fear and cower from. And I will say that in my own experience of the divine whatever that may be in whatever.
However, that may be valued.
The thing that is fearful about the divine about origin.
It is not its judgment.
What is fearful about origin is it is so explosively beautiful that you will die of ecstasy by interacting with it. You will die, you will expire of joy.
That's what's frightening about it. It's not violent or judgmental or like the thunder thing.
I mean, it's, it's ever more ecstatically beautiful in each moment that you interact with it. It's like an explosion of ecstasy of ecstatic, loving, joyful beauty, which is nothing like.
I call it, I call it the state of grace.
Yeah.
Fair enough.
When you enter that state of grace.
It is non stop. You're in a state of grace and there's many ways of entering. There are many doors to that state of grace. And, and, and yes, grace is something divine.
It's funny because
it's something very important.
That has become, I've become aware of it over the past few years as I explore more deeply my concerns with the origins of injustice and the problems with the humans in modernity.
And it has to do a lot. One of the features of it has a lot to do with the absences.
And strangely,
that word again, absences.
Oh, absences.
Especially absences that present as presences, but there's something I notice, which I think is quite profound. And that is that
the way in which the divine may be palpably absent in our experience is expressed as beauty and love and kindness.
Like, the absence of the explicit presence of the divine expresses itself as like the glorious, flowering beauty of any organism or living place, right.
Whereas this other absence that is very upset about that kind of absence. Right, because that's an absence that
it's mystically, sacredly absent. Right.
And this other absence can never do anything like that. So it wants all that stuff gone.
That stuff has to go away. If I had any cost, like as soon as you can just kill it, just kill it off.
And what what McGillchrist in his book was argue was suggesting was that, you know, in our minds, the right hemisphere interrupts the fictions of the left.
Right. It.
It's watching when the left starts to confabulate a fake world and it'll interrupt that and cause that to all break down so that it has to be remade hopefully better than last time.
When the right hemisphere is shut down or missing is stroke.
Yeah.
You're, you're, you're breaking up, you're breaking up.
Yeah, let's see what's breaking up a little bit.
Okay, I think my, my, my internet was broken.
I don't know. But you know that what you were saying about absence is lacking, lacking when something's lacking. It's
sent
our nation and channeling all these things that are
moving and I feel even have seeds and make more little
right.
Just to get them to the others are lacking other things.
I don't know if you remember that movie of Amadeus and a salieri, the guy that was there.
Oh, we're
okay. I think you stopped the video.
I stopped the video because it was so broken.
And now that I've stopped it, we can hear each other. I'll start it back up in a moment.
Okay, but it's still being recorded. That's all right.
Before the part before where you started talking about Amadeus was very broken. So I'm not sure if that got recorded. I wonder if you might re say it.
Okay, when I was saying it was about the lacking. I was talking about when things are lacking, the absence that you name it, you call it absence. I call it lacking where there's not enough energy or
I, or whatever it is to instigate the ability to
and it goes the other way feels it from other places, you know, like protons and neutrons, you know, they come together with other molecules and they will share their their electrons and create a new element, right.
So I think everything is in a state of constant creation.
Yet, when there isn't enough electrons to go around and and the energy dissipates.
What's little left is is always yearning to steal from other people, whatever they can and they don't care about the quality. They don't care about the quality and that's when I that image of
and that movie Amadeus is very interesting because he has this little dialogue with God and and and he takes the cross and and he's talking to God that, you know, is angry at God because how dare you create this creature that has so much talent and that he's only, you know,
like in a prison suffering and watching God speak through the talent of this most side to the point where he decides to destroy God's little creature talented creature and that's that's I remember that so well.
But as do I.
It's a common.
It's, it's a common. You see me now.
I can but still the quality is very poor.
So something is wrong with the, with the connection.
All right. So for the moment, let us continue without video.
Okay, I'll turn off my video unless we want to try to reconnect.
At least this way we can hear.
Okay, well, you want to comment something about what I just said and.
Yes, it's very similar.
I find it really, really important.
I do too. But it's tragic for everyone involved. As I said before, one of those wolves is infinitely hungry.
And the other wolf is easily satiated by even a small morsel of food.
Right.
And this is important. And I think there's something very tricky about these wolves identities.
And one of the wolves as a.
We think of one of the wolves as an absence and the other one as a presence or one is lacking, and one is plentiful.
I think if we actually look very carefully at the wolves we will discover that the hungry wolf, the infinitely hungry wolf isn't actually a wolf at all.
He's the other wolf's right call.
Right, he's like one extension of the, of the good wolf.
And he's trying to be a whole wolf, and he can't.
Now, normally, it's not a problem, right, to be the right hand of a being.
If that hand wanted to dominate the whole body and was really angry and tried to attack, for example, my face or my torso or something right, then you would see a similar to what we are what we are witnessing.
You know, what if, what if Moliary was actually a feature of Mozart.
It could be, it can be, you know, that, that dark side that we all have I always had this thing with my kids when, you know, they they're fighting or doing something stupid.
And I said okay, you two better shape up, and they're, and they keep going right and I said okay kids, you guys don't want to know my dark side because my dark side's rarely dark.
That's when they stopped. Then that's when they stopped. Okay, mom, we believe you, we believe you will stop.
They think they're playing, they're doing harm, and they don't know how much, you know, somebody's going to poke somebody's eye out or do something really stupid.
It is, I'm trying to avoid it. But then I call my dark side to lurk and show a small little bit of how dark my dark side is and they don't want to know they don't want to know.
So, yes, yes, we are both at the same time.
You know the.
What what McGill chris is arguing is that our cult what we call our cultures which are not actually cultures. And what we call our societies, which are not actually societies.
They are like left hemispheric style constructs that have no right hemispheric aspect that can correct them at all.
Right, so they're just, they're doing the thing you were talking about earlier. They're trying to arrange their own death, but no one's coming to kill them.
That's what they're doing.
You see, it's the same.
I could see it. I've seen it so many times I've seen it so many times, and, and people say, oh no no you're you're you're miss misinterpreting and no I'm not misinterpreting that that's something that I have, not just the skill, but, and the intuition, but it's just like 100% of everything I do.
This is very important.
When I
want me to turn on my camera.
We'll see.
You know, the thing about how much of a coward.
A person can be.
I want to turn it off again. Yeah, I want to, I want to make sure that the least our communication is clear. You know, I don't think it's cowardice I think it's something weirder I think it's like a soullessness.
The soul has gone down. So it's not just it's not cowardice it's a kind of a vulnerability, perhaps. What do you think.
Well, I really think there's like six elements working here. And one of the, I mean there's like, on the positive side, the positive, sensible, common sense, fortitude is the ability to learn the ability to
move the initiative so that you move outwards, you know, you have this force that goes forward.
Despite many odds, and then there's the admiration, because you've seen it in other people, or in other things that that all three of those elements create this force, a benevolent force that will
just about anything into action into a benign state or the state of grace. Once those three elements are here, but their counterparts, what are the counterparts of, of admiration is envy.
So the sense of envy that, and I'm not talking people that are jealous because you know the difference between being jealous and being envious is a great deal. I mean if you're jealous, it's like, you know, see somebody with a nice car.
You know if you work hard, you can buy that nice car. But if you see somebody with certain attributes, let's say a good voice, you know that no matter how much you practice, you're never going to have that voice.
And so, yeah, so I admire people with a beautiful voice, and I, and I don't envy them, because that's something I will never have yet I have my own talents, but when when it comes to being dependent or reliable.
I'd rather be reliable and then dependent. So said other people depend on me because I think I can do what I what I say I'm going to do. But the opposite of dependent is useless.
No, I can't do this. I can't do that. You know they they they dig their own grave because there's just like no I can't know I'm too afraid over this. So they, they create the situation where you're saving them, and they're hanging on to you.
So dependent people can be really, really negative, because they're always nagging about something right. So that's, that's the opposite of learning, like you say well I don't know but I can learn, and I just need practice the more I practice the better I'm going to get at it.
But that other person's going to say oh no I can't do. So what happens with the controller the person with initiative the one who's like the politicians who talk and talk and blab and blab.
They don't have the skill set.
But what they do have is that they recognize the, the ability to to go forward that they're going to need the other two, but then they will depend on people with those other skills.
But what does the other controller the negative controller is the destroyer. You know, no, nothing can exist except me, me and me alone, because if somebody sees somebody else are going to compare them and of course I'm never going to be as good and and all three
situations the end the, the belittlement of self is going to pop up and reinforce the sense of I'm bad, but I'm incredibly bad and nobody's going to know just how bad I am and so they have to be like incredibly bad and every day you know they'll have
children and they'll teach them. Oh you're going to chapter learn to cheat. This is how you cheat and you, and if I catch you that means you didn't learn to cheat right, you know there's all these fables about
teaching their, their, their children how to be evil, which is really silly.
Well that's how I feel that there's the counterparts that are working against this.
There's other trinity of skills and the other ones are just plain lazy, you know laziness and postponing and you know even magical thinking or positive thinking for that matter which is a whole school of psychology.
I'm just thinking, which I think is horrible because I think the, the capacity of us to see the horrors is also important.
Yes, I agree. You can.
Yes, we should not that you just think everything's nice and rosy all the time.
And on the one hand. Okay, this is these matters are very complex and they're not easily encompassed in simple proclamations or simple declarations.
I want to say a few things though that relate to the history of the conversation that we've been having today. And one of them is that
it seems to me that the elements that represent the absence of our humanity they're very good at organizing they can organize
incredibly effectively so that they don't have to not be lazy.
They can get away with lazy evil, because there's 15,000 of them doing it together. Right.
So they can get away with being lazy and evil.
And again, I'm not sure that that it's actually people. Right, it's like depersonized humans. It's dehumanized people.
You know, if you go to a job every day, even a job that isn't necessarily evil right you go work in an office.
You're sitting in front of a computer at a rectangular desk everything around you is rectangular. It's all a bunch of squares. There's some fluorescent lights above your head killing your soul every moment that you're there.
It's basically like one of those tears of Dante's hell. Right, it's a terrifying thing. And so what happens is the people become dead inside, and then they just they enact the functions I remember writing a poem a long time ago when I was in the poetry class about
who disappeared in Guatemala after seeing a show about this on television and being so moved by it.
And one of my friends in the class turned to me and said, You don't understand evil Darren. I was like what do you mean.
Like evil isn't it's not a thing inside people.
I interviewed those people who killed and buried the people in Guatemala. Those people weren't evil when they asked them why they did it they didn't say because I love torturing humans.
They said I did it because I was just following orders. I was just doing what I was told.
I was doing what I was told to do by the guys above me. And here we come back to this.
We come back to the hierarchy, right, hierarchy of human power.
So, yeah, I think that my video is too probably too high res. Let me see here one second.
Yeah, I can make the video a little bit less irons.
I'm fine.
It comes and goes it's a little unstable but
Yeah, you're very blurry on my end so I'm going to, I'm going to give up my bandwidth for the moment.
All right, so we'll see how it how it record.
Yeah.
I'm going to stop your video too because it looks pretty choppy.
So we'll just do it this way for the moment.
Wait for seconds.
Yeah, look back. Yeah, there we go.
All right, so the thing is, there is something like culture.
And there is something like society, but it's not the big culture in the big society that we that we think of when we use these words.
It's like when you go to the poor people in some city or village, and you get some of them together to start making art.
That is culture.
You get some of them together and you teach them new skills and they learn them together for each other with you.
That is a society. That's what a society looks like.
Not like this other jump.
Right, not like the enacting of a bunch of dead inside rules. What do you think.
Well, of course, I don't know if I ever told you, but back in 2008, I started teaching a art class in Skid Row over there in Los Angeles.
And the police precinct there asked me if I would give all these people something to do.
And I said, what do you mean is that, well, they need to pay their tickets.
But so they have to do a social service, but we have no social service for them to do. Could you, could you take them as your students or something or do something with them.
I'm going to need tables and chairs and paper and oh no, no, we'll give you absolutely everything you need.
And so this community, which is Skid Row, it's an important community, mind you. There's people that've been living there for 20, 30 years.
And there's newcomers every day, of course, now it's grown exponentially.
But back then it was pretty big. It was like maybe 17,000 people were in that area camping at some given time.
And they all had all sorts of issues. But the main issue is that they had to do their social service.
So what I did as an art teacher, I told them, you know, and as soon as everybody arrives, just have this piece of paper and write your name on one of the corners, whichever corner you like, doesn't matter.
Just write your name and we'll get started. And then once the people gathered, I would tell them, okay, we're going to do these series of drawings and lines and so on.
And some people were there can't do this. And I thought, did you write your name on the piece of paper.
And they said, yes, of course. Well, that is a drawing.
And they, they would just go cathartic because they like, what? And I, yeah, you drew your name.
The word written writing is just another form of a name on a piece of paper.
You can draw the lines and you can draw the whatever. And the thing is, I would give them a little series of exercises, and then I would have them turn the page and draw the person in front of them.
And they did it.
And they could. But it was a funny little thing happening right there, Darren.
The person that they drew was themselves with the features of the other person and say they had a little hat or big eyebrows, but the face of the whole drawing was them.
What are we looking at? What are we seeing? Oh, well, it's a picture of him with a with a mustache or something. And I was like, wait, wait, what's going on here? And I said, well, thing is that we have been trained not to look at others.
We have not been allowed to look at it into each other's eyes and observe the person in front of us.
What we see is the person in the mirror when we brush our teeth. That's who we know. We know the guy or the lady that's in front of the mirror. And that's all we know.
So of course you're going to draw a face that looks like yours. But this time I'm going to give you a new sheet of paper.
And this time we're going to study the face and he's going to study your face and she's going to study your face. And we're going to observe carefully. And you're not going to take your pencil until I say so.
You're going to spend 15 minutes studying the features on the person in front of you.
And it's okay because of them so you can draw them. So you're going to check and see just how far their eyes are apart, how big is their jaw and I gave them a little bit of advice and then they drew everybody there.
Every single person made a portrait of the person in front of them exactly with the features that they had to.
And that was a two hour session. Okay, so the ability of people to change and to turn into a commute and to acquire new skills is something I did every Saturday.
Right there and downtown Los Angeles.
See, this is what I'm speaking about. So you gave those together with those people you all experienced something that would seem impossible.
Right.
I'm sure none of those very few of those people who you were working with probably thought that they could actually make a portrait of someone who's in front of them.
I think they probably thought they could not do that. That's not possible.
And yet you gave them a direct experience of doing something that shouldn't be possible.
And they thought was impossible.
And you gave it to them, you gave them this together. Right, they were doing it together.
Not just one on one one person, you know, everybody had to do their social service and here's the crazy thing because well, these are all adults, and they're not, you know, not well, all sorts of Matt bad habits, whatever.
You know, they're healthy might not be good their mental state, definitely crazy, of course. And some of them would, you know, be really nasty like, Oh, well, how, how is this a social service.
How is this going to be make anything better. And then I would say, don't you see, you just taught your hand to respond to something your eyes looking at that created this little channel inside your nervous system, where all your
muscles are concentrating on that pencil and that paper to proceed relating something you're looking at.
And they would still like say so what so what what so what if I learned to do that. And I said see from now on, you can train your eye to see your problems.
And now you can solve any problem, because now you can see it. Now you can see it before we were not taught to see anything like you mentioned so many times people don't see the squares everywhere.
They're everywhere, but they don't see them, because they're not taught to see things. And it would just bring tears to their eyes, because I would say, Now, you can create the life you want.
And you need and solve your problems. And that makes you a better person.
See, you teach them better people. This is a better world.
You teach them something about the connection between their capacity to see, and their capacity to act, and their capacity to do something beautiful with their hands.
And that connection that three, that three way connection is in a sense what you were talking about earlier, when you spoke of transmutation.
They've got the proof. They've got the proof in their hand. They've got it. And the person in front of them is like, You made my portrait.
And sometimes they would exchange portraits. I mean it was so cathartic to the whole class everybody was just really happy and they would return and they would give me updates on their lives and it was just a lot of fun.
And I think that allows people instantly to take control to learn to see, because we've been so damaged, like you said these vibrating lights and all this disconnection.
How can they connect. Well, they just have to let go for a moment, and they were obligated on top of that this was an obligation this was a civil service obligation they had to be there.
They had their Sunday best, and they had no idea what they were getting into.
And something really beautiful here. And this is one of the things that I've, I always have respected and loved about you is that, you know, you are a really beautifully hearted human being and woman.
And thank you. I've always felt very privileged to know you and to see the beauty in your heart and your skillfulness and your art.
And I still feel this way today, but one of the things I just want to mention is that you were mothering those people, Natalia.
You were mothering them.
They may have been adults.
You were like being like one of the people who might guide you across the river.
You were like, hey, after you die, right, but except you were guiding them back across the other way.
You were guiding them to an anemesis to a resurrection of their humanity and their spirit and their capacity to heal themselves and each other.
And meanwhile they're asking how is this a social service what I'm just drawn pictures.
You can see that this art is medicine and is powerful and is beautiful and profound.
And I just think that it's really, it's really important what you're saying because everybody has the capacity to be awful or to be wonderful.
It just, it's always there. It's always there.
But it's also very painful to be deprived of our humanity and our spirit and our origin and our mothers and our fathers and our living places and our siblings and our honor and our creativity.
And that that's what leads to addiction. The humans are trying to replace something that is absolutely crucial to their existence and has been essentially vampirically stolen.
Now I'm not saying they have no role in its loss.
It's very easy to become to become absent to oneself, and once potential, once enough of what is crucial has been sucked away by our body opposite of what I would call culture.
And so one of the things I love about the story that you just told is in a way you're just doing I think what comes naturally to you.
I mean, you're doing like the thing that the woman in Greece, who initiates people into the mysteries and she leads them through the death and resurrection thing.
You're doing something that actually resembles that you're resurrecting them in the midst of Los Angeles right you don't have the ancient Greek temples and stuff to lean on.
Right, y'all you've got some tables and paper and maybe some, you know, art supplies.
Beautiful. And I just, I want to celebrate the spirit with which you have brought humans and places back to life through your art and your love and your.
Thank you. Thank you that that's.
Hi, I welcome the kind work because sometimes we get so involved in giving and doing and an appreciation is always welcome I think it's very important to to do what we're doing right now because I'm sure there's going to be people
listening to this, and I'm sure there's hundreds of artists out there, thousands of artists that if they did that, what I did that little exercise in their community, or maybe on Thanksgiving, or between their siblings
and I don't know, go places and and do just that little exercise and give people back their sight and their ability to see reality.
I think reality is fabulous I'm not saying there's no horror stories in it there's tons of horror stories in it, but what, but without the beauty without the ability to see and open, open people's eyes and and you mentioned it many times.
They can't get together. Well they don't see each other. That's why they don't get together. They can't. They can't get together because they've been taught to ignore absolutely everything and around them and especially people they they run away from people
they watch so much television, so much stupid things. I mean, I had a production company at one point in my life, and I realized how important it is to produce the right content to get to stimulate in a positive way.
And I always wanted to have an animation.
And I didn't I now now that the chat GPT thing is just moving right along taking everything it can. And I think it's too bad it doesn't have any ideas there.
That's such a pity.
I wish they did.
So there's there's something I wanted to share about this. Again, there's a problem where.
All right.
When you and I come together.
I am lucky and that I am aware of a lot of the features of our possible humanity that we may not commonly experience.
And one of the things I would point out is that
one thing I love the humans. I'm not a missing throat. Right, which a lot of intellectuals are they criticize the humans.
I'm really sad about what happens to the humans at their large collective scales, but I actually love the humans and I believe in them as an organism the earth has invested more in humans than probably in any other organism that is a complex one anyway.
The amount of investment that it takes to just keep the humans alive is unimaginable moment to moment.
And probably unsustainable.
It's probably not unsustainable to keep the life, but it's unsustainable to keep a billion machines going that's for sure.
That's for sure. Yeah, I agree with you.
Yeah. Yeah, I mean everybody's arguing like there's too many humans will actually there's too many objects. Right.
There's, you know, 7 billion cars or something and 12 trillion guns and who knows what. But anyway, so the humans, they are like,
the humans are topology. There's amazing humans and there's amazing groups of humans and then there's really bad groups of humans that are, you know, deprived and like the like the bad wolf or whatever, or the hungry wolf.
But there are a bunch of problems that are really simple. We're not shown features of the nature of our humanity and we're trained to a colonizing mindset that poses us as individuals.
What do I get was take what's being taken from me. That's what molly airy was upset about molly airy didn't thank God for producing a Mozart in his lifetime who he could study and learn from and adore and enjoy.
Right, which was be just as natural a reply to the existence of Mozart as any other reply. I would argue.
Well, he decided that he was alone. He was a separate person.
And what I'm reminded of is a sort of a fairy tale that I made up where
there was a world that was made for birds.
But there weren't any birds on that world what there were were separate wings.
And they flapped around on the ground a lot complaining.
And they had stories of flight, but none of them ever flew, because they never put two of them together and formed a bird between them and I think our nature is to actually be thus.
We are an animal that needs each other to explore and discover and to block to like fertilize and to nurture our humanity. It's not a thing of individuals.
It's not a thing of separate persons. And when you and I come together to speak and explore and learn and remember.
Every time we do this we make a beautiful bird together right my you join your wing to my wing I joined my wing to your wing and there's a bird between us and it's the bird of concern for our planet.
And for the people and for the sky and for the living places and the animals and the creatures and everything, everything alive.
Right. It's this really beautiful spirit.
Right.
And I believe in that bird.
I don't believe in the individual.
And on top of that, there's there's this thing about feminine and masculinity that I can never think like a man and I tried because I had two precious sons and they're they're both boys with their boyish ideas, but I discovered this masculinity was was threatened by their
masculinity. I mean, men against men. That was something I couldn't, I couldn't understand. And it keeps, you know, your point of view enriches so much of the things that I can't perceive, because of my femininity that is just, I can't stop it.
And I am, you know, because my essence is this, like you said, mothering nonstop nurturing is is just something that comes out in an in without any effort. I mean, it's effortless.
I don't have to think, Oh, I should do this. In fact, I want to say something here that's going to scare people, but I don't think I think I just do.
I have said nothing about that pop up in my head. I can't say I thought about them. They just pop inside my head and like in architecture, I can see the building already finished inside my head before I even start drawing.
And those, that's why I can't say I think, or I believe, because the things just pop in my head there. They're already there. Or when you say something, immediately something, this association or the capacity to associate so many things like we were talking
about the scary movies or the Captain Nemo. I mean, we're going to have to talk about Captain Nemo because I have a lot of stories around this whole thing.
Yeah, this is what was a little was was related to an ocean city. So we'll talk about that some other time, Darren.
But I wanted to get you started talking about words and meaning of words. Yes, yes.
You're, you're, you're masculine focus on this whole aspect, which is, I find, find important and I find that I need to learn from you, all these sounds and vibrations and, yeah, you got a lot of things up your sleeve that I want you to share.
Okay, I want to go back over a few of the things you just said and one of them was that you thought it would be frightening. If you told people that you don't think, and I just like to suggest something here that I have recently discovered.
So first of all, I don't usually think either the stuff that I write. It's not because I thought it. I wasn't sitting there trying to figure something out, like a math problem.
I don't usually draw or when I write or when I make music, whatever it is I'm doing, I'm not thinking. And also I would argue that we, moderns, we are very confused about what minds are for, and I'm going to suggest that minds are not for thinking.
Minds are for communion. Minds are for coming together and making a third way of seeing that is both of our hearts and our spirits joined together in a beautiful mission that our ancestors and our children would be proud of.
And that thinking is what happens to minds when they're being tortured by being isolated and separate. Then you have the molly area problem.
And then you have molly area. It's it's Salieri, Salieri, Salieri, my bad. Yes, thank you for correcting me. Salieri. Yeah, that's the character. No, no, no, just just wanted.
No, that's an important correction. Yes.
I understand.
Oh, yeah.
Is another is another character from another.
Correct. Yes, my mistake.
I'm getting old.
For about two, two hours.
We should get together again and.
Yes, yes, we will wind down soon. Yes, we want to know when you're available.
So we will wind down momentarily. I just want to share a few and wind down and
I adore. Yes, please.
The way you enact your femininity and I adore your spirit and way in the world and I honor and respect this about you.
I think you're just a beautiful being and I'm so grateful to learn with you and see with you and hear your experiences and your insights.
It's it's really a treasure.
I'm so grateful for this time together. We will do this again sometime very soon.
And I'm happy to hear anything you care to share before we wind down for today.
Well, it's been a great pleasure every time we've encountered a few words, and maybe we'll make it a habit of doing this.
I am.
I admired so much the way you manage to create all sorts of things. It's just, I really, I really, you've always inspired me a lot to keep going.
I don't know this because I don't express it enough, but it's, it is the world of ideas is the world of words. And if we don't use the words properly, we can fall into that category of misunderstanding or
interpreting so much so much so that people taint their life with a sense of hopelessness. And I think your work is full of hope, constant and radiating with this sense of togetherness and hope that is is out there.
It's being obliterated by so many forces, but you know, like I said, they don't want to know my dark side because I will use my light side with my dark side to approach and set them straight because this is too much too much.
They're getting on my nerves.
I understand and yes we should fear the anger of the mothers.
I think we will soon be subjected to some of it as humans because we've been as a species, we've been wildly misbehaving in the nursery for a long time now.
I think there will be some answer to that. I hope there will be some answer.
Natalia, you're amazing. I'm so grateful.
I'm grateful as well. Thank you, Darren. It's really, really, really.
A wonderful talk. And we have to do this more often. All right, we will do this again very soon.
I hope that you have a beautiful rest of your time there. And I wish you wise dreams and amazing experiences.
Same here. Take care. You too. Bye bye for now.
Until next time, my friend.
Till next year.
