Hey, Sarah. Wonderful. I'm pretty well, and I'm super excited to be here today with you. I'm so curious about your work and your history.
And I'm fascinated by everything you do.
So I'd be grateful if you could just take a moment and tell people who are not yet familiar with you a little bit about yourself and your work and what fascinates you.
OK, so I live part time in Greece and part time in England.
And I wrote a book two years ago about the history and culture of dreaming in the ancient world with particular emphasis on Mesopotamia, Egypt and Greece.
And now I'm running dream themed retreats in Greece and other areas where there are ancient temples dedicated to sacred sleep or divine dreaming.
So that's what I'm up to these days.
And I guess I got into this whole area because I've just always loved dreaming and been a lucid dreamer since I was a kid, and it's been a huge passion of mine.
And then over the years, I've realized that my kind of love of ancient history and culture could be marriage to my love of dreaming.
So I've discovered this kind of niche weird path for myself.
And I'm loving every moment of it.
Beautiful. Yes, I am particularly inclined to pay attention to people who are operating on the outskirts of what we would think of as ordinary humanity and ideas and concepts and stuff.
And your work is particularly fascinating to me due to my own long astonishment about the nature of dreaming and some of my early experiences.
I wonder if you might be willing to share a few episodes from your childhood dreaming that were particularly influential for you that you may remember.
Well, one of the things I was thinking about today actually was I had an opportunity a couple of years ago to interview this amazing woman called Rebecca Sharrock, who is one of I think only about 80 people in the world who have been diagnosed and assessed for this
not really a condition, but a state of having highly superior autobiographical memory. So she's also on the autism spectrum.
But she has this phenomenal memory where she thinks she can remember before she was even born, and she has memories of being a baby of being a toddler.
And when I discovered I was going to interview her because I was interviewing her with my friend, Anthony Peake, who I have co-hosted his consciousness hour YouTube series with for a while.
I was really excited to ask her about lucidity and dreams because I figured if she has highly superior autobiographical memory, then it must mean that her dreams are lucid because dreaming and memory.
Basically, if you have a great memory, then I think you're more likely to become lucid and one of the things I would always advise for people seeking more lucid episodes is to do what they can to improve their memory.
There's a relationship also there with like language and being detail orientated. So it fits in really well with autism spectrum as well and so many other aspects of sort of hypersensitivity,
synesthesia, she's synesthetic as well. So I was just super fascinated by this and it turns out that she is lucid in all of her dreams.
And one of the questions I wanted to ask her was because I have these memories of dreams when I was a baby, perhaps or a toddler that were all white.
And I said, did you have dreams that were all white in the beginning? And she says she remembers having dreams that were all white for a while and like me were populated in the first instance by like a single favorite toy.
In my case, it was a Fisher Price pull along phone. And I remember this dream distinctly of my Fisher Price phone. You know, the little one that's got a face that you pull it long is called like a chat along or something like that.
I picked up the receiver, and it was my nan telling me that, no, it was Wersel Gummidge telling me that he'd killed my nan.
Do you have Wersel Gummidge in America? So Wersel Gummidge is a terrifying scarecrow TV show that I know the actual episodes that that dream was inspired by because I can remember being terrified of Wersel Gummidge when I was small.
And I found out when it aired and so I would have been about four then when I had this dream. And I answered the phone and Wersel Gummidge was like a really scary like wrinkly faced horrifying scarecrow that could take his head off and chuck it at people.
And there was this particular episode that really scared me where he was chucking his head off of the back of a van and throwing it at people. And I think that's what inspired the dream.
So I remember that very distinctly. I remember a dream that had my first experience of ecstasy when I would have been about, I was at primary school, and I dreamt that I was a cat sitting on a rocking chair.
And I guess I'd had lucid dreams before then, but this dream was lucid and I had this like bodily sensation of ecstasy like this euphoric feeling which I've come to since really associate with the lucid state.
So in this dream, I was just, it was a very simple dream. I was a black cat sitting on a rocking chair, but I could feel this like delight in being in a cat's body and the texture of the pads on my paws and like my fur and teeth and claws and everything and it was just an amazing sensation.
And so I very much distinctly remember that dream. And then one of the sort of main features of my dreaming, especially when I was a child was there was this particular landscape, this dream landscape that I used to return to every single night.
And there I used to draw maps and it's one of the techniques that I use for dreaming is like this dream cartography dream mapping where you draw out the landscape of your dreams and the architectural structures and the features of the dream landscape to kind of create feedback between the waking world, your creative output and what you're dreaming about.
And it works really, really well, especially with children. So do dream workshops for children as well. And they're brilliant at it. So I do exercises with them where they'll do something like design a fantasy dream theme park and in the act of doing that, the process of doing that.
They're actively imagining exploring the stream theme park designing the rise getting excited, which I think is an important part of like the emotions associated with experience and really fantastic things.
So they get excited doing it. They imagine themselves doing it. They tell me stories about what it's like being there. And then that I get them to dream it that night and then they report back and tell me like what it was like exploring that dream theme park.
So my one my dreams landscape that I can still remember now it had things like an underground pier, a red velvet underground because I was into the world underground when I was a kid and had sinking sand beach with cable car ride over the top of it.
There was a huge kind of school building with lots of small windows that had a jungle next to it, and a farm where they bred flatfish like just all these little things I used to like drawing and create maps of.
And I was always really into those books that have fantasy maps in like, you know, cartography in it like a Tolkien's Lord of the Rings and Alice in Wonderland and all that kind of stuff.
Brilliant. Oh, I'm curious if you can recall an early experience in which something profoundly strange occurred that you didn't understand.
Lots of things my dream life and the kinds of experiences that I had in my dream life. I think directed me towards exploring philosophy, esotericism, considering perception as being malleable reality as being malleable,
considering that there was something that happened to your soul upon death that your soul goes on journeys during dreams.
So, as a kid, I was a bit obsessed with a creating some sort of machine that could record my dreams so I could show them to other people and be that if I perfected lucidity was able to absolutely do it and be in complete control the time that I would
survive dying and I could explore these other realms that I would visit in dreams and I was sure that where you go when you die is the same place you come from when you're born and a place that you can access in dreams as well.
That's why ancient cultures so like great for exploring dreaming because you can kind of look at it in a very academic scholarly way, looking at the material culture, but through dreaming is a very legitimate way of doing something really creative with the
imagination as well so I love it because I like being scholarly and academic and really nerdy and going to lectures about ancient Near Eastern material culture and all that kind of stuff, but I also like thinking about what what I might imagine the dream life of someone in that time could be like.
That brings up so many questions. Okay, so once again, I want to ask you about any early experiences or a central experience in which something occurred that you were completely unprepared for didn't understand anything like that in your recollections.
So I had a dream once that you know I told you about there was a school building with lots of small windows and I remember walking past and as I say like I was always reading about esotericism like it got me into thinking about the nature of the universe and the cosmos and all this kind of stuff.
I walked past this school building one time where there was a, you're walking into a jungle like up a dirt track and this is where the the shed that had flatfish, where they're breeding flatfish and then there was a tunnel in the flatfish heart that you could access the red velvet underground through.
And as I walked past the school building once there was an equation written like in chalk on the side of the building. And when I looked at it, I understood the secret the meaning of the universe and I had this kind of mind blowing epiphany type of experience and when I woke up I tried to write out this equation.
And like, since then I've come to the realization that your dreams will kind of provide you with what you think might be required to understand something because now I don't think there is any meaning or secret of the universe but at the time that's something I was questing for.
And it seemed to me like logical as a child that that could be something that was contained in an equation. So even though I saw this writing on the wall this what I considered to be an equation on the wall it was probably nonsense.
But it acted on my consciousness in such a way that facilitated this like mind blowing transformation. And I had a lot of other dreams and one of the things I'm really interested in because of this is dreams where I'm given a drug or a substance in a dream.
And that drug or substance changes my consciousness in the dream so I have like a psychedelic experience or I can I get drunk or it just it acts as an agent of transformation within the dream which is something that really interests me with regard to myths around this idea of eating food in the underworld or taking food from another realm and the fact that you have to stay there if you if you do that.
Wow. Okay, so that brings up something. Yeah, there's there's so many things here. Those are beautiful recollections. This is such a treasure. Oh my gosh.
Okay, so what about experiences that happened for you either hypnagogically or hypnopompically where you have an experience that wasn't really dreaming but was very surprising anything like that.
I've had a couple of really great hypnotic experiences recently because I'm looking into Greek mythology so much and especially exploring the gods goddess or figures of importance in the Asclepian family and in the Asclepian tradition.
So two of those that I've been I purposefully kind of incubate for dreams with and I have kind of hypnagogic meditations focused on them have resulted in sort of interesting encounters so tell us for us I had recently, which is probably my favorite led me on this whole amazing quest to discover who tell us for us is.
And what I loved about that so I had this.
I had a hypnotic experience as I was falling asleep. I'm very interested in tell us for us he is this kind of child God, sometimes represented as a dwarf sometimes represented as the child or son of Asclepius.
And he, you know, we're told he represents the completion his his kind of the personification of the completion of the cure and the successful treatment of patient entering the holistic healing sanctuary of Asclepius.
He's mostly associated with the site of Pergamon the Asclepian of Pergamon in Anatolia.
So, as I was falling asleep tell us for us came to me in an image and told me that if I needed if I wanted to know him and I had to really know his name and that was it it was just a very direct succinct message.
And so I started to look into his name and think about him a lot and meditate on it and look at all the statues I could find of him and all the records I could find of him anything in stories that I could find.
And one of the other things that came through in that as well is that I might find him in folklore or fairy tales as much as I might find him in mythology, and he is supposed to be a Celtic supposed to be a figure from Celtic mythology.
That's the idea.
But then the next day I received an email from someone saying I've just seen this little tell us for us in a French Museum completely out of the blue and they sent me an image of the tell us for us that they saw.
And that was like validating so I got even more into it and I wrote an article about how one of the other things it wasn't part of the hypnotic experience but something that came to me is you know like sometimes just information just sort of comes out of nowhere.
Doesn't seem to relate to anything you're thinking about the time you might not even know exactly what it's referring to. But one of the things was that I thought tell us for us was born with a call.
And I don't know. I can't remember now where that even came from. But the more I looked into it the more I thought that that would make a lot of sense, especially in terms of him developing and evolving out of this Celtic, almost Jean I type figure, because there's this concept of the luck child this lucky child that's born with a call,
and is protected from harm throughout their life and tell us for us acts as someone who protects someone throughout their life he protects them in birth.
He brings them into the world he's often associated with women in labor and facilitating an easy journey from the mother into the world.
And then often he is found as a votive in the graves of children and shows them holding their hand and taking them into death and being their guide in death.
So there was just something intuitive about he might relate to this idea of the luck child who's born with a call and as that figure could be like a lucky charm like a lucky totem type of figure.
So I just got really into researching that and there's a lot of stuff that I found out about tell us for us and about actually being born with a call being like a huge thing in the ancient world across all sorts of cultures that if you're born with some of the amniotic sack on you,
that this means you're going to be lucky throughout life. And in ancient Greece, they even practice a sort of divination looking at the condition of the call on the body.
And especially if it was a kind of band around the child's head that that showed that they were already crowned. And so there's this association with being born with a call marrying into royalty because you've already got a crown either having great beauty.
But one of the main things is being protected from drowning. So Percy is the hero telephos the hero who is actually why I think tell us for us is named tell us for us because the first mention of his name is found in an inscription at Pergamon and telephos the king who's like a mythical hero king is the legendary founder of Pergamon.
So I think they there's some association because tell us for us seems to sort of suddenly be named tell us for us and appear as tell us for us in Pergamon for the first time.
So, so yeah, I went down like a lot of rabbit holes with tell us for us, but I felt that that was a special important thing to study.
And one other thing about the escalation at Pergamon is the main treatment center where you went after you had kind of undergone all the other stages of healing so the catharsis in the theater, the purging the purification in the cold water baths.
When those stages of the healing had been completed you walked through a tunnel. And at the end of that tunnel is a treatment center a circular two story treatment center that was actually called the tell us for and so is the temple of tell us for us.
And that's where you were perfected. So one thing that's come through to me recently and something that I've been working a lot with him the Gothic incubation and sort of intentional dreaming is that darkness was a massively important part of healing.
And what we call initiation but that wasn't really initiation in the ancient world in terms of the rights of a LFC now this idea that you are perfected in darkness and that darkness itself is a kind of ritual practice to reveal the divine presences of gods and goddesses.
So I've recently started working with Maria Marigou in in Greece. And she's, she sort of specializes in deep etymological analysis of ancient Greek words and is incredibly passionate about it and has spent years researching the LFC in mysteries.
And, you know, her description and her explanation for what was happening in the telus, telastere and the, the initiation hall is that the telastere on the word telastere on the root of that means something like the perfect the place where the perfecting rights were carried out.
And one of the things that Maria says I find really interesting is that 30,000 people would take part in that sacred way pilgrimage.
3000 people were allowed to pass into the sanctuary and could take that place in the telastere on, but only a handful of those in the telastere on would actually have the experience.
So it isn't like the Freemasons you you're not going through grades and receiving qualifications and getting any seals of approval.
It isn't like a hierarchy like that. It's, you either are perfected, you either have the divine experience and the direct experience of the gods and goddesses, or you don't.
And that's something that I think is very interesting. So something, you know, one of the other things she says about the telastere on is that some of the initiate some of the misdi that enter the telastere on reports spontaneous healing events.
So the darkness and the perfecting rights themselves, like what's occurring in the telastere on Pergamon, when a patient is perfected in darkness by the gods, is that you are kind of perhaps leave your body.
Encounter something divine and come back in and your your consciousness, your spirit is recalibrated so that you can be healed from things. And I guess I think of that because I like to think about these things on a sort of practical scientific level.
How is this possible that someone could be healed from something like an out of body experience. And I think about something like it's not what used to be called Disassociative Identity Disorder.
I think it's got a different name now.
But where someone experiences a trauma or a shock, and in order to cope with that an aspect of that personality kind of splinters off and they create this other personality. So in some of those, some of those cases you can have, say someone's got three personalities one personality
an allergy, for example, and if they're having an allergic response they can cool in the other personality or the other personality can be coaxed out, and that allergic response will stop.
So it is really, you know, something that I think is a much more sort of complex and fascinating avenue to explore. But I think that one of the things I'm very passionate about is like ancient Greece, ancient Egypt, ancient Mesopotamia.
Is we unfortunately have kind of forgotten about the existence of the soul, and the soul needs to come back to medicine in order for holistic healing treatments to take place like we are more than the sum of our parts and the ancient Greeks absolutely acknowledge that we have a soul and that soul can be healed and perfected through non physical experiences.
So much there. Excuse me to digest.
And so many thoughts.
So a couple of things that occurred to me as I'm listening and trying to understand the incredibly rich intelligence that you're sharing here which is just such a treaty.
Oh, gosh.
So,
it strikes me that the journey that you're talking about.
During the Ellisonian process, we'll call it an initiation resembles a sort of a recapitulation of conception.
The genesis transit through the wound into the world.
As if this is being intentionally, almost as if that's the central figure or one way to see the central figure of existence is this process.
So by undergoing it occurs to me anyway that by undergoing this process again, it's like being reconceived, and then facing the crisis that happens in the transit from the womb through the birth canal, you know, to the exit of into birth.
And somehow, for some reason, the Telestarium reminds me of what the child encounters in their first moments of existence, right, they're surrounded by beings, right, and and these beings mediate the experience of the transition from the existence in the womb to the
existence in the body and the human world and things like this. And so it seems to me that the Telestarium might be reminiscent of those beings that mediate conception and embryo genesis and have her view over the transition from the wound to birth what are your thoughts.
Yeah, well, I think that that is something Maria would definitely resonate with and she talks about this idea of in soul in matter, and that it is this opportunity to die and be reborn consciously you know when we're first born into the world we don't know what's going on.
If you have that second death, it's less about the death part and more about the rebirth, but the death is necessary for you to experience the rebirth. And you get something very similar happening at the holistic healing sanctuaries of Asclepius as well where Ipnos the god of sleep is seen as the brother of death thanatos.
So you, you go for your sacred sleep in the Enchimaterion, and that serves as a pseudo death from which you wake up, and your, your unhealthy six self dies in the Enchimaterion, and your healthy self is reborn to the world.
And so people entering there is an initiator equality to go into holistic healing sanctuary of Asclepius. And one thing that I think is really important to consider with regards to the mysteries well I've seen her as well as the misty would begin this process of self change and self improvement six months at least before so the mystic God starts teaching them the ways to live a better life in the spring.
And that six month process, they're like trying to be better and nicer and a good person every day and improving themselves. So when you get finally to the Telesterion, it's this huge climax, it's a huge moment of realisation that you've been preparing for for six months.
And I, and for me it is an opportunity to be consciously born to be the person that you want to be to be the better person with all of your faculties and everything that's gone before it's an opportunity to get rid of everything that doesn't serve you up until that point and embrace a new life and it reminds me as well of
the Oracle of Trafonius where you have to drink first from the waters of oblivion of Lethe and then you drink the waters of memory so you know it seems weird that you drink the waters of forgetting and oblivion but I think sometimes in order to grow and in order to
upgrade to the better version of yourself you have to forget the stuff that's gone before and embrace the new remembering of what you're about to encounter so you drink the waters of Lethe and then you drink the waters of Minimocini so you can remember what you're about to encounter but with the
other regards as well to this idea of the womb and the Genesis, you know just the goddesses you have Dionysus has an important role in the mysteries of Elefsina in his role, he's like a torch bearing version of himself is a special version of Dionysus especially for the Elefsinian
mysteries and Persephone is is called Cori at the Elefsinian mysteries so she's the maiden and you know the word Cori the etymological root of it comes from Sprout so she's like the essence she is you know we've memory or even discussed perhaps the word core comes from Cori
and Cori
yeah so
so
Demetria is the earth mother and Cori is this Sprout this essence this first shoot of life and the process of going on the sacred way of taking the Kiki on of being in the Telesterion of that you know there's psychodrama that's enacted there's
mourning and loss and drama and you become one with the gods and the goddesses of the rights like you are them and so by by sharing I think there's an aspect as well you know the the potential psychedelic
components of Kiki on I'm I'm still on the fence about I don't know whether or not there was any psychoactive substances in it I know there's a case for
the
enzyme the
I forget what it's called now what's the the main one that's considered ergo so there's a case for ergot being on on the barley that was used to make the Kiki on by kind of think given the preparation and the anticipation that very little extra is required for you to have hallucinations
especially if you consider the Telesterion is dark and you've been fasting for a night and you're ecstatic and you're like highly prepared for something incredible to happen and you believe that the gods and goddesses are going to actually manifest in that space that's an enormous amount of
anticipation which, you know, I don't know if you know about this kind of darkness retreat therapy that's a big kind of trend now of people going on darkness retreats where they are put in a space, a completely black cave for example for three days.
And I think it's like something within 50 hours you begin to hallucinate vividly hallucinate. So it takes very very little for human beings to start hallucinating. So for the Kiki on to be packed full of ergot is kind of unnecessary but I also wouldn't rule out and there were fields that were dedicated to growing the barley that were used to produce the Kiki on and all this kind of stuff but for me.
The taking of the Kiki on is more about kind of Theohenia the idea of having this sacred meal with the God this divine hospitality. And you get the same thing in the sleep on holistic healing sanctuaries as well where a big part in Epidavros in particular is about sharing this meal with the God.
And that that in itself is a healing ritual because you are partaking of the same food and you are becoming divine and through becoming divine you are throwing off that the kind of illnesses that can affect mortals.
So to me visiting the sanctuary of Asclepius you get this real sense because it's enclosed by sacred grove as well as encircled by trees and the sacred grove was protected in those in that area if you cut down a tree you could be you could be killed like it was a very serious offense to cut down a tree that belonged to the sacred grove of Asclepius and that sacred grove acts as a kind of buffer zone between the mortal world the ordinary world and the world of the gods and goddesses.
And there is something it's a big it's a big sanctuary the one at Epidavros and actually the footprint of it in terms of the archaeological site today is a bit smaller than what it was originally because there are other temples on the outside of the archaeological enclosure.
But the place really feels like it was a place where the gods lived. And I think there's also something for me that's really important of how beauty and nature can heal you and that if you find yourself in a beautiful environment and you're surrounded by biodiversity that that just helps encourage healthful life.
Iguia who is Asclepius's daughter you know she's often called the personification of health but really her name means whole she's wholeness she is like perfect harmony and wholeness and wholeness is health and so this very important way of considering healing as being wholeness is something
that I think we would do so well to return to these days, especially with regards to considering beauty and nature and treatment for the soul.
Okay, I have a million things in my mind. Let me walk through a few of them.
When you were first describing, by the way, Maria's work is absolutely fascinating I hope to do an interview with her sometime very soon. I'm so grateful to you for introducing me to her work.
She is absolutely brilliant I've listened to the recording that you shared with me over and over and over again and every time it's one of those things where every time I listen to it.
It's as if I'm, I'm being, it's like I'm being transformed inside right I get I see totally differently each new time, which kind of reminds me of the process of having a day of waking life, falling asleep, dreaming, and then awakening
right there's so much here that's fascinating.
Because one of the things now that may be different for the woman that you were describing in the early part of the interview, I can't recall her name yet.
It may be different for her.
And perhaps, again, please.
Highly superior to biographical memory. Yes, yes.
Rebecca.
Sharon.
Sharon.
So for her it may be different. I'm not sure.
But one of the things that I find very profound, and I'm, I've been long fascinated by dreaming and I've, you know, I've made discoveries of my own that I think are unusual.
But, um,
are waking. Okay, so the concept of left there, right, being dipped in the waters of forgetting, and then being dipped in the waters of I pronounce her name the most and he, but I think you called her.
How do you pronounce it.
Well, I mean, I've, I've not that bothered about pronunciation as, as long as well. I like saying minimal senior minimal senior.
When I first wrote the book, I thought it's nemosine nemosine. Yeah, but I say minimal senior now I mean I guess because I'm in Greece.
People are saying things back to me and I'm trying to remember how they're saying it.
Of course, do you do you recall how Maria says it.
I think she says minimal senior. Okay.
So,
first of all, we can imagine a very simple metaphor, which I think is trivial, just the metaphor of a chalkboard. Right.
We write on it, we write on it. And then it goes back to black.
And now we can write a new.
And, you know, I've been fascinated by the concept of let a and of course this is the root of the word in English lethal.
Right to mean deadly.
So,
when I awaken in the morning, it is as if a vast array of memories of Darren, his history.
What has harmed him what has given him joy, what he regrets all these things right this is a vast weight to carry. Yeah.
And most of that stuff disappears when I go to sleep.
It doesn't really accompany me.
It doesn't accompany me in my dreaming in the way it accompanies me in my waking life. Let's put it that way.
And also when I wake up, there's this long linear continuum of Darren, right, that I know and is familiar and I have the things I have to do and the problems I've solved and so forth and all these things right like a vast library of stuff.
Whereas,
when I begin to dream.
It's like a new world.
My dreaming self does not recall yesterday's dream.
Right.
Though it can, it's not, you know, it's not a law, it's a principle right it can yesterday's dream can certainly influence what I dream tonight and so forth.
So there's something fascinating about being cleansed, and also this purgation that you spoke of, I think is super important it's something.
I was reminded when you were talking about the El Sinia process.
And by the way, Maria pronounces it.
LF, not L use LF, right LF senior, or perhaps you could correct my.
I say a left this and LF senior left this and LF senior. Okay, great.
So,
when when you were describing the process you went through like four or five phases, and one of them was pergation.
And then you talked about how there were 30,000 people, a certain number of them will be chosen to actually undergo the process, the ones that got to the Telesterium, maybe some small number of them would actually undergo the healing experience.
And I think, what do you think about the idea that this could be the birth of the concept of democracy.
Right, that some are chosen. And we have, we're supposed to undergo pergation before we go out of voting, and so forth, right.
It's probably wise that people that make decisions about the world have gone through that process. I mean, one of the things I was taught I did a podcast this morning actually one of the things I was talking about was Peter Kingsley's research into dream incubation.
I don't know if you've read Wisdom of the Dark Places is a book he wrote about the history of dream incubation in ancient Greece and the fact that in pedacles and parmenides were almost the kind of the last of a long line of what we might now call kind of shamanic sages that we associate with
Eastern practices, but there was a tradition in Italy and Greece in the polis around the Greek world of a kind of wisdom system and tradition that unfortunately was lost.
And he talks about dream incubation being something where people that were leading communities in the heads of these polis or these elected members would purposefully dream to make decisions to write the laws of the polis.
And that's me makes so much sense you get a group of people that dream they try to connect they receive the laws in their dreams. You still have to check because you've got these other people that you're responsible to something about the veracity and show discernment in terms of interpreting those dreams and not making, you know,
crazed decisions based upon perhaps unhinged epiphanies or whatever. And I think veracity and discernment is really important when thinking about dreams.
Even in the same way that you might with regards to psychedelic episodes as well because I know there's been a lot written about
some issues surrounding psychedelics and how they although they're supposed to kind of dissolve the ego often result in Jesus complexes in people where they don't show discernment in terms of integrating those epiphanies and they think that they are, you know, accessing the secrets of the
universe like I told you about my dream when I was a kid, you know, so discernment and veracity testing are really important with dreams as well but I think that because dreams enable you to make really fantastic novel associations with enormous amounts of data and to have this
overview effect that actually good decisions often result from spontaneously divinely inspired dreams that do often result in good solutions to problems.
One of the one research about lucid dreaming is that if you're a regular lucid dreamer you're good at problem solving. It's like a kind of something that lucid dreamers been recognized a good problem solving, which I find quite interesting because novel association and having the
overview effect. I think they can often make quite good mediators because they can dream of another person's perspective.
I'm so reminded of our overwrought valuing or authorization of thinking. Right, and it strikes me that I have recently been struck by the insight that thinking is one of the worst things you can do with the mind.
This is what minds are for. This is not what minds are for. Mines are for something like dreaming communion insight forging the third mind together and moving together into this place, from which our purview is radically expanded.
And there's just so much like I was saying that I think thinking, you know, for a mind thinking resembles what it would be like for a bird to be nailed to rock.
It's a symptom of isolation. And of course, you know, I'm hyperbolic and I'm Italian right we do this naturally. I'm being very hyperbolic, but I think we've got entirely the wrong idea about what minds are and what they're for.
And because we're paying too much attention to the pseudo left hemispheric, you know, grasping manipulation, objectification utility pragmatism, accounting courtroom games, right all of these things, which if you
know, our pattern recognition is supposed to be used and applied for survival. And this is why I think social media drives people insane because, of course, you can see patterns in it because it's all patterns and algorithms.
And so this is why we are living in these like increasingly small echo chambers and halls of mirrors and arguing with ourselves and AI is going to drive everyone even more insane because they're talking to themselves and and people can't help but
have opinions on things and there's almost like a pathological need to express that opinion when the opportunities become available and the more forms of communication we have, the less we're actually communing, communing is more important than communicating.
So, I think in our common daily lives and those of us who are not particularly well versed in the wisdom of dreaming.
We place far too great an emphasis on thinking, and I honestly believe that there's a place for thinking right I don't want to just throw it out the window.
But in an actual communal situation.
The amount of thinking we would do is much more is vastly minimized. I think thinking is a symptom of isolation from the polis from communal awareness concern reputation problem solving questing play creativity, all these things.
You know, I don't, I don't want to just go on about my perspective here but there's a couple more things I want to say.
The humans are going to invent a mechanical God what could go wrong. I mean, that's going to go great. Every massive upsurge and technological development for the humans has almost been the opposite of something like
development of awareness, communality, presence, authenticity, resurrection, rejuvenation, all of these things right.
And I don't think the humans realize that our technologies are sygenic.
They produce mind states, the same in a not dissimilar way that drugs do.
And I don't know if you've looked much at images produced by AI, but those, I played around quite quite a bit because I've been fascinated by the problems and technology and so it would have been for many, many years I'm a technician.
And my early experiments with having chat GPT produce images were literally mind blowing. I mean, they were psychedelic experiences.
That were more like psychosis and insanity than they were like, oh, that's produced beautiful images.
So I'm fascinated by all of that but I want to stay on topic here. And there's a couple of things.
I'm really interested as well and I'm really interested in how material culture influences perception of reality and structures of reality.
So you look at the early creation myths and they tend to rely upon the material culture of the time and the technology of the time.
So you have people being created on a pot as well, for example, or, you know, the earliest ones are people coming from the stars.
And how we talk about simulation theory and that we're all living in a computer game.
You know, AI will become the next creation myth that we are created while people already say that don't know that we're created by like a highly technology orientated civilization and we're minions for it or whatever.
One of the things I researched in my book I'm very interested in.
I'm super interested in ancient material culture and how that can help you kind of reverse engineer the likely feelings about reality because so say for example one of the things I'm really interested in is the history of mirrors.
And the earliest mirrors ever discovered, to my knowledge, have been found at Chattel Hoiak in Anatolia and that polished obsidian surfaces like palm sized handheld mirrors and they became elite grave goods around this time as well.
They're also really early obsidian mirrors found in China and places like this.
And then later on in Egypt mirrors became associated with rebirth with life with the sun with Hathor and with Ra.
And when glass and mirrored surfaces were invented, one of the kings of France developed this condition called the glass delusion.
So I think you're completely right.
Material culture does reflect back to us our psyche and vice versa and we are augmented and changed by our habits and cultures.
And the glass delusion means that you believe you're fragile and that you could shatter because there's this kind of over associating with the material world I guess.
And I think that's why so many kids kind of go crazy when all they have is the internet and they don't have physical one on one interactions with people very often.
They don't have to even acknowledge their physicality.
They can exist in a completely cerebral virtual way and therefore they're disconnected from their body and they feel uncomfortable in their body as you would if you are sitting down all the time and looking at a screen.
It's the obsidian mirror.
This is an obsidian mirror.
And so is the computer and so is the television. Right. We've, and we keep this in our hand at all times and it lights up. I mean we should think very carefully about the metaphor.
This is replacing right because part of what this is replacing is something resembling a guardian spirit or intelligence that connects you to the sky.
Well, it's a portal to another world and instead of the world of our imagination or of our collective psyche, it's an another world generated by companies and by other people.
So it's, you know, I think of these modern devices and the modern technology as being kind of outsourcing our memory. So instead of sending the tendrils of our memory out, we are being kind of severed from that, that connection and that memory.
I mean, one of the things I think in terms of acts of worship and in terms of what dreaming teaches me more than anything is that the point of a human being is to create biodiversity on earth and and and celebrating life because life is creating energy and working magic.
And so, you know, one of the things I really love about being in Greece is there's an archaic nymph on my road and the little wild tortoises gather around there and butterflies.
And for me, it's like, well, the nymphs are still alive because the wild tortoises are nymphs and the butterflies are nymphs and the birds are nymphs.
So I can feed the nymphs and honor the nymphs still. And I think that, you know, I've got friends that work with nature connection and psychedelics and they talk about nature appreciation.
And one of my friends, Sam Gandhi talks about shifting baseline syndrome where, as modern humans, we can't really appreciate how much biodiversity has changed in, you know, the last few generations.
Because, you know, passenger pigeons used to blacken the skies over America and are now extinct, you know, things like the amount of life, the density of life.
And I think the density of life is is more about more than just about living organisms, it's about spirit, nature spirits.
And the more we look after and cultivate and culture life and biodiversity, the more nature spirits we're creating and the denser and thicker and more connected to that web of life can become and we will feel more part of it, the more nature that's around us, the more we can feel like we're, we're dreaming with the planet.
I mean, I would argue that the humans are profoundly confused in asserting their separation conceptually or their supremacy over nature.
More, it seems much more to me that our capacity for memory and intelligence floats on an ocean of biodiversity. And as we burn that down, we get dumber and what the problem with getting dumber that way is the first thing you lose is the capacity to tell that you're getting dumber right like if you're being.
If you're being deprived of the faculties that you need to understand that you're being deprived of something, it quickly just becomes a cascade.
You can certainly, we want to imagine that to exist in the ancient world, surrounded by largely unaffected, just oceans of biodiversity right memory and dreaming we're probably a wildly more astonishing experience than what we moderns will usually
not that it's entirely unavailable to us, but I think what I'm trying to get at is the human seem to think, ah, you can just kill up a bunch of stuff over there and you still got your house and your car and your shotgun and your whiskey, you know, we're gonna be fine.
That's true, like, this is one, our planet is one being, and that being also has relationships and friends. And as the humans, I mean for the earth, the interval over which the humans have been decimating the environment is very tiny.
Right, it's like one eye blank or something. But if she wakes up and gets upset about this, and her friends get upset about this things are not going to go well for us. Let's be really clear. These beings are not.
We are nothing compared to these beings like we are a little dust specs floating around on the surface. So I think our health vitality intelligence memory capacity for transcendence or awareness or learning, all of these things absolutely depend on biodiversity.
And we just been burning that stuff down and converting into dead objects and machines and artificial intelligences and so forth. I mean, the idea that the universe is simulation is hilarious.
The idea that the brain is a computer, or that the, that the mind is just the brain doing stuff. There's no chance of those things being true, yet they can be mechanically compelling.
I want to be careful about not doing too much doom singing. On the other hand, I want to sing the praises of the living planet that I adore that we both, you know, live for the sake, and in the womb, moment to moment of, you can imagine an embryo that just starts attacking, you know, the uterine wall with machines right like what, what do you expect what's the outcome there I mean is who, what do you get out of that so I understand.
Like the most, the most kind of great thing you could ever do in life is be a gardener, you know, because I've had like a little garden, and I've got a little garden now in Greece actually and I love having a little garden and when you grow things.
You see all these relationships and you love the plants and I think, you know, a big issue with people feeling lonely these days is they're not able to extend their love or their feelings for anything beyond human interpersonal relationships, but you can love the land and you can love
plants and you can love animals and you wouldn't have to feel lonely if you can develop those feelings for something that's non human.
Yeah, I just found like gardening is one of the most healing things we can ever do and human beings and I don't know how things are there but in England, you know, people are living in increasingly small places on their own no human contact let alone nature contact.
And it's very easy to feel disconnected from the throbbing pulse of life and one thing that helps you to release a fear of death is feeling that you're part of this fabric of the cyclical nature of life death and rebirth and regeneration.
And I think, you know, this is something that the people in the, who took part in the LFC and in mysteries must have felt in a very real embodied sense and I've been to the site of a leftist during springtime.
And also, I've been to a theatrical performance like the great theater at Epidavros as well which is a theater that was part of the healing treatment so you'd go to the theater to be engaged in raptured to experience emotional catharsis like that is why you went to theater because it was healing
right. And with the diminished stripped back chorus and scenery which at the time you can imagine would have been like incredible with like 50 people in the chorus, extravagant sets and costumes and designs and like raucous possessed musicians.
I can't even imagine, you know, it must have been wild. And even without that degree of like religious fervor, you can get a sense of how healing, it would have been to have had that cathartic experience in an ancient Greek theater, you know, with, especially with the natural acoustics.
So I mean that's another thing that I'm really interested in is the appreciation that the ancients had for sound design. And the theaters are the theater at Epidavros is one of the best in the world it's like acoustically perfectly designed.
And there's another structure in the sanctuary called the theme alley, which I think is an architectural divine instrument that people would enter into to become one with the performance with the chorus so that structures called the theme alley and the most common
use of the word theme alley in ancient Greece is for the altar stone that was at the center of ancient Greek theaters that was dedicated to Dionysus because all ancient Greek theaters double as a temple of Dionysus as a shrine to Dionysus.
And it's where the conductor of the chorus would have stood to conduct the chorus so the fact that this whole structure is called a theme alley and is quite unusual in that sense suggests to me where a performance took place that was considered to be cathartic and
and Paphsanius the Greek travel writer who he was present when it was kind of still standing or part of it was still standing. And there were two paintings inside one was of Eros putting down his bows and arrows and picking up the liar.
And the other one was of the personification of drunkenness like a drinking wine. And so the Dionysian overtones to that and Dionysus is a figure of healing and he gets forgotten about, you know, his role there.
But to have the catharsis that religious ecstasy that frenzy is a way of releasing and purging negative feelings or
frustrations or anxieties it's just an opportunity to release blockages emotional and physical mental.
Okay, so many, so many amazing things in my mind, again, from everything you've shared.
But I'm going to circle back to a couple questions that I had earlier in our conversation.
I know, I'm blessed by knowing a number of it's unusually insightful and intelligent women.
And one of the first of these women that I met is a woman named Catherine Ironwood.
It's like Y R O N E W O D and she's to be one of the publishers of eclipse comics she lives in forestville.
And she told me a story in which she would dream about a sort of a village or a town.
She began to draw maps of the town.
And eventually she met a man there.
And they would go to the cafe when they met and they would sit down and they would have coffee and they would talk and they would talk about the
fact that they're both aware that they're dreaming, and that they know that they're dreaming the same place over and over again together.
Eventually, she says, and I trust her that they exchanged contact information and met in the waking world.
Have you ever had any experiences resembling something like this or heard of things like this?
I have heard of a couple that met in a dream and then they've both seen each other in dreams and then eventually met one another at a conference
and the guy was looking in various places for this woman.
And I think because she's Greek and he's Mexican and because she doesn't look typically Greek, he was looking in some wrong places,
but then they eventually came across one another.
I can't remember where they were in the world, but they were at the same conference.
They are holistic architects and they have a company called Geophilia and they work with Dan Winters.
They're very much into sacred geometry and things like this.
They were sharing dreams before they met and passing messages to one another and I can't remember now the details,
but it's a big part of their story is that they saw each other first in dreams and then eventually met up in real life.
Alright, so there's a couple of things I want to touch on.
Are you familiar with the traditions from South America that are oriented around the concepts of the knock wall and the tunnel and their relationship with dreaming?
No, I was talking to a friend the other day actually who's really interested in Mayan dreaming and has been doing lots of research into that,
but I don't know much about that tradition.
Since I've been a kid, I've found, anytime I find a book on dreaming, I read it, but something I'm very passionate about is,
I really feel my roots in the Western esoteric tradition.
Going to some of the places in Greece, I feel like I'm from here, like I've been here before and I think it's really important to recognize that in England, in Europe, in America, in Canada,
we have these traditions, these deep, mystical and mythical traditions of our culture.
And one thing that I love, because lots of Americans and Canadians come on the retreat actually, and sometimes it'll be the first time they've come to Greece,
and it's this amazing feeling of homecoming for them, like this amazing wave of familiarity and love for this land.
And Greece has this amazing sense of home for everyone, I think.
The Greeks have got making people feel at home down to absolute fine art.
It's like nowhere else I've ever been, they know how to make you feel at home.
I moved there within a week and I had no doubts whatsoever and everyone has been completely delightful and welcoming and lovely.
My home feels immediately like my home, everything feels perfect.
I just feel like one thing also, and one thing I was going to say about biodiversity actually, is something I'm very interested in is how we consider ourselves to be separate entities,
or this new way of viewing the human organism as being like a separate organism inside an environment.
Whereas actually, I think in ancient times, there was a greater sense of we are part of the fabric of the environment that we're in.
So if you take someone out of a shitty environment, an unhealthy environment, and you put them in a healthy environment, then they can be healthier because they're influenced by that environment.
And I see this a lot with people that live in messy, cluttered, dirty houses, they're hoarders.
They'll start to become ill, they'll start to have blockages or health issues or mobility issues because their environment is getting cluttered,
and as that gets cluttered, it's like feng shui, you start to mirror the environment in your body.
There are all those studies in terms of addiction and how like rats that live in an enriched environment just, you know, they easily give up whatever drug the scientists have been pumping them along.
And so I think this is something that the ancients really understood.
So this is why they recognized it was important if you wanted someone to heal, to put them in a beautiful place.
And it seems like absolute common sense and intuition that you would do that.
But I mean, the state of hospitals in most Western countries in the world are crazy because there's no appreciation whatsoever that you need a beautiful environment with nice lighting, with airflow,
with healthy, delicious food, with gardens, with beautiful things and friendly, kind people helping you.
You know, I mean, people do their best in these health institutions, but they're, they aren't considered unless they have an extraordinarily visionary, rich, wealthy sponsor that recognizes the importance of the environment.
But the environment is really important as well.
And I think we, we are extensions of our environment and we should be very careful about if we want a place to be healing of beautifying it and making it a healthful place.
Yes, so this brings up problems in cognition and concept, which is one of my specialties actually specializations.
So we tend to think either that we're separate, or we're part of something and I don't mean to criticize the language you were using. It seems to me more that I'm not sure there's an outside of us.
Right.
We think that things outside of us are outside.
But I think we are instances of the universe, the solar system, this world, the place we live, the home we live in, the living places, the entire history of life on Earth, and also whatever the humans in their mad insanity are doing to and around us.
So yeah, I absolutely agree with you about hospitals. It's the worst.
The worst thing that could happen to you is to have to be in a hospital. It's, it's the least healing environment you could possibly imagine. If anything it resembles something like purgatory or a prison.
It's just absolutely awful. I was there briefly, just overnight, one time a couple years ago and I was just like, you know what, if I have to do this again. I'm not doing this again.
I'll just, whatever, you know, I'll expire if necessary.
But I feel like that. I haven't got a doctor. And the thought of going to a doctor's or a hospital is really horrifying to me. And yeah, I mean, I think I'll just lie down and die in an orange.
You're so beautiful.
Okay, so back to the South Americans, because this leads to a thread I want to explore.
I studied the work of Carlos Casaneda.
There's a discipline in, in that branch of bizarre, probably mostly fictional mythos.
There's a, there's a branch of their disciplines called that they call dreaming. They don't necessarily mean what happens to you when you go to sleep.
And some time ago, perhaps 4 years ago now, I was scrolling around on YouTube. I came across an interview between this guy, Alan Steinfeld, who was the interviewer. He's now something of a friend of mine.
In fact, I met him shortly after watching this video through a friend.
And I was listening to a guy who I think his name is Sergio Magone.
And he is a, you know, like a, like a, a toll tech teacher.
Hey, wow, I'm like, oh, I see, I just, I just accidentally did a gesture that my camera understands.
Anyway, so I'm watching this video about Sergio and he's talking about dreaming exercises and experiences.
And he, he, he gives a couple of instructions.
Thankfully, I tied it up my room a little bit before the feet. So now you can see the whole thing. It's not just a mess.
So, the thing that I want to talk about briefly is that one of the practices that these sorcerers or magicians undergo.
There's a series of practices with mirrors. And specifically obsidian mirrors.
And more specifically, a bowl of obsidian in which there is water placed. And this is placed on the stomach.
And you can actually see Aztec carvings of these not walls, which is a is a very complex word, but in the simple translation would be shape changer.
These beings who can change shape, they can become animals or they can become a place or they can, they can transform.
And the practice is to gaze into the mirror and cause your reflection to disappear.
And he was saying that if you find yourself in lucidity, one of the most powerful things you can do is to swap your perspective.
From the one that you're used to in which I am in me and I'm looking out into the world to I am the world looking into me.
And he says that what you will discover if you manage to do this is that there's nothing there.
And that moment of discovery will liberate you. Now you have abilities that you would not normally have even in a lucid dream.
So I found all this interesting. I was familiar with some of the traditions.
And a few nights later, I found myself. Oh, he also said, you know, if you try to do that and you don't succeed to try to turn your perspective around, you don't succeed.
Then just look at your hands, right, which is a well known.
What something we're often instructed to do in dreaming if we want to become lucid.
So a few nights later, unexpectedly, I found myself on the roof of my flat.
While I was dreaming. And I remembered what he said, and I was very surprised that any of this was going on. It was night.
And I tried to turn my perspective around and it failed. And I looked at my hand and it was weird.
In fact, what I remember is that the thumb was on the inside of both of my hands.
Right. And they were, and they had like extra fingers and more blurry and weird. The moment I did that.
Something very strange happened. So ordinarily in my dreams.
I'm still kind of myself.
But what happened this time was I simply started flying and I don't mean.
Flying like Superman or or Darren flying through the air. I mean.
I became flying the action. Right.
And I went to a strange place where things happen. I won't describe here. I went to another place where I committed myself to the eternal protection of two elderly women who were there.
And this happened twice. Basically the same kind of thing over a period of a few weeks.
Four or five weeks after that, I was on a call with my friend and the guy who did the interview joined the call.
And I was like, you seem familiar to me. Oh, are you that guy that interviewed Sergio McGillan? He's like, Oh, yeah. Yeah.
And I was like, that's really weird.
Now, the reason that I introduced these things.
There's two threads here. One is mirrors.
And particularly obsidian mirrors.
But the other is.
In the castanet and traditions that are sometimes referred to as toll tech, which I think is probably wrong or confused.
There's a lot of discussion of what they call the other.
Which or the double.
What are your thoughts or feelings or knowledge about anything related to that? Now, I often think before you answer, I often think that I try, I'm trying to understand what took place in those two specific experience.
I had lucid dreams before.
And I've also flown in dreams, but as myself, right? Like kind of like Superman or something, right?
But this was a completely different experience. This was like, I became an animal that flies.
And I went and did a bunch of animal things.
And then I went and spend to women in both, both experiences, the same sequence of events happened. And I went to some women in the 1st case, elderly women.
And I was like, I am your protector. I will always be there. Don't worry.
You know, and in the 2nd case, it was a young woman at a deli and I was like, I got your back no matter no one's going to ever hurt you again.
It's confusing and interesting to me why, you know, both these things happen, but it seems that there's another aspect of ourselves.
And I want to ask you a lot of questions about souls, but it seems there's another aspect.
And this, the other, which is a concept in castanet and perhaps some South American traditions. What do you know of this? Do you have any experience of it? What are your thoughts?
I did read those books when I was a kid. I didn't realize that's where this talk tech.
When you were a kid.
Yeah, there's the castanet books. I was really into that sort of thing when I was a little age.
I don't know. I've got like any books I could find about dreaming. I was reading like JJ Ballard books and stuff when I was 10 because he had this book called unlimited.
Ballard when you were 10 no wonder you're so.
I didn't like under really get it, but I like to read surreal from a very young age.
Me too. Yeah.
Yeah, I was probably a bit older than 10 when I read JJ Ballard, but I basically used to go to, there was a local library.
And I used to get any books that had like surreal covers and read them. And because JJ Ballard himself was a massive fan of surrealist art, all of his early publications had surreal art covers.
And I started off because the first book I read of his was the unlimited unlimited dream company. And I didn't know what it was about it just had a surreal art cover and I read it and I loved it.
I just thought it was weird. I loved weird stuff from a very young age. And so I read everything that JJ Ballard wrote.
So and Castaneda, the books that of his that I found in the library, they all had cool weird interesting covers and related to dreaming. So I read those.
And one of the things that I find interesting about this idea of double or perspective is something that brings up kind of ancient Egyptian ideas about self and soul and dimensions and qualities of the human being.
And how we're more than just the material body, we also have this spirit body, the bar, the car, the act, the shot, the all the different aspects of the human body.
And one thing I like to consider as well.
My notes about you.
Nice.
Yeah.
Yeah.
So, um,
I mean, I tend to just think about the bar, the car, the shot, the rent is name. So it's a bit of a different concept of self. It's like,
Yes, remember, remember with tell us for us. He said you need to. Yeah. Right. So you can, there's something very important about name.
Name is because I was thinking about like, I think everyone kind of becomes that name. And it may not be in a way that you is immediately obvious, but there's something always like the name is the first spell it's like the spell that conjures you into the world.
And, you know, my name being Sarah, when I was a kid in the, in the 80s, literally every other girl in my class was called Sarah. So I was one of about nine Sarah's.
And we all called each other by our full names because it was easiest way to distinct. That's why I call myself Sarah James all the time because my surname's James, but it sounds like Sarah Jane.
And everyone called me Sarah James at school. So I've always thought Sarah was really boring and I'm very unprincessy and the Hebrew name Sarah means princess and that's not really like me.
But when I started studying hieroglyphs, ancient Egyptian hieroglyphs, Sarah as a name would means child of the sun, and I'm born on June the 22nd summer summer solstice baby and I am a complete sonadora, and I like waking up at dawn, and I love the sun.
So I feel utterly like a child of the sun.
Right. Yeah. Yeah.
It's a duck and a solar disk is how I'd write my name. And actually, it's usually means son of the sun, but the is Sarah, it would have to end in a turf to be the feminine Sarah, but really like the essence of my name is like child of the sun which I love.
I do think there's something about that like the, even if it isn't the obvious etymological root of the name, there's still something like that you can find where your, your name makes sense for you.
One of the things I like considering looking at this different aspects of the human being in Egyptian conceptions of reality is that all of these aspects pretty much dwell in the in the heart.
They don't, they're not in the brain, they're not behind the eyes. So this idea of where are you emanating from where is the center is the abyss the heart, which really transforms the way you navigate the world if you think you're emanating from the heart area as opposed to behind the eyes which is generally
what I think conceptions these days tend to be the brain and the eyes. It's always fascinated me that, you know, when I was running my lecture series down here I had a lot of neuroscientists and people that research in psychedelics from a neuroscientific perspective, and they would do things like brain scans to work out what psychedelics
are doing. And I was like, that's really limited because you're a holistic organism system. And there are, there's like serotonin receptors in the heart, in the guts, there are brain cells in the heart, like integrated.
So just scan the brain and think from that you can really know what's going on is weird to start with.
So I work with a neuroscientist who's, you know, had some experience with psychedelics, and he would say,
wait a minute you're taking still still photos of states of the brain. Are you taking still photos of the flow of a river.
Where's the flow, you don't see the flow. And yes, the oldest, I mean the brain has been around for one seven of the history of organisms on this planet.
So if you take that and divide into seven, you know, for this many there were no brains and the primary organ of knowing was the gut. And if, if anyone's ever done psychedelics, they're going to notice that the primary the beginning of the changes
happened down there.
What happened here, you feel your gut undergoing some kind of trans or at least I have perhaps it's not the same for everyone undergoing some kind of transformation, right. And then that leads to cognitive and sensorial transformations, which I think, you know, the the neuroscientists were expecting
to find. Oh yeah this leads me back to a bunch of other topics. We're expecting to find hyper activation.
What we found was inhibition. Right, they found like stuff that normally keeps stuff clamped down to reduce feedback across systems loosens up. Right. And that feedback is probably what we're experiencing as psychedelia.
Now I want to circle back.
So first of all, do you fly in dreams. Have you had flying dreams.
Actually, talking about flying is interesting. So, there was something that I wanted to say just quickly on the Egyptian thing actually is that the Egyptian word the ancient Egyptian word for brain is skull awful translates to something like skull
awful. So they did know that the brain was important, especially in terms of like motor functions, because there's reports in some of the papery about people having their brains exposed because of head accidents and certain motor functions.
Not working or being like obviously related to particular brain injuries. So it wasn't like they thought the brain didn't do anything, but it in terms of where they thought intelligence and the soul was was the heart.
So with regards to dreaming. Yes, I do dream and I do fly in dreams had this really embarrassing experience once when I was watching a morning breakfast show with my dad and Russell Grant who was the show astrologer and dream interpreter was doing this kind of casual thing and interpreting
people's dreams. And someone phoned up said I dreamt I was flying and Russell Grant me and my dad were both like yeah we've had that dream. And then Russell Grant said this is a sexual dream me and my dad were both like
sorry. No, no, this is super important.
So I was very surprised by what took place.
After I became flying in the specific way that happened after, you know I saw Sir Jim agone, I think that's his name.
Because in both cases, I went somewhere, had a bunch of sex, and then went somewhere else and said I'll protect you forever right to these women.
Which I didn't understand at all it wasn't like I was, I'm like what was going on here first I'm flying them. I remember I said I'm doing a bunch of animal things.
Right.
And I was trying to you know keep it on the down low, but there's, there's a, there's a variety of threads here that I think are important to our conversation that I would like to draw into it.
In the best kind of way possible and understand why both, especially if you're sitting there with your dad. Right. And like, oh this is a sexual thing right you both just said like, oh yeah I have things like this.
And then, you know, you're looking at each other like, wait, you know, sex.
But,
I'm trying to organize the threads.
So ecstasy.
And it's, you know, the humans are us modern humans I often do this I'll say like the humans as if I'm not one of them, but it's because I'm not nearly human, whatever we might be.
It's got to be so much more than just a human being. And similarly, whatever our soul is.
It's not like a possession. It's not like a thing in a jar. Right. It's some kind of wild amazing constellation of histories and brilliance and awareness and beauty and like the virtues and all these things right it's not.
We tend to have in America and we speak English. We have this sort of problem with one thing mind.
A thing is one thing. That's a tree was my soul, you know, my soul is inside my body. And if I die goes outside my body, you know, and whatever. And I think it's very confused because
whatever a soul might be.
It's not Darren.
Right, it's something really astonishing and even if we take things without any metaphysics at all. Okay. And we just think of beings.
Organisms, organisms around this star here.
This organisms on this world, animals, humans, this human. Well, most of me is everything. Right. And then there's, you know, then then we can sort of open the matrushka doll and take out each doll, and we eventually get to that little tiny thing in the middle called Darren.
Right. So I think it's really important if we're going to think about something as astonishingly unimaginable as what a soul might be, we better be really creative.
Right, we better not just be thinking like, I got this thing, you know, and I also think like you say again, like Casper the friendly ghost.
Hey, yeah, right. I also think that like, it's as if, okay, imagine a child who's like flying a kite. Right.
And the kite goes up in the sky and the child's like, it's almost as if part of the child's in the sky, it's very exciting when you're a child, not necessarily when you're an adult.
It's just like the universe is, is sort of fishing in material reality like myriads of beings and forces and histories and such. They form this little thread that comes down and gets incarnated as Darren and, and you know, it's like,
Oh, wow, that's terrifying. Hang on a second.
My camera is doing something stupid.
I'm going to try not to pay too much attention to it.
So, there's, there's so much going on here.
That is beautiful and astonishing.
I just got really distracted. My camera is painting eyebrows on my faces. Can you see this?
No, I can't see it.
It's totally ridiculous.
And it's just, it's some high tech nonsense that accidentally got turned on. Let me see if I can turn it off really quick. I'm not going to spend a lot of time on this.
So,
Ecstasy, dreaming, orgasm, lucidity.
I want to ask you a few questions that I often ask people.
Do you recall ever having seen the sun in a dream?
The sun.
Oh, that's something I'm very interested in. No, and it's something I think about a lot. It's like the things of the dream world are self illuminated. They're not illuminated from a solar source or an outside source.
They like glow from within.
Oh, that's the best answer anyone's ever given to that question, which doesn't surprise me at all, given who you are or what I know of you. Wow. Okay.
Have you ever seen the moon in a dream that you remember?
I have stood on the moon and looked at the earth turning on its axis in a dream. And so I have seen the sun actually, but from the perspective of the moon where the earth is turning on its axis, like it was different because it still had that dark quality of light.
Wow.
But to ask you again, have you seen the moon like you would see it from the earth?
No.
Okay. What about stars?
Yeah, I've seen stars and nebula a lot actually.
Oh, wow. How about a lit candle?
Can't think of a specific lit candle now.
A fire?
Yeah, I've definitely seen fire and dream.
I wonder how the dream takes place in the room that you're sleeping in.
I've had an out of body experience that I was in a dream and I was in the room that I was sleeping in. Yeah.
I had a lot of false awakenings, loads and loads of false awakenings as a kid when because I had a cabin bed that my dad made and I think he was drunk when he made it because they didn't have a ladder or anything to stop me from falling out of it.
So I think part of the reason that's how I got really good at lucid dreaming because I'd have to lie in it like this to make sure I didn't accidentally kill myself in the middle of the night.
And another thing that I think helped was if I needed to go to the toilet in the middle of the night, it was such an ordeal to get out of my bed because I had to like lower myself carefully down, stand on my desk, then get out.
And I was a bit scared to do it and didn't want to do it and I'd get cold doing it. So if I needed to go to the toilet, I would just lucidly remind myself that I mustn't wet myself in the dream because I was still in bed.
And so I think that helped strengthen my lucid dreaming powers as a child.
Okay, so when I mentioned having a dream in which you're in the room you're dreaming, you immediately set up having a body experience.
Talk about your first, what are your first memories of an experience that is out of body like that?
There might have been ones before but it's the ones of being woken up to go to school or the vivid ones. There may have been ones before that but I can't remember those as well.
The false awakening things were like out of body experiences where one of my parents would come in and tell me that I had to get up.
And so I'd kind of dream that I was up and I'd be up getting dressed for ages and then I'd realize, oh no, I'm actually still asleep and I'd see myself still sleeping and then I'd have to start all over again.
And sometimes that would happen like five or six times in a row.
And so yeah, they're the first ones I remember. And I really remember having one one time where I saw a disembodied wolf's head standing in my doorway.
Okay, that's really important. So as somebody who's paid a lot of attention to dreaming, I know some very strange things about dreaming that I'm not sure that I'm the only one that knows them, but I rarely hear other, I never hear other people discuss them.
So since I'm with someone who knows about dreaming, I want to ask you some things.
The head in the doorway or the bad black cloaked man with a big hat, right? The homunculus that sits on the chest and one is suffocating. Have you experienced sleep paralysis?
No, I have had something the other side of I can't wake up out of the dream. And that's only really happened to me strongly twice. So I had one dream once where it was a lucid dream where I was standing in the garden of like a beautiful stately home.
I remember it was painted the color of duck eggs. And I was on a gravel path walking through the garden and I was just ecstatic. And so I started to jump up and you know how you kind of float when you jump up in dreams like the gravity is different.
So I was like just floating above the earth, but then suddenly everything was black and I was just plummeting into an abyss and I tried to wake up because I was scared, and I couldn't.
But I could feel the weight of my body on the bed and it was like my soul was it was like a smoky spirit trying to click back into the right position. So I kept trying to twist back into the position to wake up and eventually did and was like in a sort of panic.
And the other one I remember is an amazing like dream within a dream within a dream where every tearing of the layer of the dream would result in just another layer of dream and it took me ages to get out of it.
And that's, I've only had one experience that that was like that but it was, I'd wake up I'd think I was in the bed I think I was awake and I was not it was I was a must have been in a really deep state of dreaming might have even been carbon monoxide poisoning or something it was kind of.
I remember my friend did have a dodgy boiler and I did always have really deep sleeps at the house.
I don't usually have problems waking up I normally wake up quite quickly. And so this was quite an unusual thing as possible there was some reason for me having those but it was like layers and layers of dreams that just went on for ages.
You know, we're inclined to think that, and I think part of the problem here is the primacy of language, nouns and concepts in consciousness, which is very deceptive.
We're inclined to think that if I say the word dream, we always mean the same thing. A dream is, that's that thing we do when you fall asleep right we think we know this.
And actually, it seems obvious to me and I suspect you'll agree with me here, but there are a broad there's a broad continuum of forms of dreaming isn't there.
And so, there are many different kinds of dreams and one of the things that distinguishes a specific aspect or mode of dreaming for me is having a dream in the room I'm sleeping in my dream, and you could call this, we might use the language, you know, false awakening.
Right, because it usually does involve something like that. I get up out of my bed.
I, you know, walk around the room try to do something, which leads me to another question I want to ask you. Have you ever attempted to turn on a light source in a dream.
Yeah, I have because one of my best friends was really into waking life, and he didn't have very exciting dreams himself and when I would describe them.
When I would describe my dreams to him it'd be like that's really weird I never dream about like stories or places. I just dream about shapes and there are hardly any colours in my dreams so it was a really weird thing that our dream lives were so different.
And when he watched waking life he saw other people had lucid dreams and he learned, you know, about the light switch and I think the hand looking at the hand is in that and looking at clocks and various things like that.
And oh one of the things so one of the things he said to me she can't turn on a light switch in a dream or nothing happens or what you expect happened doesn't happen.
And the other thing he said that you can't read in a dream so this propelled me to do loads of dreams where I was turning on light switches all the time or turning switches on and reading a lot of stuff and and so I had a run of dreams where I was writing down words that were coming.
You know I was reading in dreams and looking them up online and I liked reading in dreams but but text does seem to morph like does tend to morph or be nonsensical or the form communicates something to you that doesn't necessarily relate to the actual form of the word it's like it stands in as a sort of metaphor or a symbolic
suggestion of writing.
Wow. Okay there's so much there.
So, what happens. Do you have memories of trying to turn on a light switch and what happened.
I think all kinds of stuff happened nothing happens.
Things other than light switches happening happens and lights go on so it could be anything and I think it's to do with expectation context of the dream, all sorts of stuff.
And usually what happens to me is, and it's not the same every time.
I'll try to turn on, I'll go I'll get up out of bed you know the turn on the light switch, nothing, right doesn't go on.
And so then I'll be like, oh the power's out. So I'll go get my flashlight, and I'll you know hit the button in the flashlight. And when the flashlight doesn't go on now I know like, okay this something's weird going on right.
And usually there's some kind of a very profound, weird encounter with a non ordinary force that takes place after that. So, for example, one time after having the light having tried to turn the light on it doesn't go on.
I walked out my room my room and up my hallway is a bathroom door the bathroom door was mostly closed and fascinating me for reasons I would love to know why there was a small paper lunch bag in the crook of where the door hinge would be.
And I reached out to to hold.
Or to open or close the bathroom door. And there was this force on the other side that was monstrous and profound and electrical and like, chaotically, vibe like shaking the door back and forth very violently.
And I've encountered this force, hypnagogically.
And you know, it's interesting the difference between hypnagogia and hypnopompia and human experience because in my experience hypnagogia.
It can, it can involve things like false awakenings or bizarre sounds or visions or so forth, and hypnopompia tends to be different it doesn't, I don't usually have visions I can experience sleep paralysis.
In fact, that's the most common thing that happens although, although I rarely have hypnopompic experience or I have hypnagogic experience very regularly.
I'm not here to talk about my experience. So,
what do you suppose Sarah is the source of illumination and drink.
I've been really interested in this idea and one of the things I did think is bioluminescent in the actual human organism itself, or accessing the collective experience of the world like residual light coming in through the collective.
I've written, I have written articles about this a long time ago because I was really interested because there is actual bioluminescence in the human organism I discovered.
And it is one of the reasons why you know, James Cameron, it was inspired to create all the bioluminescent scenes in Avatar because of a lucid dream.
I think that by that experience of bioluminescence there's something really pre birth remembering about that. I think there's something to do with by a bioluminescent experience of reality before birth.
Yes, often when I ask people this question they haven't. I mean, most people find it very surprising.
And by the way, you, you spoke of both you and the woman with a dedicated memory, having white dreams.
And I think that's amazing.
But have you ever had black dreams.
I had one black dream when I had an out of body experience once. And, you know, I read a lot about Tibetan dream yoga and this meditating in the abyss, but it was one thing I'd never experienced.
And then I did some remote viewing experiments in a shepherd's hut in the Brecon Beacons. And I actually had a kind of, it was, it wasn't quite a panic attack, but it was like a kind of a weird panic where, you know, when you saw panic sometimes,
it's like you pop out of your ordinary timeline. I had an experience like that during the day basically where it was driven, I had like a, an episode of fear, a very sort of sudden brief episode of fear that made me, I kind of collapsed on the floor,
in a bit of sort of overly dramatic way, but when I did, it was like I just split off a bit from my body. And, and then when I got my senses back, had a drink of water, felt okay again.
I felt revived, really revived in fact, like I felt like I could have walked had so much energy I could have walked all night.
And then that night I had an out of body experience that I was floating next to my body sleeping on the bed. And I could move my fingertips in micro movements, and I was creating these kind of like snowflake patterns by moving my fingertips in the blackness.
And then I was meditating, I was in an abyss and I was meditating and it was just the abyss and whilst I was there, I was thinking, oh, this is the abyss. This is what I've been reading about in Tibetan dream yoga.
And I don't think it was a timeless experience because it didn't last any perceivable period of time. But that's the only time I've had that experience.
Brilliant. I mean, I underwent a problematical transformation of my sleep and dreaming at the end of 2018, which I thought was personal to me, but after talking with many others, it turns out that it wasn't personal to me, which is very concerning and troubling.
But first I stopped dreaming as far as I could tell. And then I started having dreams that were just black. I was having like a dream and relating with situations of people and stuff, but there's no visual information.
And I learned so much by questing to understand what the hell was going on. Right. And one of the things I'll just give a couple of the things very briefly.
And dreaming seems to me at this point now, we're aware that we have what we call circadian rhythms. Right.
And I think, again, you know, we have one thing mine. So we think, oh, your circadian rhythm. It's one thing. It's just your, you know, your body's relationship with time and the light and blah, blah, blah. No, no, no, no.
It's way more specific. It's like an orchestra of things. Right. A chorus, actually. And there's a conductor. There are there are multiple conductors actually of your circadian rhythms.
And what never occurred to me before, before things messed up in my dreaming was that there are oneric rhythms. Right. And normally your circadian rhythms and your oneric rhythms, they synchronize.
Right.
So, when they're synchronized things go well.
But what ended up happening to me is my oneric rhythm split off from my circadian rhythms.
And so my body was wanting my, I don't know what was wanting some aspect of my being was expecting to be dreaming at like 12345pm.
Meanwhile, I'm not asleep at that time. Right. If I fall asleep at that time, vivid dreams. If I'm not asleep at that time, no dreaming.
So these two things can say again.
That's really interesting.
And so I've learned so much and I, you know, I'm really interested in like,
I'm really interested in the knowledge that you carry and the insight and your history and all these things. So I'm resistant to just going on about what I've learned, but I did understand that we have oneric rhythms.
Under circumstances that cause them to desynchronize and let's be really clear about one simple thing.
If you viciously slaughter the environment, the living environment, it messes up the features that synchronize human dreaming.
Right.
Now, each person humans themselves are like a topology.
So there's like people who are so sensitive that in the early days of the problem, they're going to sense it right away.
And there's people who are so not sensitive or their faculties are so richly endowed that they're going to keep dreaming and and their memory will stay, you know, brilliant and they'll so humans are a topology right like mountains and valleys.
And I suspect that you're given your history with dreaming and stuff. You're, you're a mountain. Right. So you might not have the same kinds of experience that I would have, even though many people that I know.
And actually, mostly men have had a similar experience at the same time right around the end of 2018 started having problems with sleep dreaming motivation, all kinds of things. That's a, that's a story for another time.
So the thing is, are dreaming.
There are these in the real world that you attribute.
Oh yeah. I mean the devastation of the environments, the devastation of the remaining ecologies is huge. But there's also things like computation which humans think is just free.
You can do as much computation as you want. I can just get it. They just give that stuff to you, you know, it's not going to hurt anybody.
There might be, did the humans ever think that there might be like a constant about the amount of constant in nature relating to the amount of computation you can get away with on a living world before it starts collapsing the relational integrity of the organisms.
No, the humans don't, they don't think about things like that ever. There's not one person thinking about that.
So there's an, you know, was it large hadron collider.
Those physicists are doing dangerous stuff within machines. I don't trust them much.
No, there could be 10 different changes in the sun.
A transformation. The sun is pulling the earth through time space. And the humans think like, oh, time space is just the same everywhere you go. No, it isn't.
Time space is, it's energetically different as you travel through it. And the sun is actually doing something other than just making light and warm, which the humans, you know, think, oh, that's just a big explosion in space.
It makes light and warm.
It's really disturbing what the camera is doing to my eyebrows. But anyway, I'm going to ignore that.
So yeah, we could be in a different, like the sun transforms and that certainly affects our dreaming.
The relationship between the sun, the moon, the solar system itself, where we are in relation to inside the galaxy where our galaxy is in relation to other galaxies.
A lot of these things have hugely long timelines, but we can move from a place where dreaming is much more easily sort of funded energetically to a place where it's much less easily funded.
And those people probably like yourself who are well practiced and sort of their dreaming muscles are very vital may not even necessarily notice.
Although if they're paying very close attention to their dreams, they might notice a transformation, not not the same way as like the sudden cessation of dreams that I experienced.
But yeah, there are oneric rhythms, they are very complex, it's a symphony, it's a chorus, right, and there's a variety of conductors.
When they are synchronized with our circadian rhythms, things go well, under certain circumstances that's synchron, those, those good things can split off.
Right.
Oh, there's so many more things. And I know how are we on time. Let me just ask you how are you doing.
I'm okay. I mean, I probably can't do too much longer because I have to watch the storyteller.
I like to watch fairy tales before I go to bed.
Beautiful. What are you going to watch tonight?
Well, I don't know. There's this ATEEZ TV series that we've been watching called The Storyteller.
We watched Hands My Hedgehog, which is one of my favorite, like it was a fairy tale collect by the Brothers Grimm, and my dreaming last night was all me being Hands The Hedgehog.
It was ridiculous.
Okay, so do we have like what, 20 minutes, half hour? Where do you think?
Yeah, sure, 20 minutes is good.
There's so many things I want to talk about.
And I hope maybe we could have a second conversation sometime soon because you're like, you're like a library and I'm not going to be, I'm not going to be satisfied with the chapter.
I'm sorry. I just want a lot more, whatever you can share. I want more of it.
So,
so many threads.
Do you think, why is my camera though? My camera is trying to focus on, I forgot this camera and then that's really carefully set this up before I do another interview.
All right.
There's a bunch of little notes I've taken here.
Oh yeah, this one's really important.
So, I strongly suspect that our distant and the four distant ancestors experiences that we might think of as psychic were very common, much more common than they are now.
And they were probably partly more common because the biodiversity of the earth was vastly superior to what it is now.
And also, there were no machines. Right so there's nothing machines just dump entropy into living environments and organisms do the opposite right they they are negentropic.
So they, they do something sort of thermodynamically impossible and they do it together with and for each other. It's kind of a chorus thing, and, and, you know, Corey is involved here I think.
So, you know, we have two problems and one of them is humans tend to think that we.
They tend to think of of human beings. They mattified what it is to be human, according to the machines they've built. So like, they eventually people are like, Oh, the heart, it's just a pump.
It just pumps stuff, you know, it's nothing like what the heart is brain that's just a computer.
No, sorry. Nothing can brains made computers and without hearts you don't have brains. There are no brains without hearts let's be really clear about that.
So I think the Egyptians and the Greeks and the ancient peoples were right.
Not just right. They were insightful about what is the core of us. What is the core us. Right.
Well, they learned this as well by very close observation of nature, which we are deprived of now because most people don't grow up with that.
The luxury of an incredible close observation of nature. And when I was little, although I lived in a bit of a crummy area in Croydon, which is like a suburb of South London.
I did live next to this field where the gypsies used to keep their horses and animals and things and I had a sort of weirdly kind of fantasy nature childhood, even though it was a kind of on a main road next to industrial
I had this little pocket of wild nature next to me and I would spend hours just looking in a pond or a spider's web and being on my own or being with animals and cultivating relationships like the gypsies left their goats there.
So I used to be friends with the goats and I'd go over there and I'd have all these goats around me and I would talk to the goats.
And, you know, and I like to think for myself as well of being in film talking to these goats and my mum and dad used to call me Heidi because all these goats would follow me around all the time.
And I had an appreciation for, you know, an innate and intuitive sense for that as above so below. And I think what you're saying about the cosmos is really interesting because I was thinking about this just the other day when I was meditating.
I had this kind of sudden feeling of really acknowledging that I'm spinning like a thousand plus miles on the axis of the earth, you know, like we have calibrated to feel still in an incredibly chaotic time space in reality like the amount of galactic movements, cosmic movements, rotations, spirals and we're also spinning anti-clockwise.
And, you know, and so in my when I was meditating, I was thinking about the fact that, you know, we've constructed this clock and this way of viewing time as moving forward the way a clock hand moves over a dial and that the earth is turning anti-clockwise.
And when we sleep at night, when we lying our beds, we're just surrendering with the movement, the natural movement of the earth. And like you say, that kind of symphony of the movements of the cosmos and we're part of that chorus and the dreaming, the state of dreaming allows you to kind of recalibrate to that cosmic time space,
which is why I think dreams can be so healing, because you're naturally aligned to cosmic time space, as opposed to trying to live in this relative time of existing as a human being in this planet that is subject to clock time and subject to, you know, hours in the day and whatnot.
It's why I really do enjoy waking up at dawn, because you get this sense at dawn of this great communion between the heavens and earth that, and you know, I was mentioned having that dream where I was standing on the moon.
And when I was standing on the moon, seeing the earth turn on its axis, I had this fantastic embodied gnosis about the fact that I live on a planet that moves through a universe and not the sun rises above the horizon like I felt it in my body.
And I read later on about how astronauts, when they go into space and they see the earth from a distance, they get this overview effect. It's like a psychedelic, it's associated with the psychedelic experience as well, of having this overview effect that helps you release your fear of death,
because you feel that you're part of something much bigger, and just recognizing like this is what I think prophecy is about ultimately. And the healing events that occur in the Telestereon and the Telesferion is that prophecy and the apocalypsis of revelation is that sudden awareness of the fact that you're part of the cosmos,
and that's all you need to be okay, because you'll never stop being part of the cosmos.
Yes, we imagine death to be an ending. And it certainly is the ending of this animal body that I am familiar with that part is real that thing comes to an end.
But it could be a waking up from this dream.
I mean, I, yeah, no, I have so many crazy ideas about this, especially over the past few months.
I've been fascinated by death my entire life as I'm fascinated by dreaming as I'm fascinated by organisms.
But I want to be careful because I know our time is limited and there's so many more things I want to ask you. I'm like a kid in a library, right? I want like nine more books.
So,
I'll tell my publisher that.
Yeah, yeah, please.
I will say a few things briefly.
It occurs to me that
as if
the word God is so value laden, I'm going to be clumsy and use it anyway, as if a ray of the light of God falls asleep, or even dies, and wakes up in a human body.
And then lives out this, this continuum of material existence, and can actually do things with stuff, right, which is pretty exciting to have hands and those consequences if you make them steak and all that stuff.
That's pretty amazing.
And then,
and while in the human body this ray of light or the splinter of the divine or origin, if we don't want to use the word God, it falls asleep and dreams.
Okay, how incredibly beautiful is that up. And then when I die that aspect of origin or the divine or God is resurrected.
Right, so my death is the resurrection of something else. And, you know, we seem to think that we come from before our life.
Right, because we think in timelines and we know we were conceived and born and I come from before.
I think it's important to at least entertain the possibility that we come from after.
What if a life is the wisdom of our death leaking back into time, day by day moment by moment, and our dreaming is actually the sort of flower that attracts that that the B of the death, it's dubbed the intelligence of our own death.
And, and reviv and like vitalizes it into our lives day by day moment by moment.
There's so many other ways to imagine the majesty and the beauty and the creativity of existence that the humans are not very creative when they, they just stick to like the the road puzzle, the jigsaw that they were given.
Right, it gave you this piece you start over here, you die over there. That's all you need to know son.
There's something like that going on what's actually going on is so ecstatically beautiful and mysterious and orgasmic. Right, it's like, it's ecstasy, literally like unprisoning.
And, you know, when in my own glimpses of, of insight and I've wonder and awe at the nature of existence and I like you, I've been this way my whole I was born.
I was a problem. Right. I was the same kind of problem that I think you've been.
You know, I'm fascinated by all of these questions and quests.
I think there's some other ways to think about death. I don't think it's the end of anything except this human body. And I think we've become confused and we think like this human thing is me.
I'd be really surprised if anything ceases to exist.
I think it does have to do with our perceptions of time. The ancients perceive time differently. They weren't limited to like the 24 hour clock. They thought in these greater cycles of planetary movements of generational
lifetimes, they had understandings of ancestors and grandparents that went back, you know, hundreds and hundreds of years. They had that oral storytelling tradition for a very long time.
Whereas modern people are lucky if they know what their great, great grandparents did that there tends to be more record in the ancient world of
gone before of honoring ancestors of recognizing and, you know, there's a concept as well, which I find very interesting of like death medicine of actually eating of dead things, you know, not just killed animals, but of corpses of mummy
wrappings as a medicine as a kind of apotropaic magic to protect someone from death. But also one thing that I've come to sort of understand or feel about life is that life and death are actually always entwined.
You know, we're a bit living, but also always a bit dying. There are always cells dying, and they're always cells being born. And that as above so below, as within also as without. So I think that by appreciating time as cyclical and cosmic intersecting cycles and
spirals, which ancients do seem to record the view of time and space as being cosmic terrestrial spirit, if you have that sense, then going to sleep every night is a small death that you wake up from.
And so when we die, it's, and it's a greater cycle of wakefulness moving to death. And so I just think it's going to be cycle spirals within spirals, and that we're like life and anti life all at the same time our DNA is kind of like woven with life and death.
So there's always part of us that's dying. There's always part of us that's living. And there's, you know, Rudolph Steiner's book, Knowledge of the Higher Worlds, there's exercises in that where you try to cultivate your what he calls spiritual organs to sense life and death.
And one of the exercises is that you sit with like a dead plant, for example, and contrast it with the experience of sitting with a living plant, and you become sensitive to the emanations of life or the aura of life that comes off a living plant, and the kind of nothingness aura that comes off of a dead, you know, plant that's died.
And it's interesting doing that. You can walk down a road and you can walk in front of people's drives and if like a driver's totally tarmacked over no life, it's like this void.
And when you walk through a much more biodiverse garden or something, you get this sense and aura of life. So I think that like life is the matrix that kind of holds the planet together.
So as you said, like the more biodiversity, the more life, the more diversity there is, the greater life force this planet has, and the more power there is to life and consciousness.
And I think it's one of the things that has skewed our idea about life on the planet as well.
Like you look at, you know, there's these ideas of law of attraction and abundance thinking and all this kind of stuff.
And one of the things I noticed when you live in somewhere that's very biodiverse that if a seed drops on the floor from your plate, you know, suddenly there'll be a tomato plant growing, you know, you live somewhere like that.
Things happen more quickly because that spirit of generation is in the land that sense of life being life flourishing is actually the land itself, the soil itself and so creating biodiversity helps to just increase the density of life and makes energy flow more quickly for everything and everyone.
And I think that, I think that it's a great gift to be able to create, create biodiversity and I hope that people will sort of just naturally return to it and recognize it after a while because it's a, it's actually like a treat now, a treat to be a nature experienced by diversity.
You know, it's so bizarre, the time we live in right you see commercials for SUVs escape to nature, right in an SUV, which is what's destroying the nature you're escaping to the irony isn't lost on me.
So many things there so I want to circle back something I was talking about briefly when I introduced humans metifying themselves as machines, the hearts of pump brains computer.
So radio, I think replaced are actually the telephone replaced telepathy and radio replaced group telepathy and television replaced group dreaming. And this is why I think this is one of the reasons why I think you're such an amazing being because you get people together to dream together.
And that is so important that's, that's so crucial in this time. This is the thing we're not doing. And the one of the reasons I was mentioning the South American practitioners is that they were brilliant at this they knew, right they would form a tight little pod of specialists, each with a unique specialization.
And then they would go on dream missions, right. They weren't just asking it, like what to do about some problem. They would go on missions together like, like an intelligence, like, like, like a green beret team or something except the dream version, you know what I'm saying.
I think we were born for all of these things that most of us moderns have never tasted we never even imagine they were possible and group dreaming is so important you can imagine. People used to live in a cave together a long time ago, they would go to sleep at exact and pretty much exactly the same time.
They would dream in the same space together every night inside a cave inside like a womb, like a womb in the earth, an ancient womb in the earth like it's made of stone and stuff right. And, and it's just, it's a completely other universe of possibility and human intelligence awareness and capacity faculty senses.
There's something like Robert Moss talks about this as well of being like a dream detective. There's something naturally about dreams and the way we experienced them, which I think is always trying to reveal things to you.
And, you know, often we get caught up in what is trying to reveal to us about our personal life or situation. But I think it's trying to reveal something bigger, like a bigger mystery to us. And I guess that's one thing that is missing from modern human experience is a real sense of mystery of what is still mysterious.
And I think often of mystery being an actual kind of sense and feeling that people had up until relatively recently, like you think about, we now know what outer space looks like what all other countries look like we've seen photographs from everywhere we there's, you know, we think we can't imagine there's
something that is unimaginable to us like we know that there are hidden depths to the ocean, but nothing's really surprising or truly mysterious and I love thinking about, you know, sailors that embarked on big voyages and they thought they might drop off the end of the earth because
there are stories told of sea monsters and dropping off the end of the earth and that really very few people find themselves in a situation where they do not know what's going to happen.
There's no expectation of what kind of beasts they might encounter in foreign lands, for example. So there's, there's a really there's a kind of art that I really love which is sailors that went on some of these early voyages and drew pictures or made paintings of the animals that they saw before without having
a framework of context of previous photographs, or any expectation or anticipation so that's the a tiger, and that painting and drawing of it looks weird, probably not because they're not especially skilled artists but because that perception of it is completely different to our perception which has a framework and
the perception of what a tiger's supposed to look like has a photograph as a reference point, but encountering something like this for the first time I mean it must have been truly magical and mind blowing to encounter an elephant without having any preconception about what an elephant could
be or that it even existed in the world. And not having names for things, you know, like talking about how words and names for things act as anchors for us to build ideas about the way reality works and you know this is one of the things I find fascinating about
Minimossini because she's the goddess and personification of remembrance. And I think that kind of remembrance that refers to is the remembrance of the fact that you are a product of the earth and starry heavens as they say in the, you know, the Orphic gold tablets.
Minimossini is a psychopomp in that tradition and she reminds people when they die when she takes them into Hades that they shouldn't drink from the waters of oblivion so they forget that divine birthright they need to wait and drink the waters of memory so that they can remember and I think there's something
like the Tibetan dream yoga in that that you're supposed to remember yourself back into the, the kind of the all the cosmic source.
Wow. So one of the things that stood out I just want to mention before I forget.
We have a broad library of faculties senses that we don't develop because we think there's just five senses you know thinking things you smell me taste them you see whatever.
It's nonsense. We have myriad faculties as this whole we're born with like the thousands of seeds of these faculties that don't get developed and dreaming.
There's a there's a whole library of dreaming faculties that we don't even think about that right as moderns. So, you're, you're like such a, your work is so important, Sarah, because you're helping people to resurrect these intelligences these faculties
you're getting people to dream together and to organize their intention around dreaming together. Oh, it's absolutely brilliant. I think that's so important. And the thing that you were saying about the tiger.
You know, photographs normalize novelty.
Okay, they just cut the novelty right off. They just snip the novel part off and this is a photograph of an orchid now you know every orchid in the world you don't have to go see orchids or relate with them or you know anything.
So there's a there's a huge problem with the in humans with representation, and in a sense representation, especially explicit representation dreaming has many enemies, one of them is explicit identity, and one of them is representations.
It's interesting because one of the things that I really miss about children's books is that they have photographs in them or digital illustrations rather than paintings and drawings.
And I think there's something about a painting of an animal, or I had this animal encyclopedia that I was obsessed with as a kid.
I love this encyclopedia of animals and I absolutely loved it and if I ever see it in a shop I'll buy it because I love the paintings in it. And it does weird dream like things. So for example, it has paintings of herons, but it shows all different herons, the
heron family tree in one tree. And that's the sort of thing that I find in my dreams all the time I think because this book inspired me and this painting and drawing is like the poetry to prose is leave space for your imagination to fill the gaps and if you're not leaving
Yes, yes, that's so crucial.
You know, I like role playing games because I was exposed to Tolkien when I was a kid. Oh wait this. And I used to play a text based role but role playing game because you had to imagine everything.
There were no pictures.
All right.
That's for the imagination. That's so much. Okay, the other thing I want to get back to is, you know, the, the, I think the Greeks, they did not think of seeing as passive.
They thought of the gaze as like rays. No wait, I misspoke.
There are certain enlightened people among the ancient Greeks who actually thought carefully about these matters. And maybe it was common for everyone to think this way, but but it was as if rays of light were coming out of the eyes right.
And I'm pretty sure there's some research that shows that our eyes actually produce photons.
Possibly when we close our eyes, the play of those photons on the phosphines on on our eyelids may seed the first moments of dreaming experience and in my own experiences of hypnagogia, which if I've got it right is the beginning liminal space and
hypnagogia is the ladder of waking between dreaming waking. So I wanted to mention that I think your bioluminescence thing. It's important and could be could be real.
I'm going to look for that encyclopedia and send you a copy of it. I want to make sure you get one of them. Yeah.
And I don't want to keep you much longer if if we're running out of time what what's your that's how's the time thing there.
I do need to go now because I'm getting I like to not look at a screen for too long, although I will watch TV.
No, I would I would love for us to have a second conversation because there's about 19 billion other things I want to ask you.
But right now I just feel so grateful. What a privilege it is to have this time with you. And I so celebrate your work in the world. You are like one of those.
In terms of nature, Sarah, you're doing the most amazing work, you can possibly do and you're, you're helping the humans to remember the primacy and the vitality of dreaming together, and even to practice it, you know, on on Greek islands and things
right so that it's just pretty, pretty good, pretty lucky.
I'm just a fan of what you're doing and I don't mean, you know, in the trivial sense, I just really believe in what you're doing. It's so beautiful. It's such a privilege to have this time with you. I'm so grateful.
Oh, thank you so much. It was a pleasure. I'd love to talk to you again as well. You know, I know you're really interested in linguistics and language and actually hieroglyphs is something that I'm super interested in and how Egyptian hieroglyphs kind of change your
perception of the world because you know the the hieroglyphs of the Medu-Nedja, God's words. And one of the things I've thought about quite a lot is how for a literate person ascribe in ancient Egypt when certain configurations of real world things would manifest in their waking
reality they could actually read them like the real things of the world could organize themselves into a readable word which I just love that idea.
The hieroglyphs is a really good way of changing and influencing dreams actually and it could be a really good tool because I think there's something about for me like micro movements of writing, proper pen to paper, pencil to paper, painting and drawing.
And I think there's there's perhaps something in the brain where the areas associated with those kind of micro movements of writing, of craft, of making things. A friend of mine said to me that she recalls her dreams much better when she's knitting in the morning.
There's something about the act of knitting that helps her remember things. So I think there's something about writing properly.
And as you're doing, as you're enacting it, it seems to help you remember. So it's interesting to me that Mnemocini is also the goddess of eloquence and eruditeness.
So she's a goddess of sense making, which I think is really important. So she helps you to make sense of the vastness of life and the cosmos.
And as she's a product of heaven and earth as well, she's the daughter of Oranos and Gaia, and she's the source of all inspiration in the world because she's the mother of all of the muses.
So yeah, dreaming is like dreaming can take you into all kinds of avenues and I'm disappointed that it isn't more studied as an avenue to sort of explore consciousness because I think it's fascinating,
especially with regards to dreaming and memory because memory is obviously vitally important to our experience of dreams.
And there seems to be like almost a dreaming memory that is only accessible within dreams or in these special states of consciousness.
And that's something I think should be studied a bit more.
Who cares scientifically studying stuff? What does it prove? Where does it get us just live a better life?
Yes, there's so much here because we suppose that outer space is the really interesting, crazy, amazing thing that we don't know anything about.
There's no reason to believe that we can't explore it with dreaming.
And really, we also suppose that there's space out there and then inside here is just the regular stuff.
That's not true. Like there's some way in which, in the way that we are beings and in the way that we are intelligences and in the way that we are members of a common origin.
It's as if we can use the dreaming senses to do something that resembles both like paleontology, archaeology, right?
The ancients are alive in us and the dreaming senses can contact them directly.
And we can also do something resembling time travel, right, which is to see the future.
Oh God, what am I?
It's very interesting to me that like all ancient dream interpretation is preoccupied with predicting the future or reckoning with the future.
And that that isn't done in terms of like direct visions of the future.
It's done because the entire world is a regular.
The entire world is revealing itself all the time just by existing.
And if you can read the signs and the patterns in the world at any moment in any configuration and any arrangement of things in any area that you can read the future.
So, you know, that for example, like the sort of material cultural aspect of dreaming in the ancient world reveals so much about the perception of time and space in ancient Egypt and ancient Mesopotamia that the future is readable always in the now.
And the past is always a dream so we can always explore the past in dreams.
And I've always felt that there's something about in a dream you can scale and time become irrelevant really and perspective and perception of time has to do with your position in time space.
So in the dream, your position in time space changes from being, you know, behind the eyes looking into the world to all eyes viewing from every conceivable angle so you have this omnipotence where you can see close up and far away at the same time.
And so the experience of time space expands because you aren't you aren't on this kind of linear trajectory through time space you are time space.
So, you know, this is why I thought that you can exist in a dream forever because time is detached from your ordinary linear journey through the world.
Oh my goodness.
So, you know, I've, I've been very curious about lucid dreaming and I have experiences of dream lucidity. I don't chase it too often. It's not like these days.
But I'm really curious about one thing that I that I just want to leave with you, which is lucid dreaming seems to be this gentle intrusion of the waking mind into the dreaming context, gentle enough that it doesn't cause the bubble to collapse.
One of the things that I heard a moment ago when you were talking about seeing in dreaming was an answer to the question.
What is the source of illumination. It is the many. It is the chorus of Sears. Right the chorus of Sears. And yes, the nature of oracles is fundamental to this discussion on our future discussions.
And really, I think what happened over time is the same thing that happened to us in a single human lifetime, which is that we used to be dreaming while we were awake as children, and that was slowly getting affected by language and enculturation and object
relationships and all of these things was just getting pushed away.
And part of what's causing.
I think the damage in the dreaming manifold of the humans in our time right now that I and others have experienced.
Is that thing that kills dreams.
It's not satisfied with evicting them from our waking world.
It wants to make them go away.
And I want to talk about that in a future conversation.
So, I'm going to leave you with a couple of seeds, you know, a little bit of food for thought here, because I think a lot about this. What is it that destroys the imagination of our childhood as we get older.
And thankfully, you, you obviously keep yours alive. You're going to go watch fairy tales in a minute, which I think is awesome.
Well, I think that's it. I think playing and stories are two really good things to keep dreaming.
So the thing that I was really curious about is that I think our ancestors, our ancient ancestors were dreaming while they were awake.
I think there wasn't such a strong distinction between dreaming and waking.
So, I would describe that.
It reminds me of Julian James's bicameral mind ideas that there wasn't a hard, there wasn't so much black and white in terms of awake and asleep and especially bringing back in this idea of mystery.
There were a lot more unknowns and unknowns tend to invite the imagination so you create and fill the gaps with unknowns.
So I think about something like the night hags and the screech hours and how ours, you know, even now, given, given the sort of lack of biodiversity, we don't see ours quite so often.
But ours tend to be, you know, not too fond of being seen by humans.
Oh,
can you push it in?
Right.
Sorry, I was just getting a package that I have some for
so I missed the last part of what you said.
I was just going to say, you know, I think about there are a lot more unknown quantities in the dark for ancient people, for example, lots of half seen mysterious things that the nowadays we can photograph in high definition with night cameras and all sorts of stuff but things
like just something as simple as an owl.
The night demons, the Lilith types or the Lilitsu, the entities that came as spirits of air and possessed people at night.
The owls viewed suddenly mysteriously surprisingly just glimpsed and only seen, you know, the sort of glitter of their eyes and their sounds would have been experienced in a different way because they didn't have a high definition photograph of them during the day.
You know, it's a complete.
There's so much there so the sun actually declares identity to our perception.
Right. It tells you this is blue this is a cup it's this and this and this. Right.
And this is very similar to the waking minds experience of cognizing identity.
And the linguistic experience of that is a tree right I know what that is it's tree when actually everything that we look at has infinite qualities so so the idea of deriving an identity.
It's useful I understand it pragmatically and we'll have longer conversations about this later but what I want to say is moonlight doesn't do that.
Moonlight suggests, and it's almost hypnotic, right, it's paradoxic it produces paradox if I'm pronouncing that word that I've read a lot correctly.
And so it suggests, I'm strangers, and what you're saying about the owl right you're, you're walking along and suddenly for a brief moment from the blackness of the night right of white thing just appears suddenly before you and then just to suddenly disappears.
Like, go ahead.
If you've ever seen an owl in the middle of the night it kind of glides silently.
It is like a specter. And one thing I was going to say about children and why children tend to have such vivid dreams as well with that learning language still that's that being structured in the framework of how to perceive reality so how to proceed you know to.
And I think one of the really good ways of encouraging that kind of dream consciousness is to try to forget the names of things do some exercises where you forget the names of things, or you try to suspend your knowing of stuff.
I remember having an experience a few years ago this brilliant experience I was in the British Museum and opposite the British Museum is Swedenborg's house and Swedenborg is a Christian mystic who had a lot of amazing dream experiences you probably know.
And so I went in there to have a look I knew about his experience with dreaming and I was reading the bookshop and then I saw there was a talk upstairs about South American magical realist novels and I love South American magical realism novels.
So I was like I'm going to go to that talk. And then the guy given the talk was this guy I know called William Rawlinson, who I had seen talk at the psychedelic conference breaking convention like the year before on elves and fairies and perceptions of elves and fairies.
And so after the talk I went up to him and we've got mutual friends and I was saying oh I saw you talk at breaking convention about elves and fairies and they said oh you're the one that's into lucid dreaming.
And we're talking about dreams a bit and he said to me oh I don't know that you know I'm dreaming I might be dreaming now everything all those little badges on your jacket they may represent like scenes from my life and I was like that's weird because all these little badges on my jacket they represent scenes from my life.
And then we had this moment of standing there like thinking maybe we are dreaming like properly thinking maybe we are dreaming right now I think Williams quite famous for doing this to people actually I later discovered.
Anyway at the exact moment I'm thinking this could this actually be a dream a woman in the front of the audience turns around and on her cap is embroidered is this a dream.
And then I had this like full body experience of I'm actually in a dream like this is a mate it felt incredible.
And then you know you get like a sort of charge of I don't know what it some sort of neurotransmitting chemicals that just made me feel amazing.
And then I was sitting on the train on the way home later on in the evening, and I just decided to stop knowing what everything was called and thinking I knew what I was seeing like I just, I just looked.
And I had everything went weird and kind of fluid and moving and I saw the train as being like a serpent instead of a train.
I saw the seats become the toot and car moon golden blue fingers like nothing was the normal framework of what you see even though I was seeing the real world at the same time as well and it was it was like I recognized it was the way like a child sees the world
before they know the words for things, and they know what to expect. And then years and years later I mean this is 15 years later.
I started this project called dream palace Athens where we did this 10 day residency with artists come into Athens and I started working with a woman who runs a studio in London, who's very into how dreaming kind of moves through the arts and how, you know,
collectively dreams can produce art and people can work together through dreaming. And we started working together and we were communicating on Facebook and I looked at an old photograph of her on Facebook.
And I realized that she had been the woman in the audience that day with the cap that said is this a dream embroidered on it and and the whole, you know, those moments where you feel like you're living a dream they seem to him.
That's the true nature of reality, though that it seems to be this.
There's something about dreams where it's trying to tell you all the time that it is all a dream, and that in waking life every now and again you encounter these things that test are trying to show you that actually there's a lot more sort of reality is a lot more malleable
and more dream like and dreaming is a very fertile arena to practice magic.
Oh that's so beautiful and it's right with the topic that I was just about to briefly introduce which is
I understand that the nature of lucid dreaming involves the gentle intrusion of certain aspects of waking awareness into the dreaming context. If it's not gentle, it collapses the manifold.
Right. It's the difference between like a penetration and a sort of certain circumnavigation. Right.
And the one thing that always surprised me was that I'd never heard a single person ask about lucid waking.
What's the experience over here that is the the converse of lucid dreaming, and that would be something like what you've just described where the dreaming aspect enters into the waking mind, but doesn't collapse it into dreaming.
Right. And so I'm fascinated by the possibilities of lucid waking, and you seem like one of the best people I've ever come across to have a longer conversation about this with very same.
Let's do it and let's do it. Absolutely.
Next time next time I'll be in Greece. So that'll be great even better.
Yes.
So let me get done somehow. Let's see. I think you have my email address.
So I'll email you a question about where to get that encyclopedia to you.
Thank you so much, Darren. It's great.
Just what a joy. I'm so grateful for this time and I can't wait to learn again together more.
Just what a fabulous path.
I very much look forward to to you talking to Maria as well because she is, she is a true Mr. Gogg that woman.
She's yeah, I can't wait and thank you so much for introducing me to her.
Very grateful.
Blessings wise dreams.
Lovely, lovely to meet you. Bye bye. Good night.
Bye bye for now.
