Hello everybody. Welcome. I have just
reattached my wind buffer to my wired
Apple headset microphones or microphone.
It's not particularly windy but I'm sort of
pleased with the simple solution of
wrapping a cotton ball around the mic
and securing it with a, there's probably
a formal name for these objects, but a
bread wire, right? These little wires that
sometimes close the bread package.
There are a lot of contrails in the sky today.
I suppose there are people who suspect
that every time they see a contrail,
they're seeing what, chemtrails.
Pretty sure most of those contrails are
just vapor caused by vapor. The engines
heat the air, makes a vapor trail.
There might be occasionally in some places
some things that aren't contrails, but I
strongly suspect that people who spent
their lives watching aircraft and
contrails would alert us. I know this is a
very controversial topic that borders on
the conspiratorial, but there are other
strange problems like, I guess, maybe my
objection isn't as strong as I once thought.
This often turns out to be the case.
One of my simple objections was if somebody
is spreading some kind of chemistry in the
atmosphere itself and they're doing that on
purpose, it's going to affect them and
their children and their children's
children and so forth. I suppose it could be
that they don't have any children and they
don't care. This is strange, this is the
second bit of a carcass that I've seen
today and that's interesting because I
almost never see bits of carcass and I
walk here every day. Is it just that today
I'm noticing what I don't notice, or is
today a bit of carcass day? I just don't
know. They're rather disgusting. Little
chunks of fleshy, bloody, gristle and fur
and things. Certainly unappetizing.
I don't necessarily have a plan for this
talk today. We'll see where it goes. I was
thinking about some things. Various kinds
of magical intent, the transactional
kind where you trade something often or
sometimes this is apparently whatever is
referred to by one's soul for some boon or
benefit in the short term. It seems like
a wildly stupid idea to me. Hopefully I
haven't accidentally done that myself.
And the kind where you employ. Wow, what is that sound?
Oh, it's a bird. Oh, it's a baby bird. It's a
feed me sound. Okay. There are two
fundamental principles of something
resembling our idea of magic, which let's
face it, it's get or accomplish something
without physically having to do the thing
or chase the thing or something. Something
like this. So in traditional black
foot knowledge, the language is
problematical because what magic means in
English is a broad array of things or
actually magic doesn't mean anything in
any language. It's just a word. What
actually happens with words is that we use
them to mean things to each other in
actual conversations, unless we're not
having conversations and we're just
saying things. And this becomes very
confusing very quickly because then the
presumption that words have meanings begins
to pervade. We have to interpret the gap.
What gap? The gap of no relationship, no
preexisting context, random context, and so
forth. There are ways in which that
situation can become useful for us, but
only if we deal with it very insightfully,
intelligently. And what do I mean? I
mean the randomization of language
is a kind of a paramagical substrate.
What am I trying to mean by magic? Well,
I'm not trying to mean illusionist's
tricks. Fascinating though they are. And
I'm not trying to mean the mere manipulation
of the vulnerabilities in human thought
and consciousness. I'm trying to mean
something more like perhaps what people
usually very naively mean with the word
manifesting. An idea that I fundamentally
mistrust or maybe it's just the language
that I mistrust or maybe I'm ill-informed
which isn't as rare as I might like to be.
Yes, I'm not, as my listeners know, a big
fan of the secret or the various cults
that derive their central premises from
such ideas. At the same time, there is
something to a kind of envisioning or
dreaming of the future that is very powerful.
The question is, is it as trivially silly?
Like what happens when you make that idea
explicit is one of the questions. Because
there's a fundamental difference between
peripheral vision and foveal vision
between explicit identity and potential
identities. And in that blur, there's
something transcendentally momentous
and powerful. But if we make the blur
explicit, irony often results. Meaning
direct contradiction with stated purposes,
goals, hopes, desires, intentions,
cautions and so forth. And so perhaps
what actually bothers me about the
manifesting cults is that they're taking
something that I suspect properly
belongs to the peripheral and making it
foveal. Your foveal vision is the center
vision. It's what you use when you look
at something. Because your peripheral is
what you use when you spread your gaze
and take in the whole. And as some of
you know, that if you gaze at the night sky
when you look at stars, you can see the
stars visible to your foveal vision.
When you look toward them,
I'm getting a little wet there.
If you spread your gaze, you will see
stars that will literally disappear
if you look at them. And this is kind
of what my concern is, as well as a
sort of ideological trivialization
of destiny, dreaming, visioneering.
Yes, yes, yes.
The scent of the herbs. Beautiful.
So yeah, I'm getting somewhere near
what sticks in my craw. And the weird
thing about this problem for me is that
by explicitly pointing at what sticks
in my craw, this is part of the problem
with thinking and part of the problem
with language. Once I think I have a
sense of what might be going on, I tend
to become kind of clingy about that.
And in that clinginess, well, you know,
it's not always conflicted, but it's
often produces significant conflict.
Sage flower, scent, yum.
In Blackfoot, the two principles are
similitude and contagion. And they mix
together, they mate, they bond, they form
very powerful abilities, you might call
them, as well as faculties.
I'm not going to lecture about that today.
These two principles are also found
in other magical traditions, such as
voodoo, hoodoo, various
witching ways, and perhaps also
shamanism. Resemblance is a way to
understand similitude, and similitude
is a very sophisticated word that
my friend Ryan Firstdiver uses.
Contagion is fairly obvious.
In a way, to refer to something
directly in consciousness can often be
a bit of a trap for us, whereas to
suggest it, it's much more powerful
and in a sense magical, by which I
mean transcendentally potent.
Historically, women, females, are
masters of indirect communication.
Suggestion, entrasment, which places
consciousness into a sort of a flow
state that can then be directed
into the...
or shaped, or both, redirected, so forth.
Yesterday, at this spot, there was a
young woman sitting on a log up above
me, and she was practicing playing
a particular kind of flute that
appeared to be made of wood or
possibly bamboo. I sat down, you know,
without gazing directly at her
because, once again, explicit
attention produces problems. Or, you
know, it's occasionally appropriate.
But usually, if we're going to, if we're
paying direct attention to something,
it's often that we have the desire to
capture, possess, or manipulate it.
And nobody really wants to be
captured, possessed, or manipulated.
There's that explicitness in language
again, of course, sometimes we do.
Or sometimes we partly want that.
Or an aspect of us desires this,
while other aspects of us flee from it.
This is the stormy cloud of what
it's like to be human.
I've made it to the high view.
And there's that thing that looks
a bit like Warden Cliff Tower, but
it's actually the emergency
public broadcasting speakers.
The peripheral and the foveal.
You know, dreaming consciousness largely
corresponds to the former,
waking consciousness to the latter.
Without being explicit, allow me to
suggest that in the daytime,
in bright sunlight,
the sunlight declares the color
and identity of objects and situations.
What they are doing is obvious.
It's explicit, relatively explicit.
Whereas the moonlight, if it's there,
or even the total darkness.
In total darkness, it's pure suggestivity.
You don't know where anything is.
You can tap your way along the path
of the stick if you're lucky,
or skillful, or practice that.
If you're very witchy,
you can run in the darkness.
I've never known someone who can do that.
I can usually perambulate.
I've heard of people who can run
in pitch darkness,
having practiced a kind of a
non-ordinary sensing array
that is natural to humans and animals,
but rarely
siren.
Terrible noise.
Dominates the entire oral sphere.
Siren.
Thankfully, most situations are highly temporary.
The moonlight suggests
rather than declares identities,
and thus, pareidolia.
I need to look up exactly
how to pronounce that word.
But the imaginative
experience of shapes and faces
in, for example,
the whorling bark of trees,
or the texture of the surface of the trail,
or the clump of bushes
that just happens to be in a shape
that looks like a raccoon,
and you can't at first tell it isn't.
So there's this dichotomy between
suggestion and declaration.
It's very profound.
And similarly in dreaming,
because in dreaming,
things, beings, and situations,
you know, we may later decide,
oh, that was my brother,
that was our house,
that was this, that was that.
But in the actual dreaming experience,
it's not really like that.
A house that's quite different from mine
can be my house.
My sister can be a man.
All kinds of strange amalgams
of possible and actual form,
identity, function, behavior, and so.
Usually when, I don't know,
when those days are making that noise,
there's often a raptor in your mind,
but maybe not.
It doesn't sound as chiding.
It sounds more like,
here I am, here I am,
I'm over here.
Although that looks like a raptor tree to me.
That's Stellar's Jay,
making the calls.
See, there's that thing, right,
of explicit, categorical identity.
So there are kinds of magic
that don't really require trades.
They're not transactional.
And by magic, in this case,
I mean the curation
of time, space, and relationships
in the hope of producing
the resemblance of desired situations,
transformations, relationships.
Without manipulating them directly, physically,
although some kinds of physical activities,
such as ceremony and or ritual,
whether they are formal or informal,
may be involved.
You know, one can envision very formally
by deciding I'm going to sit in this place
which is powerful and envision.
But then, you know, think about,
okay, so when you go to sleep,
dreaming tens, for many of us,
some of the time, to resemble breathing.
It just happens.
It happens, it's as if it happens to us
and also within us.
Now, one can then form intentions around dreaming,
for example, the intention to dream about a specific thing
or the intention to the request
that the dreaming aspect helps us better understand
the situation or experience a transformation
of some kind or gain what we think of as information
about something that's otherwise difficult to know about
as if the dreaming mind has powers that are
irracular and transcendentally seeing
and I think it does.
The dreaming mind is an array of faculties
and also some things we might think of as functions,
meaning it does stuff, important stuff,
regenerating the organs, cleansing the metabolism,
transforming the energetic situation in the body.
We might think of a spiritual energies
or soul energies or life energies
or electromagnetic, subtle electromagnetic stuff.
All of these things the dreaming mind is naturally skillful with
and it does its job much like our heart and lungs do
without much instruction,
but it can also be instructed or skillfully developed,
much like our breathing, perhaps like our heart rate,
certainly like our habits of thought.
So we can have the formal intention to vision-ear futures.
And there's what I remember when I was younger,
the informally vision-earing features,
and many of them came to fruition.
But there was a mix.
I formally wanted to play the guitar.
I formally wanted to be a graphic designer.
I formally wanted to publish texts.
I formally wanted to be a good fisherman,
even though I don't really eat fish.
I formally wanted to have an ass like Robert Wagner's.
That one sort of came true, which I think is ridiculous,
although now I'm old and it doesn't matter much.
I formally wanted to be a secret agent.
Now all the things I formally want, I also informally wanted.
I'm not sure why I have such an antipathy
toward the formalization of certain kinds of things.
Perhaps I'm not really concerned about their formalization.
I'm concerned about the way that cults
utilize formalizations of principles and wisdom
to capture and abuse people,
to disempower and blind them
by giving them the wrapping paper instead of the gift.
Yeah, I don't like that.
Although sometimes it can be very helpful,
and this is hard to understand at first glance,
we'd like to have societies and situations
that are so fundamentally enlightened
that we just climb the ladder together beautifully
and successfully toward self-development,
mutual development, insight, skillfulness, awareness,
wander, awe, play, joy, humor, eros, all these things.
We just climb the ladder together
and are constantly lifting each other above positions previous
or at least into harmonious balance
where health and vitality and rejuvenation
and resurrection are natural features of the situation.
We all hope for this, but in our actual situation,
sometimes it may be useful to fail.
I talked about this before, the power.
Imagine a situation where everything you do succeeds
the first time, and so it requires very little effort
and it's going to be extremely difficult to improve
and to experience a gain in skillfulness, or ability, or function.
In order for that to happen, there has to be the possibility
of making mistakes and perhaps of pain
and suffering, confusion, ignorance, all these things.
So it can be very useful, at least in theory,
to become enamored of a cult.
I have before, and we join the cult, we are enchanted by it.
It's very compelling because suddenly we have belonging,
we have an experience of belonging that can be otherwise quite difficult to...
in our common modern situations,
worst common denominator talk here,
but in our common modern situations it can be very difficult
to find a coherent groups that are doing something amazing
and beautiful to belong with.
This is part of why, even though education is kind of a disaster,
it wouldn't necessarily just want to get rid of schools,
clearly one might want to, what,
mediate, positively mediate and transform the existing institutions.
But the schools are very important because they give young people
and the teachers and others
the experience of belonging together,
and so to the cults and so to the various pedals
on the strange flower of fandom,
musical groups, films, sports teams,
also the usually lethally, in more ways than one, motivated
military cohorts and such, yes.
Belonging.
And obviously we get all kinds of pandering around this.
Social media panders to this desire to belong
and delivers largely counterfeit representations.
We steal the real thing is stolen, ground up,
compromised, essentially destroyed,
and then we are sold a broad array of ever less rich
and powerful counterfeits.
This is the common thing that happens a lot in our modern culture.
Now when we come together with and for each other
and we forge intentional social contexts
and cohorts, pods if you will,
like a dolphin pod or a primate pod or a whale pod,
then we have both a kind of natural immunity to these gambits
and the capacity to lift each other out of them,
or even to manipulate them from within.
This is the covert version of the possibilities
of our human sociality.
And this can be done in various different kinds of ways.
It can be done in rather serious ways,
and it can also be done in more or less playful or game-like ways.
And these two can actually merge so that you can have
playful games that actually transform or ameliorate
the ear sats humanity and ear sats community,
ear sats spirituality that is so pervasive in our modern experience.
It's not the only thing going on.
When we're alone, when we're isolated,
it doesn't seem like the entire context is just violations.
And this is what leads people to terror, agony, self-harm, suicide.
What we think of as madness, which, you know,
madness is a fairly natural result of the constant exposure
to the kinds of double-triple, quadruple, or myriad sorts of binds
that emerge in our experience of the broad array of competing anti-cultures
of anti-nations, anti-societies that dominate corporations,
that dominate our modern experience and concern.
And they are terrible, but they're not the only thing going on.
And in order to, you know, it's not just that we discover what's going on
when we begin to form intentional communal groups,
even if it's only for a short period of time.
See, this is the key.
We can get escape velocity immediately from all of this
in a small group with a shared intention to do so.
And we can sustain that over time and give it a heartbeat,
and that can even reproduce other little groups that bubble in and prosper
even in the counterfeit nightmares that they rise from and perhaps against
and out of the desire to transcend these troubling situations.
So there are forms of magic that don't require trades or soul-selling and so forth,
but are very powerful, and some of them are profoundly virtuous.
They are not composed for the sake of vengeance.
This is a very dangerous motivation, generally speaking.
It leads to a lot of trouble in almost every case.
They are not war machines.
They are not primarily for personal gain.
They may not be entirely selfless, though they can be composed
under such circumstances,
but they are resistant to capture
by selfish, manipulative, or war-like motivations.
And they can also be profoundly protective, healing, calming, nurturing, nourishing.
And these forms arise from an ache that I suspect we all come to human incarnation with,
and it's an ache for the positive version of justice,
which is the dissolution of injustices and their replacements with virtues.
Now again, if either of these ideas become highly explicit,
there's going to be a lot of trouble.
Most of the time.
If you're explicitly concerned with virtue, this tends to produce irony.
If you're explicitly concerned with harm or vengeance or war, you're going to have irony.
Cleansing, bathing, smudging,
natureing, grounding, getting your feet, your bare feet on the surface of the ground,
surrounding, going into nature, going into the living waters of the river, the ocean, the lake, the stream.
These are potent and powerful precursors to the formation of the kinds of intentions
that naturally become, that naturally influence, without dictating futures and transformations of situations.
I was speaking with someone maybe about a week and a half ago, and I asked him if he had ever prayed,
and he said, you know, I don't think I ever really got the impression that something was listening.
And that's a very rational response, sensible.
Why should we engage in activities whose effectiveness we have no way to determine?
You know, that's one perspective.
But I wonder if it ever occurred to him that whether or not someone was listening, or something was listening,
the transformational effects could be profound either way.
They could be profound neither way.
They could be profound both ways.
They could be profound even if there was no way to understand how or why they were, in fact, profound.
Because somehow our behavior transforms our potential.
And the fact or fiction of our explanations, in many cases, either doesn't matter or can be very limiting.
So, yeah, these are things to consider.
You know, I heard once that some president, perhaps it was Bush inaugurated a study of prayer.
It's like attempting to study, I don't know, something that cannot be detected by the methods we would ordinarily presume.
I heard this morning of an experiment done to establish what's called the Leisman barrier in biology,
a feature of biology that is certainly wrong and yet has been canon for a very long time in modern, in terms of modern science.
And the experiment was absurdly stupid.
And yet everyone supposed that it was one of the greatest biological experiments that had ever been done.
Well, perhaps not everyone. It was very common to suppose this.
Yeah, so I had people pray for sick people and so on, people who knew them and people who didn't.
And apparently the study produced the result that the people who were prayed for were actually less likely,
slightly less likely to recover than those who were not prayed for.
Experiments and rational thought and science are very powerful tools.
Their scope, though, is quite limited compared to that which is.
You could say that which is the case, but that's different from that which is.
Their scope is different from reality.
The scope of rational thought is similar in its limitations to the scope of the physical manipulation of objects.
I can move hammers all I want.
Much of my experience cannot be reasonably affected, cannot be properly transformed or successfully transformed by my manipulation of hammers.
And if I should fall under the delusion that my capacity to manipulate hammers is the only way for me to achieve true and valid belief,
conceptual or procedural insight understanding, then I'm going to be in a really bad situation.
One imagines someone that is a boatwright but specializes in the formation of the skeletal precursors to the hull.
And they think this is the only important thing, the skeletal precursors.
They don't have a hull without these, so they only build the frame and the frame doesn't float.
And they think that they are an expert and that they know everything about boats because they do the most important thing which is produce the frame.
My presentation of the metaphor was a little sketchy there but I think you get the idea.
This is similar to the overvaluing of rational frameworks, models, explanations, theory, experiment and so on.
When we do experiments we try very desperately to evict most of what's going on from the context so that we can control the resulting context and its variables well enough.
To acquire deterministic knowledge of cause, effect, and future transformations.
And this is a very compelling method but it can also be blinding in tests to determine whether things like telepathy exist.
They do, I assure you. I am as sure of telepathy as I am of breathing.
If you, if any of the experiments, took a fundamental feature of telepathy into the experimental context, what is this feature?
Intimacy, deep mutual concern and awareness which is naturally productive of various forms of non-ordinary awareness and sensing of the state needs, thought, concern, desires of the other.
Natural between mothers who adore their young and newborn children, though it's not merely a matter of the young and the newborns.
Natural between dogs and cats and their human companions, probably other pets, natural between certain insects and humans, birds, reptiles even and so forth.
Well there's no evidence, nobody's written a paper about that, there's nothing in the literature.
I remember one day I was here at this lake talking with an ornithologist and I explained that by careful observation I had determined how to sex, how to determine the physical gender of geese, the snow geese, white cheeks, the Canadian geese,
I think they're called, which by the way I'm pretty sure isn't named after the country, I think it's named after a man whose last name was Canada.
I think, I think I heard someone saying this, they might have been having, having their friend on.
Yeah, I explained by careful observation over time, because this is a quest I undertook.
I realized the geese can tell for sure each other's gender by sight, right, and if they can tell we can tell, but in the literature it is claimed that it cannot be determined, it can be determined by behavior, but not by appearance.
And I didn't believe that, so I went on a quest, it took me a few years.
It wasn't until I met an old goose couple, an older couple, which is very uncommon in nature because old geese don't survive in nature, but in cities they can.
And then in them the distinctions were highlighted, exaggerated.
And so I said to this guy, I was like, you know, there are ways to visually determine the gender of these birds, and he got very upset and literally said there's nothing in the literature about that.
And I was like, how about we just look at some birds together and let's see if we can do it.
Nope, it's not in the literature, there's no evidence.
We hear this all the time, there's no evidence of faith healing, no evidence of God, no evidence of angels, demons.
I mean, I would argue that Facebook and Google are pretty strong evidence of demons, not to mention, you know, many other bizarre features of our modern world.
If you decide to not look for evidence, or if you decide that previous experiments, not done by you,
explain for all eternity what exists, what doesn't, what it doesn't, doesn't do, what
it can and cannot do, then you have become theory-blinded.
Because in point of fact, you know, we speak and think as if that which has previously been
established is continuous and permanent when there's no evidence of any permanent thing
and continuity is relative, right? It's not concrete, it's relative and the nature of
time itself can change, the nature of light can change, the nature of perceivers can change,
does change. If you're dreaming, you're still perceiving. So it's very important to be able
to distinguish between, you know, there might be stuff that's nonsensical in a dangerous way
that we should avoid. We should naturally avoid believing it, right? Acting as if it's true. On
the other hand, life and thought, our bodies, our relationships as human beings are fundamentally
experimental. The fact that there are concrete realities doesn't mean that all previously known
exemplars of fact are the concrete foundation of our existence or our reliable guides to
futureity. You know what Nassim Nikolay Taleb calls black swans, which are previously unknown
phenomena happen all the time. The current models of time space and such are all come from black
swans. Totally, no one expected that Einstein was going to come along and go like, you know, I think
this distinction between space and time, while seems very obvious and intuitive is wrong. And then
Arkhani Hamed and others of his ilk came along and said, you know, this perspective that time
space isn't must be fundamental to all that's going on, not only is unlikely, but can't be the case.
Black swans come into our awareness and obliterate previously dominant biases. And when they do
so, they are usually liberating. We gain new degrees of freedom, insight, wonder, play, ability, function,
so on. The findings of science theory and experiment are provisional. They will be overturned. It's not
they might be overturned, they will be overturned. And so we should recognize that the terrain ahead
isn't the ignorant, you know, I'm not sure what to say. There's a word I'm looking for. The crippling
suppositional certitude that, oh, we've already determined what a goose is. And now we know, well, I
doubt it. The fact is, we don't know what anything is. We have highly provisional toys. And when we
exchange those for wonder and curiosity, passion, insight, something inside us begins to die.
You know, what we have mostly as moderns is not knowledge, it's representation. And representation
in language and concept is deceptively powerful. And it is this deception, this, see, here, here is magic,
here is transcendental influence by which we can be captured and manipulated. What we have is
something that replaces intimacy with tokens, words, maps, models, hypotheses. Because actual
knowledge is intimate like kissing. And if you experience the in in flowing and in dwelling of
this knowledge, it will not be like thinking, it will be like orgasm. It will be like kissing, it
will be like death. It will be like birth. Some of you may notice a radical transformation in the vector
of my my my my location or a location. But yes, science is powerful. But it is not the arbiter
of meaning, identity, purpose, value, fact, truth. And we see this kind of refraction away from
science in many domains of our modern social experience. The problem with that particular
refraction is that some of that is a weaponized sigh up. Nations are experimenting with how to kill
each other's populations with information. And so we have the mixture of the truth of the danger,
for example, of the COVID vaccines with the intent to deceptively harm populations,
right? This is very common, unfortunately, in our modern situation.
Oh, my father's life, he thought he knew what a tree was. And then one day at the mirror pool
here in this garden where I'm standing, I accidentally enchanted him. We sat on this bench
and he began to have what might be described as an emergence event. And he turned to me
and he said, we have to leave. I'm dying. I'm going to become this tree. And he was quite,
he was simultaneously, hello. Nice to see you today. He was simultaneously alarmed and ecstatic.
He had never had an experience like this. Drugs were not involved. He felt he was becoming the
tree. And I tried to calm him. I told him it'll be okay, we can leave if we must. He said, we have
to go, we have to leave. And then a squirrel climbed up his leg and up onto his shoulder. And he said,
see, see, even the squirrel knows I am a tree. This is intimacy. And trance can produce the
potential for modes of intimacy that thought must extinguish. Speech is very similar. I was talking
with someone the other day about their dreaming experience. And gosh, who was it? Whoever it
was, he said, I don't think I remember speaking in a dream. And I was wildly unsurprised. I mean,
I was partially surprised because most of us think, it's the keyword we think, that we have the
experience of having conversations, many of us have these memory of an experience resembling
conversation in dreaming. And that part's true, it resembles conversation. But as it moves more
and more explicitly toward the semblance of speaking, the manifold that supports the dreaming
is collapsing. The intimacy is disappearing. One way to end an experience is to speak about it. Think
of two people passionately kissing. And one of them then, for whatever bizarre reason of dissociative
confusion, decides that the most important thing in this moment is to say something. The speech ends
the experience. Language is deceptively weird in that we think it gives us the power to communicate. It
does, but primarily in the layer of representations, which is not the same layer as experience and
certainly not the same layer as intimacy. Where in this mess is science? Science is in our time, at
least, demonic. And when I was a child, I wanted to become a scientist because it seemed that these
were the people who best knew, who had the most complete knowledge of things being circumstances,
origins, futures, and so forth. And machines were very fascinating to me, because it was as if in my
previous incarnations, these things didn't exist, and now they do. And they seemed quite impossible.
Even the thing like a zipper is impossible. How much more impossible is a thing like a mouse?
You know, humans can compose a zipper. They cannot compose a mouse.
So you see this kind of representational knowledge is extremely dangerous because it evicts us from
what I would call transcendent participation. And that's where our actual spirit, our capacity to
forge purposes, beautiful, noble, and true, and to embody and enact them together arises, not from
knowledge, from participatory intimacy. You know, we, because we are embodied humans,
eventually, one way or another, most of us, the last majority of us, have an experience that we
call orgasm. And for some of us, this happens in childhood, and for others, it's in our teens,
and for some, it might not be even until our adulthood. And there are more life phases than
those ones as well. But there are experiences of intimacy that make what we think of as orgasm
seem trivial in comparison. And these are four modes of intimacy. Everyone's going like, wait,
what did he just say? That's not true. No, it's true. You can have there's a broad array of
experiences that are normally, well, they are very successfully inhibited in us moderns. And
there's a broad array of similar modes of cognition, the use, the sort of the reformation or the
formation of modes of awareness, consciousness, things that resemble thought and so forth, that
are so different from everything we've ever imagined. And yet are natural to our kind of being,
our form, our humanity, our animality, our organism, our organismality, our beingness.
There are modes of intimacy so ecstatic that you would never trade them for an orgasm.
And this is part of why we hear some mystics singing the praises of
what the ascetic path, the path of not indulge, of nonindulgence,
the path of chastity or temperance. And, you know, dreaming really is very, very profound.
And in dreaming there can be modes of adoration and eros that are vastly beyond what we are inclined
to usually experience while awake or beyond what seems accessible to us while awake
in our life phase, in our development. But what I'm trying to get at here is that this
thing we call orgasm, it is, in a sense, a,
there's different ways to say this, it's a repercussion of participatory intimacy
that can be physically produced. And since our first experiences with it are usually
catalyzed by physical sensations, rhythms, rhythmic pulsing, rubbing, so forth. We should
understand that that is a lesser stasis, a lesser exemplar of something for which there is
a forest of superpositions above that. And when I was, when I was a child and I was
fascinated with science, what I didn't realize is that I had no way to understand this. Although
some people tried to say something, maybe this is why the problem ensued.
There didn't seem to be anyone whose knowledge was deeper than the knowledge of scientists,
but the knowledge of the poets, of the mystics, of the philosophers,
of the adoring ones, this knowledge makes the powers of science
shrivel. Oh, they are still mechanically powerful and may in fact snuff our planet and our people.
Yes, they are physically very powerful, but where is the intimacy?
It is that participatory intimacy that we hunger for, and when we hope not for justice,
but for the diminution,
the transformative composting of injustices.
It is this participatory intimacy
that we know we sense would thereafter obtain
and become the water,
the many forms of waters in which our hearts and histories and futures could then swim.
We poor moderns have named nearly everything and thus evicted
all the named features and beings and relationships and situations
from much of our experience, if not all of it.
Yeah.
We have representational knowledge
miles deep.
How tragic for us.
This is the, that is the
the Alexandrian library of the skeletal remains of what might have been understanding and insight,
medicinal awareness, transformative ecstatic participation, magic, wonder, play,
all, virtue.
I'm walking in the botanical gardens here,
even though this is a place curated by
my extremely confused at the group level species, the living beings here,
they form a manifold over the strange
dead inside evictions that otherwise prevail as cities and roads
and shops and buildings and so forth.
And they are ecstatic.
If we could change our way of being in time, this ecstasy would flow into and through
and around in between all the aspects of our being in such a way as to draw us
into transcendent visionary awareness.
And I don't say this because I know it.
This isn't knowledge.
I'm, I'm on the verge of experience.
So I'm on the verge of the experience of what I hear.
Suggest.
We are not distinct in the ways our common thought,
suppose,
or create.
And there are games afoot.
There are missions here so beautiful that the entire history of language and knowledge
has nothing to do with them.
There's no thing you can formally know
that's more interesting than the kiss of your beloved,
the flavor of that food grown by your grandmother in her garden on endless afternoons.
As she toiled to make the foods the families would consume together.
Mostly in distracted confusion.
Especially once the invention of televisions began to become dominant.
And think for a moment of what the television is replacing.
There's a reason that thing is so compelling, was so compelling.
It's a reason why we have these screens.
They are counterfeiting something.
And if you think just a little bit, you will see what they are counterfeiting.
And what it is, is something resembling group dreaming, group telepathy,
group organized, group missioneering, organized group and amnesis.
And this is what we must reach for together if we are to retrieve the faculties,
the ecstasies, the beauty.
Of our origins and natures and potentials.
And that's a mission I adore and do believe in.
And if my humble speaking can contribute,
then I will have lived this day in a way worthy of my ancestors and their dreams,
my progeny and their dreams.
Which dreams must not be euthanized.
My thought, language, machine, modernity, war, prison-eering, commerce, tokenization,
representation, eviction.
There are many ferns here.
I've always loved the forms of the plants.
The insects are impossible.
The animals, the organisms on this world are fundamentally impossible.
If we could take off the staggering burdens of representational cognition,
ecstasy would naturally arise because we ourselves are and are surrounded by
infinite manifolds of impossibly beautiful wonder, organism,
origin, spirit, purpose, the superposition from which the concept of beauty is derived,
the living bubble of being, history, and future, and purpose.
That naturally embodies up from the soil and down from the sky,
like trees and rain, ecstatic,
like originary, true, vital.
Oh, how I adore these organisms, how confused I mostly am
when deprived of that fundamental participatory intimacy,
which is true recognition
and explosive anemesis.
Thank you for joining me.
I'm so grateful to have this time.
Take a moment to like, or comment, or ask a question, or share something personal.
This way you will help my humble efforts reach more people.
May your ways be beautiful, your hearts be light, and your relationships
exquisite.
Thank you for joining me.
I look forward to learning together again very soon.
Bye-bye for now.
