And I'm going to say hello and a warm welcome to the three monthly online holistic science
talks.
Again, they're organized by Schumacher College in collaboration with the Field Centre.
I'm Simon Rieks, having asked you where you're from, I'm in Nalsworth at the Ruskin Lord
Trust, I'm the publishing manager for Ruskin Lord Trust and a researcher at the Field Centre.
This month, we are delighted to be welcoming Matt Segal, and Matt will be presenting on
Alfred North Whitehead's Philosophy of the Organism, sorry, Philosophy of Organism.
I'm going to give a brief introduction to Matt, who is a process philosopher and he
teaches on process relational thought and German idealism for the Philosophy, Cosmology
and Consciousness programme at the California Institute of Integral Studies in San Francisco.
Matt's going to present on Whitehead, who's best known for his process philosophy, as
a broad number of applications, and you can find this, for example, in ecology, theology,
education, physics, economics and other such areas.
So before I hand over to Matt, there is a Q&A box that you'll find on the bottom of
your screen, and then if you put your questions or your comments, I will then shape those
into a discussion with Matt for you at the end of his presentation.
Please try not to put them in the chat box, try and put them in the Q&A.
Okay, Matt, a very, very warm welcome to you.
We're delighted to have you with us.
Thanks so much, Simon.
Great to be here on planet Earth somewhere, you all are, and I'm here in California.
It's a delight to be able to join Schumacher College, to meet Simon this morning, to see
Troy and Judith here, and I've been really enjoying the opportunity to teach a bit for
Schumacher.
I've talked twice now in the past, once in person at Dardington Hall, back in 2018, a
course on Whitehead, and then earlier this year online in Pandemic mode, a course on
Whitehead and Gerta, and I'm doing that again later this summer.
And it's a real delight, both to work with master students at Schumacher College and
also short course participants.
I've found in teaching Whitehead that there's such a diversity of people with a diversity
of backgrounds that are interested in his work, as Simon was mentioning, he's touched
on a whole variety of different disciplines.
He's not just a philosopher, or at least his philosophy is not just relevant to other
philosophers, it's also meant to be an aid to our everyday lives and part of an effort
to allow us to reconnect to a universe that in the last few hundred years has really grown
in size, in magnitude, compared to what pre-modern people were used to.
And so we're in quite a novel situation, and Whitehead's philosophy of organism is an
attempt to make us or allow us to feel more at home here.
So I'm going to try to go into, go until the top of the hour here, and run through first
a brief sort of biographical introduction to Whitehead, who he was, the trajectory of
his career.
I think that helps make sense, it helps us make sense of how it is he managed to touch
on so many aspects of contemporary human life here on planet Earth.
And then I want to just step back and ask the question, why would we even care?
Why do we do philosophy?
Why do we do metaphysics?
Why is it relevant to our lives?
And then I want to spend the remaining time going into detail, introducing you to some
of Whitehead's philosophical concepts and to try to paint the picture of a world in
process.
He's a process philosopher, right?
And so I'll introduce you to some of his categories, his concepts, his new words, neologisms.
And after that, you'll probably be full of questions.
So all right, let me share my screen here, thumbs up, Troy or Simon, if that's good.
Okay, great.
So there he is.
Whitehead was born in Ramsgate, England in 1861.
And by the time he, in his late teens, you know, he's already showing a lot of promise
in mathematics and he makes his way to Cambridge University, King's College, and Trinity, excuse
me, not King's College, and studies math there.
He studies with James Clerk Maxwell's student.
So Maxwell, of course, invented the or discovered the electromagnetic theory and developed the
maths to understand the propagation of light waves.
And Whitehead wrote his dissertation on the electromagnetic theory.
And so from, you know, his very first academic work and research, he is bridging mathematics
and physics and this connection between the abstract domain of geometry and the concrete
physical world remains of deep interest to him throughout his career, as we'll see.
So in, I think, 1884 or so, 1885, he began teaching mathematics at Cambridge.
Around 1906, he and Bertrand Russell begin to collaborate.
Actually, Russell starts as Whitehead's student and they, you know, very quickly realized that,
you know, they were peers to some extent and that they should be working together on a project
that climaxed in the Principia Mathematica, which was a supposed to be four volumes and
ended up being three volumes, which was an attempt to prove logically that one plus one,
in fact, equals two.
And we might take for granted that this is a simple formula that even elementary school
children can solve.
But in fact, as they discovered in the course of writing this book together, there are some
logical paradoxes embedded in this simple formula.
We don't really have a clear definition of what a number is, much less what two numbers are.
And so Russell and Whitehead did really, you could say, inaugurate the whole discipline of
analytic philosophy by developing a quite impenetrable symbolic language that costs quite a bit of
money for Cambridge to print.
I think they even asked just to do the typesetting.
I think they even asked Russell and Whitehead to chip in a little bit of their own funds
to print the first 500 copies.
The book didn't sell very well, but it was nonetheless very influential.
So that was, I think, 1911 through 1914 that these three volumes came out.
They were supposed to be a fourth volume on geometry, which was going to be mostly Whitehead's
contribution.
But the war started and Whitehead and Russell began to have some tension around that.
Russell, of course, would be himself dismissed from Trinity College, Cambridge for his pacifism
and anti-war activism, Whitehead, I don't know that he was cheering on the war, but
his son, Eric, was drafted and was in the Royal Air Force.
And a few years later, actually, would be shot down over France, I believe, and died.
And so given that just the difficulty around the loss, not just for Whitehead personally,
but for many of the European nations during the war and Russell's, you know, you could
say brave pacifist stance at that point, Whitehead and Russell, who were good friends, sort of
had a bit of a falling out.
And at that point, there was something else brewing in the international scene of physics
and cosmology.
Robert Einstein, of course, beginning in 1905 and then in 1916 had published his special
and general theories of relativity.
And Whitehead independently of Einstein had already been exploring, again, this relationship
between math and the physical world.
Actually also in 1905, Whitehead had published this article that was called Mathematical Conceptions
of the Material World.
And in there, he's exploring different approaches to modeling the physical world mathematically.
And he looks at four or five different models and the fourth and fifth models begin to gesture
towards something like a relativistic understanding of bringing space and time into more intimate
relationship than had hitherto been done.
But you know, Einstein was the real genius here in, you know, bringing together some
work that had already been underway, you know, with physicists like Lawrence and Minkowski
and Reiman and others building on the development of non Euclidean geometry, right, to totally
shift and transform our understanding of space and time and gravity and matter and energy.
And so Whitehead was really swept up by this Einsteinian revolution in physics in the first,
you know, two decades of the 20th century.
And it brought him more and more out of just mathematics and physics and into metaphysics.
So to set the scene here in 1916, Einstein had made some predictions about how light
would bend around the sun and suggested that during an eclipse, we would be able to take
photographs of the moon blocking the light of the sun and see the stars around the sun.
And we could actually measure the parallax, the degree to which the light from the stars
around the sun shifted due to the warping effect of the sun's gravitation.
Newton had also made a prediction that this would occur, but Einstein's prediction was
about, I think, twice as much as Newton's.
And so they could determine whether Einstein's theory of gravity was correct or not by observing
an eclipse.
So Einstein's first prediction was off.
He got the math wrong and lucky for him, the attempt to prove his theory in 1916, it must
have been, was thwarted because, well, actually it was 1914.
So he had developed a theory a little bit earlier.
And someone went off to Russia to try to observe an eclipse that was happening then, but the
war started and this scientist was arrested and his equipment was impounded and he couldn't
run the test.
If he had, he would have found that Einstein's prediction was off.
So luckily that didn't occur or Einstein might have been dismissed and wouldn't be the greatest
genius of the 20th century.
Einstein has another chance to redo his math, makes a new prediction.
Sir Arthur Eddington and a team of astronomers from the Royal Society decide in 1919 that
they're going to travel to the West Coast of Africa and to Brazil to have two teams to
observe the eclipse in 1919.
They were able to take some photographic plates.
They barely got enough plates.
It was hot and the mirrors were warping and Eddington was off the coast of Africa on this
island where monkeys were stealing his equipment.
And so it was not easy to get these photographic plates of the eclipse, but they managed it
and Eddington makes the announcement later that year in London at the Royal Society,
Whitehead is in the audience.
And Eddington says, we have confirmed Einstein's predictions, light indeed is warped by the
presence of mass because according to Einstein, space bends, space, space time is warped,
it bends.
That's what many of the newspaper headlines read the next day.
You know, there were headlines like space caught bending, right?
And Whitehead reports the sort of theatrical environment in the hall at the Royal Society
when these men and women of science are taking in this new discovery, you know, the universe
has unveiled another aspect of itself.
But Whitehead has some issues with this notion of space bending and over the next several
years, you would have several occasions to speak with Einstein.
At the statesman and philosopher Lord Haldane's home in London, there was a party that Haldane
threw, invited Einstein, Einstein gave a couple lectures as well at Cambridge and elsewhere.
And Whitehead tried to talk Einstein out of his implicit metaphysics.
He was fine with the physics and with the new geometrical tools that Einstein had developed
with help from other mathematicians.
But he was worried about this notion of space bending.
Because the thing about measurement is that you need a rigid ruler in order for measurement
to be accurate.
And Whitehead thought that if space was allowed to bend due to the presence of mass, which
is sort of contingently spread around the universe, we're in a situation where before
we can measure anything accurately, we first have to know where all the mass is, but to
know where all the mass is, we'd first have to measure it.
And so you can see how, as Whitehead put it, we'd first have to know everything before
we can know anything.
And you know, Einstein had a response to this that because over the spread of the entire
universe, mass is distributed more or less evenly, we don't have to worry about the
warping of space over long distances.
Whitehead was not convinced.
He thought that we needed to distinguish between space, which was a matter for geometers, geometry
to figure out, and physics, the mass, which was what we're trying to measure.
And if we conflate the two, we end up with some logical and indeed metaphysical paradoxes.
And so this set Whitehead off into metaphysics himself, and he developed a whole philosophy
of nature and a cosmology, which integrated relativity theory and also the early, some
early aspects of quantum theory that were being developed in the 1920s.
And just as Whitehead was beginning this work, he was invited to, when he was 64, I believe,
he was invited to come to the United States, to the other Cambridge, Cambridge, Massachusetts,
where he began lecturing in the philosophy department for Harvard University.
Whitehead says in his first course, as a professor at Harvard, that it was also, it has to count
as his first philosophy course himself, he'd never actually taken a philosophy course.
And here he was taking up the chair that William James, a great American philosopher, had held until like 1910.
And Whitehead continues at Harvard from 1924 until 1937, when he retires.
And during this time, he publishes a number of books on process philosophy or his so-called philosophy of organism.
Process in Reality was published in 1929.
It was actually a series of lectures he gave at the University of Edinburgh.
So he went back across the pond to Scotland and gave the Gifford lectures.
And Process in Reality is one of the most difficult books in the history of Western philosophy.
I don't recommend that you try to read it by yourself.
You may get lost and will never be seen or heard from again in the thicket of new words
and difficult arguments that Whitehead makes in that text.
However, if you can find a group of other people who are weird enough to be interested in metaphysics,
studying it together is helpful.
You can keep track of each other.
You can speak with each other in this new language that Whitehead develops.
And I don't mean to scare you off from studying Whitehead's work.
I just think it's important to recognize that he's really developing a new language in this book and his subsequent texts,
which are a little bit easier to read, adventures of ideas, modes of thought,
some titles of his later books, which take the dense technical and formal language of Process in Reality and make it a little bit more digestible.
But Whitehead's really trying to develop a new language that once we learn it, it in fact alters our perception, I would say.
And we begin to inhabit a world that is no longer sort of the mechanistic common sense that for the last few hundred years we've been raised to accept,
where we're in a sort of spatial container with other solid objects in this container and that, you know, time is simply a measure of the change of the location of these objects in the spatial container.
And that these objects, including we ourselves, we have no intrinsic relationship to each other.
We're all what we would say is, Whitehead would say, we're all just externally related in this container of space bumping into each other, right?
That's the sort of more or less Newtonian picture that Whitehead thinks 20th century physics completely demolishes.
And so let's shift them to this question of why philosophy is even important and, you know, why Whitehead was drawn into metaphysics.
You know, I spoke to this a bit.
It was he was really inspired by the Einsteinian and quantum revolutions in physics to move into philosophy.
But why? Well, because he felt that these revolutions in physics had demolished the old mechanistic worldview, the old mechanistic metaphysics that had undergirded science since its foundation in the 17th century.
Whitehead refers to this as scientific materialism.
And it was based on the idea, two main ideas, which he refers to as the idea of simple location, that a thing has simple location in space, and that its location can be determined independently of the location of everything else in space.
And the other idea would be this notion of nature being fully present at an instant or say a bit of matter being fully present at an instant so that there's sort of this notion of of matter is just this enduring lump of stuff or substance would be the technical
metaphysical term that just mutely endures, endures in its motions through space or its endurance through time.
It's just there, right, fully present at an instant and with simple location.
Now, after relativity and quantum theories demolished both of these these notions of simple location and nature at an instant, Whitehead realized that science was now advancing.
Its theoretical understanding, almost floating in free air, floating without a metaphysical foundation.
And if you try to understand quantum theory and all the the weirdness that ends up seeming like a consequence of some of the findings of quantum theory, you'll note that there's such a disconnect between our common sense experience and what quantum theory is telling us like Schrodinger's
cat right in this in this chamber with a radioactive isotope apparently we can't know whether the cat is dead or alive but it's worse than that.
We have to say that the cat is both dead and alive at the same moment right this totally conflicts with our common sense understanding and from Whitehead's point of view this is because we don't have we don't have the metaphysical
substructure to undergird our scientific understanding such that what we discover in the special sciences, whether it's in physics and the different aspects of physics or in biology, or in chemistry, unless all of these special sciences have a
metaphysical substructure, we don't know first of all how they all relate to each other just within science, but we also don't know how science itself relates to our everyday experience to our common sense experience of
being conscious agents in a world of other conscious agents who we think have some responsibility for their actions, who perceive beauty,
who, you know, have have purposes and life goals, how do we integrate the findings of contemporary science with the hardcore presuppositions of our everyday lives.
Whitehead thought that
the 20th century revolutions in physics and even before that the metaphysics of scientific materialism and mechanism had sort of left us in a bit of a muddle
and a fragmented state because, I mean, before the revolutions of the 20th century,
if you looked at mechanistic science and tried to integrate that, even though mechanistic science was Whitehead admitted a clear set, it had a clear set of principles, everything was more or less understood, the universe was a clockwork, right.
That doesn't integrate with our understanding of human life at all. This is why, you know, Descartes, an early modern scientist, had his dualism, where the mechanistic world could be understood with perfect precision mathematically, but it was set apart from the inner realm of the human soul, right, and this was a sort of
compromised position, but as science advanced, it began to encroach more and more upon the inner life of the human soul.
But then, in the early 20th century, as this mechanistic metaphysics is called into question, Whitehead sees the opportunity to develop a more coherent understanding
that was not dualistic, that didn't separate human consciousness from the rest of nature, but that understood nature, not as a collection of objects, blindly colliding with one another in empty space, but rather came to understand nature as a network of events, you might say.
And this network of events is, for Whitehead, in a process of becoming that is inherently tilted towards complexity, tilted toward beauty, he would say, and when we think of nature as a network of events,
Whitehead thought that an event, or an occasion, a happening, something like, you know, the agitation of energy described in electromagnetic theory,
that this was easier to bridge, you know, the agitations of energy as a happening as an event is easier to bridge with our understanding of experience, because experience too is a happening.
It's not just an object in space, right.
It is a subject to which events are transpiring or for which events are transpiring and so in Whitehead's universe, subjectivity is understood to be pervasive, not conscious self-reflective, you know, rational consciousness such as human beings, some of the time, possess.
But a more basic form of experience, which is simply the feeling of inheriting a past and anticipating a future right so every event in the universe for Whitehead is inheriting a past and anticipating a future even if you think of the wavelength of light.
You know, it's, even if it's highly repetitive in its inheritance of the past, just repeating the same energetic pattern over and over again, Whitehead says, well, why is it repeating that pattern because it's enjoyable, right, and so
this is a point where many people who are perhaps more wed to the materialist worldview and want to see human consciousness as something totally different.
Whitehead's going to give them pause here, and they're going to find this perhaps incredible, incredible.
But Whitehead found reasons looking at, and we'll go into this, looking at the post Einsteinian post quantum study of physics and looking at biology and evolutionary theory.
He found that he was justified in moving to what's called a panpsychist or a pan experiential metaphysics, because again his goal was not only to integrate all of the sciences, but to understand how science and human life can be integrated such that the
universe that we actually experience as conscious human beings would have some relationship to the, you know, the particles and the waves and the galaxies and stars distant stars studied by by science.
And so we do philosophy and metaphysics Whitehead would say, in an effort to to understand our place in the universe.
And one of the best images that I could find for describing Whitehead's universe was was this spider web with some dew drops on it.
So rather than, again, a universe imagined as a spatial container with objects within it.
I described Whitehead's universe as a network of events and Whitehead refers to events also as actual occasions.
And these are actual occasions of experience, right, and each of these dew drops you can imagine as an actual occasion of experience and that they exist in this network or mesh work with one another.
And one of the ways is to say that, just as each of these dew drops reflects all the other dew drops, each actual occasion is mirroring the rest of the universe.
And so there's a holographic sense in which within each actual occasion at whatever location it happens to be in the universe it is in fact, containing within itself.
This cosmic environment. Right. And so if you were to zoom in on any of these dew drops, you'd see each of the other do do drops reflected there. And then if you were to zoom in on those dew drops.
You'd see, again, the repetition in a fractal like way of the entire web. And so there's this infinite nesting occurring in each of these actual occasions of experience.
In Whitehead's universe. We're not just externally related to one another.
For moment to moment, we are including one another, one another's pasts within ourselves. Right. And so the only problem with this web is that it, it presents a sort of static picture of interconnection.
And so Whitehead's understanding of the relationship among these actual occasions of experience is in process. Right. And so we'd have to imagine a more dynamic image whereby these do drops are constantly growing together into one another, and then dispersing
If we think about this in human terms. It's a profoundly Whiteheads is a profoundly relational understanding
of existence whereby, you know, as you're taking in my image and my words right now. Yes, it has to be translated into, you know, electronic pulses in a series of transistors and microchips and then sent across the planet to wherever you are but then it's produced through your speakers on your computer back into
the background.
And my image is conveyed to you and Whitehead is saying that the energy that I am expressing is absorbed by you and it actually becomes part of you.
And when I get to hear your questions later.
It's a part of me and that we're in this constant give and take with one another, whereby we are literally making each other from moment to moment. And so it's quite a profound mesh work that challenges not only this old idea of mechanistic
that things exist independently of other things but it challenges our modern sort of political and social sense of
individuality at least if we take that to an extreme, if we were to imagine individuals existing on their own private island without
being constituted by their relations to others I mean it becomes quite obvious when we think about developmental psychology and the maturation of
individuals in relationship to the mother.
We can see, I think, in that dynamic, the sense in which we really do belong to one another, we really do require our relationships with one another to be who we are as individuals, and that's very much in the spirit of
of Whitehead's philosophy.
So, before even the 20th century revolutions in science there was the first scientific revolution which was shocking enough, right, it begins with Copernicus, who rediscover some ancient Pythagorean speculations about the design of the solar system.
And, you know, Copernicus puts forward this, this hypothesis that actually, it's not the earth that's at the center it's the sun that's at the center, and the earth, like the other planets is wandering in space.
So the, you know, Copernicus throws the earth into motion. This was profoundly unsettling for, you know, the medieval world to take in.
And in many ways, hundreds of years later, we're still grappling with the fact that we live on a planet that is in motion through space.
And following Copernicus, Kepler and Galileo and Newton developed laws of physics that allowed them to overcome this ancient sense of a division between the earthly and the heavenly realms, right, the terrestrial and the celestial domains.
For Aristotle, very different laws applied in these two domains. There is perfect motion above the sphere of the moon, perfect circular motion, but below the sphere of the moon from the terrestrial sphere.
There was only imperfect motion, but Newton with his universal law of gravitation says, note the same laws apply in heaven as, as, as apply on earth.
And so modern science inaugurates this new sense of the unity of the universe. In fact, and one way of looking at this is to say that now
post scientific revolution, the earth is itself brought into heaven.
I mean, the materialistic way of saying it would be that the heavens were brought down to earth, but I think we can look at it either way.
And so, you know, from a contemporary cosmological point of view.
Right had felt the urgency of providing us with a new found sense of, of where we are, right, situating us in these vast expanses of space and time, but just to think about our situation in space.
There was a map, as it were, of our local galactic neighborhood with the Milky Way at the center, and drama off to the right and down a bit, and drama is actually hurtling towards us, and we will collide with Andromeda.
At some point in the next, I think, billion or two years.
It might not be as catastrophic a collision as you might first assume, two galaxies colliding. There's a lot of space within each galaxy and while the gravitational effects might distort the perfect spirals of these two galaxies.
It's likely that we will survive, or the earth will survive.
And that, in fact, this, the gravitational effects of this collision will seed new stars. Right.
So this whole understanding of our situation as a galaxy among other galaxies billions, hundreds of billions of other galaxies in our visible universe. It's, you know, we're talking about a century here, where this has been understood.
And it's profoundly disorienting, right. There's been plenty of documentaries that, you know, Carl Sagan maybe the first to do it and more recently people like Neil deGrasse Tyson and others who just depict this, this new story of where we are.
And it's almost maybe we think it's normal now.
We know the words, you know, to use to describe our situation but have we really taken it in the magnitudes here are, I think, actually impossible for us to grasp.
We don't have the the the biological capacity given the proportion that our senses have evolved, you know, to allow us to perceive. I don't I don't really think we have the imagination that is powerful enough to really make sense of our scientific knowledge.
And for whitehead this was a problem.
Because if we don't have.
If we if we're not adequate, if our imagination is not adequate to our knowledge.
He was worried that the very foundations of civilization would be unstable, because a civilization needs to have some sense of confidence in its purpose, and to know our purpose we have to know our place in the wider universe.
And so whitehead was very worried, right about as much as he was excited by the advances in science he was worried that there wasn't enough effort being made to connect this, this new cosmological story to our everyday human existence.
This is an attempt to depict our situation in time if that galactic map was our situation in space this is a simulation of what happened hundreds of millions of years after the big bang as the first clouds of gas condensed and gravitational forces brought them together to form
the stars, which form the first spiral galaxies.
And so, from whitehead's point of view right remember as I was describing this in the with the spider web and the dew drops.
And so that space, all of that time, despite the vast magnitudes we're talking, you know roughly 14 billion years back to the origin of the visible universe, according to you know inflationary cosmology or big bang cosmology, and the, you know hundreds of millions, billions, hundreds of
galaxies that we can observe.
Whitehead thinks that all of this is unfolded within each moment of our experience that it took the entire history of the universe to produce each one of us.
And, you know, we know we're all stardust right and that even it took a second generation star to produce heavy elements through the process of, you know, going supernova.
So that complex chemistry and the emergence of life would be possible here on planet Earth and perhaps on other planets.
Whitehead really wants us to feel the, the energies and the magnitudes of this wider cosmic environment as as something that is present within us as a potential, and that is in fact,
giving us the strength and the power to to move forward in the world as human beings in a creative way we are an expression of all of that cosmic organization.
But how do we bring it down to earth.
How do we inhabit this planet.
How do we make sense of our situation here, you know, with grass and trees and clouds and the sky.
Whitehead for the first time he says, philosophy has to rescue the facts, as they are from the facts as they appear.
We view the sky at noon on a fine day. It is blue flooded by the light of the sun.
Another fact of observation is the sun as the sole origin of light and the bare heavens.
Conceive the myth of Adam and Eve.
In the garden on the first day of human life.
They watch the sunset, the stars appear.
And low creation widens to man's view.
The excess of light discloses facts and also conceals them.
Right and so whitehead is here pointing out the way that
there's more to the universe than what at first meets the eye, which is why the scientific process of discovery is
exciting.
And so with Lauren, we think we have understood something and we continue to study it and then there's a deeper layer which reveals itself.
From whitehead's point of view, this process of discovery is unending, because the universe isn't just a finished object.
It's not a, the big bang is not something which occurred 14 billion years ago and then finished.
Right, it's still banging. The universe is still in the process of creating itself.
And we as scientific observers are a part of that creative process.
And so in a universe of creative process, we will never be done.
Knowing right knowing itself must remain an open ended process.
And whitehead wants to invite us into a new understanding of knowledge right and this is where his understanding of science and philosophy relates to education he was an educational reformer who while he was always teaching
mathematics and philosophy he was also involved in administration, trying to shape the modern research university to provide a holistic education for for its students so that students who majored in science would also take courses in literature and humanities and
otherwise versa. He thought that if someone were to graduate from university, only having studied engineering without any sense of, you know, Shakespeare, or without any exposure to to Kant and the history of philosophy that it really diminishes our outlook on the nature of
science. And so, for whitehead knowledge is really important but it's a side issue the important thing is learning, right and the process of learning.
We do learn in order to come to possess knowledge, but in whiteheads view, we have to be willing to not be possessive over our knowledge because it's going to constantly need to be updated and expanded.
And so, you know, we could think of his view of science and the scientific investigation into nature is not an effort to produce knowledge.
As though the universe were just some fixed already completed collection of objects out there, but science is really about this ongoing process of learning.
In many ways, it is an end in itself, right, it's not that we investigate as a means to arrive at some end where we will then possess the complete and final understanding of everything.
Science is the process of learning, the process of discovery is itself the end, right and we need to whitehead would say be content to remain in wonder at this universe and ourselves are placed within this universe to pursue science as an infinite task, right, rather than something
that could finally be completed.
He says, I often start my talks on whitehead with this quote but I'll give it to you now that echoing Aristotle he says philosophy begins in wonder.
He adds, at the end when philosophic thought has done its best, the wonder remains, right and so the goal of the philosopher is not to replace wonder with explanation to explain away wonder, right by reference to whatever mechanism might be
interpreted in a particular era, rather, the goal of the philosopher and the scientist is to elucidate and and bring some understanding to our experience of wonder but that experience will always remain.
It's explained away. Right and if science begins to explain away the wonder for whitehead that's a pretty good indication that it has become dogmatic and needs to be.
It needs the critic, the critique of a philosopher to remind to remind it that in fact, we inhabit a creative universe.
Powerful line from whitehead and then we'll get into some of the details of his metaphysics.
You know what I only have like five minutes left so we'll have to give you the quicker version of whiteheads entire metaphysical scheme.
Whitehead says in our experience there is always the dim background from which we derive and to which we return.
We are not enjoying a limited doll's house of clear and distinct things secluded from all ambiguity in the darkness beyond.
There ever looms the vague mass, which is the universe, but getting us right. And so for whitehead this vague mass is what he calls creativity right it is this ultimate metaphysical category for him.
And everything that we see around us everything that we experience in ourselves is an expression of this creativity. It's this creativity.
Taking the form of temporary products right so creativity is infinite productivity.
And our bodies planets stars these are temporary sort of achievements of creativity, which enjoy themselves as they arise but then perish back into this creative process, but they perish back into the creative process.
And their experience back to the whole, such that the process of the universe is unfolding for whitehead is, I would call it cumulative right there's a memory bank, and everything that happens in the universe gets added to that memory bank so that the next
moment to arise has this storehouse of experience to draw upon to advance the universe one step further.
So, this is going to be quick, and do not expect to have by the end of this five minutes mastered whiteheads technical jargon here but I want to use this illustration to introduce you to some of his concepts here this is.
And I'm going to explain the process of concrescence to you, concrescence is whiteheads term for how creativity, or infinite productivity becomes a finite product.
And that process whereby the infinite becomes finite, but only for a moment because the finite entity which has can crest immediately perishes back into this, you know, dim background from out of which we arise and perish.
So, if we turn these daffodils on their side, we can use them to illustrate illustrate concrescence which whitehead defines as in terms of this, I think, almost magical formula.
Concrescence is the process whereby the many become one and are increased by one.
What does that mean.
The many are perished objects in the past environment so the daffodils here are let's say an actual occasion of experience right and each actual occasion of experience begins by inheriting perished objects in its past environment.
In addition to the past environment, whitehead also had this realm of what he called eternal objects. These are like platonic forms but unlike Plato's forms.
Whitehead didn't privilege this realm of eternal objects as the preeminent actualities right for Plato, the forms were the most real things that there were, and the actual world was a pale imitation.
So he interprets that picture. These eternal objects for whitehead become deficient in actuality he says they're pure potentials but they long for actualization.
They're pure potentials so that they provide the different forms of definiteness that become actual in an actual occasion of experience so colors shapes sounds they're they're sort of like the adjective adjectives that characterize our experience.
So every actual occasion has these two poles to it, a physical pole.
And a mental pole.
Right and so everything down to subatomic particles and the most trivial puff of existence and far off empty space up to each moment of our conscious human experience is an actual occasion, which has a physical pole and a mental pole though for very simple occasions, like those associated, you know with photons or
subatomic particles. These occasions are mostly dominated by their physical pole, right, which is to say that they're repeating what has occurred in their past, without much innovation.
Now, an occasion inherits its past via what whitehead calls a prehension and a prehension is a feeling.
Prehensions are the process, whereby the past is allowed the objectified past right the perished past is allowed entry again into the into the present to be felt by this concussing occasion of experience.
Now, eternal objects are not, you could say they're prehended their conceptual prehensions but whitehead also has a term for this called ingression.
So these peer potentials ingress into the mental pole of an occasion to allow this occasion to again characterize what is it what it has inherited from its past environment now without the ingression of eternal objects to provide an actual occasion.
Novelty, some alternative ways of characterizing what it is inheriting from its past, then there would only be repetition, right, in each of these occasions of experience. And so the ingression of eternal objects provides some source of novelty in the mental pole of an occasion so that it can
innovate upon what it is inheriting from its past but again, simpler forms of experience, say in the inorganic world, they don't ingress much novelty. They mostly repeat the past right it's only more complex
living organisms and multicellular animals like, like, you know, mammals and primates and humans who can ingress these peer potentials, so as to, you know, really radically shift from from what we inherit from the past and do something totally new almost free, we might say
freedom, something like freedom seems to become possible in human beings.
We don't just have to repeat the past anymore. But again, the inorganic world does mostly repeat the prehensions of its past, which is why physics can develop such reliable,
lawful descriptions of what happens in the inorganic world, whereas it's very difficult to predict how a human being will behave in a new situation but even us we still have some degree of habituality right in our behavior but nonetheless, we ingress we ingress these peer
potentials and are capable of quite a bit of novelty.
Now this term subjective form is Whitehead's way of talking about the emotional quality that occasion experiences as it begins to inherit its past. How does it feel about that past right that's the subjective form.
And then the subjective aim is how in the process of concresing the various prehensions of the past are led to grow together, and, and any conflict between them between the feelings of the past is brought into contrast Whitehead says, and harmonized
like notes in a chord that is struck.
So the subjective aim allows them the many of the past to grow together into a new one.
Right.
And achieve satisfaction as this new subject, which for Whitehead, as soon as that new subjective point of view is achieved. It perishes, right, and becomes a super jet.
Super jet is a subject's way of of persisting into the future of gifting itself and the value that it has realized in its process of concrescence to the future, so that it becoming a part of the universe again can be taken up by the next
moment of concrescence right so the last thing I want to say about this is if we think about it.
At the level of our own psychology as human beings this this process of concrescence is meant to apply at multiple levels right.
It's the, it applies at the simplest level of a wavelength of light and electromagnetic propagation.
As it does to our stream of consciousness, you know for for we psychologically complex human beings.
And what it what Whitehead is suggesting in in our case is the reverse of the Cartesian understanding where Descartes said, I think therefore I am right which implies that there's an already existing subject.
Who has experiences, right, and or has thoughts, and these thoughts sort of they qualify my substantial self, but my substantial self the subject that I am pre exists my experiences of objects in the environment, and sort of persists as the same entity throughout
my life. Whitehead is saying that actually, in each moment of my experience, a new subject is emerging, and rather than a pre existing subject having experience of objects in whiteheads universe, the parish objects of the past are growing
together and being can crest into a new subject so a new subject grows out of the parish objects of the past, allowing the past, which is finished and perished right to move again into the future.
This is the present. And so each present moment of our subjective experience is the result of the growing together of these objects and so Whitehead says, he says no thinker thinks twice.
If you're familiar with the first process philosopher Heraclitus he says, you can't step into the same river twice. Well, Whitehead is extending this principle of process philosophy into our own conscious experience.
No thinker thinks twice, or we could say no subject experiences twice.
Right, because each moment, the subject of perspective that we are is arising out of our environment, experiencing and itself as a new perspective, enjoying that perspective and then that perspective parishes and becomes an object for the next moment to
change. And so in Whitehead's view, my identity my personality my sense of a flow of consciousness is actually a whole series of these actual occasions, a historical root he says of these occasions, which are in the case of my own consciousness,
being related to one another, in a way that, you know, my historical root is not as intimately woven together as with your historical root and so we each have our own sort of flow of consciousness because we each are composed of a, of a distinct
chain of actual occasions, which are inheriting from one another. And so a human soul in Whitehead's view becomes something that needs to be understood as a sort of pulsing process of coming right rather than a substantial ego as it
was as it was in Descartes view, we're more of a process. Right. And we are a process that is constantly in folding the environment into us.
Right. And so we're not separate from the environment we are the environment, coming to take a subjective perspective upon itself.
It's a radically different view of who and what we are from the typical Cartesian perspective.
So I will, I will stop with that. I'm sure you are, I'm sure your heads are spinning. That's a good thing. This is a very novel perspective on reality.
If you're not confused and you probably didn't hear me, but I'm happy to discuss this with you and answer some of your questions so thanks for your attention.
I'll stop sharing my screen here too. There we go.
So Matt, I want to thank you very much for the first of all for the invitation into the confusion, but also for the clarity that you brought.
For introducing your white heads biography, and then deeply into philosophy. I get a sense of somebody who wants to develop a language to enable a new seeing of the world, but one that is corroborated by science at the same time.
And it also gives the human being this this creative knowing.
It has creative knowing and the process of becoming back to the human being.
Yes.
So,
the next session, we're going to come, we're going to give over to a discussion, and I've got some questions that have come in from the participants.
Jason and he's saying concerning whitehead and Einstein, developing a mathematical physics.
This is to say that math wasn't really meaningfully applied to physics, or to the study of the material world before this point.
What does it mean more broadly to have begun to conceive the world abstractly at this time.
Yeah, very good question.
No, it's not to say that math isn't meaningfully applied to physics.
There would be no modern physics if we couldn't meaningfully apply math.
And, you know, whitehead was in being critical of Einstein wasn't trying to say that we cannot use mathematics to model the physical world.
He was simply trying to suggest that we must be careful not to mistake the model, the mathematical model for the reality.
And so in the case of Einstein, whitehead did not deny the practical utility of a four dimensional geometric manifold for making predictions about how bodies masses move in space.
Einstein's equations are very accurate in the predictions that they make about large masses in space.
And in fact, in space time even his, his understanding of the relativity of space and time has been tested by synchronizing clocks, very accurate clocks putting one of them in an airplane flying around for a while, and coming back to look at the to compare
the clocks, the clock that moves in the airplane is slower relative to the clock that remained on earth we've tested this.
So the faster that an object moves apparently the slower that time passes for it relative to a stationary observer.
The consequences of some of Einstein's equations, while they may be difficult for us to grasp and imagine are nonetheless, many of them experimentally proven.
Now, but the question still remains, given the physical accuracy of Einstein's mathematical models.
What's going on metaphysically. What is the relationship between the model and the reality now.
One of the issues that whitehead has with Einstein is in, he would describe it in terms of what he called the fallacy of misplaced concreteness.
Many people who have not read whitehead directly have probably seen him cited in other works with with regard to this fallacy of misplaced concreteness and this is just precisely to mistake the model for the reality.
If Einstein's model of space time is correct.
In other words, not just correct but if it is in fact.
If there is no difference between the model and the reality, then that says something about our human conscious experience of a flow of time.
It says that it's an illusion basically, and Einstein repeated this notion.
He famously wrote in a in a letter to one of his best friends widows that upon the death of his best friend that, you know, for us believing physicists the difference between the past the present and the future is nothing but a stubbornly persistent
delusion.
Now, for whitehead this is no basis for a purposeful human life to take that point of view seriously and so
whitehead like some other 20th century philosophers disagreed with Einstein, not about the accuracy of his new model for making predictions, but about the metaphysical interpretation that Einstein was giving it.
And on reverse on the French philosopher had a debate with Einstein in 1922 about the nature of time, and Berkson wanted to say hey, we can only do science, because we are conscious beings and all the dials and meters and doing the math it
all presupposes conscious human beings, right.
We can't get itself read without a conscious human being to look at it. And for Berkson as for whitehead there's a time, a process of unfolding that is anterior to or prior to the time that is measured on clocks by physicists.
Einstein did not like this idea he didn't want to cede any territory to the metaphysicians claiming this concrete time of becoming as somehow primary, but if we don't recognize this time as primary as concrete.
Then we lose ourselves in the abstractions of the model, and we begin to denigrate the deliverances of our concrete experience by reference to the model, which we are told is what's real.
So, whitehead is just saying to Einstein, and he's not saying we can't use the tools of math to understand the physical world he's saying, do not forget that we're dealing with models, and that there's more to the concrete becoming of the universe than any model
can capture.
So hopefully that helps with that question.
There was also another question on Berkson but we've touched on Berkson a little bit.
I want to go from the west to the east. We've got two questions around and this is normal. This is quite a popular question around Western philosophers.
This is this genre of question.
So this comes from Jurgen and also from Dennis what would you say about the connection between whitehead and Eastern thought, so towers and to me it seems almost as if whitehead is dressing towers and Western language.
There's a friendly smiley face after that one I should explain.
Also, yeah, does whiteheads philosophy relate to the, I'm sorry, how does whiteheads philosophy relate to the Hindu Vedic cosmological concept of Indra's net or web, if that is something you are familiar with.
Great questions. Indra's net is precisely what I was attempting to illustrate with my spider web with dew drops on it.
That is certainly an apt metaphor for whiteheads cosmology with the caveat that we have to throw it into motion and make it more dynamic.
Whiteheads universe is not simply not that it's simple it's not simply though a holographic universe where in each part reflects the whole.
It's also a creative advance, whereby, again, member the definition of concrescence the many become one and are increased by one. So the universe is this cumulative process that is continually growing.
It's the same twice. And so when we think about the universe as a whole is all of these occasions of experience reflecting or mirroring or containing one another.
There's also new occasions of experience constantly being birthed, which contain the entire past but carry it forward into the next moment.
And it's much like interest net though, with this dynamic tilt toward toward the future toward toward the as yet unrealized future.
And, you know, in terms of the broader connections to Eastern thought, Eastern religion and philosophy, whitehead says himself in process and reality that his metaphysics resembles more Vedic and Buddhist forms of thought
than it does anything in Western philosophy, or in the Judeo Christian religious traditions.
And so he was quite aware of this he didn't study Taoism or Buddhism in any depth so far as I know.
He did write a book called religion in the making, which was published shortly after process in reality where it's clear he had done some reading in Buddhism.
He was impressed enough by the Buddhist tradition to say that it qualifies as what he called one of the rational religions.
And he certainly his notion of flux and impermanence right has quite a similarity to the Buddhist notion of, you know, impermanence or emptiness.
The relationship of these do drops on the web is also something you can describe as a relationship of dependent co origination, which is an important concept for certain Mahayana Buddhist traditions.
In the contemporary world.
Actually whiteheads work is being taken up by China.
There are something like 35 graduate programs in China devoted to process philosophy and and whiteheads thought.
There's a lot of people 35 graduate programs so it's you know a lot of people, but still, that's a lot of whitehead in China.
And I think there are several reasons that the Chinese are so interested in whiteheads thought one is that yeah it fits naturally with the Taoist and Confucian Buddhist traditions there but
I think it's that you know the Communist Party is a little bit hesitant to allow in those more ancient traditions into they want to be modern and whitehead affords them the opportunity to, to be modern with his understanding of science and you know he's coming from the
world. But while still tapping into these, these deeper traditional understandings of the nature of the universe as, as Lao Tzu and Shuang Zhe and Confucius, not the Taoism and Confucianism are the same but there are some similarities there.
So his thought allows China to in a way get in touch with its own history while also moving more into the modern world. And so his thought is exploding there. I think precisely because of the resonances that that are being remarked upon in these in these questions.
Matt, thank you.
So now, and this is what to do with panpsychism and possibly consciousness studies and this is from Dennis.
You're saying Matt in your view. What does it mean to experience.
And the sub question from that is, can particles experience.
This is a big question this is a major stumbling block for many people who are new to whiteheads thought, though, what's sometimes called panpsychism is actually undergoing a bit of a Renaissance right now.
Even an analytic philosophy.
More philosophers of mind are taking this idea seriously.
Even in the last five or 10 years than ever before.
There was panpsychist, obviously.
Leibniz was a was a panpsychist.
Giordano Bruno, one of the early modern scientists was a panpsychist.
And so there's a there's a sort of venerable tradition here it's a sort of marginalized yes but still readily visible stream in the history of Western thought, even Heraclitus process philosopher yes right.
So the term is flux.
But Heraclitus also referred to everything as he says the universe is an ever living fire.
And so in other words, life goes all the way down. Right. Life isn't something that just emerges atop a physical substrate.
And so, for whitehead.
He protested against what he called the notion of vacuous actuality of vacuous actuality would be.
Some sort of an entity which is imagined to exist independently of experience, whether it's own experience or being experienced by someone else.
He thinks it's a meaningless notion.
And the reason panpsychism is becoming
more into the mainstream academic philosophical arena is because of the difficulty of this hard problem of consciousness.
Right, which is, if we do inhabit a physical world that is not experiential at what point does something like conscious experience arise or emerge.
And, and how does it emerge right if, if in the physical world you have parts that just rearrange their relative location to one another.
And just mutely persist right as these substantial bits.
And it's just that, surely through a rearrangement of those inert parts, you could ever get something like an interior experience, right, or, or experience of what it's like to be somebody.
It's like, not only a hard problem but an impossible problem and so panpsychism is an attempt, not so much to solve the problem but to to dissolve it, and not to have ever imagined in the first place that there would be a dualism between matter on one hand, and
mind on the other. And so, you know whiteheads taking this track and an attempt to understand how there could be conscious animals like us in this universe what must the universe be like, such that we are possible.
And so, he wants to push experience down all the way to the simplest happenings in nature. But remember he's a process thinker so it's not that atomic bits of matter are, or have experience.
We don't want to think of particles as little substances as as little inert, you know globules of stuff.
Remember in whiteheads metaphysics, the universe is made not of stuff but of happenings. And so a particle for whitehead, let's say a hydrogen atom.
It's an enduring entity we can actually see groups of atoms now under microscope. And for whitehead that enduring entity is itself, he would call it a society of happenings it's a or a historical root of happenings that are repeating the same pattern,
as inheriting the same pattern from moment to moment, as this helium, or this hydrogen atom. Right. And so you could say the experience of the hydrogen atom is this rather repetitive experience of just saying, Ah, I am here I am helium I am helium I am helium
over and over and over again. And there is indeed a vibration to these to these particles right and for whitehead the vibratory signature is itself an expression of this, this process of arising and perishing arising inheriting the past and
perishing and so we get the sort of the vibrate the vibratory pattern of this atom persisting through time and so what is experience in this context well.
At the simplest level it's just the feeling of inheritance of a past and the contrast of the contrast between that feeling of inheritance and an openness to the future.
I mean just, just imagine the, the various form of like tension that might exist in this present moment that is not closed off from the past and the future but it's held intention between past and future between inheritance and anticipation.
And, you know, for these simpler forms of existence it's just a flash.
And that that moment the present moment, as you move up the scale of nature and into more complex organisms the present moment can expand a bit.
We can, in our conscious imaginations as human beings we can, we can hold the present moment, keep the tension stretched and taught, and consider different possibilities before we actualize one of them right.
For hydrogen atom, there's no time for considering possibilities it's just repeat the past repeat the past but always with some little bit of creativity, otherwise hydrogen wouldn't have formed stars.
And for something new in the universe.
You know, 500,000 years after the big bang or thereabouts, hadn't been any stars and then all of a sudden there were stars where did they come from well, is because these simpler forms of energetic activity aren't just repeating the past.
They're also lured by certain possibilities to take on greater complexity and order and deepen their experience.
It's, it's a difficult imaginative exercise to think of experience in a way that's generic enough and general enough that it's not conscious reflective human experience anymore but something.
It's a bit bigger and just more basic, but why did things, you know, if we give it a try we can imagine something.
Simple enough that it could reasonably be applied across every scale of the universe.
Thank you. We've still got a number of questions to get through but I'm just gonna, I'm gonna, because of the time.
I just want to balance the scales a little bit and take it in a different direction and bring it back to the human being.
This is.
So I think you talked about the transformation of the subject into this. Is it the subject.
Great. Okay.
So this is a question from Paul.
And it's Rauti and other American pragmatists have suggested that the contemplation of metaphysics has been a philosophical distraction for 2000 years, partly because we can't know what we know.
Rather the goal of philosophy should be making life better for all.
Please discuss.
So, Richard Rauti called himself a pragmatist and I think, you know, he is a version of pragmatist, you know, inheriting the thought of William James and Charles Saunders Purse and John Dewey.
Whitehead is also a pragmatist, you know, as I mentioned, he took up William James's chair philosophy at Harvard.
So more than a decade after James had died.
And, you know, for for Whitehead, William James was he called James the American Plato, and thought that James put philosophy and metaphysics on a new basis.
And what Whitehead found so important about James's philosophy was its pragmatic emphasis and so Whitehead is a pragmatist he is a radical empiricist in James's sense of the term.
And so given that you might wonder well why was he doing this abstract metaphysical stuff.
Well,
what Whitehead did was take James's psychology.
And if you've read James's 1890 book, Principles of Psychology, maybe haven't read the whole thing it's, it's quite thick but any part of it, you'll see what a brilliant writer James is it's so accessible.
And still very relevant I mean you know neuroscience was just beginning to take baby steps back then but so much of what James had described is, is, you know with a few tweaks here and there are still accurate.
And why did it's taking James's psychology, and actually this this phrase drops of experience, Whitehead borrows from James's psychology and applies it to cosmology.
James had some of his own speculations and I think we could say he was a panpsychist of sorts but what Whitehead does is take James's psychology and systematizes it into a cosmology.
And so, you know Whitehead has to do some system building.
He has to develop all of these categories as part of his new cosmological scheme, because he wanted to make sense of science.
He might have been somewhat unhappy with the systematic element of Whitehead's philosophy James was suspicious of system.
He worried that it, it would, it would grow too abstract and disconnected from everyday life.
Perhaps one could criticize Whitehead on these grounds, but Whitehead himself at least his intention was to elucidate our everyday experience he even goes so far as to say, right at the beginning of process and reality.
He says the soul justification for any thought, the soul justification for any theory is the elucidation of experience.
And so what's driving Whitehead to erect this whole cosmological scheme is he wants to make sense of the universe that science is describing to us, so that it can be understood as congruent with and consistent with our everyday conscious
science. And he thought that already with the first scientific revolution and the mechanistic world view that there was an incoherence because the human soul was put off to one side.
The rest of nature was described as a machine. And then in the 20th century, we couldn't even fit the disciplines the sub disciplines of physics together as part of the same universe right because I didn't mention relativity theory
the macroscopic universe as this, you know, continuous field, whereas quantum theory describes the microscopic universe as discontinuous.
They don't fit together these two theories they're describing two very different universes. And so that's the first problem Whitehead wanted to solve with his cosmology.
How can these two theories relativity and quantum theory describe the same universe, but also how can our physical understanding of the universe be related to our human conscious experience right and how can we preserve a sense of importance and
purpose and value and freedom and beauty, all the things that are part of the human realm of conscious existence right. How can we take all of that seriously as real factors in the universe, not just as nice things that humans
can believe in, despite the fact that physically we know they're not real for Whitehead if if that's the metaphysics or the cosmology that's guiding our civilization.
Deep trouble, because that's a very fragmented worldview, where we're asking people to find purpose in their lives that they know, or they're told to believe is actually ultimately illusory.
Whitehead didn't think that that was a stable foundation upon which to build a civilization. He thought that the scientific picture or scientific understanding of the universe must in some way support the values that we presuppose as civilized human beings.
And so his pragmatism comes through in his effort to justify human human values in light of our cosmological understanding. So how can we fit our scientific understanding into a cosmological picture that would provide a source of inspiration for us.
In our social and cultural and political endeavors, rather than being at best irrelevant or at worst, a profound challenge to any sense of purpose that we might attempt to realize.
So, yeah, ultimately I think Whitehead is a pragmatist. We already didn't like Whitehead's metaphysics. I think Rory was especially influenced by Ludwig Wittgenstein in this, in this view, where, you know, Whitehead was engaging in this form of metaphysics that's, you know, is predicated upon the idea that
Whitehead, which can provide us some insight into the nature of, of reality of the world beyond words. And, you know, there are some readings of Wittgenstein that suggest that that's just a faulty understanding of what language is and what the task of the
philosopher is, which is simply to clarify our sentences and to make sure we know what can and cannot be said. Whitehead wasn't satisfied with any sense of boundary.
He didn't want to remain silent about the apparently ineffable. He wanted to be able to expand the dictionary, as he said, and invent new words to describe realities that we hadn't even conceived of yet or hadn't yet perceived.
And in this way, he's, you know, he engages philosophy like a poet, and that with new terms of phrase, we can actually enhance our perception so that the world we thought we knew with the prior language is expanded as we begin to speak about it in a new way.
And that, thank you so much.
I want to thank you on behalf of all the participants for being, for being so generous with your insights with your erudition, and also for fielding such a broader, broader rate in the discussion from the questions that and just jumping in.
We've got three invitations and one of them is going to come from you because you're doing an online course at Schumacher, which is science and the soul of the world, and that is 24th of July to Saturday, 28th of August.
Can you say a few words to tempt people in.
Yes.
So, this is my second go at this course it's science and the soul of the world. It's not just on whitehead it's also on a German poet and scientist and statesman.
I'm Gerta. And what I'm trying to do here in this course is reveal the ways in which Gerta as a poet scientist and whitehead as a mathematician and philosopher, though they may seem like quite different.
There are different approaches to understanding the natural world. They are in fact sort of ideal opposites that in brought into polar relationship with one another can intensify our understanding of the universe and indeed a universe that is in sold a universe that has a soul.
And I think that these figures both whitehead and Gerta allow us to engage in science, not as a method which would disenchant the world but in fact, there's another approach to science which they exemplify, which allows us to
create that enhances its enchantment that in that allows us to deepen into the life of the whole of which we are a part. And so, I think we have six sessions together.
And, you know, we'll go deeper into whitehead will go deeper in Gerta will bring them into dialogue. And I think it's going to be a lot of fun.
Thank you. And I think Troy has put the link to the Datington website into the chat so you guys can get it if not if you just go to the Datington website.
Then you can find out all about that.
Okay, so two more invitations to join us. The next one is for the Healistic Science online lecture series.
We'll be back on Thursday the first of July, again at 4pm with Stephen Harding.
And Stephen, sorry, Stefan is one of the founding members of Schumacher College, and he will be presenting on deep ecology and the healing of the earth.
And then there's an invitation to join us in person, actually live, live human beings. And that's what Schumacher College later in the year October the first of the third.
That is for the holistic science in dialogue conference.
That's a collaboration between the field center Schumacher College and the holistic science journal.
And that conference revisits and builds on the contributions to holistic science made by Henry Bortoft, Margaret Colhoun and Brian Goodwin.
So we'll have presentations, research panels and also discussions, booking for for the live for that live conference will happen as of next week.
So we have confirmed speakers Emma Kidd, Dr. Judith Sassoon, Claudio Stern, and also a confirmed keynote is Isis Brook.
So, once again, thank you very, very much to Max, I'm going to say thank you and depending on where you are, where you've been tuning in from around the world, all of you lovely participants on behalf of the team, like to wish you a very good day, evening or night, wherever you may be.
And hope to see you soon.
Thanks, Simon. Thanks everyone.
