The field of economics is a joke right now. Whoever has a degree in economics should feel
useless. They should seriously go over in the corner and cry. Entire economics libraries
burn down or should I say recycled, because everything on this planet is part of the circle.
Nothing goes to waste. What economics never got was that in order to grow something, something
else needs to get smaller. And all this time, yes, what has been getting smaller so that
we can grow. Nature, resources, habitats, clean water, life. So forget growth. Growth is dead.
It is a magician's trick. Stuff doesn't just magically appear and disappear. The molecules in
your body didn't come out of nowhere. They have been on this planet for three and a half billion
years. When you die, your body turns into organic mush. You become delicious food for the other
beings on the planet that take over from you. And the circle begins again and again.
So where did it all go wrong? Economics itself is wrong, but it's very existence. It's very
foundation, because it was built on the concept of profit, a concept that makes no sense in a
circular system. So please do away with the calculators, economic theories, lectures,
banks, stock markets and graphs, endless graphs. It's all completely useless. Our failure goes back
to even before money actually existed. Our whole civilization was set up the wrong way. Eat, eat,
destroy, destroy, destroy. Eat more, destroy more. Eat even more, destroy even more.
Shit everything out as CO2. This was our definition of economic growth.
I'm Dean Walker and welcome to the Poetry of Predictment podcast, a podcast for people brave
enough to face humanity's challenges and problems, and most importantly, our numerous predicaments.
The Poetry of Predictment is a podcast meant to inspire us to bring forth grace, beauty and
connection with the web of life in the face of a predicament laden world. Today we speak with a
poet and a piercing social commentator, George Sacroclades. Get ready for some spot on analysis
of what we're facing in these times with medium author, George Sacroclades.
All right, welcome back to the Poetry of Predictment podcast, and what a remarkably
busy week this is where multiple huge fires in California, extraordinary political hubbub
going on as usual in the USA and in the UK with Brexit and elsewhere around the world
in so many different troubling ways. And this has also been an extraordinarily busy week here
in podcast world where I just had the real pleasure of meeting and then having some
wonderful conversations. And today is no exception. George Sacroclades, man, I know I'm
still not quite saying it right. It's a struggle for me to kind of get my mouth around a lot of
consonants. And thank you for your patience with me attempting, George. George is a
is a relative newcomer to a writing site that I respect a great deal, medium. And in a very short
time, George, you're writing both your poetry and your prose, your analysis really more accurately
has really struck a chord with me. It's rare that I get that combination of an artfulness
and a dead on accuracy to what I believe is actually going on in our world. And so the analysis
is as valuable and as rich as the poetic side or the prose side of what you do.
And so it's really been a pleasure to meet you in the past few minutes before we hit the record
button. And I am just really happy that you are here. Turns out we've got a few different places
where I think we overlap from time to time, whether we know it or not. So it's a pleasure to expand
that in a conscious way, those intersections. So, George, thank you so much for showing up
and for joining me here and us here on the podcast. And let me just read a couple of
sentences that you've written about yourself in medium, and then ask you to fill in some gaps,
anything that you'd like to add to that autobiographical couple of sentences.
George is a molecular biologist, food scientist, advocate for an earth of empathy,
gratitude, compassion, and awareness. He's a recovering workaholic and author of age of
separateness. George Sacroclis, welcome to the poetry of predicament.
It is lovely to be here, Dean. Thank you very much for inviting me.
All right. Anything you'd like to add to that, those couple of sentences about yourself?
I would like to remove something, actually. I think that all of us, as we go out of a mature
life, we think we have a path and that we are progressing in an additive way, adding degrees.
We can't degree junkie at some point in my life. And we all reached that point, at least I reached
that point where I thought I was somewhere until the climate crisis came into view, as well as
other side effects of the climate crisis that I was experiencing in my immediate environment,
whether it was people getting sick or people having bad work experiences. And I just would
like to add that I am all of the above, but above all, I am a work in progress and we are all on a
journey. Yes, amen. We are all works in progress. And there's a particular way of describing that
work in progress, Ness, that you're mentioning. There's a particular way of talking about it
that I'm fond of using. And that's to describe that state of being, of being aware of the
malleability and the evolutionary quality moment by moment that we are invited to live into,
calling it the liquid state. And it's for the average person who's not familiar with this
as being something natural and something that actually promises an extraordinary
growth into a new state of being, for a lot of people that this can be a state to be feared,
to be retracted from, you know, and rigidified. Conditions us to believe that we have a distinct
identity. I'm a dentist, you are a therapist, you are this, you know, everyone is completely unique
and everyone is on a journey to discover truth. I think that our circumstances and degrees that
we study or countries that we live are just different lenses through which we experience life.
And it's not so much about what you've studied or who you are or what you do. It's about how you use
that lens, how you use that information to learn from it. For me, writing is a catharsis. Writing
is a way to cleanse my sins as a human being on this planet and to bring other people with me,
to bring other people into the collective awareness of where we are. When I read my own
writings, my own poems, I feel touched by them and I feel a connection with people.
The language is a powerful tool. Yeah, it truly is. You know, we both connected to some degree or
another with the relatively recently created deep adaptation forum that was created by
Jim Bendell in 28, actually in this year, earlier this year, but his kind of rocket
to notoriety happened in 2018. And just for those who aren't yet familiar with the deep adaptation
notion, Bendell came from a background of academics, professor of sustainability
development in the UK. And he really took a tremendous risk by publishing his paper about
what he's calling deep adaptation in early 2018. And right in the center of what he's talking about
is an acknowledgement that not only is there really no sustainable version of our predatory
capitalist system, but even more, I think, daring is his declaration of that we are
in the midst of collapse now. And what was, how he couched it at the beginning in 2018 in his paper
was that it's imminent, imminent social collapse was going to be coming from how we do things,
how we do this human operating system. And since then, it's become quite clear to him
and in his subsequent papers and presentations that no, it's going on now. And yes, there will be more
and more dramatic elements of collapse in our world, both human and earth systems,
but it is actually going on now. And that's what I keep reading in your
writing as well. And I, you know, I just noticed before we hit the record button today, as we
were just meeting on this call, you mentioned something about being a little reluctant to
use the word collapse. I'm wondering if you could say more about that. Yeah, I mean, collapse,
I think, is a bit of a misleading word in the sense that collapse sounds as if something
is happening suddenly, like a building collapsing, and that there is a specific
cut of coin beyond which you know that you are in collapse. I don't think any of those things
are true. And I don't think that goes against what Jim Bandel is saying. I completely agree with him
that we are in the midst of collapse. We may still be able to have food in the supermarket,
but all the wheels have been set in motion. We are in the sixth mass extinction. We are in the middle,
well underway of an ecological collapse, to use a scientific term, an ecosystem collapse,
which is you all of a sudden have lots of species starting to disappear. And then this process,
of course, accelerates because all of the species are connected. One of my degrees is in biology,
so it's a very, very simple concept. And I think to be honest, most people get that.
But I do think collapse is a bit of a misleading word because it makes some people feel that
it's really dramatic, which it's not necessarily depending on which part of the world you live.
And it makes some other people feel the opposite. It makes some other people
feel that actually collapse is something that will happen at some point in time.
And until then, for the last minute, we've got to be okay. My fear, and this is well
into most of my writings, is that humans are very adaptable. And although that is good sometimes,
being adaptable is also very bad because we are witnessing collapse at the moment,
and we are used to it. We are becoming used to swimming in our own excrement,
sorry for the agriculture, but this is what humanity does. And we have witnessed collapse
before. I think this is the only thing that people don't realize that collapse has happened
multiple times in our civilization. It just has not happened on a planetary global
scale. It hasn't happened as in the form of the final collapse, which this would be
the final collapse. Not necessarily the extinction of the species, but it will be
quite an unrecognizable planet, the way things are going. That's my view on collapse. I just think
it's a much broader term that needs to be felt. I think that some of the posts that I see on
deep adaptation are a bit, for example, do you see people talking about how they are
pickling vegetables and saying, oh, I'm getting ready for the collapse? I don't think it's like
that. It's like I said, it's not going to happen from one day to another. And you don't even know
if pickling is going to be a skill that will help you survive. All of us, we don't know what we're
having, unfortunately. We have no idea whether it's going to be electricity that goes out first
or apples or we just don't know. Well said. Thank you. It's fascinating to me. I'm connected with
many, many people that have crossed themselves over the threshold, who call themselves collapse
aware, and there's a continuum beyond that that goes all the way to the folks who put themselves
into the category of near term human extinction people. So there's quite a
range of severity of voting for this is what's going to happen. And this is how we must define
collapse. And this is what will happen. And various people have their own version of a timeline
that they're estimating and so on. I'd like to just go go back to I mentioned to you that there
was another article that I'd like to just bounce off of a little bit with you in our conversation.
And it's one that you called again, it's in medium. And you call it the nothing manifesto
revolution of nothing. And for there are there are many ways that I like this piece.
And particularly it rings with how you're just kind of delineating your take on collapse.
And it also overlaps with why I named my own. The only book I've ever written a couple of years ago,
I put out the impossible conversation. And that was actually what I'm about to mention from your
article is is exactly why I named it the impossible conversation. And that is and that is
why we are so encased these days in the mythology of infinite growth on a finite planet.
And our our little roles, each of us take on our particular version of a good contributor
to the infinite growth paradigm. We do our version of it and hold up our end of it.
And I can't I'm hard pressed. I can't imagine a harder
addiction to break than the addiction to this system, this fossil fuel driven extravaganza
that we're in of consumption and production and extraction and so on that you articulate so well.
And in this particular piece that you've written, you give us a number of different
elements that it would be really good for a person who's interested in in
in proceeding on this track of hopefully shaking loose of this addiction. What are some of the
premises? What are some of the distinctions? What are some of the understandings that would that I
would need if I was a person who wanted to to find some other way of being then deeply addicted
to this system? And you you kind of carve it out by saying, what if we did nothing?
You know, reflecting on or contrasting with in this system, we pride ourselves on doing more and
more and more faster and faster. And as you said in the other piece, eating, eat more, eat more,
destroy more, destroy more. And what what more stark contrast than doing nothing?
So let me just swing open that gate about this other article. And I'm wondering if this sparks
you to to say anything? Yeah, I mean, we are we are addicted not just to fossil fuels. This is this
this goes back to the start of our civilization. We are addicted to ambition as a species. And this
is making us consume and purchase things that we don't need that have absolutely tremendous CO2
footprint. What is what is really interesting is how this complicated complex lifestyle and
civilization that we developed all comes down to just one single molecule CO2. Isn't that ironic?
Because it's both mental and physical. It's in fact, the mental is the biggest challenge.
Because the solution is not about shutting down a few coal mines and putting up some wind turbines
and sucking up CO2 out of the air. The scale of the change that we need to do
can only happen if we feel in our hearts how wrong our life is. It's very, very difficult to do that.
Because I mean, we grew up in this life from, you know, I grew up with refrigerators and electricity
around the house. And it's very difficult to understand that, you know, growing beef is wrong.
That we're using something like 70% of the Earth's land mass to grow crops. And we obviously reached
the limit of that. And that figure might be inaccurate, but it's still the real figure is
absolutely shocking. And because because it's what I what I learned from my scientific career was
when you have such a complicated complex problem, it is ironic that the solution is usually a very
simple solution. And the simple solution here is do nothing. Do less as humanity.
Leave Earth alone. I think Ethiopia is a fantastic example. They are simply
leaving fences around huge areas so that those pastures are not accessible to cattle. And what
they're seeing is that the landscape is recovering. There are rivers that are flowing out of nowhere.
It's, it's a miracle if you just leave Earth alone. And there's a number of ways that we can do that, but
George, you were you just broke up when you were saying where they were putting up fences to
allow it to recover. Where was that that you were describing?
It's in Ethiopia. Ethiopia, thank you. But you have also examples in Western Europe where
urbanization is leading to villages in the countryside being abandoned. And in fact,
the total forested area in Europe over the last decades has grown by about the size of
Switzerland. So these are the few glimmers of hope that things are possible. But I think that hope
is a very dangerous word. And this is why I'm very skeptical of, you know, big words in slogans
like the Green New Deal. These have already been hijacked. And this is by no means a critique on
Naomi Klein's book. I think she's very much aware of these risks. And I deeply respect her as an
author. I think that she would agree with me that the Green New Deal is in danger of being
just used as a way to lure investors who, of course, will be interested in profit.
And also to give hope to the public so that that can act as a smoke screen that collapses
in common, collapses and happened already. It's very dangerous.
So if you don't mind, I'd like to stay there for just a few moments because it's,
the whole notion of hope has been a reoccurring topic, well, for years for the folks that have
started this conversation, you know, even decades ago. But more recently, there have been a few
remarkable authors, you know, Derek Jensen comes to mind, Debo Zarco comes to mind,
and a few others. And I'm curious if we could just spend a little time on this idea of hope.
If I may, I'd like to start by just sharing this. I have many conversations with people,
I call them my impossible conversations. And so often it starts with, I ask people when they say
the word hope, which usually gets brought up in early in the conversation, what they mean when
they say hope. And to just lump many of them together, if I might, it comes out something like,
gee, I hope the experts come up with answers to these pesky problems so that we can get on with
and return to business and life as usual. I think that's what I'm reading when you
poke at the word hope. In, you know, for instance, this piece on the nothing manifesto,
what do you mean when you say the word hope?
It's kind of like a pill. It's a delusion pill. It's a drug. It's a way of kicking the
can down the road. It's a way of, no, the house isn't on fire. It's not.
Yeah. Hope is a way of blinding yourself. And it's quite tragic that a species that is so intelligent
is actually intelligent enough to deceive itself. We have an amazing capacity to
self-medicate, to be in denial, to have really, really complex mechanisms in our brain,
which I always get some inspiration from my biology background, all that homeostasis. And
the example I always give is the Aralsea, which not many people know about, because the Aralsea
has almost disappeared. And humans in the many decades that it took for the Aralsea to disappear
simply got used to having less fish, having less water. There was no collapse.
There was no perception of collapse. It was a slowly deteriorating change of life,
same with the dust bowl in the 1930s in the U.S. We just destroyed these ecosystems and we left.
But the thing is, we can't leave now. We have nowhere to go, because we're going to destroy the
whole panel. But we're using the same mental mechanism of homeostasis, which I've written a
full article about, pioneering, borrowing this biological term to describe a mental state.
It's also similar to hypernormalization, the famous Adam Prentice film, which I think that
is also happening on the media landscape. On one hand, we have more work on climate change. On the
other hand, planet change and movements like Extinction Rebellion, just become a part of
one's daily life and we become desensitized even. This is a strategy that can be employed by
the private sector, by governments to further desensitize us and to say to us,
yeah, okay, we're not denying it, climate change, it is happening. It's very scary
because it really trips you. At some point, we might just say, well, collapse is happening.
Yeah. I'm completely in agreement with what you've just been laying out and it reminds me of
the shock that I felt in writing my own book, because it was shocking enough to discover
not only the reality and the ever-increasing reality of abrupt climate change, far beyond
normal interpretations of climate change. And then on top of that, a handful of other
extinction-level measures of human impact on the planet, my head was already exploding with
all of that. And what I didn't expect, I had no idea how deeply I would be sucked into
how we talk to ourselves, how we control ourselves in the narrative, the narrative that
we're living within. It started hundreds, perhaps thousands of years ago, with the notions that
became colonization and a profit orientation to a now predatory capitalist model and so on.
And so now we're firmly living in and ensconced in this structure, this rigidified structure
that will revive. And again, from the biological perspective, and again, I'm not an expert in
this field, but to me it makes sense to think that our brain is rigid. And the reason our brain
is rigid is because it evolved during thousands of years when the climate was stable, our resources
were abundant, and there is more evolutionary development in the human brain to minimize
risk and to apply brakes on the destructive processes that we use to exploit the resources
around us. I've written many articles on this because that was the point where I kind of exploded.
I've written an article called Our DNA Makes Us Destroy This Planet. I think it's
tied to something like destroying the planet is our destiny. And I unfortunately believe that
it is our destiny. Then again, we can change our biological destiny.
So there is hope in that sense, but I think we do need to realize that the default path
is actually to destroy the planet. If we do realize that, then hopefully we can scare ourselves enough
to be able to wake up from this primitive mind that likes to take risk, that likes to take
risk in the stock market, likes to take risk by wage and war in the country market store,
to appropriate its resources, likes to take all kinds of risks in order to further itself,
to use risk as a survival strategy as opposed to using conservative approaches, circular approaches,
degrowth approaches as a survival strategy. That is a revolutionary concept.
Yeah. What came forward for me when you were just speaking was
there's an odd aggression that's showing up. And I wish I could say that it was the aggression
between people who are solid denialists and then people who are aware of the truth of
what's going on in our earth and human systems. But it's not that. Just in the past few months,
in particular, there have been a number of examples of people who are really close to one another
in terms of philosophical orientations, in terms of
how we frame or see the world, that we have to do something about climate change,
and this is very important, and some people are activists in that, and other people are
academicians, and they're this far apart from one another. And this is where a new kind of
aggression is showing up. A contrarianism of people who are so close in their orientation
to life and in the frame of how they see the important issues that matter most to them.
And it's fascinating to me, and it's heartbreaking to me, that
people can be so close to a common ground of seeing what's truly important in these times,
and what will it take for us to survive, to possibly even thrive.
And what it really comes down to, to me, is the willingness to declare or to just state
that we are indeed in collapse, that there is some substantial part of our system at its core
that has failed. And so that that tiny difference between the people that I'm talking about,
you know, these are famous science communicators, people who are really good at what they do,
communicating the extraordinarily difficult conversation about climate change,
and people that are just an inch away from them on the spectrum.
And what seems to be the difference is the ability to say we've failed.
Yeah, because it is, and it will always be, a risky statement to make. And we, unfortunately,
are individuals living within societies that a lot of things depend on what we say, a job,
being trolled on the internet, being threatened.
I have conversations with a few very small circle of climate scientists that I know,
and the conversations that I have with them in private are completely different to their Twitter posts.
In private, they tell me the world is coming to an end very soon.
On Twitter and in public, they have, of course, a much more conservative stance.
And this is where the great factor comes in, you know, someone who doesn't have to obey,
someone who is not being paid by anyone who is unhinged, in that sense, who has the freedom
to say what they want to say. It's someone that broke through the barrier that almost kind of
opened up the floodgates for a lot of people to follow.
You know, it's interesting, I have had very few inner circle conversations like you're describing,
where you've had some ability to speak with these people kind of offline,
out of the public arena, and to be able to hear a different take on it. And I'm now wondering
how much of that is so, I appreciate you bringing it up, and I'll, I guess I have some homework to do
to see if I can find out some of those. I think it's a very nice part in the interview that my
only client gave to the BBC, I believe, or was it Channel 4, where it sometimes is being asked
a very good question by the journalists. So, what do you think is going to happen?
Are you an optimist, or are you a pessimist? And I won't tell you what she answers, but
it's a surprising and a slightly alarming answer, I think, that she gives. It was, for me,
was a little bit more pessimistic than I thought. It's very brave. I think it's the attitude that
we should have, really. We only have one earth, even if we think that, even if we know that,
two degrees change, three degrees change is already locked in. For me, personally, even if we can say
one species on this planet, one doughy little piece of bacteria swimming in a slime
pot hole, that would be a victory. Yeah. If we can say that one piece of life,
because that is how cautious it is. Yeah. We don't, we don't know if there's other
earths out there. I think in the 80s, Carl Sagan, who thought there were a lot more,
but now scientists are starting to understand that actually we might be quite rare.
Yeah. And that was a Channel 4 Naomi Klein interview, and that was fairly recent?
Yes, it was very recent. It's from a few weeks ago. I can send you a link.
Oh, well, thank you. I'd appreciate it. I'm, I'm going to go ahead and excerpt
from that, from that interview, and I'll put it in right in this part of our conversation.
So I really appreciate that. Thank you. You know, you might be headed now, George. You might
just have, have headed into what is really the most important part for me of any of these
conversations that I'm, I'm privileged to, to have. And that is,
there are times when I, I just need to slow down and realize what we're actually talking about.
And it, it started to dawn on me. As soon as you told the piece about Naomi Klein,
and then this last piece you just shared,
I never would have guessed growing up in the world that I was privileged to grow up in.
I never would have guessed that a part of, of my lifetime would be confronting
what's now called the sixth mass extinction. And I never thought that I would have conversations
like this where, you know, little cute expressions like carpe diem and smell the roses and so on
would shift from cute little greeting card expressions to really survival level coping
strategies to keep ourselves present somehow in the face of ever larger stressors.
And I'm, I'm curious if you would share a little bit about how, if you have your own version
of, of a dynamic like I'm describing for myself, how has, how has this realization
of our, of our situation, how has it landed on you? And how do you carry it in your heart?
How do you keep yourself inspired and connected with life while carrying this in your heart?
I mean, it's important to talk about this and to talk about this a lot because
it really takes a toll on us and it's, it's, you know, existential stress, it's
existential anxiety. It's even in the news these days. And I do believe the polls that say that
the young generation is really feeling that. Well, I'm of a, of an older age group. So I grew up in a,
in a world where we were told that humanity improves with every decade from industry to human
rights, to discoveries, the world, which just gets better and better. Look, there's green
peace now. They're chasing away the oil market, the ocean. It's good, you know, people are cleaning
up the environment. It's all going to be great. And then you come to the realization that there's
climate change. As a scientist, I was, I had my big wake up call in 2007, but I was with
Argos and Convenient Truth. That was kind of a definitive evidence for me.
And then I think a couple of years ago was when I had a second realization
that we were not on a long-term journey. This is actually quite short-term. It's accelerating.
In human years, it might be a few generations, but in geological timescales, this is absolutely,
you know, it's, it's a snapshot. It's, it's, I've written about this as well. It's like,
when you've put the egg on a pan and the egg, the pan is hot and you've thrown the egg on the
pan. The egg is still transparent. And that is what gives the climate change in ours. The opportunity
to say, look, nothing's happening. The egg is fine. Yeah. But just check, you know, a million for
the second or whatever it is later, and we've got this change. It is, and I've talked about this,
I've written about this, because we need to keep ourselves sane if we have any chance of,
of working towards mitigating what's happening. I think that the existential stress that we're
on is a cocktail of feelings that has never existed before. Psychotherapy was not meant to
help people through existential stress, because this is not about a fear that will not materialize.
This is a fear about something that will happen, that will come, of unpredictable
ways in which it might arrive into your world, to your family, your children or the children
of your children. And it is an, it is an emotional roller coaster, I would have to say, has been
from my part. And I think this is a very, very common thing. You go through stages of grief,
of anger, of depression, of sadness. And at the end of the day, the best, I think,
arrival point is that, you know what, the end of the world is actually coming. I think for me,
just being aware of that, and actually feeling it in my body,
helped me. I wrote another article at some point where I, I put some pictures in it which were
pictures from strange times in human history, from the Dark Ages, or from
Catholic churches, and they are pictures of the Apocalypse. You might know a painter
called Hieronymus Bosch, who is famous about those things. And I thought, for me, that was sort of
that realization point, that we grew up thinking that the Apocalypse was this
sci-fi kind of religious, and it's now happening. It is actually happening. Yeah.
It is actually happening. And it also kind of made me think that we somehow always knew those
paintings now are a bitter irony, aren't they? Quite a bitter irony, because they're quite
telling. Yeah.
You know, it's just a pleasure to speak with you, George. What I mentioned at the beginning,
that was the original reason why I reached out to connect with you, was your blend of
an artfulness and heart with also a real eye for piercing analysis of what's going on, and being
able to put the two together. And again, I just really respect and appreciate that gift of being
able to blend those pieces the way you do. And then thank you for what you've just gotten through
saying, you know, a little bit of a snapshot of your, how you map this out, how you position
yourself or find yourself in what I call an internal mapping of how do I make sense of
this world as it's laying out, and what are my reactions that want to just come up naturally,
and what are the reactions that I aspire to? I was hearing you share a little bit of each of
those, and I thank you for that. And I'm curious if you could shift gears to speak to other people
who don't necessarily have the background of either just the skill of writing and that kind of
mapping and articulating, but also don't necessarily have the kind of scientific background
and acuity that you also have. I'm wondering if you could offer any suggestions for folks who would
like to bridge from whatever their world is, whatever they've grown up with, and the people who are
just really bumping into, yeah, there are big troubles going on in this world. Something is
really not right. You know, they might, again, they say it in their own way, they might have a
simpler version of it, but they just know in their gut that things are not okay. Are there
any elements that you could share that could help them bridge to a new way of holding or seeing
this world? Yeah, the problem is that we are all at different levels of realization, and it also
does take some time to go through the brief at different stages of having gone through
and I myself, I sometimes are ultimately between grief and denial and optimism and pessimism and
that kind of overwhelming existential cocktail of feelings, but I think that what we can all have
in common is that recognizing that we are in a situation because I don't think, I think very
few people never deny it. I think some people don't consciously, haven't consciously accepted it
because they are afraid, but that is becoming a minor note as well, and I think that forgiveness
is a really important thing as much as I think that we are a predatory species and our DNA
has made us really have the destruction of the planet as our destiny. That was not our fault.
That's how we evolved on this planet. I think that we just need to recognize that, move on,
forgive ourselves so that we can have the strength to minimize any of the damage that we can.
That's what you do, and just stay close to the other people, even if it's
close family environment that finds this conversation a bit too strange or daunting.
Stay close to them because the thing is that we cannot rely on a minority of
white middle-aged academics to save the world. We need to somehow reach out to everyone
and realize that this is a social crisis. It's the way that we have set up our economic system
to depend on exploiting other people. I wrote another article recently saying that racism
is actually a natural resource. It's what colonialism and capitalism has dependent
on for cheap labor, and this is what has caused the consumption, and this is what has caused CO2.
There is a way to reverse this, which is to be happy with less stuff. If we all do it at the same
time, then we won't be jealous of each other's belongings, and we won't need big salaries.
Yeah. At least that's the idea of degrowth. Right. It also wouldn't hurt to reposition ourselves
with regard to taking a stand for a universal standard of living around the world, which I hear
hints of, particularly in your article, The Nothing Manifesto, which again I'll put the link to
with a number of very simple but profound elements that you are suggesting
would assist us in a transition to some sort of alternative to this hyper-consumptive world
that we have all grown up in with The Nothing Manifesto.
George, it's just been an absolute pleasure to speak with you, and I just feel like I'm lucky
to be able to reach out and meet folks like yourself who have truly something to say
in this, which I believe is the most important conversation that humanity
has ever had to face. Again, it's just a particular pleasure to find someone who
brings the amount of heart and artfulness that you do. I look forward to more and more
conversations of this type as time goes on, and thank you so much for spending your time
with us on the poetry or predicament. Thank you so much for inviting me, and this has been
really, really fun for me as well. Yeah. Well, I hope to see you over at the deep adaptation
forum sometime soon. Absolutely, the conversation continues. All right, thank you again, George.
Take good care of yourself. Take care.
Thanks for watching another episode of the Poetry of Predictment podcast produced by Dean
Walker and the Living Resilience Alliance, www.livingresilience.net. Also available on our
website, www.livingresilience.net, is a wide array of articles, online learning series, arranging
group and individual resilience coaching, and sign up for our every other Tuesday free support
group that we call Safe Circle Calls.
