Welcome to our gerontology research group online meeting.
Today is Friday, March 24th, 2023.
And special thanks to Miles Jacobs,
who manages our meetings.
I'm kind of busy solving the problems
of biological aging these days.
And without Miles,
we probably wouldn't have as many of these meetings
and they definitely would not be as high quality
as the one we're gonna have today.
Today we have an extraordinary innovative speaker,
Dr. Michael Levin.
And Dr. Levin is distinguished professor
and Vannevar Bush chair,
biology department at Tufts
and director of the Allen Discovery Center at Tufts.
He's also associate faculty at Harvard's Dease Institute.
In his lab, he studies basic questions of information
processing and biology
and drives applications in regenerative medicine
and synthetic bioengineering.
It must have been 20 years ago,
I read a book, The Body Electric by Becker
and I was just amazed at the opportunity.
And now I believe Dr. Levin
is going to bring some of that to life for you.
So I will hand the floor over to Dr. Michael Levin.
Well, thank you so much for the invitation
and thank you for the opportunity to talk to you all
and share some ideas.
I am not directly working in the field of aging,
but I think we have some thoughts
that are possibly useful for that set of questions.
And so if anybody's interested,
this is the website where you can find all the primary papers,
the software, the data sets and everything else.
So I'm going to talk about today
is an approach towards what I call
a definitive regenerative medicine.
I will explain what I mean.
And in my view, the road to this definitive
regenerative medicine contains large components
of understanding natural bioelectrical signaling
between cells, specifically not just as a physical mechanism
but actually as the medium for the collective intelligence
of groups of cells.
So what I mean by a definitive regenerative medicine
is breaking the unsustainable feedback loop
or cycle between this scheme
where we try these interventions late in life
and to whatever extent we can push forward the lifespan,
the next set of interventions
has to be increasingly more heroic
because what you're basically dealing with
is a continuously sinking ship.
And this is unacceptable for us as patients.
It's unsupportable for any society
because it exponentially increases the cost
of each further intervention that has to be done.
So something radical has to break this cycle.
And if we think about it,
all of the problems of medicine
with the exception of infectious disease.
So we're talking about birth defects, traumatic injuries,
cancer, aging, degenerative disease, all of this
have one important thing in common.
They are all problems of information processing
in the following sense.
If we could control what it is that groups of cells build,
that is if we could convince groups of cells
to build particular complex anatomical structures,
all of these problems would go away.
We could continuously rebuild structures of the body
to maintain health span, repair injuries,
reprogram cancer.
All of these things would be resolved
if we understood how to get cells
to build particular anatomical structures.
And so the kind of end game of this whole field,
I call something that can be termed
as the anatomical compiler.
The idea is that someday in the future,
we will be able to sit down in front of a computer
and draw in terms of the anatomy that you want
you're a plant or animal to have.
So not molecular pathways,
not the underlying biochemical details,
but what you actually care about,
which is the form and function.
So you will draw this some sort of anatomical structure
like this three-headed flatworm.
And if we knew what we were doing,
the anatomical compiler would convert
that anatomical descriptor into a set of stimuli
that would get cells to build exactly that.
So what we're talking about
is complete control over growth and form.
This is the radical solution that we need.
Now note that this kind of thing is not a 3D printer.
The point is not to micromanage
where every single cell goes.
It's a communications device.
And we'll get back to this concept
towards the end of the talk.
So having focused in on this idea
that it is the cooperative action of collectives of cells
that build our various organs,
either healthy organs or not,
we can then ask this very simple question.
Where does the body anatomy come from in the first place?
So this is a cross-section of a human torso.
You see all the amazing structures that are here, right?
Everything is the correct size, shape relative to
the things next to it and the correct orientation.
So where is this structure set?
Where is this order specified?
And lots of people are kind of intuitively will say,
well, it's the genome, it's in the DNA.
But if we look closer at that claim,
we now understand we can sequence genomes.
Now we know what's in the DNA.
The DNA doesn't say anything directly
about large-scale anatomical parameters.
What the DNA specifies is proteins.
It specifies the micro-level hardware
that each individual cell gets to have.
And so what we still need to understand
is how the actual collective activity of these cells
with the hardware that they have from their genome
works together to build the right thing.
That is a species-specific target morphology.
How do these cells know when to stop?
Why do cells sometimes defect from this plan
and form cancer?
We'll talk a little bit about that.
How would we induce, if a part of this is missing or damaged,
how would we induce these cells to rebuild,
damage their aging structures?
And as engineers, how far can we push this process?
What else can these cells build
besides their normal default target morphology?
And so I want to kind of start off by thinking about
what's necessary to understand this process.
And we've had great advances in genomics
and molecular biology and big data and genetics and so on.
And so you might think that,
well, this should be solved already.
Why do we not have this anatomical compiler?
And I just want to be very clear
that very, very fundamental things are still impossible
from the perspective of genetics and molecular biology.
So this is just one example.
So here's a baby axolotl, it's a little salamander.
Baby axolotls have four legs.
This is a frog larva or a tadpole,
which do not have legs.
And in my lab, what we can do is we can make frog allotls,
which is an embryo that's part salamander cells,
part frog cells.
Now, I pose a simple question.
Will frog allotls have legs or won't they?
Now, we've got the genome for the axolotl,
it's been sequenced,
we've got the genome for the frog, it's been sequenced.
Can anybody tell me whether frog allotls
are going to have legs or not?
And the answer is no, we have no idea,
or even more subtle questions like,
if they do have legs,
are they going to be made entirely of the axolotl cells,
or are they in fact going to induce
some of the frog cells to participate?
And that's because this kind of question
is not a question that could be answered
at the level of the hardware.
This is a collective intelligence question.
What are these complex agents going to build?
And we are still not very good at understanding
the rules of that kind of process.
So where we are really is that molecular medicine
is very good at understanding
which genes and proteins interact
with which other genes and proteins,
and so we can build nice models like this.
But we are really quite a long way away
from the control of large scale structure and function.
If you wanted to make rational changes at the system level,
it is very hard to know what to do back here.
And so I think where molecular medicine is today
is roughly where computer science was in the 40s and 50s.
In the 40s and 50s,
if you wanted to program a computer,
you had to interact with the hardware.
You had to directly rewire it physically.
You were always down at that hardware level.
And this is where we are today.
So all of the most exciting parts of molecular medicine,
so genome editing, CRISPR, protein engineering,
pathway rewiring, all of these things
are really down at the biological hardware level.
We haven't even really begun to take advantage
of what computer science has done
to give us the information technology revolution,
which is to figure out that actually,
if your hardware is good enough,
and I'm going to argue that biological hardware
is definitely good enough,
then what you can do is you can communicate with it
via a high level interface.
You don't have to,
this is the reason why when you want to change
from PowerPoint to Zoom on your laptop,
you don't get out your soldering iron and start rewiring.
It's because we have this nice interface
that allows you access to some of the computational
capacities of the system that are reprogrammable.
In other words, could we take advantage
of a higher level of information processing specifically,
and I'm going to define this word in a minute,
specifically the intelligence of the software of life.
And the thing about biology,
which is actually not captured today
in any of our computational devices
or robotics or anything like that,
is this amazing multi-scale competency architecture
where we're not just a nested doll,
set of nested dolls structurally,
where you've got molecular networks and cells
and tissues and organs and swarms and so on.
But actually each one of these layers has competencies
that solve specific problems in its own space.
So we have problem solving in physiological space,
in transcriptional space,
meaning the space of gene expression,
in anatomical morphous space,
and of course in familiar 3D behavioral space
in the case of whole organisms.
And so we could spend hours talking
about all these different examples,
but I just want to highlight a couple of things
and then spend most of my time talking
about the morphogenetic problem solving.
So just to give you an example
of some of the amazing plasticity of life,
this is what we've done here is we've made a tadpole.
So here's the mouth, here are the nostrils,
the brain, the gut, the tail.
And what you'll notice is something very strange
about this tadpole, there aren't any eyes
where the eye should be.
What we've done is we've placed some eye cells on its tail.
Now these cells, they have no problem forming a perfect eye,
even though they're sitting next to muscle
instead of next to the brain.
They then put out a single optic nerve, which crawls out.
It synapses on the spinal cord right here,
then it stops, it does not go to the brain,
it sort of ends on the spinal cord.
And these animals, as we found from building a machine
that automates the training and testing
of these guys on visual cues,
these animals can see quite well.
They see perfectly well out of the side.
And so what you see here is this amazing plasticity
where this brain that expected visual input
from these two locations for millions of years,
this is the architecture.
In one generation, no adaptation,
specific adaptation needed,
the fact that the sensory motor architecture
is now completely different, no problem.
They're able to incorporate that
into their behavioral repertoire.
So it's clear that there are these interesting,
capabilities of these kind of biological systems
to adapt to novel circumstances.
And this is what we're going to hijack.
These are the kinds of things we're going to hijack
for a kind of really, really radical regenerative medicine.
What I want to spend some time on now
is to introduce you to this little critter,
which I think in many ways this model system
has the answer to many of the big questions of life,
not only medicine, but beyond.
This is a planarian flatwork.
So these are not simple organisms like earthworms.
These are similar to our direct ancestor.
They have true bilateral symmetry.
They have a true centralized brain.
They have lots of organs, lots of different cell types,
all the same neurotransmitters that you and I have.
And they have a number of amazing properties.
The first is regeneration.
So you can cut them into pieces.
The record is something like 275 pieces.
It doesn't matter how you cut them,
what the plane of section is,
you can cut them any way you want.
Each piece regenerates a perfect worm.
It grows exactly what's needed, no more or no less,
gives you a perfect, perfect worm.
They're very cancer resistant.
It's not that they can't get cancer,
but they're extremely resistant and they're immortal.
This is maybe the part that's the most interesting
to all of you.
There is no such thing as an old planarian.
The individual cells senesce and drop off,
but they get regenerated.
This animal regenerates continuously.
And so the animals that are in my lab now
are in direct physical continuity to worms
that were here half a billion years ago.
These are literally them.
They just sort of continue.
And they're smart.
You can train them.
I'll talk about that momentarily.
And they've got this interesting property.
So they've got an incredibly messy genome.
Why?
Because most of us reproduce sexually,
which means that when you reproduce,
your children do not inherit the somatic mutations
that happened in your body during your lifetime.
But in planaria, the way they typically reproduce
is they tear themselves in half and then regenerate.
So any mutation that doesn't kill the stem cell
in which it occurs basically gets propagated
through the body in the subsequent generation.
They hold onto, this is called somatic inheritance.
They hold onto all of these mutations.
They don't clean them up the way that the rest of us do.
And so their genome is a complete mess.
They can be mix-a-ploid,
meaning every cell has a different number of chromosomes.
It actually looks a lot like what we would say
of a tumor genome.
And yet it has all of these properties.
Now, this is really strange.
In no course of cell developmental biology,
genetics, and so on,
does anybody give you a theory that would predict
why the animal with the messiest genome
would actually be the most regenerative cancer-resistant
and immortal?
Because what we're told instead
is that the genome and your genotype
is actually a critical determinant of all your capacities.
This goes exactly backwards.
Why would the animal with the worst genome
have all these amazing properties?
Now, they have one more interesting property
which is interesting for aging, which is this.
They're smart, you can train them.
And so if you make little bumps like this
on the laser edge, little bumps on the surface
and you feed them with liver on this region.
And so they remember that this is sort of a safe place
where they can eat.
Then you can cut off their heads
and the tail will sit there
for a week and a half doing nothing.
They will then regenerate eventually a brain,
the head with the entire brain,
and then you will find out that these animals
still remember the original training.
So what you see in this model system,
you can actually look at the distribution of memory
in the rest of the body, meaning outside the brain,
and most importantly, the imprinting of that information
onto a new brain as it develops.
Besides kind of fundamental philosophical implications,
what the medical kind of impact of this
is that in the future, when we have regenerative therapies
that replace cells in a human patient's brain,
which may have six or seven decades of memories
and personality and so on with progeny of naive new cells,
the question is what happens to the personality
of that patient?
And these kind of models start to suggest
that actually there may be considerable hope
that these properties are actually spread farther
than one thinks and may actually be imprinted
onto the new tissue.
So let's think about how all this amazing plasticity works,
regeneration of body and of memories, how does it work?
Well, the key is this,
that all of us used to be individual cells.
We all started life as an unfertilized oocyte,
a quiescent oocyte that's a little pile of biochemistry.
And through this process of development,
you become one of these creatures
or perhaps one like this, this is Rene Descartes,
who is going to have all kinds of opinions
about the living beings and machines and so on.
But notice that this process is completely continuous.
There is no magical flash during development
where you say this is the moment
where you went from being chemistry and physics
as a quiescent oocyte to a being
with metacognitive capacities and so on.
This is a slow and gradual developmental process.
And this is the sort of thing we're made of.
Now, this is a free living organism known as a lacrimaria.
There's no brain, there's no nervous system, it's one cell.
And all of its problems are solved within a single cell.
So it's metabolic needs, it's physiological needs,
it's behavioral, morphological repertoire.
All of this is taken care of in one cell.
So while these individual cells solve little tiny
kind of goal states at the level of a single cell,
together they work towards very large scale
construction projects like this.
And that process, what we're going to do
is look at the involvement in that process
of something that I refer to as intelligence.
What do I mean by intelligence?
I mean what William James meant,
which is the ability to reach the same goal
by different means, that's it.
When I say intelligence, I do not mean
it has to do anything with brains,
I don't mean it has to be this kind of metacognitive,
I know how smart I am or I know what I know.
It just means the ability to deploy some level of competency
to reach the same goal state by different means,
depending on what's happening in the environment.
So some level of ingenuity and problem solving.
So let's see some examples.
One thing we know about development is that it's very reliable.
So you start off as a single cell, the egg,
and then reliably this collection of cells
navigates that space of possible shapes
to reach that species specific morphology,
a normal organism.
But actually it's reliable, but it isn't hardwired.
Because if you come along halfway through
and split the embryo in half or in quarters,
you don't get two half bodies, as you would
with a typical device that we've made until now.
What instead you'll get is two perfectly normal
monosygotic twins.
In fact, this is a system that can reach this.
So here's the kind of abstract anatomical morphospace,
here's the ensemble of states we recognize
as a normal human anatomy.
And you can actually get there from multiple different
starting positions, even avoiding some local maxima
because this is not a hardwired system.
Not only is regulative development like that,
but in some animals, they do that as adults.
So here's the saxolotl, the salamander
that can regenerate its limbs, its eyes, its jaws,
its spinal cord and tail,
ovaries, portions of the brain and heart.
What it looks like is this,
if you amputate a leg anywhere along this distance,
what the cells will do is rapidly grow
and undergo morphogenesis to restore exactly what's needed
and then they stop.
And it can do that from this position,
from any position, it makes only what's needed.
This is the most amazing part of regeneration
is that it stops.
How does it know when to stop?
Well, it stops when a correct salamander arm
has been completed, that's when it stops.
So we need to start to understand
how does it know where it's going
in this anatomical morpho space?
How, what are the policies guiding the navigation
in the space of these cells
and how do they know when they've gotten there?
By the way, this isn't just for frogs and flatworms
and salamanders, humans have some of this
and mammals, some mammals have more.
Of course, the human liver is highly regenerative.
Deer, a large adult mammal regenerates
up to a centimeter and a half of new bone per day
when they're regrowing their antlers.
And human children can regenerate their fingertips
below a certain age.
If you just keep the wound clean,
they will actually regrow a
cosmetically normal fingertip.
So we have this critical question.
How does the collective decision-making
of these cell groups determine
what they're supposed to be building,
when they're supposed to stop and actually,
what are the failure modes?
Why doesn't it work in humans all the time?
Why are we not like axolotls or salamanders?
So we started to study this process.
And in particular, starting to look at these questions
of how do collections of cells represent the goal states
that guide their construction projects?
And so we took our inspiration from the nervous system
because if you're trying to think of an example
of a collection of cells that can store large-scale
navigational set points in some kind of space
and then act to implement them and then stop when they're done,
of course, the nervous system is the best example
we have of that.
And so what allows it to do that is this,
the hardware looks like that.
You've got cells we call neurons.
They have these little ion channel proteins
in their cell membranes,
which move ions around and generate a voltage potential.
This may or may not be propagated to their neighbors
via electrical synapses known as gap junctions.
So that kind of excitable medium is the hardware.
And what it does is it underlies the software,
which is the physiology of electrical states
moving through the system.
This is a video which this group made
of the real-time electrical activity
in the zebrafish brain.
And it is the commitment of neuroscience
that all of the animal's cognitive capacity,
so all of the computation, all of the memories,
the goals, the preferences, the behavioral records
whereas all of it is encoded in this electrical activity.
And so there's this process of neural decoding,
this idea that if we knew how,
we would be scanning these electrical states
and decoding them to really understand
what the animal is thinking, what it's seeing and so on.
Actually, there's been some progress in this
both in human patients and in mice and so on.
There's been some progress in this neural decoding.
But the really interesting aspect of this
is that this is not unique to the brain.
Every cell in your body has ion channels.
Most cells have these gap junctions to their neighbors.
And you can imagine a very parallel,
and this is what we've been doing for 25 years now,
you can imagine a very parallel process
where you take all of the tools and concepts of neuroscience
and you simply port them outside of the nervous system
and ask, okay, what are the computations
that the rest of the body cells are doing
and might they underlie a kind of decision-making
and particularly the one we care about,
which is morphogenetic solution to morphogenetic problems,
injury, aging, cancer and so on.
So what we have here is a really clean isomorphism
where what the nervous system does
is use the electrophysiological software
to make decisions and those decisions result
in signals being given to your muscles,
which move you through three-dimensional space.
But this amazing system didn't evolve out of nowhere.
What actually happened was that it specialized
a far more ancient evolutionary basal bioelectric system,
which works in a very similar way.
It was here long before nerves and muscles evolved.
What it does is exactly the same thing,
networks of electrically active cells
produce bioelectrical signals
that control all of your body cells,
but they don't move you through three-dimensional space.
They move your body configuration
through anatomical morpho space.
This is the system that evolution pivoted
into the control of behavior
when it was speed optimized for nerve and muscle.
And so you can read more about it here,
but the point is that this is as ancient
as bacterial biofilms.
Already evolution had figured out
that processing information, storing memories,
collating inputs from other sort of spatially distant areas
was really well accomplished by bioelectrical networks.
So what we did was we developed some of the first tools
to read and write these electrical pattern memories
in morphogenetic contexts.
So the first is a set of voltage dye techniques,
which so what you're seeing here
is this is a voltage sensitive fluorescent dye.
This is an early frog embryo.
You're looking at all the conversations
that these cells are having with each other
about who's going to be left, right, dorsal, ventral,
and so on.
And this is a video taken by Danny Adams in our group
that basically allows you to see,
much like people do with scanning activity in the brain,
allows you to see all the electrical conversations.
Now, we can also do a lot of modeling
and look at the various channels and pumps that are there
and ask how does, where do these gradients come from?
I wanna show you a couple of examples.
This is a time lapse also made by Danny
of the first stages of a frog embryo
putting its face together.
So what you see here, and this is gray scale
instead of colorized, but same idea,
the brightness value indicates voltage.
And this is one frame taken from that video.
So what you can see here is that long before
these organs are actually formed,
the tissue here already has a plan
of where everything is gonna go.
Here's the eye, here's the mouth, here are the placodes,
and this eye is gonna come in shortly thereafter.
What happens is that this is a native
essential component of normal development.
And not only can you monitor this
for incipient defects,
but we actually know that this is functional.
This is instructive.
If we move this bioelectrical pattern,
the gene expression changes and the anatomy follows.
I will show you that momentarily.
So this is a normal part of development,
a normal pre-pattern.
This is a pathological pre-pattern
where if we inject a human oncogene,
there will eventually be a tumor.
But even before that tumor becomes histologically apparent,
you can already see using voltage dye
that these cells have basically disconnected
from their neighbors.
And at this point, all they're going to do
is roll back to their ancient amoeba-like lifestyle.
As far as they're concerned,
the rest of the body is just external environment.
So we'll talk about the cancer soon.
So we developed some techniques
to actually start to read these patterns.
And then we developed even the more important component,
which is the functional technology to change them,
to write, not only to read these data states,
but to actually rewrite them.
And we basically took everything from neuroscience.
So there are no waves, no frequencies,
no electromagnetic radiation, no magnets,
and then nothing like that.
What we do is manipulate the native electrical interface
that these cells are using to control each other's behavior,
which are the ion channels and the gap junctions.
So we use, we can genetically, pharmacologically,
or optically control the various ion channels,
and that changes the voltage states directly,
or we can control the gap junctions,
which determines who talks to whom.
So the topology of the network.
And that corresponds to synaptic plasticity
and intrinsic plasticity if this was a neural tissue.
So now I want to show you some examples
of what happens when you do this, right?
Why do I think that these electrical states
actually mean an eating for morphogenesis?
And so this is, I'll show you a couple of examples.
This is one of them.
So here's an embryo.
I showed you that in that electric face image,
you saw that there was a particular bioelectric pattern
that said put an eye here.
So we simply said, okay,
if we recapitulate that pattern somewhere else,
could we convince other cells to make an eye?
And so in this case, in this example,
we've taken some ion channel RNA
encoding some potassium channels,
which we knew would induce that state.
We inject them into precursors of cells
that are going to make gut.
So this is endoderm.
And sure enough, they will go ahead
and make a very nice eye.
Now, this, by the way, is counter to what you will see
in the developmental biology textbook,
which says that only the anterior norectoderm up here
is competent to make eye.
This isn't true.
Well, it's true if you stick with the master I gene
called PAC-6, but it isn't true
if you go upstream to the bioelectric pattern
and you can make eyes anywhere on the tail, on the gut.
Anyway, notice a couple of interesting things about this.
First of all, that it tells you
that these bioelectric patterns are instructive.
We're not just screwing up some existing process.
We're actually telling these cells to build an organ,
which has all the right lens and retina and optic nerve
and all the right things.
Second is note the modularity.
What we did not do was put in enough information
to specify how to build an eye.
You don't have any idea of how to build an eye.
There are lots of different cell types
that are required in a very precise arrangement
to make a proper eye.
We didn't do any of that.
What we did was provide a high level trigger.
If you're a coder,
this is basically a subroutine call
that tells these cells you need to make an eye.
That's it.
Everything else is, all the complexities
pushed onto the system itself,
which is a very nice property for regenerative medicine.
So it's highly modular.
The bioelectric code is not a code for single cells.
It's a code for organs and up.
The other kind of capacity,
which is really interesting and this harkens back
towards this idea of the cells
as a collective intelligence is this.
This is a cross section of a lens sitting out
in the tail of a tadpole somewhere that we've induced.
The blue cells, the labeled cells here
are the ones that have the ectopic ion channel.
But notice what's happening.
There's not enough of them to make a proper lens.
So what they've done is recruit
a bunch of their normal neighbors.
They've hijacked some of these other cells
to participate with them in this construction project.
This is something that often happens
in other collective intelligences like ants and termites,
where a few of them will actually recruit
as many neighbors as needed to complete some larger task.
All of that is intrinsic to the tissue.
We did not have to do any of that.
All we said was build an eye.
All of the parts where the cells can have to detect
is there enough of us to build the eye?
If not, how do we signal to the other cells to get them?
What should be the size of the eye, the structure of the eye?
All of this is handled by the tissue itself.
What we are doing is taking advantage
of these competencies, including recruitment.
So we can, using these same techniques,
we can make extra forebrains, as you can see here.
We can make extra legs.
Here are some six-legged frogs.
We can make extra hearts, extra odysses or inner ear.
Lots of different organs that we don't know how to make yet.
Also, we can make fins.
This is kind of interesting.
Tatboles aren't supposed to have fins.
That's more of a fish thing.
We'll get to that momentarily.
And so having seen that these bioelectric pattern memories
can actually call up different organs,
we began a project in regenerative medicine of the limb.
And so what happens here in a frog?
Frogs, unlike salamanders, do not regenerate their legs
at this stage.
And so you cut off the leg.
And 45 days later, there's basically nothing.
By the way, within 30 seconds of amputating,
so here's this bioelectrical signal at the wound,
within 30 seconds of this amputation,
you see the opposite untouched leg
has lit up exactly the same way.
So there's some kind of long range, and it's not neural.
You can take out all the spinal cord and all the neurons.
It still works.
There's this long range connection
that kind of carries information
about the anatomical order.
But what we did is we designed a drug cocktail
having to do with the ion levels
and thus the voltages of the cells in the wound
to give it a particular bioelectrical state
that says rebuild the leg.
And when we do this, here's what happens.
Within a couple of days,
this MSX1 major blastema marker is expressed.
Here it is, the leg starts to grow by 45 days later.
You've already got some toes, you've got a toenail.
Eventually you get a very respectable leg
and it's touch sensitive and motile
so the animal can feel it.
The treatment itself is 24 hours with this drug cocktail.
The leg growth in an adult frog takes a year and a half.
You get a year and a half of leg growth
from a 24 hour intervention.
We do not touch them in between.
So the idea is not to micromanage this process.
It's not to tell the stem cells what to do.
It's not to control the morphogenesis.
It's to very early on to shift the navigation policy
of this collection of cells towards building a leg
and away from scarring and blockage.
And that's it, it's an early stimulus
and then you leave the system alone
and let it do what it needs to do.
So at this point I have to do a disclosure
because Dave Kaplan and I are scientific co-founders
of a company called Morphosuticals Inc.
And the goal is to take these insights
and now to do this in mammals.
And so the idea is we're currently in mice now,
hopefully someday in human patients
but obviously we're not there yet.
This is kind of just the beginning.
So at this point what I'd like to do
is to go back to the planaria
and kind of to talk about,
again the role of bi-electricity
and this idea of pattern memories
and how does it help us to understand
how a body keeps itself together?
Because this is really in terms of
a definitive solution to aging.
This is really it, we really need to understand
how cells come and go all throughout the lifespan.
How does a particular large scale anatomy hold together
even though cells are coming and going?
And what does it take to reinforce that
so that we have a better health span
and that we can retard or abolish this as planaria
have this whole aging process.
So I just wanna show you what we've done in planaria.
So here is a typical one-headed flatworm.
So you cut off the head and the tail,
you've got this middle fragment.
This is a genetic marker that shows us
where the anterior cells are.
So these are the cells that are,
the thing they're in the front of the A of the worm
and so they are.
And so if you do this,
if you cut off the head and the tail,
this middle fragment gives you a nice one-headed worm.
And so we asked the simple question,
how does this middle fragment know
how many heads it's supposed to have?
How many heads should it regrow and at which end?
And so it turns out we discovered this pathway
involving potassium and proton fluxes.
It's an electric circuit that holds the information
of how many heads you're supposed to have.
And so what you can do is you can visualize it,
here it is, this fragment here has a pattern,
this is one head, one tail.
And so what we decided to do was to rewrite it
and we rewrote it and we said, no, actually two heads.
And this is a little messy,
the technology's still being worked out.
But we said, well, a correct planarian should have
two heads like this.
And then what happens is if you take that animal,
and by the way, the gene expression is still normal,
the anterior genes are still in the,
or just in the front, not in the back.
But if you recut this animal,
what it does is it builds a two-headed flatworm.
This is not Photoshop, these are real.
The reason is because this is the actual pattern
that the cells are using to know what to build
and when to stop.
So I promised you at the beginning
that we were going to look at bioelectricity
as the medium of the collection of intelligence
of these cells, that's literally what this is.
Very much like people are trying to read memories
of future goal states out of living brains,
we can now read bioelectrical target states
out of tissue to know what it's going to build
and rewrite it.
So this is all the cells have to go on.
If the pattern now says two heads,
that's what they're going to build.
There's nothing they have to compare it with.
We've rewritten the target of this homeostatic process.
So really crucial, this electrical map is not a map
of this two-headed animal.
This is a map of this perfectly normal looking
one-headed animal and before it gets cut.
So basically a single flatworm
can have two different representations
of what a correct body shape is.
And this shows you these large-scale features
of the body shape are literally encoded
in the electrical states of the circuit.
It's actually a kind of counterfactual memory
because it isn't true right now.
This animal does not have two heads right now.
This is a future, it represents what you're going to do
in the future if you get injured.
Now, I keep calling it a memory why
because if we take these two-headed animals
and we amputate the primary head,
we get rid of this ectopic secondary head
and we just let it regenerate in plain water,
it will continue to give rise to two-headed animals forever.
We now know how to set it back
and here you can see a video of what these guys look like.
So this has all the properties of memory.
It's long-term stable, it's rewritable.
It has conditional recall as I just showed you
and it has some possible discrete behaviors.
So this is quite subtle.
You can ask what determines the number
of heads in a planarian?
Well, on the one hand, what the genome does
is create a machine that has by default
an electrical circuit that naturally by default
will start off saying one head.
But that's not the only thing it can say, it's reprogrammable
and in fact, if you change it to say two heads, it will keep.
So the actual number of heads in a planarian
isn't genetically determined at all.
It's genetically determined is the hardware
and a kind of default state that's there
if nothing else happens.
But it's not just about head number,
it's also about head shape or morphology.
So what you can do is you can take this
triangular-headed planarian, amputate the head,
let the rest of the body regenerate
while you block some of this electrical communication,
it gets confused and sometimes it makes the right head,
but sometimes it makes roundheads like this S-meneterania
or flatheads like this P-philina.
These other species are about 100 to 150 million years distant.
There's nothing genetically wrong with any of these animals.
We've done no genomic editing, no synthetic circuits.
Not only the head shape, but the shape of the brain
is just like these other species.
And so what you're doing here is you're exploring
other regions of the morpho space for this genome.
Normally it goes here where it belongs,
but actually it can land in some other attractors
that are typically occupied by other genomes.
But you can visit that in software basically
by just changing the bioelectrical signaling
without actually having to change the genomic hardware.
And you can go further than this.
You can explore the latent morpho space outwards
and look at shapes that don't look like planaria at all.
So you can make these three-dimensional cylindrical
forms, you can make these weird spiky shapes,
you can make hybrid forms.
And this ability of cells to build other things
than what they normally build is everywhere.
It is, what evolution gives us when it produces
cells and bodies are a set of really highly hackable,
highly programmable machines
for solving morphogenetic problems.
And not only bioengineers like us
learn to tap into these controls, but animals do it too.
So for example, in the plant world, this is an oak leaf.
And what's happened here is that you would look at an oak leaf
and you would think that these plant cells
have only one kind of capability,
which is to grow this nice flat green thing.
But in fact, what happens is when hacked
by an insect embryo, a wasp,
it gets the plant cells to build these kind of remarkable
three-dimensional red structures out of the plant cells.
These are not wasp cells, these are plant cells.
And so the plant is basically doing what we do rationally.
The wasp does it evolutionarily by providing signals
that trigger the cells to build something completely different.
So this plasticity, this ability to get cells
to build various things or to reinforce
the standard morphology is really what we're after
in the control of growth and form for the solution
to these kind of biomedical problems.
So what we're doing now is building
a full stack computational system
where you can go from the genetics
that tell you which channels and pumps are in the cells
to the bioelectric simulations that explain
why the gradients are in a certain location,
what the behavior of these gradients are,
how they function as a passage of time.
And ultimately what this means for algorithms,
for human understandable algorithms
to derive anatomical structure from these kind of cell behaviors.
And so the last story that I wanna tell you
for a few minutes is really how we use
these computational platforms to repair damage.
And so the perhaps the best worked out system
in the example in this is that of the frog brain.
So here's a normal tadpole brain.
Here's the forebrain, midbrain and hindbrain.
And there are a wide variety of teratogens,
some of them chemical like nicotine, alcohol and so on.
And some of them genetic, which I'll show you in a minute,
that mess up brain formation.
So this animal has profound defects.
You can see the brain is completely abnormal.
The eyes are actually connected here.
It's missing the forebrain and so on.
So we asked the question,
how could we repair this?
How could we induce repair of such a complex organ?
Doesn't, you know, if we're gonna repair,
don't we need to really understand every part of this
and really control every bit of this complicated shape
and function.
So what we did was we built a model
and this was by our collaborator, Alexis Pytak,
who created a computational model
of the bioelectrical pattern that we observed
that normally tells this brain what size and shape to be.
And we analyzed this computational model
to understand all the various ways that it could go wrong.
And in particular, we asked the model to work backwards
and to suggest an ion channel
that we can, one or more ion channels
that we could open or close
to get the pattern to the correct state
from an incorrect state.
So what you have here is you have a computer model
of the bioelectrics going on inside of a sheet
of the nascent brain cells
and the pattern is incorrect.
And so you asked the model,
if I wanted to get this bioelectropattern back
to where it should be, what would I need to do?
What channels would I open and close?
And this particular model said something very interesting.
It pointed us to this thing called the HCN2 ion channel.
The HCN2 ion channel has a very particular
interesting property, long story short.
It acts like a kind of like a sharpen filter in Photoshop.
What it does is it sharpens voltage gradients
between regions of cells with different voltages.
And here's what that looks like.
This is, I'm showing you the toughest example we have,
which is instead of a drug like nicotine
or alcohol or something like that,
we use the genetic mutation of the notch pathway.
Notch is a really critical neurogenesis gene.
It's very important for formation of the brain.
This is a normal brain.
This is a brain of an animal with a notch mutation.
You can see the forebrain is gone.
The midbrain and hindbrain are a big bubble.
They have no behavior.
They just lay there doing nothing.
So what we did was exactly what the model said,
which is that we treated it with one of two drugs
that open up these HCN2 channels.
These, by the way, are already human approved anti-epileptics.
And what happens is that the animals are repaired.
They get their brains back.
They not only get their normal anatomy back,
but they get their IQs back.
They are, in terms of learning rate,
they are now indistinguishable from controls,
whereas these guys could barely move.
And so what you see here is that some disorders,
and I'm not saying this is true for all of them,
but for some disorders,
really nasty hardware problems
can, in fact, be fixed in software.
All we did was temporarily open a particular ion channel
to trigger this kind of improvement
of the native bioelectrical pattern.
So the whole pipeline looks something like this,
where we will have a system,
and you can already kind of play
with an early version of this online,
where you choose the tissues or organs
that you're interested in,
whether normal or cancerous.
It knows all the ion channels that are expressed there,
because these are all present in databases and the literature.
And then there's the simulator,
which tells you which of these channels you would need
to open or close to get this back to the correct state.
And that allows you, once you know which channels,
that allows you to pick a drug,
because something like 20% of all drugs
are ion channel drugs,
which means there's a huge potential pool
of so-called electroseuticals
that can be used to infer how to make these changes
from this computer model.
Just one kind of quick piece of information
to remind us that this is not all just
for these lower animals that we work with.
All of these different ion channels,
which work exactly the same way
in that some of our model systems
have all come out of channelopathy studies
in human patients.
And in fact, if you look at the gene expression
downstream of various bioelectrical interventions,
as we did here,
the genes downstream of frog axolotl
and human mesenchymal stem cells are overlapping.
So the targets are all the same.
So this is a very ancient, highly conserved system
for body regulation.
And we have a lot of confidence
because of that what we learn now in animal models
is gonna work well in medicine.
So just for a couple of minutes,
the last story I wanna tell you is about cancer.
So what we have here, again,
let's just remind ourselves what bodies are
because the right question for cancer
isn't why we get cancer.
The right question is, I think,
why isn't all cancer all the time?
Why is there anything other than cancer?
Because we are made of individual cells
that used to be individual organisms
that basically have two goals,
to go wherever life is good,
be metabolically and to proliferate
for each cell to become two cells.
But what evolution has done
is given them some amazing hardware,
including bioelectrical hardware,
but also biochemical and biomechanical,
that allows them to,
instead of working on unicellular level,
tiny little projects,
what they do is they work towards something much bigger.
They together as a collective,
they navigate anatomical space
to build something like this.
And if it gets damaged,
they will rebuild it very much like ants do
for an ant colony and so on.
They continue to build something very large,
but this whole system has a failure mode,
and that failure mode is cancer.
This is glial blastoma in vitro.
What happens is that when individual cells
get disconnected from this collective,
they go back to their ancient unicellular past.
As far as they're concerned,
the rest of the body is external environment.
They're no more selfish than the rest of your body cells,
it's just that their cells are smaller.
Cancer is a reduction of the diameter of the self.
So from something very large,
where they're all part of building this one organ,
now it shrinks down to the level of a single cell,
and it just goes to pursue little single cell agendas.
So what we decided to do
was to use this kind of very strange way
of thinking about it to develop a therapeutic.
And so here are these tumors
that are caused by injecting human oncogenes,
for example, nasty KRS mutants and so on.
And you can see here, the oncogen is labeled,
it's in red, it's very strong in this area,
in fact, it's all over the place,
this is the same animal, there's no tumor.
Because even though if you were to sequence this genetically,
you would see the mutation, you would say,
ah, well, this is of course gonna be a tumor here.
There isn't any tumor, despite them,
the oncogen is still there, we haven't gotten rid of it,
it's quite strong, but the cells,
we force the cells to electrically remain connected
to the rest of the tissue by including an ion channel
that sets a particular voltage.
And we've basically forced them
to remain part of this construction project
that builds nice skin and nice muscle,
regardless of what the oncogene is telling it to do,
which is to disconnect and go off on your own.
So you can see that, and so we're now,
we're currently in human glioblastoma kind of applications
to see if we can transition this to medicine.
So I'm gonna just summarize
and then give you a couple of, okay, bigger thoughts.
So what I've tried to argue
is that there's a physiological software layer
that sits between the genotype and the anatomy.
And it's a really important tractable target for biomedicine.
It's not all about the molecular details of the genome,
there's actually this physiological layer that's critical.
Evolution discovered very early on
how powerful the electrical component is of that layer
and lots of cells hack each other's behavior
by controlling these large scale electrical patterns.
We think that cracking this code in the sense of neural,
in the same sense as neural decoding
will reveal how cell networks and tissues
make group decisions.
And so we already have applications
where we can rewrite these pattern memories
to program new large scale shapes.
And there's some really exciting AI tools
that are coming online for the design
of specific strategies for regenerative medicine.
So this is going to be anything
that's going to help us control in real time growth
and form is going to be really critical
for the aging problem.
And in bigger picture,
I think that bioelectrical signaling
is very much like it does in the brain,
serves as a kind of cognitive glue
that binds individual cells towards larger purpose,
which is to maintain an organism against disorder,
which is aging cancer and everything else.
So kind of the last thing I just want to mention
is if we look at the space of all biomedical interventions,
you've got basically bottom up conventional strategies
which are all of these kind of hardware focused things.
And then you've got some ways to treat this top down.
And this is only now beginning to be sort of exploited.
And you can see lots more in these papers.
But this is where we get to take advantage
of the native intelligence of cells and tissues.
The fact that they're not just clockwork,
they have specific,
because they used to be independent organisms,
they have preferences, they have competencies,
they have memory, they have trainability.
I haven't even mentioned all of those,
the data for all of that,
but there's a large field of emerging information on that.
And really being able to take advantage of it
is extremely powerful.
And this is key.
People who study placebo effects and expectation effects,
and really at this point,
anybody who studies any kind of drug action
has realized that the mind plays a really important part
in this.
And so Fabrizio Benedetti has this great quote that I love,
which is that words and drugs have the same mechanism
of action.
And he literally uses a brain scanning
and those kinds of technologies
to really show the mechanism of action
of having expectations about what various pharmaceuticals do
versus what the actual pharmaceutical does.
And I think that bioelectricity is an incredibly
attractive target as a communication interface
between large-scale intelligence,
between your expectations of these contextual
of behavioral cues,
which is what informs a lot of how successful
certain pharmaceuticals are going to be,
and the actual molecular level outcomes.
Because as a human being or as any other animal,
your decision to get out of bed in the morning,
this high-level kind of executive decision
of what you want to do,
has to filter down to change the molecular properties
of the cell membrane in your muscle cells.
In order to get out of bed,
you have to depolarize those muscle cells.
And so that bioelectric interface is literally
what takes a high-level content
of an intelligent, metacognitive individual
and converts it into changes of molecular signaling
within the cells.
And bioelectricity is what does that.
And if we understood really how to manipulate that pathway,
we could have really, really radical medical applications
that are completely different than trying to cobble together
the addressing of symptoms bottom up
via drug design and things like that.
So I'll stop here.
I'm gonna thank all the students and postdocs
who did all the work and my many collaborators.
Again, three disclosures.
These are companies that we work with.
Our other funders are here
and most of all the model systems
because the animals do all the heavy lifting here.
So thank you.
I'll stop here and take any questions.
I just want to say, wow, that was great.
Thank you so much.
Thank you.
Absolutely fantastic.
I appreciate it.
Thank you.
That was amazing.
Yes, thank you.
Michael, yeah, mind-blowing stuff.
Hi, how are you doing?
Hello.
Yeah, I've been meaning to ask you.
I'm just trying to get my head around this bioelectric pattern
that you're referring to.
So how is it distributed across the organism?
You have different ion channels active
in different parts of the organism.
How do you set it up?
Yeah.
True in that there are, of course,
regionalizations of ion channel expression,
but that isn't the major part of it
because remember that if you imagine a field of cells
where every cell has exactly the same ion channels,
okay, exactly the same ion channels,
you can still have all kinds of complex patterns
of bioelectric states because of self-organization
of, you know, think of touring patterns, right?
And the chemical, so this is very familiar
to people who think about chemical signals.
You can have a well-mixed medium
where all the chemicals are homogenous
and yet you can have these very complex
self-organizing patterns.
Exactly the same thing is true in the bioelectric circuits.
You don't need to necessarily have different ion channels
to have different electrical states.
You can self-organize very kind of clever patterns,
but on top of that is overlay the fact that actually,
yes, some cells do have different ion channels
than other cells.
But when you control, like where the eye goes,
for example, you go and localize your ion channel
and the state of these channels.
So, yeah, so there's two ways,
there's two, we have two applications that I showed you.
One is, yeah, in the case of the eye,
we inject the channel RNA into a specific region
because that's where we want the eye to form.
So there's some localization there.
On the other hand, for example,
in the work that we did to induce,
let's say tail regeneration in a tackle
that normally won't regenerate it,
we soak the whole animal
and only the wound at the tail is what actually regenerates.
We didn't provide any spatial specificity
and that's because there's also an element,
and this is something else that's sort of stolen
from neuroscience here,
is there's an element of attention in the system.
So the cells that are not injured
that are in a quiescent location where everything is good,
they ignored our signal completely.
And so it's only the cells at the wound
that need to know what to do
that actually responded and they grew a tail,
the rest of it didn't did nothing.
And we have many examples of that actually.
The same thing for the anti-epileptics
to repair the brain,
we didn't inject them in a specific location,
we soak the whole animal
and the brain was repaired and everything else.
In fact, other things got slightly better,
that's a whole other thing
is that it's actually a tune-up for the whole organism.
Other organs, developmental noise,
which is like this variation, normal variation,
all of that got crunched down into these embryos look like,
I had scored them myself when I first saw this effect,
I looked at it myself,
they look like they come off an assembly line.
I mean, they were just perfect,
like each one was exactly like each other,
just reduces the noise.
So we didn't have to produce any spatial specificity there.
Do wounds have electrical signals?
Sorry?
Do wounds emit electrical signals?
Yes, yes, this has been studied,
I believe the first work on this was like in the 1880s or something.
Yes, absolutely.
So every epithelial layer has a voltage across it.
And if you poke a hole in it,
it'll short-circuit and all the cells nearby know where the wound is
by following the electric field lines.
And these things have been measured by,
I think, Emile Dubois Ramon was the first to measure this
in the late 1800s.
This has been around for a long time.
We've had several questions in the chat queue
that I'd like to get to now.
I notice Miles has had his hand up, he organized this.
So he gets priority, Miles.
And I don't recall who was asking another question
that may have been Paul or someone.
Will, we'll get back to you.
Miles.
Thank you, Johnny.
I don't claim the probability, but thank you very much.
Dr. Levine, sorry, I'm from British Express
in the end South Africa.
We say Levine.
But okay, the two things I wanted to talk about
was neural cellular automator.
Neural, I don't know if you've come across the term
because they say they are inspired by your work.
So there's this distilled.pub.
That was our paper.
Yeah, yeah.
Yeah, we collaborated with Alex Mordvintsov's team.
Yeah, I know the papers you made.
Okay, thank you.
So that's the one thing.
So then that's answered my question.
So that's basically modeling the same thing in software.
And the other question was that we have a paper from
Judd Hough, I think it was 2019,
showing that in the adult, in the adult,
the human adult, any mammal or eukaryote,
there is the embryonic program
and the fetal program of development in the genome,
but it is switched off.
And they've been able to, well, I suppose,
look at the Yamanaka factors in a sense,
they seem to be switching them on again.
So the embryonic program and the fetal program
are switched off, they are called hypo-methylated.
I don't know if you're familiar with this or what?
We also familiar with this.
Okay, then that also answers my question.
Yeah, I mean, the thing with the Yamanaka factors
is that what you're doing there is regulating single cell state.
So you're telling one cell that it's a primitive
embryonic-like cell and from there,
that cell needs to be able to figure out what to do by itself.
The problems that we've been talking about
are not single cell problems.
They are large-scale morphogenetic problems
and if all you do is set up a bunch of undifferentiated cells
without the proper anatomical cues,
what you will end up with is at best the teratoma
or some other kind of a tumor that grows out of control.
It's not enough to have,
the cells themselves are like the building blocks.
Yes, you need undifferentiated cells
to make the various tissues, but it isn't enough.
By themselves, you will not get
the three-dimensional correct patterning.
So I think that obviously the Yamanaka factors
are incredibly interesting and important as a technology,
but it doesn't provide the answer to what we're looking for.
I don't think.
All right.
Thank you very much.
Just one last comment.
Oh yeah.
The doctors in play at Harvard,
they show that when they crush the optic nerve in a mouse,
the same biochemical pathways were stimulated
as during the OSK Yamanaka factors.
So it's as if the wound
had the same effect as the reprogramming.
Yeah.
I'm not surprised.
I mean, yes, and I know David's worked quite well.
I'm not surprised.
I think that's a fantastic finding.
And I think that that's the right way to do this.
In other words, it's the cellular environment
and the pattern memories in that environment
that are needed to tell the cells what to do.
It's not enough to just have plastic cells bottom up.
Very good.
Justin's next in queue.
Actually, Kudos to Justin.
He's doing some outstanding things in our community.
He's been making videos lately
and I was honored to present one on genomic analysis
and longevity genes.
So Justin, do you wanna read this or Dr. Levin?
Do you wanna just read this yourself?
It's up on the screen now.
Yeah, I see it.
Yeah.
Well, it's hard to say more influential.
It's sort of like, I mean, they go hand in hand.
It's the right way to think about this
is using the framework of software and hardware.
So without the right hardware,
your software is not going to do anything.
So hardware is really important
and that's what the genetics does.
The genetics nails down the cellular hardware
that you have.
However, if the hardware is good
and biological hardware is definitely of that class,
the hardware does not by itself
determine what's going to happen.
It's the actual software and the reprogrammability features
that are going to determine what happens.
And I showed you one example,
well, I showed you several examples
where the physiology overrides the genetics.
So you can make worms with the wrong species heads
even though the genetics is normal.
You can make animals with a very nasty oncogenic mutation
which in fact do not get cancer
even though the genetics are wrong.
And you can have a notch mutation
and still get a normal brain
if the electrophysiology is managed correctly.
So I'm certainly not gonna say that genetics
isn't important, it's critical.
But we now have ways to override the default behaviors
that are given by the genetics.
And I think we now have a better understanding
of what the genetics does.
It doesn't code directly
for any of these form and functions.
It's just the beginning of the control path.
Okay, yeah, I mainly ask that
just because for so many years and years and years
so much funding has gone into genetics
and that that's the solution to aging and rejuvenation.
But it seems as though that's a minor part of the issue
listening to you and seeing the work that you've done.
Yeah, I hesitate to say minor.
I think it's also going to be important
because I can imagine sort of a two-part solution
where you need both, right?
So one can think about what actually happens
during regeneration.
Is it that cells are no longer remembering
the correct pattern memories
to keep up the tissues of the body?
Or perhaps that information is there
but the cells are unable to execute.
So we actually don't know the answer to that.
And it's entirely possible that you will need both.
You will need a way to strengthen
the bioelectric pattern memory
and you will need a way to improve the cells' abilities
to obey and that may be some kind of a,
you know, have a genetic or biochemical component to it.
And Justin, was your next question answered?
Yes, my next question was answered, that's right.
Okay, next in line, John Kramer.
And anyone who wants to ask the question verbally,
please click the little hand raising icon
and we'll put you in queue.
Okay, John.
Okay, how did the planet get energy
and biomass to regenerate?
I have an idea, but Dr. Levin.
Yeah, what happens is it's actually extremely interesting.
These planarians, when the fragment starts to regenerate,
it actually starts to shrink
because it has to be the correct size
to match the tiny little heads and tails
that are gonna be formed, right?
It's trying to keep proportional.
So it shrinks and the way it shrinks is through autophagy.
So it actually eats some of its own tissues
and that ends up being used to rebuild.
And in fact, even without injury,
the worm is constantly remodeling.
So if you starve it over months,
they will just get smaller and smaller,
but they keep perfect proportions.
So they're constantly remodeling themselves.
And once you feed them, they sort of get bigger
and they stay in the right alimetric scale and throughout.
Amazing.
All right, Jameson, which James affected right after
the intermittent changes.
Yeah, so I can give you a whole list.
We analyzed all this in several publications.
I can send you the list.
There are many, all of the kinds of things
that you've heard of.
So Wnt, Pathway, BMP, FGF,
all of those pathways are there, but it's thousands.
There are many, many genes that are targeted.
All right.
John Kramer, Pacific Iron Chain drugs.
Yeah, that depends on the drug.
There are some drugs that are extremely dirty
and non-specific.
There are other drugs that are much more specific.
The good news for some of these applications
is that you actually don't want to be too specific
because if you take, if you, let's say you block KV 2.1,
well, KV 2.2 is right there to take its place.
And so you sometimes want something
that will take out a whole family
or in fact, a whole class to make the change that you want.
But it varies greatly across the different drugs.
Okay.
Paul.
Yeah, I have a question.
With your respect to your hardware, software, analogy,
I've been in computer science for many, many, many years.
So I know something about that.
And Mike, it's more a comment from you
because the difference I see between the biological things
and computer software and hardware
is that with computer hardware,
the hardware doesn't generate and determine the software
in any sense.
In other words, you build a piece of hardware
and you don't automatically get software programs
that are running it, okay?
So how does the, and so I want your comment is the idea
of how does the genome and the basic biology
generate the software in a sense?
Yeah.
So what you're saying is true
with respect to the classic kind of architecture
where those two things are quite separate, right?
So you build a hardware
and then somebody else has to put the software on it.
That of course is only one type of computing device.
So we now have self-organizing computational systems
where nobody has to put the software on top.
So this is the field of self-organizing robotics,
artificial life, where we build these circuits that have a,
so just imagine a collection of,
we can start thinking about this as a collection
of electronic components for a simple analog computer, right?
When you've got the components,
if you connect them up in the right way,
you're going to get spontaneous behavior.
The whole thing is an electronic dynamical system.
It's going to have spontaneous behavior.
And depending on what the components are,
we can interpret that behavior
as various kinds of computations.
There's going to be inputs, there are going to be outputs
and nobody had to explicitly program the thing.
All of those computational behaviors
are a feature of the dynamical components of the system.
Now, the trick of course is to get the right components
that take advantage of various laws of computation.
The fact that, just to give you a simple example,
these ion channels, they're voltage-gated current conductances.
They're basically a transistor.
So if you have a circuit in the right way,
you can make logic gates.
If you can make logic gates,
then you have various computations.
All of that is a kind of a dynamic,
you can take a dynamical systems approach to it
and think of it that way, but it's much more powerful
if you actually ask what computations is it doing.
So I think in biology, we have very well developed
something that the computer technology
is only just starting to exploit,
which is self-organizing computational circuits.
That's what I think we have.
Robert, young, I like where you're going.
Ideas for applying this to solve aging.
Well, yeah, I'm certainly not an aging expert.
We don't have any work directly on aging yet.
The idea is I think that the solution to aging
is going to basically fall out of the solution
to all of these other disorders of morphogenesis.
I think that aging is fundamentally a disorder
of morphogenetic control.
And when we, and we, I don't mean just my lab at the field
as a whole, when we solve this problem
of maintaining morphogenetic control,
aging will be one of the applications
along with regeneration, along with cancer,
reprogramming and so on.
I think the key is to ask how do the cells know
what to do in the first place?
And the solutions to that will be the solutions
to aging as well.
Very good.
Next, another one from Jason.
Let me adjust my screen.
Mine was just more of a comment to Robert's question
on how might be applied to aging, so.
Okay.
Jeff, Parker.
Yeah.
Yeah, so tissue regrowth after scarring.
So we don't have any published data in mammals yet,
but we did do work in the frog where we showed that
even after it scars over with this,
what they call a non-permissive epithelium,
which normally doesn't allow the thing to regenerate,
this like thick epithelium,
we can still trigger regeneration.
So I'm optimistic.
But if you're asking about human patients,
we don't have any data on that yet.
So we'll see.
Okay.
And Jeff's next question.
I've applied to common degenerative diseases of aging.
Well, you may have applied to answer some of that.
Yeah, yeah, again, I don't know.
We don't have data on mammalian arthritis
or COPD, we haven't done that.
But I think that to the extent that we figure out
where normal lung tissue comes from in the first place
or what a normal joint is supposed to be,
we will be able to trigger
that regenerative process throughout.
So my hope is to be able to continuously induce
and up-regulate basically like what Plenaria do
where they're constantly refreshing their tissues
all the time.
Okay.
Jason would be interested in seeing that map.
Sorry, what map are we talking about?
At one point you were talking about sort of a mapping
between a bioelectric signal and a change in genes
or a change in gene expression.
Oh, gene expression, I see.
Yeah, yeah, I can, yeah, that's fine.
Drop me an email and I'll send you the paper.
I'll warn you in advance that we did it
because a lot of people are interested in that question,
but I found it highly kind of uninformative
because what it does is it tells you
how individual cells are altered by the bioelectrical change,
but all the problems that we're actually interested in
are not single cell problems.
So knowing what happens to individual,
you know, what happens to the individual transcripts
in single cells is that hasn't actually told us very much
about how to control the whole business, you know?
So when you turn on the eye pattern,
you see that you start to turn on all of the eye genes.
So you get Paxix and Rick's one and all of these things.
Someone's microphone is on and it's fading back.
Hang on.
Okay, we're good.
Go ahead, please, sorry.
Yep, no problem.
So you see that those things are turned on,
but what you'd really like to know
is how did that collection of cells,
it's not a single cell question,
how did that whole field of cells take,
convert that bioelectric pattern
and decide that that maps onto an eye
rather than some other organ?
Not what happened to individual cells,
but what's the large scale decoding?
So we know the genes,
but that doesn't actually answer the question.
And so it's some of the other kinds of approaches
that we've taken with large scale modeling
and some of the machine learning and so on
that are really going to answer this.
Yeah, it seems like you sort of need a mapping
then between a bioelectric signal
and how it alters actual tissues or organs, right?
That's exactly right.
That's exactly right.
That's the bioelectric code.
That is precisely what we're trying to map out.
Just a quick follow up.
How do you see this area of research interfacing
with areas like quantum biology?
Yeah, good question.
I've been asked that before.
I don't know specifically for quantum biology.
I'm not an expert in quantum anything.
And I don't know.
So far everything that we've been doing here
is purely classical.
It's, we don't use any quantum formalisms yet.
We basically just use standard neuroscience,
standard electrophysiology
and standard connectionist kinds of network modeling.
So I don't know.
I don't know if there's a role for quantum kinds of processes.
I assume biology exploits it
like it exploits everything else that it can,
but our models don't include that right now.
Thank you.
Okay, a couple more questions in chat.
I will copy them, but first I had one.
How can we support your work?
Well, thank you.
I guess at this point, where the field is,
is that we know what to do.
We're not stuck anywhere.
There are no great fundamental blockades
other than resources.
So right now it's pretty scalable,
meaning that if we had more people working on this,
it would move faster.
It's not every field is at that stage,
but this one kind of is.
So yeah, if you know of any leads on,
and we have lots of potential sources for funding,
but all of them take up significant time pursuit
of research and development.
So any leads on that are helpful.
That's basically the right limiting step at this point.
Okay, I'm going to,
since Miles has given so,
oops, sorry,
given so much of his time to organize this and other meetings,
he gives priority.
So are using any AI tools?
Yeah.
We use a variety of AI techniques.
We don't really use any off-the-shelf tools
that I can think of.
We basically make most of our own.
And the idea is to understand the decision-making
and the memory of the cells themselves.
So it's kind of a tight, you know,
we're not just using AI tools to crunch the data.
We're actually trying to understand the cells
as a kind of intelligence, you know,
artificial or not that that kind of doesn't matter,
but it's a kind of unconventional intelligence.
And we're trying to, we're trying to use it.
Roy Cutler, good to see you again.
And I'll reformat this.
Are you able to reverse?
You can read it.
Yeah.
Sort of.
In the case of, for example,
in the case of the leg regeneration,
that's part of what happens.
It's not so, it's not so much reversing.
It's, you know, for example, in the frog,
much like in the human, there's no de-differentiation.
It just, the skin makes more sense.
Muscle makes muscle, bone makes bone and so on.
It's a more, it induces tissue renewal and patterning.
It's not so much.
It's not so much it didn't necessarily a differentiation issue,
but, but, but we have, for example, in vitro,
you can control human mesenchymal stem cells that way.
What we biologically,
you can control whether or not they differentiate.
So, so this is one way to control differentiation,
but that again, that's, that's not really enough.
That's not where the, the power of the approach lies.
And how are you set for time?
Do you have time for a few more?
I will tell you what time is it?
I, I have about five minutes.
Okay.
Jeff's question.
And I will be reformatting another one or two that are in chat.
Let's see. Companies work. Well.
What I, yeah, I can't say too much.
I can't say too much.
Other than, we do, we do have this,
have this company called more fasauticals ink.
And we're, we're focusing on, on limery generation and stay tuned.
There will be other will be papers coming out hopefully later this
year.
All right.
John's, yeah, John's question.
Yeah.
Yeah, we've used optogenetics.
We've used optogenetics to trigger regeneration,
to trigger limb formation, to suppress cancer.
Unclear to me, whether that's going to be really the way to go in
the clinic,
because it requires the cells to be expressing a voltage of a light
gated ion channel,
which is very good in the laboratory because then you know exactly
what you've done and it's, it's very nice.
But in, you don't want to,
you don't want to have to get rid of it.
Your patient gene therapy to get those light sensitive channels in
there.
So I'm not, I'm not sure that will actually be how,
how we do the clinic.
Okay.
And I would.
Popping.
I trust that includes an answer to John's second question.
John Kramer developing drugs and.
Okay. Yeah. Well, there's a, there's a,
there's a huge amount of emphasis on discovering new drugs for
ion channels.
So, so, so lots of the,
the big pharma companies are doing that for other reasons,
not, not having anything to do with bio electricity necessarily,
but.
But so, so yes, but that's not really the rate,
limiting step right now.
We have plenty of drugs for ion channels.
I mean, we can always use more,
but the issue isn't that we don't have enough drugs for specific
channels.
The issue largely is that we don't have enough physiomic data.
So we need,
we need to read,
we need bio electrical state data on a health and disease and a wide
range of tissues across across patients, all of that.
And then, and then we can,
we can develop specific strategies.
Let's see next.
John Wenger.
And I'm.
I see, I mean, you said five minutes.
So I'm taking that literally.
And I think we have about two and a half left.
So I'm, I'm watching the clock here because I want to keep you on
schedule.
Yeah, that.
Yeah, we've never.
I have no idea.
In a planarian, we've never done anything like that's physically
moving cells around.
So I don't know what would happen.
Okay.
And Justin's question in case you can't see it all.
I'll reformat it.
Yeah.
I, yeah.
I understand the question.
I'm not sure we're going to have to worry about the correct places
in the correct period of time in the frog.
For example, we soak the whole animal.
And we do it for 24 hours and then we don't touch them again.
And that is enough to trigger a year and a half of new organ growth
in the correct place.
And so my hope is that.
If we, if we correctly.
I'm not sure we're going to have to worry about the correct places
in the correct period of time in the frog.
But we, if we correctly understand.
What, if we correctly understand how the cells process this information,
we're not going to have to micromanage the delivery spatially.
Yeah, the magnetic field of the earth.
Well, so, so we know that the magnetic field is important for some
things, as you say, like navigations.
The kinds of electrical signals that we are working with.
The weak field of the earth doesn't doesn't really impact them.
I mean, people have done experiments where you shield them off from
from the magnetic field of the earth using new metal and things like
that.
And some people, you know, there have been some effects reported,
but it's not, it's really kind of.
There's, there's not this really strong evidence for the need of a
magnetic field for the kinds of very, very kind of strong electrical
exchanges that we're talking about.
Thank you.
Outstanding.
Thank you so much.
Miles.
Just a last question. Just a last question, Dr. Levine.
So if you wanted to control the electric field down to a more granular
level, would you, on the embryonic, during the embryonic stage,
would you be looking at things like nanotechnology or sort of point
point conductors to sort of change the shape of the embryos?
You could, but my own thinking is that that's,
you know, we actually want to go in the wrong, in the opposite direction.
We don't want to be micromanaging the minute states.
We want to have very low information contact, large content, large
scale signals that let the cells themselves handle all of the details
in everything that we've done.
The most powerful interventions are the ones where we leave the most to
the cells where we do not try to micromanage it.
I'm sure there will be applications where that's useful, maybe,
especially in synthetic morphology.
But I don't, I don't think that's long term.
I don't think that's the way here.
Well, as some guy who used to travel around the galaxies on a starship used to
say, fascinating.
Thank you so much.
Thank you so much, everybody. Great, great discussion. Really appreciate it.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Bye bye.
Great job. Thank you.
Thank you.
Okay.
If anyone has something else to say, it's going to be a hard act to follow any
other thoughts, ideas.
Next topic, Miles, I believe you had another, another thing or two to say.
Yes, no, no, he caught the scientific community completely unprepared
from left field.
Well, actually, I think about 10, 15 years ago when he started, it was totally
like, like Jason was saying, the focus was on the genes.
And this level of control, which is comprehensive, it's the actual morphology
was completely unexpected.
So that's why I mean, amazing is he's broken the barrier for organ
formation.
You see the extra limbs, the extra legs, you see them coming out of the frog.
And that was a massive, massive advance.
So he's really done something fantastic.
Well, Miles, what was your next agenda item?
Well, it was, it was actually the next agenda item was after him, I did keep
something else, which was the fact that we have a complete, this has been a
discovery in 2019, something very interesting, which I found very, very
interesting.
There is a complete record of the program of your embryonic stage and your
fetal stage in your cells.
You've got a record and it is not just there, it is carefully packed away.
And it is tagged, it's tagged.
And it seems that this, this, the people from Harvard, Dr. St. Clair has been
doing this now because manipulating that program, which I think is what Dr.
Levine's work is partially doing is busy manipulating this program that's packed
away.
It's going to be the next big thing, the next big thing in, in, in anti-aging
and in, in, in, in medicine, in, in surgery.
I just wanted to flash very quickly the relevant paper if you don't mind.
Just quickly flash the paper.
Let me just see which one was it.
Sorry people, I'm just looking for my.
Let me just check if I can see the paper.
Yes.
If you, can you see that?
Yes.
Are you able to see that?
Is it over the place?
Sorry.
Can you see the paper?
Yeah, it could be a little larger.
Okay. No, I think, think Johnny, I'm using Linux tonight.
I've had issues with my Windows computer.
I'm using Linux.
So I think I'll just, just, just, if you can't see the title is extensive
recovery of embryonic and answer and gene memory, gene memory stored in hyper
methylated and answer DNA.
The title doesn't quite do justice to what they are describing because it's
actually earth shattering.
Basically what they say is your embryonic program is still with you.
It's still packed away in your genome, as well as your fetal program because the,
there's a difference between the embryonic program and the fetal program.
Basically the embryo is formed in the first eight first.
What's it?
Let me put it this way.
The embryo is formed first up to about the eighth week of pregnancy and then after
that you're a fetus.
And the two stages uses different sections of the genome to make you.
And what's fantastic is that the program that was used to make you 98% of it is still
in your DNA, carefully packed away and also tagged.
So what people are starting to do is just sort of manipulate this program.
And I think that's what Dr. Levin is doing.
He's actually manipulating this program, which is why we see this perfect restarting
of the growth of organs.
So that's something I wanted.
I have a note.
I didn't put it on our group because I wasn't sure how long the Dr. Levin would be.
Maybe we can have another discussion later on, but I thought I'd just throw this in here
because this is also quite earth shattering.
The fact that you can rerun the development mental program because it is still in you.
I don't believe there was any questions about that.
That's a big breakthrough.
An important thing to know and one.
I have a comment.
Yes.
This is John wanger.
So, I'm remembering, I think it might have been from my introductory college zoology class, but there's a saying that with regard to development and that I think it was something like ontogeny recapitulates.
No phylogeny, no, ontogeny recapitulates phylogeny.
Phylogeny is right. Yeah. Yeah.
And the, and, and this seems relevant. I mean, it seems like what we're talking now, what you just said is a slight elaboration of that principle, namely that the whole genome is there for the different stages of development starting from a
embryo to a fetus, etc, etc.
And the, and now people are trying to figure out how to, how to replay parts of those things.
The, it's really handy that that all this, the genetic patterns of development and our youths are preserved, because as we get older, where our genome are controlling active our current genome gets corrupted, we think.
And so the idea of, and people talk about taking your, your genes and doing gene banking, or your DNA banking and that sort of thing.
Well, if it turns out that the younger DNA is still in our system somewhere a different piece of the, of the total genome.
Well, that's handy because then that gives you access to a younger genome, and that obviously bears on the problem of aging reversal.
Absolutely. Yes, correct. Absolutely.
Which is exciting.
Extremely it says if they biology has handed us a gift.
Yeah, well it's not exactly the same.
I don't think biology.
Yes, it is as if the candidates a gift, but in a sense.
I mean it's kind of interesting it's always been there we just need to open our eyes and look at it. That requires the right kind of eyes and you know the right kind of mind to be able to see that.
But, but I really liked Michael's conception, because I really think that genetics is sort of taken over biology and and I think he's right that the, that the, that the real intelligence.
Well, not all of the, not all of the.
All the information is not in the genome. There's something about the, what would have called cell assemblies the notion of where does intelligence come from and the notion is that the, that the neurons would organize into cell assemblies with various functions.
It's clear that different chunks of the, of the body have their own internal intelligence that's why I asked the question about what would happen if you took injected some I cells and some hearing cells.
If plenary can hear, but, but how would they determine whether to grow an eye or an ear sort of plenary ear in the same place well that these organizational fields would have to, in some sense, either fight it out or coexist.
They would segregate themselves voluntarily and so you'd have an eye in the tail and an ear in the tail, not in the very same spot but nearby, not in the head, but back in the tail.
And so I really think that that he's really onto it. I mean, so it's just mind blowing is such an important discovery, because, because there's so much information that's why I was asking the question to about the optics.
And one of his earliest earlier slides and Johnny you did have this recorded I really hope you can see this. I'd like to look at his slides some more.
There was an optogenetic term in one of his manipulations there, but it strikes me that there may be just as there are electrical ways you know he's he's manipulating with electrical fields, but there are other fields to their you know optical fields, and the
nature might be the combined manipulation with electrical fields and optical fields, because nature is very, very clever at using things in combination I think that's one of the make that's sort of the point of his talk.
So I've kind of gone up for a little bit here but I hope I've stimulated a few thoughts.
I'm finding I found that talk to be really changing my perspective on the direction we've been going it almost seems like you know our focus on drugs and even gene editing and CRISPR.
We're still reprogramming the computer with a soldering iron.
That's right.
That's absolutely right.
Approach is no we're going to we're going to create software to change life.
That's pretty my model.
I think the issue is not that we should be creating, we should be creating the software we should be locating the software that's already in us and exploiting that software and giving it a chance to function in an older body as it functioned in a younger body.
I think the software is already in us. If the if the genome contains, if our if our genome contains the our fetal plan and our embryo embryonic plan our fetal plan, etc.
And our, you know, infant plan and the in the child plan and the teenager plan and the adult plan. If it's all in there for the for the cells, then it's also in there for the software.
If the genome contains all of that, then it probably also can contains the ability to read the associated software with it. That is to say the software is a property of of the of the ensemble of the cells.
Yeah, well I'd like to offer a thought. I am an electrical engineer by training I've worked with circuits and and also quite a bit with software.
This is nothing like hardware and software this is something different. I think we can at the conceptual level, think about higher level controls. But if you look at all the mechanisms for synthesizing proteins for replication.
That's not hardware or software, you know, and and bears a lot of thought. I mean there are some very high level, long state machines in biology.
You know, this whole field pattern, you know, biological currents communicates with that is very interesting but I wouldn't oversimplified with that comparison.
Good.
Can you hear me now.
Can we get rid of the slides.
Yes.
Just a moment. Can you can hear me now okay because my expensive yeti microphone cut off again so I guess I'll have to reinstall the drivers or something. Robert had a really great question that brings us back.
So just how are we going to use this to solve aging. Does anyone have any ideas.
Let's drop in in the chat a few month my thoughts there too.
Yeah I think with I think with this approach. It just depends on how detailed your map is. I mean if you if you know with one electric signal electrical signal that it would have a certain physiological biological response.
And that across every type of signal and every type of response. You can start rejuvenating entire organs, and in turn rejuvenating entire organ systems.
So our yeah and actually the target, the target that I'm most interested in is actually the circulatory system right like your cardiovascular and then your musculatory organ system.
And you really have to use it in combination with other therapies.
Because at the end of the day like someone was alluding to you know you have some, you know, hardware you have some hardware or whatever it is but you know how to how do the electrical signals detect.
How do you actually target specific things and it turns out that certain proteins in the body can actually be like think about like within like photosynthesis for example there's certain proteins and plants that are using light to do some kind of chemical reaction.
And it turns out in the body there's a similar thing so you essentially have to use like a combination of peptides and other things with these frequencies to be able to actually, you know rejuvenate entire organ but that that would be the approach that I would suggest.
Very good. John Kramer had a question.
It seems to me that the problem of applying this to aging is that really you need a map to decide which ion channels need to be opened and closed in order to produce given effects.
There may be an, if we're lucky there may be an ion channel that you can open that sort of causes the whole body to go into an anti age or age reversal situation.
This really needs to be studied in great detail and I'm pleased to hear from what he said that there are a large number of drugs that are now being developed which have effects on ion channels and so one needs to sort of cross correlate those drugs with the effects that they have in order to find out what's going on in mammals and apparently
Plenaria are fine but they bear very little resemblance to us and so we really need a lot of experimentation apparently investigation of what ion channels do what in mammals and if we can do that we might make real progress towards dealing with aging.
Excellent.
Does anyone here not know how to raise your hand with the little reactions.
I'm trying to figure that out.
Okay.
On the bottom.
If you move your cursor to the bottom of your zoom screen, it may be up already it may pop up, but you will see mute.
In the top video some other things now farther to the right to the right of the green share screen is reactions. If you hover over that.
There is a raise hand that puts you to the front on my screen.
And.
Okay, well,
yeah, let's let's do this.
Then you.
And does anyone else not know how to do that there you go.
There you go.
Okay.
All right, I didn't hear that so just so we can take everyone in order, and everyone gets a turn.
Let's do it that way miles, please.
Thank you. Just to answer john.
John Kramer the OSK M the Yamanaka factors, they are combinatorial.
And if you remember the experiments of prophecy I'm a knock on all these collaborators tried many combinations, until they eat the right combination which was extremely.
The same reaction from the, the embryo the animal, because it went right back to the embryonic state, which was it's a radical we normally normal animals just don't do this so it was a needle in a stack.
And it was not easy there to try many many combinations and I think the same thing is going to happen here.
There's something similar he mentioned that he's got a cocktail already. I think that cocktail is fairly complex and as you get higher up mammals and so forth.
I think that comp that cocktail is more complex and for the worms. So that that's my, my, my comment on your comment.
The other one Fiona, I also studied electrical engineering and also chemical engineering with the masters in chemical engineering.
And I think you, you know, I discovered because I switched to chemical engineering I found our host of what you would call design motifs and I also call the design motifs I mean you familiar would say a transistor.
But as an electrical engineer you are not normally familiar with a stranger tractor inside the embryo.
You're not familiar with the reaction diffusion equation which determines that that shape, you're not familiar with the other, the sort of other fields which have different engineering motifs different designs.
What Dr. Levine did. I think what you have to think about it in this way.
They're not that they're very Catholic they use everything what he did they combine electrical with chemical with mechanical in a very unorthodox way.
But what Dr. Levine did he took the electrical system by itself and discover that that's a control system, which is I think very, very, very impressive.
The electrical system is still very complex and a lot of it does not have electrical analogs. There are things that happen in biology which just don't translate into electrical motifs, but at least the, the, the, the electrical control system is now in view,
manipulating it is not manipulating it was with external fields is actually using chemistry to manipulate it but it's still because you can measure it is going to voltage, a voltage sensitive die.
So he's actually measuring the electrical fields and you can see for example like you said you can see the face of the embryo before the embryo forms the face.
So I think there's a lot of stuff around there which is not electrical is very confusing something I was like that, still am a lot of time but at least we've took the electrical system out, and we found that it's a control system.
Thank you.
Yeah, well, I, I, I know what you're saying, it's enormously interesting, and I just don't want to oversimplify it.
I don't think we fully understand and Michael would agree and I talked to him before with, he doesn't fully understand and he will not claim to.
I mean, they were poking at things and in the dark and try and learn as a black box, what we're doing here, and I would also not. I mean, I'm going to paste a link here for a video on replication and the whole thing that goes on this it is a completely
ongoing to. And there is a, there's very complex very long intelligence state machines and sub routines that you will see there. And, and this is all new, a lot of it is new research when I took biochemistry, even three years ago, some of the stuff was not yet
like his own, like his stones, I mean a lot of it is recent.
And it's just mind boggling, and I just don't want to say well this is hardware because it has intelligence of its own, and it is isolated to a cell, right.
And you could say there's a hierarchy and what might the way Michael is thinking is that you can control, not at the cell level, you don't want to be controlling at the genetic level and and there's something very powerful there.
But you know, I just don't think can oversimplify that way.
Well, there's a lot to figure out. We need more time to do it.
Jeff.
Well, you know, we did.
Dr Levin seems to have really opened up a whole new field of endeavor.
Just scratching the surface.
We're going to look at all kinds of applications to repair the damage of organs and systems in your that that occur during aging.
But ultimately, it seems like that approach is, you know, becomes a game of whack-a-mole, where as you age, you more and more things go wrong, and you can be repairing until that's all you're doing is repairing this and that.
Because we are fundamentally programmed to age, but yet there might be an opportunity with this technology to change that program.
We keep coming back to this computer analogy, but I think it's it is a good analogy that if this technology could possibly just change the entire program where we do not, you, you change the software so we do not age.
Well, let's work on it. Let's do it.
That's the moonshot, as you would say.
Well,
Yeah, I think, yeah, I've got something to talk about. You'll hear about it in a later meeting. But is, let's see, Miles, did you, you had another question.
Yeah, no, no, no, I just wanted to say, yes, I agree with Jeff, but I do believe in this combination or they're going to search for the right combination.
And you're going to see the same radical change that you saw with the Armanaka factors, which is completely unnatural.
The other question I want to make is just that he's not alone anymore. There's a big program at Harvard University, you know, the nuclear program, the vice venture capitalist are doing a big program on bioelectricity on bioelectric
control as a response to his discovery. So it's not, it's not, it's not as isolated as what we think there's actually money now going into this technology.
As we speak.
Yeah, I was just going to comment. I agree with what you said Miles, it's a broad area of research and commenting on your comment to Jeff, I think, I think that you, I think you're thinking about it sort of the right way to some degree.
It's a slightly different flavor, you know, so it's not that we wouldn't age at all. It's just we would have various tools to enhance our resilience to effectively slow down the aging process very to like dramatically, while also augmenting
ourselves to be much more resilient. And then in turn, actually reversing damage like it's slightly different like you think about like the sense, you know, Aubrey to Gray, they always talk about like this damage but it's really like the repair mechanisms that are not functioning
or like the rejuvenation functions that aren't resilient enough. So I think we can augment those through through these tools would would be kind of the way I was thinking of it and another short comment.
You know, I was thinking about what Fiona was saying and I looked at that video and I tend to agree there's so much complexity in the body.
But I think using like approach that Dr. Levin's using sort of like a top down, you know, if we can target specific organs.
And we can see, I mean, the way he targeted like an arm to regrow in some of these sample organisms, you know, we may not understand some of the underlying biology on the cellular level or even in the cells and maybe still remain a mystery even after we can rejuvenate
these organs.
You know, so I don't think we'll have to understand like every single component, or even like the complete map I was describing. I don't think we would have, at least not for a long time, you know, okay you have this frequency or this electrical signal.
What does it do to each individual cell type which you know we have thousands of cell types. So that would be a much harder problem to just a few thoughts.
We don't have to understand everything to work with it. It's like we may not understand how we breathe completely but we breathe and we function. So in that way I'm a complete supporter of let's use that tool and all the other tools.
I agree. Yeah, we have to have a we have to understand it enough to, to like alter it.
Um, for sure. I definitely
I'll take it if there is a way you could even if you don't understand you could do an eye, you know, a pattern a bio electric pattern and tell the body to go backwards and rejuvenate that's cool.
Right, it's a little bit of a, well, we can we can certainly keep learning that dimension.
Yeah, it's a star shot for sure is Johnny would say
Thank you.
Well, it's been a couple of hours.
This has been most rewarding.
As quickly as possible.
I'll get the recording up on the YouTube channel. I don't know about you but I'm going to watch it a number of times for all this to really sink in and then take it to the next level how will we use this to solve aging and then
the question is like how will we raise the money to use this to save aging and I have something I'm going to reveal soon, you will probably be among the first to see it.
So, if you are going to the foresight frontiers in longevity science I think that's the name of the conference in San Francisco.
And Fiona, you'll be there.
It's April 17 and 18.
You can't really get in now unless you become a sponsor, but that's going to be world class so I'll look forward to seeing you there.
I don't know unless there's any final Jeff final comments.
If people are interested in learning more about
Dr. Levin's work you know of course reading all of his papers but there are a number of much longer interviews on YouTube that he and he doesn't just give the same can speech over and over again.
He covers a lot of different ground in his interviews that he that he gives. So there's some other good videos to watch if you want to see more of him.
You can search for him on YouTube.
So this was outstanding. Thank you, Johnny for organizing this fascinating. I mean I was at the edge of my seat miles. Thank you.
Thank you.
Appreciate it.
Thanks people sorry for the date. He was he's not available on Saturdays.
Me and Johnny had a lot of back and forth to get him on a Saturday but me.
Breaking the schedule for that.
Thank you very much. Thank you very much.
Much worth it.
Okay, thanks everyone this has been a great morning.
We're all off to a great Friday and a great weekend so thank you see you next time.
