Hi. Welcome to the Origins Podcast. I'm your host Lawrence Krause. I'm extremely excited
about this episode with Jordan Peterson. Jordan and I did an episode of his podcast some time
ago during which he peppered me with questions and we decided we'd do a second podcast where
I could return the favor for the most part. And in this discussion that we had, I was
able to probe a lot of aspects that I've tried to understand about Jordan's writing and his
thinking, some of which I found difficult to appreciate. And we talked about his own background
as interested in becoming a psychologist and also studies in addiction and personality. And then
we moved to a topic that we both decided we wanted to focus on, which was that in some sense the
nature of meaning based on his book Maps of Meaning. And I wanted to parse some of the ideas
that he talks about there a little more carefully, which we did and talked about things from
existential threats to values and what you mean by values to the nature of narrative and life as
storytelling. It was a wide-ranging discussion, including also discussing such things as how
to do research in a time era of PC commandments that make that research difficult. I particularly
enjoyed the discussion. And I think many of you who might have listened to Jordan before will
find a new side of Jordan here as we try to explore in depth the ideas behind what he,
some of what he talks about and where he's coming from. So I hope you enjoy this as much as I did.
For those of you who are watching this on YouTube, please consider subscribing to our
YouTube channel because most of the people who watch it on YouTube actually don't subscribe.
It helps us, but it also helps you because you can get notices of upcoming podcasts as well.
And as you may know, the podcast is produced by the Origins Project Foundation, which is a
nonprofit foundation designed to encourage communication about science and important ideas.
So if you want to support the podcast in another way, please consider becoming a
subscriber on Patreon, which will support the foundation directly. And you'll also be able to
see and watch all of the episodes without any advertisements as well. Either way,
I hope you enjoy the podcast and I hope you enjoy in particular this podcast with Jordan Peterson.
Well, welcome Jordan. It's great to have you now on my podcast after I was on yours. It's
really great to have a chance to talk to you again. Oh, thank you. I'm really looking forward to it.
And I hope you are. I should say that this has perhaps been for me one of the most difficult
and exasperating and furating preparations for podcasts I've had to do. I have enough notes
here for about 21 hours. We won't go more than two, but I know I have a lot because there's
so much to parse. So what made it difficult and exasperating? It's kind of a compliment.
It is. Well, I want to give a preface because I want to be in full disclosure about how I've come
to understand you before and after our last meeting. I know for a long time when I've read
you that I'm not sure I understand what you're saying just in the reading. I've had a hard time
understanding what you're saying, or at least whether it's me or the work. And before I met you,
there's a line from the Dick Van Dyke show from Carl Reiner that I always remember where he said,
when on the surface seems vague, is in reality meaningless. And when I read a lot of the stuff,
I thought, well, this is vague. I don't exactly know where it's coming from. And as I read you,
and now I've been reading in preparation for this, I've been reading you in depth. I've read you
before. I alternate between this sense of some things I think are just clearly true, but they
kind of seem like truisms. I often wonder whether when I first my first reaction to 12 rules for
life was maybe it should be 12 pages. I mean, the 10 commandments was one tablet. And whether one,
you know, it's a long book. And you write a lot. It's just the property of the way right.
And then sometimes there were illusions and discussions that I really couldn't comprehend
or I thought were vague. Sometimes there were insights and there are insights that seem incredibly
deep and profound and true that you're reaching towards and I find them fascinating. And sometimes
there are statements that I disagree with completely. So I alternate between all of that. And it's
a fascinating way to go. I was naturally skeptical before we had our dialogue. I want to tell you
a skeptical physicist. Yes, exactly. But I was skeptical of you because I couldn't understand
a lot of it. And there were lots of reasons. But primarily was that Carl Reiner quote that
kept me in the back of my head. But after our last dialogue, I totally changed my view because
your questions were deep and interesting and curious. And what I became convinced of
was that you are a man who seriously wants to understand the world and engage in conversation.
And I and it switched and my respect for you just went through the roof as a result because that
that conversation demonstrated to me that you're earnest and serious in your desire to understand
the world. And then I decided to look at what you wrote in a different way and try and seriously
understand it. So that's you know, I hadn't expected that and the strong connection that
I do feel as an academic and as a human being towards you, which is which is a wonderful
thing because I love I love being wrong. And or at least I love having my viewpoints change.
And they certainly did after our discussion. So I wanted to in full disclosure, I want to say I
came into our first discussion as a complete skeptic and more so maybe maybe even suspicious.
And then and then then it changed. But I'm very glad to hear that. And and it is good to it is
good to be wrong and find that out. Unless everything in your life is so perfect that it's
clear that you know everything. And you know, yeah, yeah. Well, we now the other thing I want to do,
I want to give you a chance to ask some questions to because I enjoy your questions. And I know
in some of our email dialogues back and forth between there's some I know there's some things
you've been reading that you want to about cosmology, they want to talk about. So I want to
I'll give you a chance to ask some of those after in the latter part, or maybe if there's
a relevant point in the middle, you can bring it up and feel free to ask the question in the middle
as far as I'm concerned. I know the thing is about fine tuning and and and and and or universe
before our universe, there's a number of things. Also, I want to for the listeners, I want to
preference this because what what we discussed, you asked me really said the thing you want to
discuss with me was mostly maps of meaning. And that's what I've now focused on. And in particular,
what you suggested I really parse carefully was from the new book Beyond Order rule 11.
And so that's what I've done just so you're aware I've tried to try so the discussion I want to
have and you've written a lot of different things will be primarily about those things. But of
course, it'll it'll overlap with other other things. But that's where the the discussion's
going to focus on. And can you remind me what rule 11 was? I'm having some memory trouble.
So that's all right. I can never remember what I write the day after I do either. And the thing
is about rule 11, like many things in the one I read you is that the title of rule 11, it only
by the end of it, I kind of vaguely understood where the title came from. Rule 11 really seems
to me to be a summary of maps of meaning, in fact, but it's do not allow yourself to become
resentful, deceitful or arrogant. Oh, yes. And really that and those and as you and as I now
understand understanding from having read you that the sources of those of those three ills
are really related to the sources of the problems of dealing with the the meaning the map of meaning
in a sense. And so that's why it was a good place, I think for you to direct me to.
Yes, I remember why now. Yep. Okay. But before before we get to those, because it is an
origins podcast, I want to go into your origins, because I know some of the things, but I have
some questions about this. So, you know, I know you're very interested. In fact, in some sense,
in my mind, origins, I mean, I mean, maps of meaning is really about the origins of the psyche
in some sense. But I want to understand the origins of your psyche first. So that's where I want to
go. Born in Edmonton. Yes. Okay. And what what what what influence did what what did your parents do?
My dad was a teacher of what it and my mother was a nurse trained as a nurse and then she worked as a
librarian in that was mostly her career was a librarian at the local college. And my dad was
a teacher for most of the time I was at home. A high school teacher or a junior high teacher
elementary school teacher grade six, he was the vice principal of our local elementary school,
and he taught me when I was in grade six, some classes. Oh, that must have been an interesting
experience himself. It was extremely interesting, both for good and not good. Yeah, I can imagine
it's difficult. I I once taught my daughter took a summer course in physics. And I taught her and
it was really fascinating for me because I saw a very different side of her in class. She was very
different as a student than she was as a daughter. I imagine your father was a very different teacher
than he was as a father or maybe no, no, he was pretty much well tell you a story about my dad in
grade six. And so, you know, by grade six, kids are pretty noisy and horrible. And they get really
bad in grade seven, but by grade six, they're already pretty bad. And my homeroom teacher was
not my dad. He was the print. My homeroom teacher was the principal. My dad taught math. And for
at least 10 minutes before he walked in to teach our math class, no one said anything.
They were quiet. Yeah, my dad was not someone you messed around with. And so and he was like
that at home too, like he's a tough guy, my dad. And and and he's a good teacher. He's a very good
teacher. He taught me to read when I was very young and spent a tremendous amount of time with me.
But he was not someone you you trifled with lightly. And all the kids knew that he had that kind of
authority that's rare, actually, but necessary for teachers. And he didn't really have to ever
resort to any kind of discipline other than that underlying threat of absolute mayhem that was
there all the time. And so and so that that had some trouble for me, because some of this
kids didn't really like him, even though they respected them. And now and then they took
that out on me. But you know, whatever, there's all sorts of things that happen when you're a kid.
Yeah, character, it's all character building. And as we'll talk about, both you and I agree that,
you know, some bad things happening is an important part of your life. And and and that
you shouldn't be shielded from it. Did did it? So was did your dad sort of practice tough love?
I mean, because I kind of, you know, that's sort of in some sense, one gets a sense that
he didn't suffer fools gladly. Okay. And so so yes, I would say he did do that. He had very high
standards. And although he's also extremely good with little kids, my dad was really had a great
hand with kids from say, well, two to 12, he was he wasn't so fond of teenagers. And, you know,
you can understand why? Well, yes, yes. But he's great with little kids. He was he's still alive.
And he's great with my he was great with my kids too. Oh, that's great. So, so, I don't know, he
has this genuine, unbelievably genuine love for little kids, you know, and and it's a cool thing
to see in someone who's so fundamentally tough. You know, my dad's a hunter and a trapper and,
and a sharpshooter and a canoeer. And yeah, so he sees the sort of guy. Yeah, yeah, I was too soft
hearted really to hunt. I did trap with him. But even that, because I'm temperamentally, I'm very
high in compassion. And so that sort of thing was hard on me. We didn't see exactly eye to eye
temperamentally there. He taught me to shoot. I can shoot pretty well, not as well as him. He
was a provincial level shooter. And our house was full of guns. It's like 400 rifles. And
my wife's father was like that. He taught her how to he had she had guns from the time she was
young. He taught her how to shoot and how to take care of them responsibly. And, and I guess she
she went shooting with him for ducks, but she drew the line. She didn't want to do deer eventually
couldn't do that. Did did do you think, you know, I'm that influence of that tough love? I mean,
when I hear in some sense, one, even before I knew much about you, I knew of, in some sense,
you were preaching tough love in a way, you know, man up, you know, basically get over it,
get over it, get over it and just move on. Well, you know, it's not really true. What I was pointing
out more was the danger of regarding yourself as a victim. And a lot of that was it, a lot of that
was influenced by my reading of Freud, in particular, because Freud was very concerned about the
pathology of the devouring mother. And you see that in Jung as well. But, but Freud really came
up with that insight to begin with, and that an excess of compassion is destructive. And I see
that manifesting itself in victim mentality and what that does to people. And I also see it as
a manifestation of the female proclivity towards authoritarianism. Now, it's funny to think of
that as a manifestation of compassion. But we don't know much about female political pathology,
right? Because females haven't been involved in, in the political sphere for that long. And but
in the modern world, in the ancient world, they were well, exactly. Yes, yes, yes. But to think
that there's no tilt towards pathology that's specifically feminine is, well, that's naive,
it's foolish. And to not think that an excess of compassion can be a catastrophe is to be blind.
And so, and the Freudians were very, I think it's a quote from Freud, or at least one of his
astute followers, that the good mother necessarily fails. And so, what I see,
so it's not so much tough love, I would say, is that the proper balance for a child is something
like an embrace, right? That's the maternal embrace. And that's absolutely necessary.
And encouragement to transform. And that's more the paternal territory. Now, both parents can play
a role in those two territories, I'm speaking more symbolically, in some sense. But, you know,
women are tilted towards compassion. Temperamentally, they're higher in trait compassion than men on
average. There's individual variability that's quite substantial. But a variability, my wife is more,
more encourages, encouraging of transformation. And I'm, well, she's also probably more
compassionate to the me. She probably has both traits more than me. Yeah, well, I'm, at least
in terms of agreeableness, and probably negative emotion, I have quite a feminine temperament.
And so I'm probably more agreeable than my wife. I think when we took my personality test, that was
the case. And so we're a bit mixed on that front. When kids used to come over and visit my kids,
we used to have a talk with the kids when they come over, teenagers is like, we're really happy
you're here, and you're welcome here. But if you do anything stupid, and we never see you again,
that would be just fine. So, and that worked pretty well. And when they first came to my house,
they were always more scared of me. But after they came about five times, they were more scared of
my wife. So, there you go. I can see that. Now, let me, let me, the other question that, you know,
that comes to mind when I hear about your father, and I hadn't planned to go this way. And I'm
certainly not blind trying to cycle unless you, because I couldn't. But did he affect, did he,
did his teaching style affect your teaching style? You've been a teacher for a long time.
My understanding is that you're not a teacher that, that your students are afraid of rather,
they, they, they treat, I think you're rather compassionate. But, but do you think they were
quiet before they came into your classroom? That's a good question. I don't know if my dad's teaching
style overtly affected me. I think all the interactions he had with me when he was teaching
me to read did. And I think his attitude towards learning did. And his, and his fundamental sense
of encouragement, like I always knew. And this made me very rare among my friends, by the way,
because most of them have pretty pathological relationships with their fathers, where I grew
up in Northern Alberta. My dad, I knew he always had my back, even when we were at odds with one
another, fundamentally. And even when he was displeased with me, it was almost always, you
know, barring human frailty, because he was disappointed that I wasn't living up to the
high standards he expected of me. And they were high. And, and sometimes I think they were,
perhaps unreasonably high. It's very hard to say, because it's not that easy to figure out
how to balance that embracing compassion with that, the compliment that high standards
truly are, right? I mean, that's a tough thing to get right. And now my mom, I really, I always
got along really well with my mom, and I could make her laugh. She's a lovely person. She's very
easy to be around. And so, so I was fortunate, my parents, because the toughness of my father
was quite nicely counterbalanced by the warmth of my mother. And so, you know, I was fortunate in
that regard, and many others, but certainly that. Now you eventually became an academic and a, and a
practicing psychologist, clinical psychologist. Did they encourage, did they have, well, did
they encourage your reading, your academics? Oh, yes. Okay. Oh, yes, books were very important
in my family. And I learned when I was four, like books were at the top of the list. And I used to
virtually every night, when I was 10, nine, 10, 11, I read a book a day, science fiction. My
neighbor across the alley had a huge science fiction collection. And he used to just let me go in
there and take like 15 books, and then I'd bring them back in two weeks and take 15 more. And so,
I was reading a book a day, up until, I think, all the way through high school, I started reading more
literature in junior high, a librarian there who was a pretty educated woman by the standards of our,
our hometown, sort of tilted me towards genuine literature. And that's when I started reading,
I would say seriously. And so I was 13 when that happened. So, but yes, books were very important
in our household. Did you read science fiction literature? Did you read any much nonfiction,
or was primarily fiction when you were younger? It was mostly fiction when I was younger. Yeah.
Yeah. No, I didn't switch to nonfiction till I, well, I said, after I read Dostoevsky, when I was
in my early 20s, almost all fiction seemed sort of bloodless. And, but also by that time, I was
starting my research career, and I got a lot more interested in nonfiction. I also think that's a
maturation issue. And I'm not saying that in like, in a negative sense towards fiction is that,
at some point, it just didn't have the same attraction for me, as nonfiction started to.
And so, yeah, no, I know the feeling. I mean, I'm trying to relate it because I, I think it's
incredibly important and useful. I mean, I read, well, I had more time, it seemed to me then, but
I read, that's all, I just read an incredible amount when I was younger, all the time. That's
what I did during the summer, even during just reading. It was a way to get away from the family
too. I just would immerse myself in reading. And you're right, it was mostly, well, there was some
science fiction and literature. But one of the reasons I asked you this is because it's not
surprising to me that, because in some sense, you, you're arguing that, that all of understanding
comes from stories in a way. Yeah, yeah, well, that's the thing about surprising that you were,
you know, that your own understanding began with stories. I think psychologically, it seems it
makes sense. Yeah, well, and also that switch to nonfiction, let's say, did dovetail with my,
I started to be much more analytic in relationship to fiction. At some point, especially when I
started thinking as a clinical psychologist and a research psychologist, I got more interested in,
well, oh, yeah, these are stories. Well, stories are a particular kind of information. Okay, well,
what are they exactly? What's going on there psychologically? And I was doing a lot of reading
in that point too, at the neurophysiology level and animal behavioral biology, essentially,
a lot of it about perception. And I came to realize that the most advanced researchers into
perception were essentially making the argument that we actually look at the world through a story.
And that really, that was really quite the key insight. I really developed that insight when I
was reading Jerry, Jeffrey Gray's book, The Neuropsychology of Anxiety. And he doesn't ever say that
we perceive through a story, but the frame that he used to describe perception was a narrative frame.
And so that was extremely interesting to me. It was a key insight.
Well, yeah, no, well, that's, I wonder where you got that insight. I mean, that's, again, that seems
to be a central, one of your central theses is that the world is seeing, we see the world of stories,
and that's what determines their meaning. And we'll get into that. But, but I, it's interesting
that it came, that realization came later, but your own interest in stories was really
generic. I mean, it was not by nature, you were interested in stories as a young person.
Yeah, well, it's so interesting how powerful that interest is among young people. I mean,
it's easy to teach a kid anything if you embedded in a story. And then even later, when I was writing,
like when I was writing my more popular books, I also knew by that time, technically, that
facts inside stories were much more effective. And so the story, well, partly I think because
we also remember in stories, and, and stories are about action, and we're really interested in
action. So yeah. Well, now the, it's interesting, because it's kind of sad in a way that people get
my, I remember my daughter stopped being interested in reading because she was forced to read
books that she went in, in, in, I guess, probably middle school, read books that she hated
in school and, and, and, and taught by people who hated books. Yeah. And her own love of therefore
her own love of reading as something you do as, or stories as something you do for pleasure,
you know, went away. And that was, that was, that's sad. I remember in grade eight, this just
drove me crazy at this. I usually read the whole language arts curriculum for the year in the first
day. Oh, really? Wow. And so yeah, yeah, it was, I was a very fast reader. And I remember
who had a teacher in grade eight. And I said, I told her, I think two days in, I said, I already
read all these books, what should I do? She said, read them again. Oh, God. I thought, yeah, oh, God
is right, like in a major way. It's really that's your bloody attitude. You can't give me another
book. So I used to put books behind the books I was supposed to be reading and just read them and
yeah, there's a delinquent reading. That was my specialty. Yes, right. There's I remember that
that runs me of a famous, I don't know whether it was from a movie or whatever about a kid who,
you know, normally they're they've got playboy behind their their math book, but he basically
had his, his serious books in behind playboy. So yeah, right, right, exactly. Okay, you went
interestingly up. So your parents who incurred they did they encourage you to consider being
an academic or they just encourage you to just go wherever you want it to follow whatever was.
Yes, yes. Now I was interested that you went to what looked like a community college before you
went to university. Is that yes, was that I'm surprised unless that was a normal trajectory
where you're from? It was. Well, the normal trajectory where I was from was to drop out
of school in grade nine and go work on the oil rigs. And so, you know, going to college,
it was expected in my family, it was an implicit expectation that I would go to college university
that the level that was different, my dad and my mom both had bachelor's degrees. And I don't think
there was anybody in either of their family that had ever advanced past that. And so that wasn't
part of the landscape. Right. And that wasn't for me even until I was through my degree. I never
considered going further. I didn't really even, in some sense, I didn't really even understand
the distinction between bachelor's, master's and PhD, you know, because I hadn't hadn't met
anybody. I don't think by that point that had a master's degree, not not in Fairview.
There might have been some, but there weren't very many. So Fairview is a small town outside of
Edmonton. Is it 400 miles north? Yeah, way outside. Oh, it's I thought you lived in Edmonton. So I
okay, no, no, no, that makes much more sense than it. I was wondering why in a big city your
father would be your teacher, but if you're in a small town, that often happens. Yeah,
maybe it was just scraped out of the prairie 50 years beforehand. It was the end of the railway.
It was the northern most reach of the prairies and the last place settled likely really settled
in North America. Okay, that makes more sense than you would have gone to a community college first.
But both your parents had, were obviously not from there. They both had, neither my parents
happened to, as it worked out, have either got graduated high school. So but but your parents
had both gone to university in Alberta, where they from, okay, Saskatchewan, Saskatchewan,
and then they moved up there to work. They were yes. Okay. Now, so okay, so they, they said,
go what you want to do. And then you took, but your interest in psychology wasn't originally
the case. You studied political science in literature. And, and there's a, and you, you
fell out of love with, with political science. I, I, there's a, there's a, there's a discussion
here somewhere in, in, in, in fact, maps of meaning as you talk about losing interest in
political science. Yeah, well, the thing is, I was really interested in, well, I was interested
in politics to begin with. I ran for the vice presidency of the socialist party, NDP in Alberta
when I was 14. Oh, really? And yeah, yeah, I was quite, quite engaged in politics when I was a kid.
And I was, I've always considered in the back of my mind a political career, but it has always
fought against, I would say, my more aesthetic and psychological interests, and they've always won.
And with political science, I, when I went to that community college, where I got a great
education, by the way, the teachers were really good, the professor really good. And they really,
we had little tiny seminars, five or six people in the first year. And they all loved to teach.
I had like six great professors. So it was wonderful. It was wonderful, man. And I like
political science to begin with, because we were reading philosophical classics, you know. And,
but then as I advanced in political science, there was this implicit assumption that people's values,
essentially that we were motivated by economic interest. And I thought, yeah, but why are we
motivated by economic interest? I was interested in something under that, that was never discussed
by the political scientists, their axiomatic presupposition was pseudo Marxist in some sense,
you know, that our fundamental motivations are economic. And that's true, because we don't
want to starve to death. But, but it's not, wasn't true enough for me for the questions I was interested
in. And what I was really started to dominate my interest was war and atrocity. And I just
became obsessed by that. Now, this isn't going to be because what, by the way, what I'm going to do
throughout this discussion, if I can, is I'm going to refer America going to quote you on,
because then I'll go on. Don't do that. I am because then I'm going to ask you to explain to
me what it means sometimes. Okay, but, but, but, but this early on in, in Massimini, you actually
discuss this in a way that I think is relevant to understanding the importance of meaning for
you said, I could not believe in this resonates with what you just said, I could not believe and
still do not believe that commodities, natural resources, for example, had intrinsic and self
evident value. In the absence of such value, the worth of things had to be socially or culturally,
or even individually determined. This act of determination appeared to me moral,
appeared to me to be a consequence of the moral philosophy adopted by the society,
culture or person in question. What people valued economically merely reflected what they believed
to be important. This meant that real, that real motivation had to lie in the domain of value,
of morality. The political scientists I studied did not see this and did not think was relevant.
Well, that, when I read that, of course, that's a way better answer to the one I gave you. Well,
sometimes when one writes things, one thinks about them a little more carefully. But, but I find it
enlightening because it's, it, not just because it reflects your view of political science,
but it clearly reflects the underlying view you're trying to get across in what you're saying,
in what you're saying throughout Massimini, as far as I can tell throughout everything that,
that, that there is, that, that objects themselves have no meaning, but we ascribe meaning to things
and it's based on a variety of things which we're getting into, some of which are cultural in, in,
in basis. And so I was, I was interested to see that your, your disillusionment with,
with political science was due to the some, in some sense, an emerging idea which probably
wasn't even yet conscious in your mind, that you eventually produced in maps of meaning and some
of the other things you've been writing about. Yeah, well, I mean, people obviously fight in
wars, sometimes over economic issues, but they also fight wars over religious issues.
And they do that a lot more, I think. Of course. Right. And right now, our political
trouble in the West, I believe, is religious fundamentally. And we can get into that, what
I mean by that, because I mean that psychologically. I try not to actually speak religiously,
because I think it muddies the water most of the time. I'd rather speak psychologically and we
could get into that distinction too. And anyways, I had the sense that now there's something much
deeper here underneath the surface, which, which the political scientists are treating as an axiomatic
fact and not investigating. So, and then I, well, that's what led me into psychology.
Really. So that I was going to say eventually, so you first, but the first degree you did
was political science, right? You did. I did a three year degree that was political science and
literature. Then I worked for a year. Then I took nothing but psychology. You decided that you came
back. I was impressed. So you have two BAs as it is. Yes. Yes. Rather than two BSs, I guess. Yeah.
I probably have 10 of those. Well, yeah, so I want to get to your emerging interest in psychology,
but you interested, you said you were fascinated by war. Yet at the same time, you said you're,
you was more atrocity. It was more of the Nazi thing was really, and yeah. And then later that
what happened in the Soviet Union and China, but it was the, it was the Nazi concentration camp
issue that really, it just wouldn't go away for me. It just, and I don't know why like that happened
at 13. I wrote, I remember I wrote an essay in grade seven on the concentration camps and there
was a Jewish dentist in our town who had a tattoo from, from the camps and he was my dentist and
I had seen the tattoo and I asked him if I could talk to him about it and he said no, and you
know, fair enough, but that interest was there at 13. Wow. So yeah. And it's not, it's weird,
eh? I mean, who knows what, what hooks you way down deep and where that comes from. I mean,
part of it was, you should know more than me. Yeah. Well, our deepest intuitions, they guide us
rather than being under our control and they're deeply rooted in our temperament, our biology,
and, and in things we certainly don't understand. Part of it was kind of an obsession about the
Cold War and thermonuclear catastrophe, you know, and that was pretty typical of my generation.
How old are you? I'm a little older than you. I'm 67. So I guess I'm five years older than you or
something. Yeah. Same, same thing though, right? And so that was always lurking in the background
and my friends and I used to talk about that a fair bit and so, but, but, and then I guess when I
started thinking about that more deeply, that led me into what had happened in World War II and,
and then it was what happened in the camps, essentially, especially that, that proclivity
to eradicate. And I was interested in that psychologically, not, not politically precisely,
at the level of the individual. And that's always been, that's, I think, why I never did
go after a political career. I just got way more interested in the individual level of analysis.
Now, but you, but interestingly, of course, you made, as a number of people do,
that you were, and you were sort of socialist and then moved away and you said you're conservative by
nature. Interestingly, you said that Orwell influenced you in that regard, but Orwell also was
fascinated by atrocity and, and so, and impacted. So is that what attracted you to Orwell in the
first place or, or, or not? Well, a part of, I think, what attracted me to Orwell was that he's
just such a great writer. Yeah, he is. He's such a great writer, especially as an essayist, non-fiction
writer, road to wig and pair is just a deadly book. And it's the sort of book that's very
attractive to intelligent socialists, because like those working class people, man, you think your
life is rough, you should read, those people had to like crawl to work underground in the coal mines,
in tunnels that they couldn't stand up straight in for two miles before they got to work. Yeah.
Yeah, right. So it's a, it's an amazing book, but Orwell was a very astute critic of socialist
thinking as well, although he was also very sympathetic to it. So I loved reading Orwell.
Well, interestingly, I want to pick up on one thing, which I read, because I want you to have a
chance to, in some sense, respond. But so you would said somewhere that Orwell basically
got you thinking about, turned you off from socialism because he became convinced he basically
convinced you that socialists themselves didn't care about poor people, they just didn't like
rich people. Well, look, I went to a lot of these NDP conventions, New Democratic Party conventions,
and I had like a front row seat because the librarian was the wife of our MLA, our legislative
assembly member. He was the only socialist in Alberta and the only person who was in opposition
for like 15 years. And he was voted in by the people in my constituency, not because they were
socialists, but because he was really a good man. And so I met the Premier of Saskatchewan,
I met Ed Broadbent, who was the leader of the NDP in Canada, and Labour leaders. And I got to sit
and listen to them talk and sometimes sing old, you know, union songs. And a lot of them were,
they were admirable people, a lot of them, and they really cared about the working class. It wasn't,
it wasn't a facade. And they were honest. And I don't remember any of those discussions where I
thought something was off. But at the conventions, there were often demonstrations and there were
a lot of low level activists of the sort who became woke, the woke crowd later. And I just kind
of recoiled from them psychologically. And then at the same time, and I talk about this in maps
of meaning a bit, I was sitting on the board of governors at that local community, community
college. And there was all these self made guys there, most of them were immigrants because
there was an immigrant place. And they were all conservative, politically and temperamentally.
And I really respected them. And so that really put a lot of existential angst into me because
on the one hand, intellectually, I was attracted to the socialist ideas. And maybe on compassionate
grounds too, who knows. But then I had this countervailing tendency, which was, well, yeah,
but I don't really like the activist types. They really drive me crazy. And I respect these guys.
So that was hard on me. I didn't know exactly what to do. And then well, then what I did do is I
realized that I didn't know anything. That's what happened. And that was my roommate who taught me
that. You know, he was he kicked around a lot. He was a little older than me, still a really good
friend of mine. He's tough guy, came from an even smaller town than me, rough upbringing, real cowboy
type, tough as a boat. He came back to college and got literate. And we had some good talks
continually. And one of the things he said to me was, you know, that ideology of yours,
that just doesn't explain the world. And I thought, by then I kind of knew that, but that
really crystallized it for me. And then I also realized that I thought I knew way more than I
actually did, because I had imbued that ideology. And it gave me a map, right? Of everything. But
then I realized, well, look, you haven't had a family. I had worked a lot by then because I started
working out very young. But there was just, I just didn't know anything to speak of. And so then I
thought, well, I'm never going to consider a political career until I'm a competent person.
Because I could have had a political career. I knew it when I was like 17.
Yeah, no, I can see it. I can see it. You certainly have a,
yeah, I can see it. You have a way of capturing people into, in your discussions.
But okay, so it was more of the people there because, you know, there was, there's a,
you probably know of this rather scathing review of you by Nathan Robinson.
Oh, yes, he's fun. And, but he, his argument was, well, you didn't understand Orwell because he
said, you know, Orwell turned you off from it. And Orwell's whole point was you shouldn't not
like socialism, but just because you don't like socialists. And, oh, no, that wasn't Orwell's
whole point. Or one of Orwell's points was, you should be skeptical of people who say they're
acting in the best interests of others and also simultaneously on after power. So, yeah, I don't
think I misunderstood Orwell. And I, you know, and Robinson can think that if he wants, if that's
comforting, but I don't think so. I want to give you a chance to take a response to that. Okay.
Yeah. So, but, but, but, so, um, look, it's not like I'm not sensitive to left-wing concerns.
No, of course. I understand. Look, I, part of the reason I really don't like left-wing ideologues
is because they don't take the issue of inequality seriously enough. They think it's a consequence
of capitalism. It's like, no, it's way worse than that. It's way deeper than that. And that's a big
problem because it is a problem in equality. And if it's so deep that even getting rid of
capitalism won't solve it, like it's a real existential problem. And it's threatened many
societies with, with complete chaos. So, but that's not the solution. Like it's capitalism
that causes inequalities. Like, no, that's stupid. Yeah. No, I'm sorry. It's too able to label things.
And we'll get in it. We'll let people. Yeah. Well, Lawrence, you might know,
you might know, do you know about the work of the Econophysicists?
I know of some of it. I, I have been, like many things, skeptical. Yeah. Well, fair enough,
you know, but, but there are physicists who've modeled such things as the distribution of money
into a society using the same equations that they used to describe the distribution of gas into an
atmosphere. Sure. Diffusion. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So it's really, well, it points to something
way deep down, right? And that's something like the proclivity to get more, more easily once you
already have, and the proclivity to lose more, more easily when you don't have. It's not linear.
There's a nonlinear function there. And it's way under things. You know, like many things, I,
it's more easier to deal with the large groups of people than individuals. That's one of the
reasons psychology itself is probably so hard. People as groups behave in ways that just like
particles, just like, just like galaxies on the large scales, it's easier to understand if you
have many things because you can argue statistically. And that's one of the reasons why I've always sort
of liked to look at, you know, in some sense at large scale structures. By the way, I do want
to, a number of my colleagues, I remember when I was at Harvard, one of my, uh, a really good, uh,
physicists and cosmologists that later on actually ended up going into neuroscience. But for a while,
he, he decided he would be going to economics because the simple thing was he looked and he said,
well, you know, physics is getting really hard. But if you look at economics, these people win
economics, Nobel prizes for, for studying equations that we study in first year physics.
And so all I have to do is look at the equations from second year physics and try to apply them.
And I can become a big person that feel, but, but I have a great, um, I will tell you my, I have a
huge, uh, skepticism about economics. So I, I find, I, yeah, well, fair enough. The calling it,
calling it a science is, is, is, is really, um, really generous in my mind because it doesn't
make predictions that are accurate. So yeah, well, you get real rich if you were an economist who
could make predictions that were accurate, wouldn't you? Yeah. And well, I mean, econometrics,
studying the data is really important, but, but, but, uh, general theories of, right now I'm very,
anyway, I'm very skeptical of it and I'll, I will undoubtedly bring yet more hate mail. But anyway,
um, the, um, okay, we're almost to the point where I want to get to maps of meaning, but I wanted,
I'm really interested in your own progression there and I'm already beginning to see things,
which I think are interesting and I hope maybe others will be interested in in your own background
that led you to this, these ideas. Yeah. Well, I, what, I got obsessed when I was about, I kind
of have an obsessive mind in some ways and, and it, it runs away with me and I got obsessed about,
I think it was thermonuclear war to begin with. It's like, what the hell's going,
why do we want to blow all this up? Why do we want to blow this up? What's going on exactly? And then,
and then that dovetailed with the atrocity issues. Like what, what's going on with the
concentration camp guard exactly and that, that desire to annihilate and burn. And when I mean
obsessed, like I do, I really didn't think of anything else in some sense for like 20 years.
And I probably thought about that manically for 15 hours a day. Wow. And so, you know,
I had a life and all that, but man, it was just there as soon as I woke up in the morning,
it was just running through my head nonstop. And I wrote maps of meaning three hours a day for 15
years. So, okay, well, but you know that, well, and I have to ask you again, in all respect,
it's interesting, you say you get your mind runs away with things with you and I can't help, but
when I read it, think that somehow I don't know if you were edited, but sometimes it seems to me
you'll get obsessed with an idea and you run away with it. Well, in maps of meaning in particular,
see, I didn't write that really for people to read. I wrote that to figure something out.
Okay. Right. So, I was thinking, thinking, thinking, thinking the later books,
I wrote those for audiences. Right. It's clear there's a difference. It's very clear.
Maps of meaning, it goes on and it, yeah, I really feel like it's, it's, it's you talking to yourself
and getting wrapped up in ideas. And that's why it was hard for me, because you got to distil
from all of that, what you're talking about. And at times I had a hard time. Oh, well, it's,
yeah, well, yeah, fair enough. And I'm sure it's a flawed book, but I don't think I could make it
any better now even I read it, I read the audio version recorded it last year, three quarters
dead. And I, I've thought about editing it. But I don't think I've got the brainpower to, to dive
into it and do it. It was clearly something you, it was core dump. And yeah, it would be hard to
core dump again, I think. But okay, so you got interested in psychology. And before that,
I got to ask this, I know, I know a little bit about this, but were your parents religious?
That's a hard question, but no, not really. My mother attended church, United Church Protestant
Church, and she went every Sunday. And we went when we were little kids, but I stopped going when I
was 13, because the pastor, well, because I didn't like it, but also because the pastor, the minister,
he didn't, couldn't answer my questions about reconciling evolutionary theory with,
with biblical stories. And, and I thought, well, you don't believe what you're saying,
which is something I've often thought while sitting in church. And I was looking for an excuse,
anyways, and my dad didn't go to church. And so, so I bailed out then. And, and my mom didn't like
that. But it wasn't like she was, she wasn't overtly religious. My mom is a very, in the best
sense, a very normal sort of person, you know, she's not extreme in any ways. And she went to church
because that's what people did. And she liked to sing and she liked the community. And, you know,
she had her beliefs in some sense, but not really, because it was just part of the culture. And that's
what she did. And so in a small town, that's what people do. I mean, I know my first wife's mother,
you came from a small town, her mother went to, you know, church, and it was a social thing as
much. Yeah. Also, for better or worse, if you didn't go, it reflected badly on you, which is
one of my problems with religion. I met a lot of people, you know, if there is a lot of social
pressure in a small town, especially to conform religiously, what, you know, just because if
you don't go, it, it gives the impression that somehow you're a bad person. And that's one of
the problems I've had with at least organized. Yeah, well, we could talk about that in some detail
too, I think, because there's, you know, with situations like that are always really complicated,
because one of the things people are doing when they go to church is indicating that they're
willing to sacrifice an hour a week in a disciplined manner to the community as such,
you know, and then so you don't go, well, maybe it's because you're a conscientious objector,
let's say, and that's a moral reason, but maybe it's just because you're lazy bastard and you
don't care about the community. And, you know, I'm not saying that's the case, but I'm saying,
you know, these rituals are complex. I think I was more influenced by Babbitt and St. Clair Lewis,
the notion that you don't, that if you don't go, it means that you're somehow slapping the community
expects you to go. If you don't go, it means you're not respecting the community. Yeah, right.
There's a lot of social pressure and you have to go to keep, I'm better worse to keep up appearances,
because it's not, yeah, so that and that part, well, we'll get there. I want to, I want to get,
if we'll see if we get there, because I have somewhere where we're at the beginning, but
you, but I'm intrigued as much by you as, well, I'm intrigued equally by you and what you say,
so I want to, I want to get the you part done. You moved, you did, you decided to go back to
school and do psychology and then you decided to go to graduate school, which as you say was a new
thing. You know, I, I, I don't know why, I guess I decided I wanted to be a professor or I wanted
to be an academic and I don't know, in my case, and I've said this often in our podcast, it was
just that my mother wanted me to be a doctor and I, she convinced me doctors were scientists,
which was her mistake. And then I got interested in science. And so, and then I looked.
Yeah, I really wanted to go and be a clinical psychologist and, and, but I didn't really get
into research, interested in the research end until I got to McGill and that was under the
influence of my supervisor, who was a clinician, but mostly a researcher and he sort of opened up
the research world to me and, and then that got really fascinating to me. And so I got to do
both because I was a clinical and McGill was a real research school, you know, I had 15 publications
right at the time. Yes, exactly. Wilder Penfield and all the other. Exactly. The Montreal Neural
was a major place and, and a lot of fundamental discoveries about the brain were made at McGill
and at the Douglas and, or at, or at the Montreal Neural. And so I had great advisors there,
Robert Peale and Maurice Dongier, man, they were top rate, Frank Irvin, I got to know,
he had a monkey farm on St. Kitt's where he raised alcoholic monkeys, which is quite funny.
And so McGill was great, man, it was wonderful. And I got really interested in being a scientist
there. And then I found out I could do both. That's so that's where that switch came. I wondered
about that. Yeah, no, I mean, I have a good friend of mine is a neurologist and he actually,
you know, was a resident out in down at McGill and, and I get to see the impact of that on him.
He's now a professor actually in the West Coast. But okay, so that's what got you interested in
research. But I was interested. So you wanted to be a clinical psychologist. Why? I mean,
early on, I was going to ask you, why did let me I tell I like trying to help people, you know,
and I was interested in what made people tick. And, you know, I had some friends and
whose problems I tried to straighten out. And I was interested in what it meant to live a,
I suppose, a psychologically healthy life, if, you know, to speak, I guess that's a reasonable
way to put it. So and I'm, I'm, I'm, well, I am high in compassion, that's part of it, high in
openness and high in compassion. So that's good, good root for clinical psychology is good root
for someone like that, because people are endlessly fascinating. So, you know, it's, it's
actually interesting, you know, I actually, you are, it's another thing that surprised me, you are
high in openness, which is something, maybe because you've been interviewed publicly in
a very aggressive and antagonistic way, I got the sense that you were much more defensive
than you are. And yeah, well, some of those interviews, you know, that especially the
GQ interview, which is like 40 million views is like, I was exhausted at that point. And,
and it was a very unfriendly environment. I mean, it was hostile, the second I set foot in there,
which was like an hour before the interview started. And so hostile in that sort of cold,
underlying, subtle way that permeates everything. And so by the time the interview started, I was
sort of like a cat that was too close to the, you know, the doghouse. And, and so I didn't handle
myself with as much humor, humor as I would have liked to, you know, because if you're really on
top of something, you can do it with a light touch. And yeah, I wasn't really light touch in that
interview. But I was also partly because I was, I knew perfectly well at that point that if I
said anything wrong, or that could be twisted to be wrong, I was dead in the water. So
that's not that automatically. Yeah, if you're up, yeah, if you feel you can't open up, then that
really makes it yeah. Anyway, you remain the question that intrigued me before I even heard
any of this. So now, but early on was why you remained a clinician. Why during your academic
career? I mean, I guess it was great for teaching was great for teaching. Because you can use
examples I noticed in the book, there are lots of time and in all your books, I think, but at
least I haven't I've voluminously read it. Well, and it kept the theory tied to the reality. Because
I was very interested in psychological theories of all sorts. Yeah, I mean, a taught personality
theory. And that's basically a walk through great psychological thinkers in the clinical domain.
And but practicing continually meant that, you know, I was always where the tire was hitting
the road. And that was unbelievably useful, because I could test out these ideas in the
practical application and see where they were useful and where they weren't. And they were
useful, unbelievably useful. You got into personality eventually, your first interest
was more a sort of addictive thing, alcoholism, right? And is that because of was that a personal
interest or is it because your professor was had alcoholic monkeys or? Well, it was, it was,
it was a little bit of one, a little bit of the other, it probably wouldn't have been my first
choice. But I was really interested in why it was that certain substances were so attractive to
people. And that was tied with an underlying interest in neurobiology. And so when Robert
Peele offered me this position at Miguel, it was like, Oh, good, I get to go to Montreal,
because I always wanted to do that. And yeah, I could, I could do that, I could look into that.
And alcohol use turned out to be a great field of study, because alcohol crosses the blood
brain barrier like water, unlike, say cocaine and, and, and the, and heroin and so forth and
benzodiazepines, they're much more specific in their action. But alcohol affects everything.
So to understand the pharmacology of alcohol, you have to study the whole nervous system.
And that was really, really, that was great, because I did a lot of neuroscience work at
Miguel. Okay. And then, and so, and do you, I shouldn't know this, but do you still continue
to do clinical work? No, I stopped in, when all, when everything exploded around me,
partly because look, when you do clinical work, nothing can should be on your mind,
except that person right there and then. And I couldn't do that. I was so distracted by everything
that was happening. And, and you have to be around, and you have to be on call, you have to be
available, you have to have some leftover emotional space. And, and none of that was possible. And so,
I just had to stop. And it's too bad, because I love doing it. But the podcasts are a good
substitute. So, yeah, it gives you a chance to connect. And then, okay. And then you, and then
you did a postdoc there, and then, and then went to Harvard. Well, I was on the academic job market
during that postdoc. So I went to a few places and generally got mixed reviews for my, for my
approach, because I was, I had a hard scientific research, what would you say, CV at that point.
I think I published more papers when I was at McGill than any graduate student ever had. And, and,
you know, that was that was attractive to many of the places that we're hiring. But I also had
these weird side interests that people were less, you know, more skeptical about. And I wouldn't
shut up about them, even though people told me to. But that worked really well when I went to
interview at Harvard. Why? Well, because, see, one of the things you see in people who are educated
is they think that if they don't know something, then it's probably not worth knowing. They don't
just know that they just don't know. Yeah. Well, lesser, lesser academics are like that. Yeah.
Well, when I went to Harvard, the professors were so damn smart there that I couldn't say anything
that they didn't know about. And so there was nothing about what I was interested in that
bothered them. In fact, they were interested in it. Oh, it wasn't. Oh, I thought I see you surprise
me again. I thought you're going to tell me they didn't mind hearing from you things they didn't
understand or didn't know about because it intrigued them. But you tell me they already knew. Well,
they knew at least enough to know that there was something there. They weren't they wouldn't just
like say, well, no, anybody who's interested in that like Jung, for example, there are a lot of
them are skeptical of Jung and fair enough, you know, I can see why. But yeah, well, fair enough.
But but that didn't mean that they didn't understand that there was such a thing as the
psychology of literature and narrative. And so yeah, that worked. And that's when you went there,
you expressed early on that that was what you were interested in the psychology of literature
and narrative. I talked about everything I did. I talked about the alcohol research. By that time,
the the ethics committees had made the sort of research I was doing basically impossible. And
so I had to switch. And I interesting. Yeah, yeah, well, because, you know, let's pick up on that.
I mean, I like to go place that in plan. But I suspect that impacted on some of the things you're
talking about later on. Yeah, you did. Definitely hate ethics committees. They're terrible. And I
understand why why don't you elaborate on a little bit because, well, first of all, you know,
they'll come back and say, Well, why don't you do this experiment this way? It's like,
do your own goddamn experiment. Part of the reason I'm doing this is because that's what
I'm interested in. You want to do a different experiment, get your PhD, set up your lab,
do the goddamn experiment, and don't come in and fix mine. Who the hell are you anyways?
That just irritated me to death. And then so irritating. Because I love doing it, you know,
and scientists, you got to leave them alone because they're weird people. It's like they got
these strange obsessions. Don't interfere with that. Well, that's, I mean, you know, one of things
that sort of made you at least more famous publicly was the response to being told what to say or do
and in some ways, which yes, really push. I don't like that. Oh, that's clearly pushes your button.
Zero doubt about it. But but I can see it in the origin in the in the ethics community. Well,
here's what happened in McGill. I was studying. We had a very specific population. We were
studying. They're very, very hard to find these people. Non alcoholic men 18 to 23.
So they had to but they had to drink, they couldn't be alcoholic, but they had to drink.
They had to have an alcoholic father and alcoholic paternal grandfather and an alcoholic paternal
first or second degree relative in addition, very hard to find. So we were studying the
psychophysiology, psychophysiological responses of people who had males who had a genetic
predisposition to alcoholism, very specific population. We couldn't study women because
if your mother was alcoholic, you might have fetal alcohol syndrome. And so that just that that
muddies the waters too much. And so well, when I went to Harvard to try to do this research,
by that time, the NI trip, oh, and so what would happen, we'd bring these guys into the lab,
and we'd give them three shots of alcohol in 20 minutes and get their blood alcohol level
up to about 0.10 above legal intoxication. And that's where the interesting psychophysiological
responses manifested themselves. Lower doses, which almost all other labs used didn't produce
that effect. So then I went down to Harvard and I AAA had got all ethical by that point and
they wouldn't let us let our research subjects leave until their blood alcohol level was at 0.02.
We used to leave them go at 0.04, 0.06, something like that. And usually we'd make sure they got
a taxi home and all that we were sensible. But that meant that these guys had to sober up in the
lab awake for like 10 hours. Well, no one was going to do that. It was torturous. And then we had
to include half women. It's like, well, we can't. And first of all, male alcoholism is primarily
a male disorder, although not entirely. And the reasons for female alcoholism are probably different.
And so I couldn't give the doses. I couldn't use the research population. And basically what happened
is every single research psychologist stopped studying the response to alcohol because it
became impossible. And, you know, how ethical is that? It's just alcoholism, right? It's like the
fifth leading cause of death or some damn thing. It's not important. So end of that. So then I
just couldn't do it. So yeah, and that's something we both are, I mean, where we began to converge,
you and I, at least intellectually, it seemed to me, is our concerns that whenever I see
research being interfered with, I get upset. Well, here's an example. Do you know that 70% of this
research applicants to the UC system this year were dispensed with at hiring because of their
diversity statements? 70%. I just wrote an article about it. Actually, it's 76%. Oh, okay. Well,
that's better. No, no, I've just actually have a piece coming out in the Wall Street Journal,
which will probably come out before this appears. That's not bad. That's devastating.
It's devastating. I'll send you my piece. I'm totally angry about it. But that kind of
interference with academia is something that we may get to. I'd like to explore your thoughts
more than that. Maybe in another time we can, because it's something we both relate to. Let me
ask you just to close off this, because yeah, this is a great concern to both of us, but
has research and alcoholism, has it died? Has research in that area died or has it ever come
back in terms of looking at? Well, the research of the sort we were doing, you can't do it. So yes,
it's dead. It's just not possible to do that. You can't get funds for it, for example. Plus,
they made it. We'd like to get these guys back three or four times, because they were hard to
find. And we were onto something. We found that a substantial proportion showed a pronounced
heart rate increase to alcohol administration that looked like it was associated with opiate
release. It could be blocked by naltrexone. It was deadly research, but whatever. Done.
So that really irritated the hell out of me. Well, you know, it's true. I can understand
the irritated the hell out of you, but sometimes when one door closes, another one opens, and
that's clearly what happened. I mean, you might have gone on to be a wonderful researcher in
alcoholism, but instead you shifted gears a little bit. Yeah, well, it was hard to teach
personality. I was in personality and psychopathology subsection there. And so I started to turn my
research towards personality. Although I kept a bunch of other research lines going until I was
up for promotion, I think it was to a full professor at U of T, and they basically said,
we can't put your research record forward because you haven't specialized in any single area enough.
And I thought, well, I've published in like seven areas, you know, there's something to be said for
that. But then I thought, well, it's way easier actually only to publish in one area. So if that's
what you want me to do. So that was also annoying, to say the least. But anyways, I did it and it
worked. And I focused more on personality for a bunch of reasons. Why were you hired in personality
if your work had been on a sort of alcoholism? You said you were hired to teach personality.
Was that just the available slot at Harvard? Or what was that?
Well, I was a clinical psychologist, and I knew the personality theorists well. And so that was a
big part of that. And they liked the fact that I had a hard research edge because, well, because
psychology, at least when it's done right, is a hard, you know, it's a research discipline. And
Harvard was certainly, it was a great place. I loved being there. It was great. Miguel was great,
too. Yeah, I joined. I was at Harvard. Well, I was in the Boston area for 10 years. And
did my PhD at MIT and then moved to Harvard. Yeah, I loved the faculty, man. I loved our
faculty meetings. They were so funny because no one wanted to be there. And they were already
funny. And so if anybody ever objected to something, the chair would say, oh, you're
head the subcommittee to discuss that somewhere else. And which is perfect, right? It's like,
that'll teach you to make the meeting longer. Yeah, that's why happily I didn't have to,
I had a position and there's something called the Society of Fellows and where I was
allowed to totally avoid anything related to anything, but what I wanted to do. So I didn't
have to teach. I didn't have to, I didn't have to, I was supposed to just think. So I happily
didn't, I didn't learn of the of the TDM of faculty meetings to later on. Actually, the interesting
thing is I went to Yale to become an assistant professor. And Yale has the policy that assistant
professors aren't worthy of faculty meetings. So they don't even allow them in the faculty meetings.
Oh, so that was good for you. Yeah, yeah. And then I, yeah, and then only later on when I became,
when I got promoted, and then I quickly became chair of a department and then I had to run
faculty meetings. No, it's a lot easier. Well, it's a lot easier to be in a meeting when you
run it than someone else is. True. Yeah. And I love teaching. So that was, that was never
an impediment to me. And I hear that you were an incredibly popular teacher. At least that's what
the word on the street or at least word in the literature I've read is. Yeah, it was fun. I
love teaching. It was especially personality. So it's so fun to teach that to people. It's so
engaging as a subject, especially for people at age. You had a big following at Harvard. Did
that continue when you moved to U of T? Yes. Well, again, let me ask a question and in, you know,
I don't know whether it's free not to answer it or we can cut it out or whatever, but
why do you move back to Canada? Well, the probability of being promoted to full tenure
from an associate position at the Ivy Leagues is basically zero. It's zero. I agree. Yeah. That's
why I left it. And I knew, I knew that and I had this attitude. I got my attitude right because
I saw some of the people there, the assistant professors who were or an associate who were on
the verge of leaving and they were all annoyed, not all of them, but mad that they weren't going to
be make it, you know? And I thought, I thought, look, if you could be promoted to full professor,
these slots that you occupied would have never been opened. So you can't be unhappy about what
brought you here. And then I thought, I'll just accept that. It's like, okay, I got to come here.
The way I looked at was, hey, I got to go to Harvard for six years and I got paid for it.
That's a deal, man. It was a great deal. And I was really sad to leave. And, you know,
I wanted to fight for promotion on the basis of maps of meaning. And I think,
you know, I think I had a shot at it, you know, because some of the professors there really liked
what I had done. But I got sick then. And I didn't have the bloody spirit to put up the proper fight.
And so, and then this, and then this position came up at the Toronto and it was perfect for me.
It was tailor made for me in some sense. And so then that's what we did. And it was hard to leave
though, because I loved Harvard. I loved living in Harvard.
It was hard to leave Boston. When I left Boston for Yale, it was very hard to leave. In fact,
I kept one day a week, I went back to Harvard and BU, you know, just to,
it's hard to break that umbilical cord right away. And I really liked my colleagues too.
And a lot of them are still my friends. And that was great. Oh, that's wonderful. Yeah.
Well, I, but I understand the, again, the psychology of it. I left Yale again before I,
I'd already been promoted to, like you, I guess, associate professor, but I,
I saw that there was no, there was, you know, the opportunities at Yale were going to be minimal,
especially in my own field. And so when, when, when, when the opportunity came along in this
case to build a department, to become chair of another department and have 12 faculty positions
so I was, it was so attractive to me that I couldn't, I couldn't resist. But I wondered why I
left. And I, I didn't know if it was a yearning, you know, as a Canadian who moved to the States,
I moved much earlier than you because I went, I went to graduate school down there.
You know, the question of whether I'd return to Canada was always on my mind. I didn't until
after I retired and, and, but, but, but I always thought about it. I often off considered coming
back and there were a few times actually to Toronto. But anyway, let's now, now having,
I hope that this has been interesting for you. It's been interesting for me, but, and I think
I hope it'll be interesting for people who, who are interested in what you have to say,
because understanding you as a person, I think is important and I never have heard much about it.
But now I want to move to what you've written about and in pretty grand maps of meaning and,
and, and, and, and as I say in rule 11, at least what I surmise from it. And the best way I can do
it, as I say, for better or worse, Jordan, is to, is to read quotes from you and ask you about them.
So I'm going to do that and we'll, we'll just skip through and we'll see how far we get.
And then I want to give you some chance, hopefully for, for us to discuss some of those
issues that I know that you were still interested in following up with me. Some of the things I'm
going to talk to you about will follow up on for people listening will follow up on our discussion.
I didn't realize actually I hadn't done my preparation, which is fine. I was, I was being,
our dialogue was you asking me questions. I realized that I forced myself to watch our, our
podcast, only I hate it because I had to listen to myself for a lot of it. But, but I didn't
realize how many of the ideas and things you were bringing up, if I'd known about it from your books
would have meshed perfectly. And so I, we can follow up on some of that discussion because
now I understand where you were coming from. But let me, let's talk about how,
right at the early on maps of meaning, by the way, you basically say beliefs make the world.
And let me, let me read this quote. I discovered that beliefs make the world in a very real way.
The beliefs are the world in a more than metaphysical sense. This discovery has not
turned me into a moral relativist. However, quite the contrary, I've become convinced that the
world that is belief is orderly, that there are universal moral absolutes, although there are,
they are struck, these are structured such that a diverse range of human opinion remains
both possible and beneficial. I learned, let's see. Okay, I believe that individuals and societies
who flout these absolutes in ignorance or in willful opposition are doomed to misery and
eventual dissolution. And I learned that the meanings of the most profound substrat of belief
systems can be rendered explicitly comprehensible. Let's get to that later. Let's, let's talk about
the first thing. I believe that individual societies who flout these absolutes and ignorance or
willful opposition are doomed to misery and eventual dissolution. Do you want to elaborate on
that? Because I'm shocked. It's interesting to me to hear you say that because again,
it goes against the grain for me. So I want to hear, I want to understand where you came from
in writing that. Well, I first started to understand that what we perceive in some real sense isn't
exactly material reality. And partly that's because that's actually impossible. And I mean that
technically, and that's something we could go into in great depth, because that realization
paralyzed a number of fields. It really started to come to the forefront in many fields in about,
in the early 1960s, especially in AI, when the AI type started to try to make machines that could
see the world in some sense like we do and then act in the world. And what they instantly realized
was that, oh, there isn't just something there that we see, this is way harder than we ever
possibly imagined. In fact, it's so hard that it looks like it might be impossible in some sense.
So how the hell do we do it? And like we still don't have robots that can move around the world
like we do. Endless generations. I'm not, maybe it's improved. The last time I looked at this
great detail, we didn't have robots that could fold laundry very efficiently either. So yeah,
well, a lot of these so called simple things like seeing, well, it's half your brain, it takes you
half your brain to see. And most animals, like we see way better than almost all animals say,
eagles, raptors. Really? Because we have two bald eagles in my back. Yeah, they can see,
their eyes are the same size as yours. And they have two foveal spots, eagles,
falcons, they're the animals that can see better than us. But other than that,
it's us. And it's half our brain just to see. Well, so why? Well, you're a physicist, you
understand that reality is composed of levels of being right from the subatomic up to the cosmic.
It's like, well, first of all, how do you specify the proper level of analysis? Well,
one of the things that's quite interesting psychologically is that we have short words
are generally used to describe things that manifest themselves to us at our level of analysis.
Cat. We see a cat, we don't see a species. We don't see cat sub parts. We see this cat. Well, why?
Well, that's, that's the level that's most biologically relevant to us, given our embodiment.
That's an evolutionary answer. And so we see what we see. First of all, what we see a lot of is memory,
but we see something that's overlaid on the world. We actually see the overlay. And hopefully,
it reflects what's underneath. And generally, it does. And it's a hell of a shock to us when,
when we make a perceptual error. But I see, I, and then I started to learn, especially from
reading Jeffrey Gray, that we, we also see the world within a motivated frame. And he was influenced
by Norbert Wiener, who was one of the world's first cybernetics scientists, essentially a great
influence on AI. Yeah. And, and Gray never talked about narrative, but the frame that he described
that we see in an animals as well, basically has a point A and a point B. So we're always moving
towards a goal if we're mobile animals. And I thought, Oh, well, the description of the movement
from point A to point B, that's the simplest unit of meaning that's a story. And then I learned that
a better story is a story about how stories transform. And so those are actually perceptual
frames of reference that transform. And then I understood that if you don't have respect for
the transformation process above all else, then you can't transform your perceptual frames when
necessary, and then you can't adapt to error and that destroys you. And so that's, that's all part
of that. When you okay, there's two bits of this I want to parse more carefully. First, the statement
that beliefs are the world. I mean, yeah, as a psychologist, I accept that statement. If you're
talking about a psychologist, namely the human psyche, I won't accept that statement as a science
as a physicist. Yeah, well, that's where we could really have a good conversation. Well,
let's have that good conversation. Yeah. Oh, yeah. Okay. Okay. So, so look, it has been very difficult
for scientists to describe the world in a way that isn't like that narrative, right? And so the
idea that there's a tension between science and religion in some sense is, is just a statement
that it's been very hard for scientists to pull out an objective description of the world, given
the way we perceive. Well, it's been easy for physics, not easy, but it's worked for physicists.
I didn't say it didn't work. I'm not making that claim at all. I'm saying we didn't manage it
till 400 years ago. Exactly. And I think we talked, this is something we talked about before,
actually, that we both read about that science is hard, and I don't mean hard in the mathematical
sense. No. In the sense that it goes against the grain. That's right. It's unnatural. It's very
unnatural. Yes. And if we didn't, we wouldn't need science if it wasn't unnatural. I mean,
everyone would be a scientist if it wasn't. And instead, we, and so that, okay, so that's,
that's, that's an insight into that issue. So then the question is, well, what is it that science
as a, as a technique struggles against? Well, it struggles against the fact that we see everything
through a value laden lens. And I mean, see, well, here, here's an example, like, look,
when I'm looking at you on this screen, there are almost an infinite number of ways things I could
be looking at. So first of all, there's each pixel in so far as I can see pixels,
but then there's all the combinations of pixels, right? And there are a lot of combinations of
pixels. And I could concentrate on one hair on your beard, or I could concentrate on the blurry
cupboard behind you or that book, or like, it's endless, but I don't, I look at your eyes,
and you look at my eyes, and you look at my eyes because you've made a value judgment that there's
nothing more valuable during the course of this perceptual exercise than looking at my eyes.
And that's a biological judgment. Well, yeah, well, when you say a value judgment,
that's interesting. Let me take, here's why I'm in, I'm a neophyte. So well, I mean, I've written a
lot, but I wouldn't describe it as a value. My understanding is that infants are hardwired.
That's okay. Eyes and there's an evolutionary reason. No problem, man. There's values that
are hardwired. That's no problem. Why do you call them values? Because, look, to segregate out a
particular element from a background of elements, I have to make that primary, I have to make it
most important and the other things less important. Okay, so that's what you mean by value. Yeah,
it's technical idea. It's like, you have to look through the world, you have to look at the world
through a hierarchy of value. There's no way to look at the world without doing that. Okay,
you could take an economic attitude, which you look at the world, what's most effective?
That's fine. The results most quickly. That's fine.
If you're dealing with humans, looking at eyes gets you where you want to go. Well, here's why.
It's like our eyes have evolved the whites. And the reason for that is because the fact of the
whites make it much easier for us to see where the eyes are pointing. And what that implies is
that all of our ancestors who had eyes that weren't easy to see either got killed or didn't mate.
And the reason that we want to see where people point their eyes is because foveal tissue is
extremely expensive. And you're not going to waste it looking at something useless. And so that if I
can see what you're looking at, then I know what you're interested in. Then I know your value
structure for that moment, I can understand you. Plus, I've been directed to the valuable part of
the visual landscape. And we're unbelievably good at that. It's part of a shared reference.
And kids have that extraordinarily early, as you already pointed out, like unbelievably early.
And so it would work. So evolution has picked that out. Okay. So when I say value structure,
I mean a decision about the hierarchy of importance. Okay. And I mean it in some sense,
both economically and evolutionarily, like there's nothing about this that's not nailed down,
especially into evolutionary theory. It's like, there's a reason we. Oh, yeah. No, I'll buy that.
Yeah. Okay. Okay. Okay. So I think that's the value hierarchy issue. But then when okay,
the value hierarchy. And when you say that, okay, so when you say beliefs are the world,
you're talking about psyche that namely beliefs are related to values and some, I mean,
when you say beliefs are the world, I still want to go back to that. You're saying as a human being.
Yeah. Well, it's partly because the world is good. We can be wrong. What was that? Well, it's
partly because we can be wrong. Like I may think that something's important and look at it, but I
might be so wrong. I'm driving down the highway and I focus on something and some car hits me and I'm
dead. Well, that's kind of why it's a belief. It's like, well, I believe that that was the best thing
to look at. And there was evidence to support that. But man, it was really wrong. It was wrong.
And so part of its fallibility, that's partly why I refer to it. It's not only that. There's
more to it than that. I guess my way of phrasing it would be, I think about it, is that beliefs,
that the world conditions our beliefs, namely, we continually re-appraise our beliefs. And the world
tells us whether those which beliefs are, if you want to call beliefs, which beliefs are reasonable
and which aren't by, you know, by killing us. Yeah, I can walk out this window, but the world
pretty well tells me, no, that doesn't work. And then I don't reproduce. But although it's too
late, I already have. But so I guess I think of the world as conditioning beliefs rather than
the way around. No, no, it did. Oh, yeah, that's fine. And it does. And that's a very, what would
you say, an eternal philosophical dilemma, because you can look at it both ways. So the existential
psychologists, for example, taking a page from Heidegger, one of them was,
one of them, one of them made the presumption that, you know, we lay values on the world, and the other
made the presumption that values reveal themselves to us through the world. And that's, they're both
right. They're both equally right. You can look at it either way, and it works. So, and for the
reasons that you pointed out. So, but you see, it's not so, it's not so clear always where the
it's not so it's not so clear always where the objective reality is. So for example, you can
train rats to produce a dopamine surge to an electric shock. Okay, so the shock is punishing,
right? Generally, punishment will bring behavior to a to a halt. But if you pair the shock with a
reward, but now that's, you know, intensity of shock matters, but it can be a pretty good shock.
If you pair the shock with a reward frequently, then the shock becomes positive. And so there's
a good example, even in a rat, where, yeah, yeah, it's a shock, and that's an objective reality,
it's electricity, but the valence of that can be shifted by learning. And so there is this
interaction between the psyche and the, and the objective, well, in the, in the domain of value.
And the thing is, so for an astute perceptual psychologist, the best one, always an ecological
approach to visual perceptions, great book, hard nose book, doesn't really go into narrative in
any direct sense, but is very much akin. He was one of the founders of modern perceptual psychology,
person who wrote that book. And he said for with children, for we don't see a cliff, we see a falling
off place. And even six months old, six month old, see a falling off place, they also see beauty,
they see symmetry, a lot of this is deeply wired, right, but still malleable, right, still malleable
by learning. So, and that's partly why there are these archetypal values, because they're built
into us biologically. And then if you flout them, well, I can give you a quick example of how flouting
this is catastrophic. Well, so, you know, part of the strange question, I suppose is, what exactly
are we interacting with? And you might say, well, it's the material world. And I would say, no,
not exactly. We interact more, what we interact with is more like a field of potential. Now,
we resolve that pretty quickly into perceptual objects, but it really is a field of potential,
because it can go one way or another, and somewhat unpredictably. Yeah, you talk about that. Yeah,
well, and consciousness, well, it's strange consciousness, consciousness snaps that into
well, the being that we perceive anyways. And so it's a field of potential. And so you can kind
of experience that you wake up in the morning, and you think, what am I going to do today? And
what you're saying is, well, I've got these degrees of freedom, weirdly enough. And if I act a certain
way, I hope these things will happen, as opposed to these things. And so what presents itself to
you in the morning, you've already seen your damn room, you don't even look at it really,
because you've memorized it. Well, what you perceive in the deepest sense is this field of
potential that you can interact with. Yes. Okay, now, now the issue is,
what's the best way of interacting with that field of potential? Well, think about it collectively.
Okay, you and I are having a discussion right now, because you can think and I can think,
but we think differently. Now, we're hoping that if we exchange thoughts, that we'll be able to
master what's coming out is better. And hopefully we will be able to. Now, imagine we shut that down.
Well, then we can't interact with that, with what's coming out is better, and it'll kill us.
And so that's partly why free discourse, free discourse isn't an option. It's not different
than thinking. And thinking isn't different than dying. So that's, that's one example of why the
West has elevated free speech to the highest place, even religiously, that's the divine word,
essentially. And that's the idea lurking underneath that it's like everything else is dependent on
that. Well, you know, that's intriguing to me because yeah, we both are have been speaking out
about free speech in various ways and I lately. But one of the things that was intriguing to me
that never hit me and you just sort of, it relates to what you said. And I was talking about this
recently that actually Stephen Fry, but but the it came to me from watching a speech by
my friend Christopher Hitchens who who said that the problem of censorship, the problem of cutting
down free speech, doesn't just it the saddest part isn't that you're infringing on the rights of the
speaker. No, that's not that's that's bad. But it's but but you're infringing on your own rights
because you lose the opportunity to learn that you might be wrong. Yeah, well, and that's fine
if you're if you're already in paradise and you already know everything that you need to know
to make your life just how it should be. That's no problem. But if you've got some problems.
Well, maybe you should listen a bit because well, even if you don't, the point is if you shut down
others, you really lose that opportunity to learn even if they're what they're saying is
reprehensible, you at least forced to ask, why do I believe what I believe? Why do I know they're
wrong? And maybe they're not wrong. And that is a right. So in some sense, you fringe up on your
own rights more than others because you lose that opportunity to to learn absolutely. Yeah,
absolutely. There's no doubt about that. Look, one of the things I really learned from Carl Rogers,
even though I talk so much, was the importance of listening, the vital vital vital importance
of listening. And it's I've met many, many people in my life who who no one has ever listened to,
not even once. And you know, if you listen to people, they unfold, that's that's the secret
to Rogerian psychotherapy and Freudian to some degree, because he led his people free associate.
It's like, if you just let so you listen, because then they watch while they're talking how your
face changes. And then maybe you ask them, well, I didn't understand that. And so they're thinking
and and they're on that edge, and they're putting themselves together, not metaphorically, man, this
is that they are they're reorganizing the internal chaos right in front of you. And that's part of
what's so fascinating about being a clinical psychologist, because you get in that groove
and it's so remarkable. It's what's so fascinating for me as some by doing these podcasts, which is
different for me, I'm used to expounding for most of my life. And and learning how to listen
effectively and and and get people to it's really for me, it's been a fascinating thing to do. And
that's one of the things I'm enjoying right now at this very instant. By asking you questions that
you can associate about free associate about. Okay, look, I think we've we've beaten that
chorus about belief and where you come from to death, I'll probably may come back to it
last week. But the second part of that is what I find fascinating, that you become that you
believe that this that this that you've convinced that the world that is belief has universal
moral absolutes, and that and that if you ignore them, and individuals or societies ignore them,
are doomed to misery, and eventual dissolution, it's interesting how much we'll get through here
because we're just at the beginning. But but I find that again, it's something that I that
doesn't resonate with me at all. So so why don't why don't you expound on it a little bit? Well,
I can give you some examples, I guess. So, and these, these are, these are like pointing to
narrative substructures, let's say, well, when I look at what's happening on the far left edge,
what I see is an existential issue. So here's the existential issues. There's the tyrannical father.
There's the benevolent father. There's the tyrannical mother. There's the benevolent mother.
That's for and we can easily become obsessed with any one of those. Well, you get obsessed with
the tyrannical father. Well, that's an existential absolute in some sense. And the reason for that
is that while we're historical creatures, right, so we have a culture, it's often viewed as a
patriarchy. And that's one way of looking at it. And it definitely has its evil edge. I mean,
and everyone to some degree suffers from the guilt of history. That's privilege, right? It's like,
well, do you really deserve what you have? I mean, you didn't invent all of it. And there's people
who maybe are just as worthy as you who don't have the same stuff. And, you know, what about
European invasion of North America, let's say, and etc, etc. Right. And so that's an existential
absolute. We always have to contend with the tyrannical father. Well, fair enough, but what
there's another half to that. And if you just get obsessed with this one thing, you're so off
balance that you're going to, you're not going to, you're not going to fix the problem. You're
just going to make it worse because you just don't, you don't have a sufficiently,
in some sense, even a sufficiently random view of the world randomized. Let's look at it that way.
Your sampling is off in a major way. And so then, well, and that tyrannical father, let's say,
that's also something really easy to identify with. That's what happens when people become
authoritarian. And there's a shadow to that. And so that's part of, and if you ignore that, well,
then your society becomes totalitarian. And it's like, well, good luck to you. It's like,
we've seen what happens when that happens. And there's a difference between a totalitarian
society and a free society. And the difference isn't trivial. And it's associated with value.
And what's at the top, at the highest place? Well, you said more, it didn't use values,
the word moral, which is intriguing to me. What do you mean by morality?
Well, morality basically is the difference between good and evil, fundamentally. And so
that's how I'm defining it. And you might say, well, is there evil or is there good?
And I know that's a complicated question. But at some point, there's an answer to that. So
here's how I answered it for me. Well, you can be dubious all you want about an ultimate good.
But there are things that have happened in the recent past, 100 last 100 years,
that are so terrible, that I defy you to look at them and say they're not evil.
And then you have to think very carefully, if you say that they're not evil, just exactly
what are you saying? And so, so then I invert that and say, well, I don't know what good is,
but it's the opposite of that. Right. And that's a good starting point, right? It's like, I don't
know. It's whatever takes me farthest away from that. And this was a personal thing for me to
some degree, because when I was wrestling with the issue of atrocity, and this is what I think,
I think this is one of the things that made me different from most people who think about these
things. I didn't think of myself as concentration camp victim. And I didn't think of myself as,
you know, Schindler, or the Dutch family that hid Anne Frank, because that's pretty bloody
unlikely. It's like, let's do some stats here. I thought of myself as a resentful concentration
camp guard. Okay. And that was quite shocking to do that. Yeah, well, it's like, are you a victim
or a perpetrator? Are you a hero or a perpetrator? Well, I can tell you for sure that you are at
least in part a perpetrator. And if you don't understand that, then if the temptation to become
a perpetrator arises, you won't know how to withstand it. And you may even want it. And you
think, well, I wouldn't want that. It's like, Oh, yeah, really? Is that right? You really know
yourself that well, do you? And you actually know what happened in Germany, do you? And the steps
that people took, read ordinary men, that's a great book, talk about step by step. That's a great
book, man. And those were ordinary guys. And they weren't particularly reprehensible. But what they
did, it's like, they were taking pregnant women out into fields, stripping them naked and shooting
them in the back of the head, you think, I couldn't do that. It's like, yeah, okay, maybe. And you
think you wouldn't enjoy it. It's like, Yeah, maybe you there's a lot more in there than you think,
unfortunately. So, well, well, so let's go back to the hierarchy of value, like that is embedded
inside a framework of good and evil. There's no way around it. It's part parcel of it's way out
at the fringes. And so when I talk about what's religious, so imagine there's a hierarchy of
value. And here's how this hierarchy works. The deeper the value, the more other values are dependent
on it. So that's the definition of deep. When you look at the deepest values, you are in the religious
domain, psychologically speaking. Okay, again, explain that you often say things and I and the
word in yeah, and I think we got to think about that's that's we got to think about this experientially
and not I'm not talking about propositional description. Yeah, I'm talking about something
different. Or you equate religion to biology, it throughout at least in many, many places,
yes, and and mythology, which I find. Yeah, I know. And and it's something I have to get over
because that's okay. It's hard. It's hard, man. Well, it's not just hard. I find it sort of,
I guess, for me, it diminishes the argument. I mean, you say, I, I, I, I, I, you really say I
learned that the meanings of the most profound substrat of belief systems could be rendered
explicitly comprehensible, even to the skeptical rational thinker. And then you just, and then
you say, and to me, this is sort of naturally turns me off, because you say the world as a form
for action is composed essentially of three constituents elements, which tend to manifest
themselves in typical patterns of metaphoric, metamorphic, metaphoric representation. First
is the unexplored territory. And I say fine, but then you automatically go to mythology as if it's
as if it has some, you say the great mother, nature, creative, destructive sources of final
resting place of all determinant things. Second is the explorer territory, the great father,
culture, protective and tyrannical, cumulative and ancestral wisdom. Third is the process that
mediates between unexplored and explorer territory, the divine son, the archetypical
individual creative exploratory world, we're adapted to this world of divine characters
as much as the objective world you are. And I see that you've found, I mean, the whole point
as far as I can see of a lot of what you're saying is something that on the surface seems
straightforward. It would be horrible if you didn't object to all that. Well, I should, but I
object to it. One of the reasons I object to it by nature is to say, well, it seems obvious
that myth, to the extent that it's, there's any universality of various myths, and the fact that
it goes back a long way is, is intimately, intimately reveals aspects of the way human's
thinking evolved, you know, evolutionary psychology and myth are related. Okay.
That seems obvious. And, but I don't know whether why one needs to take more of it
than that. I guess the question is, why, I don't think you need to make more of it than that.
That's quite a lot right there. There's a lot of it right here. There's all
Yeah, I'm trying to, I'm trying to unpack it. So, well, I'll give you an example. This is,
this is, I mean, the examples are quite nice. So
the Egyptians viewed Horus. Now, remember, they're trying to figure things out. They're trying to
figure out how to assemble a very large state, and they're trying to figure out what should be
sovereign. So they're trying to figure out, well, who is this pharaoh and what should he embody and
how should he act if things are going to work? And they're, they're doing this for like thousands
of years. They're, they're trying to puzzle this out and they're using their imagination.
And so they parse out their patriarchal God into two forms. There's Osiris and he's the old state.
He was once a hero. He was pretty good, but he got archaic and ossified, turned to stone in some sense.
So, and he has a son, Horus. Now, Horus is that Egyptian eye and everyone knows that eye. It's
the eye. Why the eye? Well, that's a falcon because falcons can really see. And so Horus was also a
falcon. Okay, so what the Egyptians were doing was worshiping attention. Okay, so now what, what
does that mean? Well, attention isn't the same as thought. So when you're listening in these podcasts,
you don't want a podcast going real well, you, you get into it and time disappears. Okay, it's
because you're attending, right? And what you're attending to fundamentally, you're on that edge
where you're willing to let the things that are ossified about your cognitive structures
flex. Okay. And, and you're expanding yourself out into unexplored territory. And that's way better
than being right. It's way more fun than being right. Although being right protects you from
being anxious. Not eventually. It doesn't work eventually. But being on that edge, well, we're,
we're adapted to that edge. I mean, I mean, seriously adapted to it. Yeah, well, I'm, I'm,
I'm certainly am. Well, everyone is, although the, this, the, let's say the breadth and intensity
of that edge is much different between different people and where they find it for them differs
with their temperament. But you need everything about your beliefs needs to be subordinate to
the process of transforming those beliefs, unless you already know everything. And so that's just
one, and so that's played out to some degree, you see that to some degree in Christian symbolism,
let's say, with it where there's a tension between the son and the father. And the father is more,
this is what is, it's already established. And the son is more, well, wait a sec. Yeah,
but there's this horizon of possibility that we have to contend with. So this needs to be updated.
And that's a very, it's a tough thing for human beings because well, it's a lot easier just to
go with what you know. But we just don't know enough. So we have to subordinate that to this
process of exploration that creative and that I believe that's encapsulated fundamentally in
hero mythology. Hero mythology is about transforming ideas. That's essentially what it's about.
I'll buy that. But why, I guess if I'm one, if one's trying to explain something, which I,
which you're talking about now, which I find fascinating and, and can relate to,
why cannot, why, what utility is there in reverting to the myth? Well, that's a good question.
I mean, partly it's the same utility that there is in me using an example to describe what I meant.
But yeah, but, but, but, but you're right. And the example, and I find when you write,
well, that was sort of a micro myth, more compelling, more compelling when you talk about,
say, and I say, I'm used to find the same thing about Oliver Sacks and other, but
more compelling when you talk about your experience as a clinical psychologist,
which something can relate to, then, then when you talk to me about the great father or the
tyrannical mother or the hero or, yeah, well, it should be more compelling because the problem
with those say low level abstractions is they lack concrete embodiment. So I'll give you an
example of that. This is a weird example, but it'll work. Mircea Eliade, he's a great historian
of religions, and he was cognizant of Nietzsche's proclamation that God had died. And Eliade knew
what that meant and what the consequences would be. But he went back when he was doing his
pioneering work into the history of religion. He said, this has happened many times. This is not
the first time. Why? Well, what happens is a community comes together and forms some
representation of the summum bonum, right? The thing that should be on top, the ultimate good.
But it gets so damn abstract that it doesn't connect to life. It's like, well, that's God,
but what does it have to do with me interacting with my wife or doing something embodied and
practical? It gets so abstract, it floats away. No one has any relationship to it anymore and it
dies. But that's not good for variety reasons, which we can get into. Well, part of the way that
the Christian imagination addressed that problem, speaking psychologically, is to take that abstraction
and make it incarnate in a particular time and place. And it pulls the story down to earth,
and it makes it much more compelling. A student once asked me, look, if there's all these
archetypal structures, why don't we just tell the archetype over and over? And I thought,
oh, it has to be particularized. It has to be optimally particularized for imitation. That's
why. And so if I get too abstract, you don't know what it means for perception or action and loses
all significance and you drift away. A good storyteller, he knows his audience and he can
put the story on the edge of their cognitive transformation. And then it's absolutely captivating.
But it means the archetype has to be particularized constantly and reparticularized constantly.
Well, it's another way. I mean, yeah, I guess it's often you frame things in a way that I think
is a fancy way of saying something that maybe I'm just too pedestrian. I would just say that
I said before teaching is seducing, car salesman is seducing. If you want to get to people,
you have to go ask where they're coming from. And you have to tailor your arguments to where
they're coming from so that they can emotionally relate. Isn't that just the case? Isn't that what
you're saying? Well, I'm trying to explain why those things are seductive. Okay, but why? Okay,
they are because no, that's the thing that it's the experiential issue. And that's also relevant
with regard to the notion of religious depth, which we should just take a quick side step.
Yeah, no, I was we're going to go there eventually. Because it's a technical issue,
as far as I'm concerned, because I'm trying to speak psychologically. So when you start to toy
with the deepest values upon which all these other values depend, that has an embodied consequence.
One is it's deeply upsetting. So it's anxiety provoking. The other is it's deeply wonder provoking.
And those things, those are both there. And the reason they're both there is because,
well, you blow apart that base level map and all sorts of things fly out of Pandora's box. And
some of those things might kill you, but some of those things might be just what you need to solve
your current problem. So it's very, it's very, it's tense. When you speak at religious depth,
there's an embodied consequence of that. It's independent of any discussion about,
you know, religious propositions as logical statements about the structure of reality.
For me, most of that's beside the point. It's like, no, no, you don't it's but for me,
most of it's only beside the point. Most of it's irrelevant. Well, it's irrelevant to what we're
discussing because there are depths. Most of it's silly. Yes. Yes. And there are depths. And if you
get deep enough, you have religious experiences. Now, what that means about all is a good one.
Well, okay. So that's the Einstein's goddess, you know, Spinoza's god, the fact that the universe is
comprehensible of the universe. Yeah, those call that a religious experience. Yeah, I think all
I'm defining this in some sense. Okay, I want to know, right. I'm defining this. Okay, so yeah,
yeah, yeah. So, so awe, let's take the emotion of awe, it's a mixture of emotions. It's both positive
and negative emotions. And it's predicated on a prey response to a predator. That's the biological
underpinning. So for example, your hair will stand on end. Well, why? Well, it's because
that's pile of erection. It's what happens when a prey animal sees a predator. It's like, poof.
Well, that's part of awe. It's like, you're in you, you've something greater than you and potentially
dangerous has come into view. That's the embodied part of that. Of course, it's way more. If I look
at the nice guy, I'm not buy it. Yeah, yeah, that's certainly greater than me. Yeah, it's certainly
something greater than me. I don't know whether it's potentially dangerous because it sort of seems
to be out there and separate. I mean, unless unless you have astrology or some bit of nonsense,
well, it's awe inspiring, even though it's completely at least on the surface unrelated to
me. Well, it's it's also a place though, where you do in some real sense, confront the infinite
unknown. Oh, yes, right there. Well, the infinite unknown will swallow you.
It swallows me every day. Well, it'll swallow you when you die. It will do that. You're surrounded
by it. Well, when I die, it won't swallow it. I mean, yeah, when you know, when you what do you
mean? When you say things like that, I don't know what you mean. Well, you dissolve into it because
it's a hurrah just to end. You just Well, it's yeah, I know, but you don't get you don't dissolve
into some mystical, infinite unknown. I'm not trying to say the wage. I know you're not. But
then when you say it, look, it's natural for people to then jump into this new age nonsense.
Yes, right. I want to I want to hold your feet to the fire only because I can you should you
absolutely should absolutely look here. What is one thing you experience at a funeral? You know,
I've seen this many times, is people will stand by the body of the person they love,
and they cannot speak. There's nothing to say. And it's because they're on the horizon. Now,
I'm not saying that you dissolve into anything, particularly, I'm saying it's a limit experience.
And when you look up into the sky, it's it's an analogy of that experience. You're on the
frontier in some sense, when you look up into the sky, and you're faced with in some sense,
you're faced with what you are in relationship to that. And now that's also okay, now I'm going
to go sideways here for a second, tell you a bit of a story. Okay, so I have no agenda. I've been
looking at this image with my wife and this friend of mine. And it's of Mary, the mother of God. Okay,
it's a very interesting image and Renaissance painters were all over this. So you can Google
Mary serpent stars, and you'll see like these beautiful paintings. Okay, so there's Mary,
her heads in the stars, 12 of them, there's a reason for that, and her foot's on the world and on
a serpent. Yeah, yeah, that's right. Well, it's the seasons. It's a bunch of things, man. It's a bunch
of things. It's a bunch of but it's the cosmos. But, but, okay, so there's that image and many,
many painters spent much time on that image. It's like it's very weird image, her heads in the stars,
her foot's on the serpent, the earth is down there, what the hell's going on? Well, here's
part of it. So when you face something that's deeply unknown, it calls to you in some sense to
be more than you are. Now, how is that related to the prey predator relationship? Well, if you're
prey, you should be a little more than you are in relationship to that predator. And so there's a
call to adaptation in the awe response to a predator. It's like, be more or die. And look at us, man.
We've done a pretty good job of doing exactly that for like little skinny naked apes. It's like,
look the hell out, man. Wolves run away from us. Okay. And so in some sense, we imitated the predator
as a consequence of that awe response. And we're good at imitating. And God only knows what we're
imitating when we look up at the stars. But this image of Mary is an attempt to puzzle that out.
So that serpent that she has her foot on, that's the snake. Well, okay, Mary's a mother. It's like,
don't eat my kids snakes for 60 million years, right? This is a deep image. But it's deeper
than that too, because there's this line of thinking and Jewish thinking and a Christian
thinking that associates the serpent in the garden with malevolence itself. So that's the
weird association between the snake and Satan, which is not in that original story. It's part
of the after story in some sense. And I puzzled over that for a tremendous long, it's like,
what's going on there? Why is that association exists? Well, the worst snake is not a snake.
The worst snake is like a meta snake. It's like, it's like the essence of snake. And then that
becomes something psychological. And the good mother doesn't just protect you from snakes.
It protects you from the snake in your heart. And that's a real snake, man. And if you're
going to protect your kids, one more thing, if you're going to protect your kids from the snake
in their hearts and in your heart too, you better bloody well have your head in the stars.
That's a nice analogy. I'll give you that. That's one of the ones that I can sort of
Well, that's what those artists were trying to puzzle out.
Hey, I guess so. But but at the same time,
why I can't understand what's so important about why for you is important to puzzle
that story about that specific myth that makes it worth
that makes it worth analyzing and and and and perseverating over why people paint Mary that
way or why why that myth of the Garden of Eden is what it is. Well, I mean, I guess you're because
because again, is it just simply because you think let me make it I can understand one aspect
and the other I can't. So I'm hoping the answer is what I my hoping the answer is because you think
it tells you something about the human psyche, not because you think it tells you something about
about the world beyond the human psyche. The first claim is plenty for me. Okay, that's fine. I buy
that. Then I understand that the only thing that I worry about is sometimes the one gets the impression
that that in well, this is where I get trouble because you see there is a fundamental problem
here that we could talk about as scientists. It's like, yeah, people parody me because people will
ask me questions like, do you think that's real? And so that's an equation is a B. It's like, yeah,
well, you think a is self evident when you ask me that question, but it's not. And so then you
might say, well, is this real? And so you might ask me, well, does this mean anything about the
structure of reality? And my answer would be, what do you mean by reality? And why are you so sure
that your presumption about what reality is, is the right presumption? So because I could say,
well, reality pretty clearly has a narrative edge. And I don't know what that means. When you say
real, I guess, yeah, but that's the issue. That's the quest. Well, look, when you come in, as you
say, yeah, well, no, no, I think I understand that. And I'm trying to, I'm trying to get into your
head here a little bit. So you're when you say reality, you mean human reality because you're
so tied to being here's the question. Here's a question for humans are relevant. Here's a question
for a physicist for a scientist. Good. Okay. What if Darwin and Einstein are in conflict?
They are, they're in conflict. Because, okay, the fundamental presupposition of Darwinism in some
sense is that there's nothing more real than that which selects.
Whoa, hold on. I think you're posing more on it than, than, than your fundamental. Let me rephrase
that. Are we adapted? Are we adapted to reality? Are we adapted to reality? We are adapted to our
own reality. Yes. No, no, no, no, no, no, wait a minute. Wait a sec. Remember earlier in our
discussion when you said that you won't walk through the window. Okay, so we're not just adapted
to our reality. Okay, we are fine tuned for the world around us to survive. Right. If you had,
okay, and the world around us is reality. Okay, that fine tuning has a narrative structure.
Go on. Why? Well, because we have to, I know, I know, I know, look, I do too. I do too.
Because we have to act out. We have to act. And our descriptions of actions, because the question
for us isn't what is the question is how to act, how to act, how to act and what would be. Right.
Now scientists, okay, by definition, I believe this by definition, the objective materialist
types cannot answer the question how to act. In fact, if they do, they're not doing what they
should be doing. But that leaves us with this question, which is, which is the question,
how to act. And so here we could have a discussion. What's the more fundamental question? What is,
that's the scientific presumption, or how should we act? Now, you might think it's
obvious that it's what is, but it is not obvious. It's tough. Now we're great. In fact, the next
question I was going to ask you, actually, I was going to, I was going to take a digression
into something you wrote about reason and hell. We'll get back to that. But at the very beginning
of maps of experience, you have these, you say the world as a form for action is a place of value,
a place where all things have meaning. This meaning, which is shaped as a consequence of
social interaction, is implication for action, or at a higher level of analysis, implication for
the configuration of the interpretive schema that produces or guides action. That's a long
wind away. Yeah, yeah, no, terrible. I know you tend to be long winded. It's just the way you are.
But that's okay. I'm working through that. But it's a definition of meaning. That sentence is a
definition of meaning. If it means something to you, it means either it's relevant for you to
change your action, or it's relevant for you to change your perception. And the meaning signals
that. Okay, but let me, so you can say the world is a place of things or a place of action. But
no complete worldview can be generated without using both modes of construal. The fact that one
mode is generally set at odds with the other means only that the nature of their respective
domains remains insufficiently discriminated. Adherence of the mythological worldview tend
to regard the statement of their creeds as indistinguishable from empirical fact,
even though such statements were generally formulated long before the notion of objective
reality emerged. Those who by contrast accept the scientific perspective, who assume that it is or
might become complete, forget that an impassable gulf currently divides what is from what should be.
Again, and I mean this in respect. I am not taking any offense to your question. There's no
offense intended. I'm really, what's different in that long discussion from Hume's statement
that you can't get ought from is? Well, what's different is that the world of ought is structured
in narrative and it's evolutionarily determined. And since it's evolutionarily determined, well
that gives us a scientific conundrum which no one's addressed. Well, you know, you often hear,
this is the other thing that interested me as a psychologist. I don't know where and somewhere
I have a quote and I was going to get to it, but we're certainly not going to get to all the quotes
obviously not in this discussion anyway. But you basically say science has a problem with the fact
that it can't really appreciate that there's a narrative and meaning and it doesn't embody that.
But what about the science of psychology? I mean, you're a psychologist. It's a weird hybrid.
But isn't that the whole purpose of psychology is to understand?
Well, it's got two purposes. Psychology is a weird hybrid because it's half medicine and half
research. You know, it's truly a hybrid because the clinicians, there are all these weird characters
like Freud and Rogers and the existential psychologists and Jung. And then there's the
straight research psychologists and they're more like the cognitive behaviorists on the,
let's say on the clinical front. And so it's facing both ways and in principle could bring
those things together. But you see the scientific, this is a terrible problem because one of the
things that the scientific perspective has done is made things look quite bleak existentially.
Now, I know there's wonderment in scientific investigation. I understand that. But it's strange
because science attempts to push subjective meaning out of the way, right? I mean, as part of its
process. And it should do that. But there's an existential problem there that leaves us
adrift. And look, one of the things I concluded from reading Milton's Paradise Lost in his
figure of Satan, Satan for him was that really the tyrannical and authoritarian rational mind,
the mind that presumes that his assumptions are final to reason. Exactly. He said that and
you know, that was the quote that not reason so much, not reason so much, not reason exactly.
Although the reason that the, the reason that the French revolutionaries tried to make a deity
in, in, in the great cathedral in Paris, that reason, that's Milton, Milton Satan. Why? Because
it falls in love with its own productions and raises them to the highest point. And for Milton,
he was a poet, right? He's imagining this. He doesn't know what's coming. But for me,
that's a warning from an artist about the dawn of totalitarian reason in the aftermath of the
scientific revolution. Okay, well, yeah, but you know, but you actually say it, I think,
the adoption of God's place by reason, something that inevitably generates a state of personal
and social being indistinguishable from hell. Yes. Well, what do you mean by that? Okay, I mean,
that's a really quite a dramatic statement about, that doesn't seem to suggest that reason is a good
thing. No, it's just not a good thing when it's elevated to the highest position. It's a really
good thing. Look, even, even in Milton's work, Satan is God's highest angel. And he falls the
farthest. It's not like this is not a good everything in its proper place. In Genesis,
man is instructed to subdue things properly, put them in order, put them in order. That's what it
means. Subdue, make everything, give everything it's due. Where does reason fit? Not at the top.
Attention. Why do you think there's intrinsic wisdom to something like Genesis?
Why do you think there isn't? Because it's 5000 years old and probably way older than that.
Yeah, I know. But why are things that are ancient give me insight into human psyche,
but they don't necessarily give me insight into into profound under to profound
understandings of the world around me. I think we're not in a scientific way. They don't not not in
the way that modern science does. They're not that isn't what they are at all. They're not that
there's something completely look, here's what they are in some senses. Look, we have an idea that
we can rank order literature by depth, right? Because you read a shallow book,
someone tells you a shallow story, you read a deep book and you have a sense of depth.
I have a duty. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. So the deepest stories are religious.
Why? That's a definition. Oh, hold on. It's a definition. I'm allowed to make that definition
because I disagree with it. It's because it's because religious emotions start to be aroused
when stories are told at that level. This has nothing to do with with propositional belief.
It's a definition. So you're saying if you're saying, okay, you use the word religion,
you tell me that I should use the word all, which I like better. If you're saying the stories that
that that are deepest are ones that relate to awe, I can understand that. If that's,
translate what you're saying. Yes. Yes. And then this is experiential. Right. And then I would
also say awe is a biological instinct. And part of the manifestation of that instinct is the impulse
to imitate. It's the impulse to because yeah. Okay. So then the question, here's another question.
What do we imitate? Well, we don't just copy each other. We don't
literally move the same way as the person we're imitating. We see someone that we are in awe of
that we respect and admire. We're gripped by the instinct to imitate. What are we imitating?
Well, imagine that we can see that in five people. And then the person,
those people, they do some bad things, but we ignore those. Okay. We're imitating something
central about all of them. That's a spirit that this is a definition. This is, it's a definition
because it's disembodied abstraction. It's a disembodied abstraction of action. It's a spirit
for all intents and purposes. We're really smart. We abstract out the admirable and imitate it.
That's also part of the religious process. Exactly that. What is it that's admirable across
instances of admirable behavior? And we imitate that. And when your child, look, here's an example.
This is a good example. Your kid goes out on the field and he can zip down and score a goal and
soccer. And he's got a pretty good shot at it, but a teammate and maybe not one that's so good
is really open. And so he passes and the other kid scores. And you're happier about your damn kid
doing that. Then you would, if you're having any sense, then you would be whether, if he scored
a goal, because he is embodying the spirit of being a good sport. That's way better than scoring a
goal. Okay. So that, that's a good example of, because if you're smart and I see parents who do
this badly all the time when I go to sports, I hate them watching the parents. Yeah, it's terrible
because they don't do this. They subordinate the local victory to the character development.
Yeah. Yeah. No, they sort of the other way around. They subordinate the character development to the
local victory. Yeah, I was wondering what you were going to get. Yeah, exactly. So they're
imitate, they're, they're worst. Yeah, it's terrible. That's sportsmen. Oh yeah, I can't stand going.
Yeah. And then you look underneath that, it's like, oh, you have a lot of under
unrealized dreams, a lot of resentment, you're projecting that all in your child. And that has
to do with your unresolved shadow and to the pathology that you had with your parents. And
it's like just an endless nightmare going down into that sort of stuff. And you go
would weigh down, you find some things down there, and they are really ugly. And that's why
you don't like going to those soccer games. And no wonder. So, a lot of this is definition,
right, rather than an argument in favor of in some sense. I guess, I guess for me, yeah, but
so yes, and I think, you know, I'm going to try and segue slowly here, because we could go on for
another two hours. And I'm not going to, I know we've gone. I can't because I'll die.
No, I know. And we're going to go, we're going to go on for another 20 minutes. Okay, because I've
got tickets. I've got tickets to a movie. It's even more serious. Okay, okay. But
but so I, I tend to put reason up at the top. I still maintain that, that, that, that even that
reason ultimately, even though you can't get off from is without is and a reason applies to is you
can't get off. And, and, and so I think I want to quibble with that. Okay, I want to quibble with that.
Sure, sure. Okay. To some degree, this is going to hinge on how we define reason, right, because
it's kind of an expandable word. And yeah, but, but I think it's useful to draw a distinction between
reason and attention. And attention should be higher. Because attention feeds reason, right?
So when you're in these podcasts, and you're attending, new information is flooding in. Now,
that's reasonable. But I wouldn't say that's reason. Reason is more like, yep. It's, it's
impure. No, I agree with you there. In fact, actually, I think you said something in my
desperately disagreed with the idea, you say somewhere that the person who is truthful
is then going to naturally do the right thing or something like that. And I think eventually,
well, yeah, but, but that really read that really graded on me because it because it missed the
attention part, namely, revel, you don't get knowledge by revelation, you only get knowledge
by attention. And what I would call attention being empirical, being experiment and testing
the world around you know, you get it, you get knowledge from revelation all the time, all the
time. Sure, I'll give you an example. You got wisdom, maybe. No, I'll give you an example, man.
Okay, this happens to you all the time, but it maybe it's an issue of definition. Right. Okay, so
you're trying to solve a scientific problem. So you ask yourself the question. Well, what happens
is that answers pop up. Now you have to use reason to differentiate the quality of the answers,
but the fact that those answers manifest themselves in the field of your consciousness,
that's revelation. Oh, no, no, it isn't. It's based on my previous empirical observations
of the world. I say, oh, not just. It's way more than that. It's way more than that.
No, no, no, no, no. Sure, it's based on the entire history of your biology.
If you locked theoretical physicists in a room for 40 years and asked them to come up with a theory,
the theories they come up with would have no relation to the world around us,
because they constantly have to be prodded and changed by observation and experience.
Of course, of course. And the brilliant insight, I've had, you know, gosh,
there are times in my life I've had a brilliant insights and I wrote them down as papers.
Nature didn't happen to agree with them. Of course. And so that's what I mean.
I didn't say that that kind of revelation was infallible by any stretch of the imagination.
It's not. And that's partly why you have to discuss it with other people.
I guess I think of, well, it defines it once again, and it's all epistemology, I suppose.
That's why I'm a physicist and not a philosopher, a psychologist, I guess.
But you know, when you say that, oh, what do you mean by knowledge?
To me, knowledge is an understanding of the way the world works.
What do you mean by works? That's all knowledge is the way it functions.
So you make predictions and you understand the way the world works.
If I say, if this happens now, that will happen then.
Yes. To me, you know, that's just a very pedestrian thing. It's why I'm a physicist.
But that's, I guess, how I would define knowledge. How would you define it?
I think that knowledge is basically experienced in relationship to
action and predictions about the outcomes of actions.
So we agree. Oh, yes, yes, yes, yes.
And then that kind of knowledge can only come from experience then.
No, definitely not.
Because you can't say how the world's going to work if you haven't,
next, if you haven't watched at how the world has worked up to now.
But you know that that's not true because the apparatus that you're
using to acquire that knowledge of the world is like three and a half billion years old.
And all of that had to come for you to draw those conclusions from
the experience that presents itself.
So revelation is definitely a consequence of your experience with the world.
But think about the platform that's doing that.
There's revelation. I think it's just reason applied to observation, right?
That you could call that revelation if you want.
It's my reasonable rational mind.
Yeah, but where do you think over what I see? Fair enough.
Well, where does thought come from?
Where does thought come from?
You're supposed to tell me you're the psychologist.
I am telling you.
No, no, no, but I'm saying it bubbles up from the depths.
There's no doubt.
Look, and I'm not I'm not being naive.
I, you know, again, we've talked about this before and you made this other wonderful statement
about reason being the slave of the passions.
And I'll buy that.
So I'll understand that there are all sorts of human reasons why I do what I do.
And I pretend afterwards it's rational thinking.
But the, but the knowledge ultimately comes when all of that is is filtered by the results of
experiments that so that so that, yeah, there may be all sorts of things, reasons I do things
that I don't understand why I'm doing them.
But the knowledge that comes out of it doesn't come from any of those reasons or any of that
internal machinations.
It comes from a from a process that eventually I can compare to reality and test it and then
its knowledge, but it doesn't come from just sitting there and saying the world works this way
because who the hell knows how the world works unless you unless you observe the world constantly.
Look, most of that I'm in complete agreement with.
But, but we think about the scientific process.
I mean, one of the things that we don't teach young researchers is how to generate hypotheses.
Yes.
Like hypotheses, hypothesis testing.
Okay.
So now you want to generate hypotheses.
Well, here's something you can do that will help read a lot widely a lot.
Yeah.
Right.
And then ask yourself some questions and hypotheses will come bubbling up.
Okay.
Are they knowledge?
No, they're proto knowledge, but they're absolutely.
In fact, I wanted to read not only read a lot, but that's one of the problems.
You may not get this as a say, oh, you may because people are fascinated with the consciousness.
So you may get some of this.
But as a physicist, I get this all the time.
I get every day people writing me five times a day with their theories of of the of everything
and well intentioned people.
I don't want to put them down.
They thought hard.
They've done it.
But what they don't realize is that you the the hypotheses to get good hypotheses to which
is really asking good questions, which is something we talked about earlier,
which is really what it's all about requires a lot of baggage.
You have to have read a lot.
You have to in order to know what the good questions are,
you have to know where the current state of knowledge is.
And so the problem with all of these letters I get is they're well intentioned,
but they don't know they don't have all the baggage that goes along with it.
And it's hard to tell people, oh, you really have to.
Well, you can't.
Yeah.
But I mean, it's it's it's sad to say to people this is nice, but you really haven't.
You don't understand all the precursors that are necessary to get to the point
where your question makes sense.
Yes.
And you don't also don't understand how ruthless you have to be in killing off
your own beloved hypotheses.
Absolutely.
And right.
And yeah, that's right.
But but again, to be fair to some of these people,
they haven't had the opportunity to do that yet.
Yes.
Just at the early stages of the person.
But you but you have to have the built, as you say,
to get to the right hypotheses.
You have to read a lot or either that or experienced a lot.
I mean, that's the other way you can do it.
And or, you know, if you're Richard Feynman, instead of raising by experiencing,
I mean, you know, you write 60,000 pages of equations and you've figured out a lot.
So you now know how to address any situation because you have a lot of intellectual,
you have a lot of this baggage, you have a lot of intellectual armor with you.
So you know how to address situation A, B, C and D because you've prepared for that.
And some of what you're saying when I when I read you and and I'm being generous,
is you're saying, look, as an adult, you have to get that intellectual armor as well.
You have had to have the bad experiences.
You've had to have these things so you know that the world can be a bad place,
as well as a good place, and you're prepared for it.
And you have you have the armor.
So when someone is mean to you, you know that, you know,
you can respond to different ways.
You can become resentful, which is the, you know, in that particular.
You can become bitter and resentful and all the rest.
Or you can say, let me let me take an attitude that makes my life better rather than worse.
And that's part of the armor that I think you're trying to provide people with.
And so part of it is, sure, I'm trying to ask broadly speaking,
do we actually want things to be worse?
Exactly. And that's why both of you react.
So both you and I react the same way.
So bitterly to these people who not only feel victimized,
but these people who want to make sure that no one makes the impossible happen,
which is that no one ever has anything bad happen to them.
Because because you you you do poignantly say at one point I wrote down,
this is the point where he's really getting something deep.
And it's where you talk about the fact that I think the example of the young girl
who never has any who's protected her whole life and never has any anything bad happen to her.
And oh, it's a Maleficent.
It's the example, again, you always have to use these stories,
which to me don't add anything, but to others they might.
But but the notion that it's going to come back and bite you in the butt literally,
or the finger, if you if you if you've been protected from the recognition
that bad things can happen and how to deal with them,
and that they never should happen.
And if they happen to you that's unfair,
then you don't understand that the world is unfair
and you better be prepared for a world that's unfair.
Yes, and if that's if you've protected your children from all snakes,
then you're the snake.
Yeah, OK, well, I think there we agree.
Let me let me the last thing I'm going to do.
I mean, we could there's so many ways of tangents,
and maybe we'll have a whole bunch more.
I would also say Lawrence,
there's something we should think about temperamentally too, you know.
So people like you speaking broadly and respectfully,
because I know lots of people like you,
they're more thing oriented in their thinking, right?
That's what makes you interested in physics and engineering.
That's a real temperamental difference.
And you would be less inclined to stories.
No, I love I love stories.
In fact, when I write, I write stories,
but I guess I think of them as a hook to understand something else,
rather than something deep within themselves.
I guess that's the difference between you.
I love stories because I think there are a useful way of explaining,
a useful way of getting people interested.
And and but but for me, the underlying,
what I would call the underlying reality is more interesting than the story.
Well, think of a map.
Map is an interesting thing.
So because a map, you know, the maps,
meaning there are no maps in your book.
Well, stories are maps.
I know, but you're looking for them to see if there are any maps.
Well, think about a map, though,
because a map in some sense is an objective representation of the territory.
But in some sense, it's not because the only thing that's on the map
are things that people find valuable.
And so even in that,
you see this weird interplay of narrative and reality, right?
Of course, it's a map.
It's it's if it isn't accurately laid on the world,
you don't get to where you want to go.
Yeah, but it only shows you where you want to go.
I want to go.
Right, exactly.
You might want to go.
One of the author of the map thinks you might want to go,
which is always frustrating for me when I look at maps
because they often.
Or where the consensus has.
And look at a map.
Most of it's like really vague.
Why?
Well, because you don't want to go there.
And so and that is really in some sense,
how we look at the world is we we put a map on it.
And it's a narrative.
It's a filter out where we are.
Absolutely.
Yeah.
And and I defer to you in that sense because you're I mean,
because yeah, because you you you're interested in the psyche
and you know much more about it than I do.
But I guess I don't give it a higher priority.
I say, yes, that is the way humans interact with the world.
But to me, that's that's of some interest,
but it's not of key interest to me.
What's interesting is the world, right?
So much not so much the way the humans.
Well, that that's fair.
That's fair.
And and look at how where it's got us.
I mean, we can't underplay the power of of that kind of thinking.
But one question that haunts me continually is,
well, what does the fact that that's the way we look at the world
say about the world itself?
And then that gets tough because it's start
because you start to have to have conversations like,
well, what do you mean the world exactly?
Well, no, but that you really to hit it that what that question you ask,
what is how we the way we look at you said it very well.
We look the world.
So what does it say about the world itself?
Yes.
And to me, I think that is a dangerous path.
It represents it.
It says a lot about how how how we learn as human beings to understand the world
and deal with the world evolutionarily and successfully or unsuccessfully,
which as a psychologist, I think you're you know,
you're trying to help people avoid the latter.
But I think it's I'm wary about the claim that you can use that
to understand the world itself.
I didn't I didn't claim that.
I didn't claim that you could.
I claimed that it was an interesting question.
But I'm going to put an interesting question.
I'm going to put a knot in your tail in one way.
I think hopefully.
Well, one of the things that's happened in biology,
and I think I probably have to stop after this because I'm getting.
OK, I have one question.
I have to do one just one question after this.
Sure. OK, OK, OK.
So one of the key insights of Darwin that was underplayed by biologists for decades,
but has recently come back more into favor is the fact that a lot of
our being and that of many other creatures was a consequence,
not of natural selection per se, but of sexual selection.
OK, now sexual selection is mediated by consciousness.
Certainly, I'll buy that.
Consciousness shaped evolution.
OK, we evolve to adapt to what's real.
What does that say about consciousness and its reality?
Now, the religious stories, one of the things that's interesting about them,
is they claim a kind of primacy for consciousness that isn't in keeping,
generally speaking, with the scientific viewpoint.
But if consciousness is so deeply structured into reality that it selected us,
then it's real, man.
Now, but what do you mean real?
Well, that's that's the rub.
And it's not an evasion.
It's like, no, no, wait a second here.
Like, is consciousness just epiphenomenal?
Well, it seems pretty similar across animal species, so that's interesting.
And maybe it's epiphenomenal, maybe it's not.
I mean, I don't know because I don't understand consciousness at all.
I don't know what consciousness is, and I don't even know if we have other...
There's big debates, I thought, of whether other species have consciousness per se,
and at least in the way that, you know, humans have...
Well, they don't seem to have this elaborated self-consciousness for sure.
Yeah, self-consciousness, that's for sure.
And some of them can recognize themselves in a mirror,
but they don't have an elaborated self-consciousness.
As I say, I mean, that's...
And you're right, and that's a deep question.
And one that's one of the...
I said to you at the last time we talked,
that's one of the reasons I became a physicist,
because it's too complicated for me.
I still...
I've talked to many people and no one's given me a definition of consciousness
that I can yet understand, and...
Yeah, well, I think the...
I don't think the problem of the question of what consciousness is,
I don't think that's an epistemological question.
I think it's an ontological question.
It's like way down there.
It's certainly way down there.
Someone once said to me, I don't know if I said that last time,
it was an interesting observation,
that you could tell how little we know about something
by the number of books that are written about it.
The more books written, the less we know.
And there's tons of books about consciousness.
There are a few books about quantum mechanics,
because once Dirac wrote down quantum mechanics,
you don't have to write another book about it.
Let me read you two quotes.
This is the last thing I want to do.
And maybe I'll just...
We may not even be a question.
To me, this illustrates, in some sense,
the difference of our psyches, more in mine.
There's a quote here in Beyond Order.
First a question, what is the world made of?
To answer this, we will need to consider reality.
The world, as it is fully experienced by someone alive and awake,
with all the richness of subjective being left intact.
Dreams, sensory experiences, feelings, drives, and fantasies.
This is the world that manifests itself to,
or better, that you meet head on with,
your unique individual consciousness.
I think that encapsulates a lot of what you've just been saying.
But it reminded me of a quote from one of the people I admire most
as a science popularizer, and maybe as a scientist,
Jacob Brunowski, who more than Carl Sagan,
I think, did a wonderful...
I just hold him in the highest regard.
And here's the quote from him.
Dream or nightmare.
We have to live our experience as it is, and we have to live it awake.
We live in a world which is penetrated through and through by science,
and which is both whole and real.
We cannot turn it into a game simply by taking sides.
And so, I think that is the...
That maybe that's a good place to end,
because I think it's a great beginning point
of a further dialogue between you and me,
because I view his view, and the two are very closely related,
the two statements, but they have very different perspectives, I think.
Look, I really like the questions,
and I know you were apprehensive to some degree about peppering me with them,
but I'm perfectly happy, although it's difficult,
to be questioned in that manner.
Like, I know that many of these things seem obscure,
and they were bloody obscure to me when I was first starting to figure them out.
But the questions that you threw at me are questions
that people have all the time about what I'm trying to talk about,
and what people like Jung were trying to talk about.
I mean, he's even more impenetrable than me.
So, that's why I don't read philosophy very much, but I have.
I gotta admit, I pretend I don't, but I have.
But no, look, I wanted...
Look, if I didn't think it was worth parsing what you're saying, I wouldn't have...
I absolutely understand that.
And I'm sorry, because I agree with you.
I love the questions.
And I told myself when I was preparing this,
let me just let Jordan ask me questions,
because it's so much more interesting for me than the other way around.
But I thought I owed it to you to ask you those questions,
but there's a whole bunch of questions that I know you still had for me,
which I hope to have in the last hour of this discussion.
We haven't had time for it.
We'll do it again.
Well, let's do it again.
Yeah.
Let's agree to do it again.
And I hope you've enjoyed it, and I hope it's...
Some of the things were new,
and I hope that for people listening that this will provide additional insights
into both you and the things you're saying.
And for me, it's always...
I was going to say a revelation, but I won't use that word.
But it's fascinating for me to learn.
So I've really enjoyed it, and I really do appreciate your time.
And yeah, this is just the beginning, I hope, of more.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Yes, well, it's a great compliment to be taken seriously.
Like, and I understand that, you know, very much.
No, in fact, I think that's maybe what charmed me about when we first talked to me
is the questions you had, you know, it's good.
People react a lot better when they're taken seriously, but I do, and I'm glad that you feel that way.
I hope you enjoyed today's conversation.
You can continue the discussion with us on social media and gain access to exclusive bonus content
by supporting us through Patreon.
This podcast is produced by the Origins Project Foundation, a non-profit organization whose
goal is to enrich your perspective of your place in the cosmos by providing access to the people
who are driving the future of society in the 21st century and to the ideas that are changing
our understanding of ourselves and our world.
To learn more, please visit OriginsProjectFoundation.org.
