I am very moved by your kind words, it's a great honor which you have bestowed on me.
I feel even somewhat embarrassed, especially with so many eminent colleagues here.
I don't know if I deserve this honor, perhaps my merit has been to be interested in irreversible
processes already at an early stage, when this subject was not very popular.
I like to remember a conference which I had been organized when I was still very young
in 1946, which was dealing with irreversible processes and at the end of my lecture, some
of the most famous thermodynamics of this time stood up and said, I really don't understand
why this young man is interested in irreversible processes.
After all, irreversible processes are transients and after some time you come to equilibrium,
why therefore not be directly interested in equilibrium.
I was so astonished that I had not really the presence of mind to say, well, we are
all transients, therefore it's rather natural to be interested in our human condition.
At this stage, to use the expression used by Professor Feigenbaum, everybody was convinced
that there was one universality and this universality was equilibrium.
If you perturb the system, well, like let's say a pendulum with friction, it goes back
to its equilibrium position.
If you perturb a liquid, a gas, it goes back to equilibrium.
So we were very astonished that when we studied non-equilibrium processes, we came to the
conclusion that at the well-defined distance from equilibrium, some quite different happen.
And as was mentioned, these different, these new things which happen, was as Professor Gover
already mentioned, that there is a possibility of new coherent structures.
And this is generally the case if there is some non-linear feedback.
For example, x becomes y, y becomes x, proteins give nucleic acids, nucleic acids give proteins.
Then the type of laws to which we are used generally are no more valid and you come to
some very unexpected phenomena such as we see now today with the Jabotinsky-Belouzov reaction
of chemical oscillations that we can see also, space structure, spirals, waves of all
kind and we are only at the beginning.
And it is very interesting that this really has shattered our ideas about that is, for
example, the chemical reaction.
Generally we had the idea that a chemical reaction is a random encounter of molecules
where to produce organized patterns, coherent time series, of course this is not adequate.
There must exist long range correlations which are absent at equilibrium.
I like to say in a slightly, I would say anthropomorphic way that matter at equilibrium is blind,
but far from equilibrium it begins to see.
And if we push the system further away from equilibrium by pushing matters who is a reactor
more rapidly or by heating some part including some other, we have some other type, more
complex type of processes which appear and chaos is one of them.
Well, personally I have some hesitation to emphasize the word chaos because chaos has
a little negative connotation.
It is the difficulty of prediction which is emphasized by this connotation.
I like to speak more about self-organization, about the possibility that for given boundary
conditions and for a given mechanism you may have more and more possible structures with
broken time symmetries.
When I was young my teachers were very proud when they could prove that for given boundary
conditions and a given mechanism you had only one solution.
Now we are very proud when we can show that for a given mechanism and given boundary conditions
there are many.
When I was invited to give a talk here I had to make a difficult choice.
I could either speak to you about non-equilibrium structures and the relation with chaos and
this is today a very fashionable subject.
These ideas have been applied in many fields.
Another possibility which was open was to try to give you an idea about the work in which
I am involved with my co-workers and two of my closest co-workers are here, Professor
Petrowski and Hazegaba and to speak to you more about things which make me believe that
indeed chaos may be a new science and as a subject of the conference is really chaos
the new science I decided to try to do this.
However this is not an easy task.
Let me start with the following remark.
After all you have seen these beautiful structures described by Mandelbrot yesterday.
You have heard about these non-linear equations and the road to chaos beautifully described
by Feigenbaum.
But you can ask the question what is the relation between all these interesting and remarkable
phenomena and the basic description of nature as embedded in Newton's equations or in quantum
mechanics.
And here I would like to emphasize that the type of processes described yesterday by
Feigenbaum occur only when there is a broken time symmetry.
It is then that you have the Stokes-Navier equation, then that you have a reaction diffusion
equation.
Therefore irreversibility is very important, that is what I already just mentioned, that
is when you go away from equilibrium that you have all these new phenomena.
What means irreversibility?
Reversibility means that there is a natural time ordering.
It is obvious that you can say that industrial revolution came after, let's say, a neolithic
time.
It is obvious that we can make a distinction between young men and an older one.
But is this time ordering basic in nature or is this time ordering simply in our mind?
And that is really a question which has been discussed since centuries.
And the reason why it has been discussed is that if you take the simplest phenomena such
as a pendulum, well, it can start here, go there, or go from here to there, and you cannot
say what's really earlier.
It seems that once you go to the basic description, then you essentially lose the direction of
time.
And this is also true in quantum mechanics.
Therefore, the question is really time real, time is irreversibility.
Now this question was really open, this pose, with the discovery of thermodynamics in the
19th century in 1865, when Closet made his famous statement that the entropy of the universe
is increasing and therefore brought in a kind of evolutionary view of the universe.
But the great mathematicians of this time, the great physicists, didn't pay any attention
to this.
This was a science produced by engineers in physical chemists which are very low on the
scale, you see, of, I would say, of hierarchy in natural sciences.
Therefore, one of the merits of Boltzmann was, who was certainly a great physicist,
was to ask, but after all, essential about that, is there something really fundamental?
He was very much influenced by Darwin, and he tried to make a kind of evolutionary picture
involving populations, not of living beings, but population of molecules.
He came out with this kinetic theory.
But people were rapidly pointing out to him that this was incompatible with the basic
time symmetry of Newton's equation.
And he became gradually more and more unhappy about the situation.
He was really like a man who had two loves, two women he loved at the same time.
On one side, he knew very well the basic equation of physics and the properties, on the other
side, he believed in an evolutionary world, and he could not have made up his mind.
That gave really a kind of tragic flavor to his life.
And the defeat of Boltzmann was considered by his hair, to some extent, as a triumph,
as a triumph of the idea that time is in our mind, where Einstein, much closer to us, has
written time as a reversibility is an illusion.
I always found curious that this conclusion was so readily accepted, because if you really
think that time is an illusion, well, human life is an illusion, and with it all the attempts
we can make to find more about the world.
That is a remark which Karl Popper has made and which is completely correct.
And I think if there was no crisis due to the defeat of Boltzmann, this came from the
fact that the physicists were convinced that the aim of physics was to express the description
of the nature in terms of universal time-reversible laws.
And this comes back really to the ideology of the period in which science, as it exists
even today, was conceived in the 17th century.
At this time, life was emphasized very much, the fact that for God nothing can be hidden,
that essentially, for a well-informed observer, what will ever happen is already present in
the present.
Therefore, in a sense, the time has to be eliminated.
And this idea to describe everything in terms of universal laws was really the goal, the
ambition of physics.
And often it seemed that physics was very close to discover really that it was right,
that we were at a point where we could reduce the universe to this universal time-reversible
laws.
And every time something went wrong.
In a sense, quantum mechanics had to introduce the observer, the strange role of the observer,
of measurement, and so on, which I shall come back later.
And general relativity came finally to the idea of the Big Bang, which is certainly a
temporal event.
Last year's conference in Minnesota had a very provocative title, The End of Science.
I don't believe that we can speak about the end of science, but we can certainly speak
about the end of certain forms of rationality associated to classical ideology.
And I think it is building up of a new rationality, of a new view of nature, cause, as it is generally
understood, certainly plays an important role.
Then, as I already mentioned, the question, is this all in our mind or not, as today a
different, has today different aspects than it had at the time of Boltzmann.
Because we know precisely that going away from equilibrium, going away from situations
which are timeless, nature takes new forms.
You have all these non-equilibrium structures, which I call dissipative structures, which
come in, which present a lot of broken symmetries, which are maybe temporal sequences or space
problems and so on.
Therefore, the question is where to look, how to incorporate time inside dynamics.
And let me give you a very simple example where you can see that this can be incorporated
in type of systems, which one calls unstable dynamical systems.
And the discovery of unstable dynamical systems is really one of the great discoveries of
the end of last century and of this century.
It's quite remarkable, this century is associated to two great conceptual revolutions, quantum
mechanics and relativity, but classical sciences like thermodynamics or classical mechanics
have also undergone quite a bit of change.
And this change, as I shall show at the end of my lecture, is likely to change quantum
mechanics and relativity.
Let me explain you what an unstable dynamical system is, and I don't know if this is very
clear.
And you see, it is a geometrical transformation in which you take a square, you squash it,
you put the right hand above the left, and you obtain more and more this type of stripes,
you see, you fragment it more and more.
And you can immediately understand the two points which were closed in the beginning will
show up in different stripes there at the end.
And these systems are characterized by instability, which has been mentioned yesterday by Feigenbaum
and Jappunov exponent.
That means that if I take two points very close, initially they will go away exponentially
and the lambda here is a kind of inverse of a temporal horizon, and in this case takes
a very simple value.
And this is an unstable dynamical system, it's a chaotic system, because you can no
more associate to it at all the regularity of periodic motions, like the motion of the
earth around the sun.
It is a highly unstable system, particles go away and it's very, very stochastic.
It is an example of what's called a Kolmogorov flow, and this gives me the opportunity to
mention the enormous, the extraordinary work of Kolmogorov, because K stands for Kolmogorov.
And I, to say also how much I regret that in the popular literature about his subject,
his work is not sufficiently mentioned.
Because Kolmogorov really was the first to understand that two concepts which seem to
be of opposite are in fact, can in fact be closely related, and this is very important.
And one is the idea of regularity, which we generally associate to dynamic motions, like
periodic motions, and the idea of stochasticity.
This system is a highly random system.
In fact, when you follow, I have no time to show it, but if you follow the trajectory
of points, you can show that the next position of the point is as random as you would play
on a roulette.
That is the reason why this system is also called a Bernoulli system, Bernoulli referring
of course to games of chess.
So this is already an example of an unstable system.
Now the important point is that for such unstable system, we can introduce a new concept of
time.
In addition to the idea of time as motion, as changing from this first picture to the
second, to the third, and so on, we can introduce a time which is not related to the motion,
but which is related to the topology, to the number of stripes, to the type of conformation,
which is a global judgment.
It's like when you look on somebody and you want to guess what is his age, you should
not look only on his hair or on his fingers or that.
It's a global judgment.
And here the vein which the red and the white distribute is a global judgment.
And in fact, as my colleague, Mithra, has shown, you can introduce a time operator that's
of no importance, which measures the number of fragmentations which you have to do to
obtain a given picture.
So there appears a second time, a time which is no more related to motion, but which is
related to something more qualitative.
And I would like to show you now that in most systems which we meet in nature, we can also
introduce this type of second time, and this can be introduced for unstable dynamical systems.
And that is a vein which time enters now into the fundamental description of nature.
And here I come to the second giant of unstable dynamical systems, and that is certainly Poincaré.
And in 1892, Poincaré asked a very interesting question.
He didn't ask it in this general form, but it is equivalent.
He asked the question, can we eliminate interactions in dynamical systems?
As you know, a dynamical system is described by the energy, which physicists call Hamiltonian,
and which contains momentum, kinetic energy of the particles, and interaction, potential
energy.
And he asked, can we make a transformation, a canonical transformation, a one which keeps
the usual form of physics such that you can eliminate the potential energy?
And his answer was no.
And that is very fortunate, because in a sense if the answer would be yes, that would mean
that the universe would be identical, isomorphic to a system of non-interacting particles,
and this would mean that there would be no coherence.
If there would be no coherence, then there would be no chemistry, there would be no life,
and there would be no noble conferences.
So it has some good and bad aspects.
But anyway, Poincaré pointed out that we cannot do it, and he showed something much
more.
Poincaré showed why you cannot do it, and you cannot do it not because of the forces,
but because of resonances.
Every child knows what a resonance is when he puts in motion a swing.
Next year I've drawn two harmoniques, which are in resonance, but the mathematical definition
is that you have two objects, or two degrees of freedom, of course you can have many more,
which have frequencies omega 1, omega 2, and if there is some integers, and 1 and 2, such
that the sum is equal to 0, and one of the integers have to be different from 0, then
we have resonance.
Now the existence of this resonance, of this strong coupling, because of resonance, as
I mentioned, is not related to the existence or non-existence of forces, that's a different
problem.
And this needs to, the famous problem which Poincaré called the problem of dynamics,
it is the problem of small denominators, why?
Because if you consider a dynamical system, and suppose the dynamical system is made up
by two parts, one which is integrated, you have eliminated the interactions, and then
you put a small perturbation, which contains the interactions, and you want now to eliminate
these interactions.
Then when you make the perturbation calculation to try to eliminate it, you come always to
situations in which this small, in which this resonance condition appears in the denominator.
Now if this is 0 in the denominator, that means then it is infinite, the expression is infinite,
that leads to the problem of small denominators, therefore to infinities.
And that is, it is these infinities which make a system non-integral.
Of course I have no time, it's always on the point to make this more precise, but let
me simply say that if there are enough resonances, then the system becomes non-integral.
What does it mean?
It means that you can no more eliminate interactions by methods in which you would choose perturbation
and expand everything in powers of the perturbation constant.
So the system, the situation remains there till the fundamental work again by Kolmogorov
in 1954.
In 1954 Kolmogorov, soon followed by Arnold and Moser, created what's called now the
Kamm theory, which is one of the most beautiful theories of physics and mathematics, and which
was the first positive answer to Poincaré's impossibility theorem.
Because what Kamm have shown is that if the coupling is small, then in spite of Poincaré's
non-integrability, most motion will remain periodic, like in celestial dynamics.
Only a small variety would become erratic, chaotic.
So in a sense, this permits to solve now this non-linear, non-integrable system to some
extent.
But there is something extremely new in the work of Kolmogorov, and what is so new is
that essentially you had the problem of the small denominators, which as I mentioned is
what's called the fundamental problem of mechanics by Poincaré, then you had the Kamm theory,
and as a result of this you have now, most motions become regular, if the interaction
is small.
But there are always now in addition random trajectories, trajectories which wonder seemingly
erratically in the system, and that is of course then the appearance of stochasticity,
of probability, of chaos through the Lyapunov exponent, through this divergence of trajectories.
And this is of course therefore a fundamental discovery, and when you look on the type of
diagrams which have been shown already yesterday by Feigenbaum, you see for example here you
see what's called a Poincaré section, you see these points are all the intersections
of a trajectory with a plane coming from a single trajectory, you find some islands
which corresponds to a more regular motion, but most of the points seem to be distributed
just at random on the surface.
So essentially the great discovery of Kamm was stochasticity, that stochasticity and
dynamics were not opposed.
Now the type of problem which my colleagues and I have been considering is just the opposite
of the Kamm problem.
In the Kamm problem you can still say something when the interaction is weak, when most of
the motions remain periodic, but what happens if there are more erratic motions, well you
can follow this on the computer, but you cannot say very much analytically.
But therefore it's interesting to consider another extreme case.
It is extreme case is the case in which all motions are erratic.
And that happens in a class of systems which is extremely, I will say popular, which is
extremely present, which we find nearly always in physics.
And there are the situations in which there are so many resonances, that each resonance
is in between other resonances, let me give you an example, a particle, a harmonic oscillator
in a field.
If I consider a harmonic oscillator in a field, the field is a continuum and there will be
frequencies of the field as close as I want from the frequency of the harmonic oscillator.
And therefore I cannot more speak about periodic motions at all.
In mathematical terms you have to say the spectrum is continuous and you have continuous
sets of resonances that are of no importance.
The physical idea is that no resonance appears everywhere.
And this appears, I would say, in most problems of classical or quantum mechanics.
For example, if you consider a quantum transition, an unstable state which is destroyed by emission
of light, then you have resonance between the energy of the state and the energy of
the photon which is emitted.
And to calculate the lifetime, you have to make an integration, I will go into the details
about, and you have to make integration over the frequencies of the field.
And the same is also true in kinetic theory.
Kinetic theory is essentially a theory of resonances in which particles come together,
collide, come together, collide, go away, and when you analyze the mechanism, and I
shall come back to this, it's a resonant mechanism, a resonant transfer of energy between the
particles.
So, these so-called large Poincaré systems are prevalent in nature.
And now, there appears something very curious and very interesting, and that is a fact that
essentially it can speak about integrable systems.
That is most of classical physics, classical or quantum mechanics.
And then we have this breaking point, Poincaré's non-integrability theorem.
Part of this breaking point comes in the theory of KAM, 54 and later, which leads to dynamical
chaos.
And then comes the theory in which we have been interested, and the same, which I immediately
to emphasize, this is really a collective work in which Professor Petrovsky has played
a very important role, and we come to the large Poincaré systems.
And what is the interesting point, which I shall try now to explain in the rest of my
lecture, not to technical vain, is that for this limiting case, we can find new methods
of integration.
We can exactly solve again this problem.
And the solution of this problem is quite different from the solution of the classical
problem.
Many things which are true for integrable systems, like for example, variational principles,
the particle takes the shortest path and such kind of thing, are no more true for this
type of system.
But on the contrary, this type of systems are more stochastic, they are more probabilistic.
You cannot say so much as you can say about integrable systems.
Not only they are more probabilistic and more stochastic, but they are also, in a sense,
of course, corresponding to much more irregular motions.
And that is the main point for us.
They have a direction of time.
Therefore, a large Poincaré system leads to the incorporation of dynamics in the frame
of the incorporation of time in the frame of dynamics.
Now how to make this integration?
What do I mean by these new methods of integration?
Here I would like to give you first a small example and then present the general recipe.
The small example which I want to take will be taken from quantum mechanics.
Now you know quantum mechanics is really a revolution in the way of thinking, in the
sense that in quantum mechanics we associate to each physical quantity, to each observable,
as one says, an operator.
Instead of being simply a number, it is an abstract quantity called an operator.
You should not be afraid by the word operator.
Operator is simply a multiplication, a derivation, something like that.
And then the main problem of quantum mechanics becomes an eigenvalue problem.
The operator acts on some function, derivative of some kind of thing like that, and then
for some function, you regenerate simply the initial function, then it is called an eigenfunction.
It is regenerated, a multiplicative constant, and this constant is then called an eigenvalue.
And quantum mechanics speak about the spectrum which is formed by the eigenvalues which may
be discrete or continuous.
Interestingly enough, Poincare's non-integrability criterion applies to quantum mechanics for
continuous spectrum, precisely in the case in which each, for example, a harmonic oscillator
is embedded in the field of seators and you cannot really disentangle one from the other.
And you have exactly the same problem.
Suppose the Hamiltonian is the sum of an integrable Hamiltonian plus some perturbation, then can
you solve this problem?
And in general, you cannot solve it.
And in fact, this is one of our difficulties in modern field theory.
Modern field theory can solve all problems of free fields, but it was already mentioned
yesterday.
If you come to the problem of interacting fields, then it's extremely difficult.
In general, you cannot do anything.
Therefore, the problem is, and this is related to Poincare, because you can no more expand
the solution in powers of the coupling constant and you cannot obtain a conversion, this expansion.
Now, the point in which we have been interested always was the problem of time.
And so we came to this idea, which seems at first a little strange, but not so.
When you remember the example of the baker which I gave you before, can we not solve
the problem by incorporating the time, a kind of internal time, a kind of functional time
into the problem of integration.
To explain you what I have in mind, let us think about a very simple problem.
We can have a stone falling and outgoing waves.
We can, in principle, have incoming waves, which would make the stone going away.
But that is not what we generally observe.
What we observe is stone falling, outgoing waves.
Therefore, what we observe is a very defined natural order.
Natural order, stone first, waves later, not waves first and stone later.
Then you now think about a quantum jump, radiation.
You expect also a natural order.
You expect that you will first have an unstable state and then you will have the emission of the wave.
That was the idea of power, the wave would be a kind of retarded wave going away.
Now, when you write this problem in perturbation, you come out to the small denominator
and therefore to the Poincare divergence.
Here the denominator is the difference between the frequency associated with the particle
and the frequencies associated to the field.
Therefore, the question arises, how can you cure Poincare's divergence?
Well, as I said, you can cure it, and what we have shown, you can cure it exactly, rigorously,
to all orders by modifying the small denominators.
Modifying the small denominators by associating to each denominator a physical process.
Then you go from 1 to k, you go to the future.
Then you go from the field to the particle, you go to the excited state, you go to the past.
This then immediately leads to ideas about mathematical methods for introducing time order.
And here I cannot go into details, analytic continuation, forget about it if you don't know it.
So essentially, you can give a meaning to Poincare's denominator.
And the remarkable feature is that this then eliminates all Poincare's divergence.
You come out now with eigenstates which are complex, which include damping,
which means it includes no dissipation, and have a broken time symmetry.
What have you done?
You have essentially extended the type of transformation which Poincare had permitted.
Poincare had permitted only, let's say, transformations which would keep the eigenvalue real
by permitting now a larger type of transformations.
We can solve problems which you could not solve before.
And of course we recover what everybody knows, but in addition we recover the existence of an entropy
or an age function which decreases monotonously in time
when the particle is decaying into the continuum and emitting its weight.
Now this is a very interesting point even from the point of view of quantum mechanics
because in quantum mechanics there's the question which was very much angering,
shrieking, are there quantum jumps?
At first everybody, in both theories, they are quantum jumps.
But when you think about shrieking as a question which is a fundamental equation of quantum mechanics,
it's a continuous equation.
There are the jumps, and this has given rise to a lot of discussions
between famous discussions between Schrödinger and Bohr, and they never agreed.
And Heisenberg wrote somewhere that it's clear that they didn't agree
because obviously the jumps come from our observation.
And this is very difficult to accept because if quantum jumps are due to our observation,
we ourselves are the cause of our existence.
Because quantum jumps are the mechanism of all chemical reactions
which are the origin of life.
To say that it's because we observe reactions that they are quantum jumps
is that because we observe nature that we exist,
that I think is a relatively strange metaphysics and I can hardly believe in it.
John Bell has written a book which he called very nicely,
Speakable and Unspeakable Problems in Quantum Mechanics,
and he makes a lot of fun out of these ideas, and I think quite rightly.
So in a sense, by making a more general transformation into the complex plane,
we can now say in this formulation there is a quantum jump.
But irreversibly the particle will decay and you cannot restore the initial situation
after a sufficiently long time.
But this is a very simple example in which I can give a simple formulation to the time sequence.
I have an unstable state which is decaying.
However, in general, it is impossible to find such kind of very easy time order.
And we have to turn to the statistical description.
What means the statistical description?
That's something which Gibbs has introduced many years ago.
Instead of consuming one system, you consume many, many of them,
you are not interested in the fate of one example,
but you are in the fate of the totality.
And it's like what I explained yesterday about voting and so on.
You are not interested in every single individual vote that you are interested to know.
There will be 30% of yes, 70% of no, or that's all.
And this then leads to the idea of a large phase space and this phase space,
many coordinates, many momenta, and it's described by density function.
And this density function depends on the particle positions, on the momenta,
and you can apply similar ideas to classical mechanics and quantum mechanics.
Now, how time enters into the statistical description?
In addition to the Newtonian time, and that's very easy to see.
I spoke about collisions.
But collisions create correlations.
Two particles which have interacted go away,
but they keep, I would like to say, the memory of their interaction.
It's like two people who had a conversation.
One of them goes to Australia and the other goes to Washington.
But they keep the memory of their interaction in the character.
Now, if I make a velocity inversion, then they will come again back together.
And now the two people meet a third one.
It becomes a ternary interaction, a ternary correlation.
The ternary correlation becomes a fourth correlation.
You can see this very well on the computer calculation,
how the correlations are building up.
In a computer, you see that binary correlations are building up very rapidly.
For longer distances, it takes much more time.
Then ternary correlations take more time, and so on.
If I would have here a glass of water, then I could say that this water is still aging.
I can make now a distinction between young water and old water.
In old water, there are correlations between millions and millions of particles which have appeared.
In young water, when the molecules have been brought together, they have no correlation.
In a sense, the time here, the analog of the eternal time which I introduced for the Baker transformation,
the time here is the time not in the units, not in the motion, but in their relations.
If you take, for example, primitive society, Neolithic society,
the people were about the same as we are today from old water can guess.
However, the relations were very different.
We are living today in a time in a period in which time is accelerating,
and this acceleration of time is related to the fact that we create more and more correlations.
We have the mass media. Time is related to the global view we can have on the events which are going on in the universe.
Therefore, there is a way of introducing an internal time in all these dynamical systems.
And that is the flow of correlation, the flow of correlation which is flowing this Newtonian time
that introduces a new dimension, a new aspect of this time.
Exactly like in the Baker, you have the Newtonian time coming from the Baker transformation,
but in addition, you have this topological time related to the way in which the stripes are distributed.
And this, of course, without any mathematics, you can understand that this will destroy the symmetry between past and future.
If I start with an initial state which had no correlations, a young state, then I go to a state B
in which there are a lot of correlations between molecules, my old glass of water.
You see, it's not at all the same as if I start with the old glass of water
and I try to rejuvenate it by suppressing the correlation.
I would need to have enormous control on all these correlations which I never have.
In fact, the best correlations I can, to some extent, control today are three-body correlations.
In fact, this glass of water about which I spoke has an hour of time which, if I leave it alone
and prevent strictly evaporation, has an hour of time which will go on till the end of the universe.
Because this hour of time will go on because the glass of water contains 10 exponents, 23 particles,
and before I will have the right correlations of billions of billions of particles
that will really take time which goes beyond every imagination.
So, in a sense, the existence of these correlations introduces a new time element.
And again, once I know that there exists this new time element,
I can, of course, introduce this into the mathematics.
I can solve the equation for the evolution of the system, for unstable dynamical systems,
for Poincare systems. I can solve them exactly, take into account a new way of treating Poincare's denominators,
again putting a small i epsilon plus a small i epsilon minus,
according to the fact that they go from a binary correlation to a ternary,
or from a ternary to a second order, and so on.
So, essentially, we can now solve rigorously the evolution of ensembles,
and we can solve this evolution of ensembles because we have, essentially,
this idea that we can introduce into unstable dynamical systems, a supplementary element,
and that is the idea of temporal succession expressing the relation between the elements
and non-Newtonian, non-Einsteinian time.
In fact, this goes further.
First of all, as I can only introduce this time element, this time ordering on the level of statistical ensembles,
I can no more go back to trajectories, I can no more go back to wave functions.
Therefore, I obtain an irreducible description which is statistical,
which can no more be reduced, neither to Schrodinger, neither to Newton.
It is a stochastic description which is irreducible.
The basic description of unstable dynamical systems is a probabilistic statistical description.
That is, the new integration, as I have shown you a few minutes ago, there is a box,
the box of classical integrable systems of Schrodinger equation, Newton's equation, Lagrange, and so on.
And then I have now a new box, and this new box deals with highly unstable large Poickery systems.
And this new box can be again integrated as rigorously as Newton and Schrodinger have done it.
However, the result of this integration is quite different.
The result of this integration is that it remains a stochastic system.
It remains a stochastic system, and you cannot reduce it.
Because if you would like to reduce it, you would lose an information which only refers to the statistical ensemble,
which does not refer to trajectories or to refers to wave functions.
Now, there is also another element, and this other element is that essentially the description of what happens in such a system
is quite different from the usual description in Newtonian physics or Schrodinger physics.
Because here now, you see, resonance plays an essential role, but what is resonance?
Resonance is coming together of two space-time events which are now correlated by resonance.
Then somebody, for those of you who know a little statistical physics,
they can remember a little the form of diffusion equation for Kaplan equation.
They are equations which contain the second derivative, not the first derivative as Hamilton's equation.
Why second? Because you have in fact at least two elementary events which are linked by resonance.
Therefore, you can no more decompose the history of the world into independent events like Feynman diagrams.
You can decompose into events which are non-linearly strongly coupled by resonance conditions.
And this, of course, is a big change in respect to classical description.
Therefore, essentially, let me summarize.
On one side, we have integrable systems with trajectories and wave functions,
on the other side, non-integrable systems, large Poincare systems for which you can introduce new integrations
which lead to new solutions of the eigenvalue problem and to an irreducible description in terms of distribution function
and to dissipation and entropy.
Therefore, you can say that the paradox which I started has to some extent been solved.
In the old problem, in the old situation, you had on one side the macroscopic level,
the level in which there is time ordering, in which people become older,
in which the thermodynamic equilibrium is established, in which if I introduce a difference of concentration,
it is leveled out.
And you had a time, a description, a fundamental description, a microscopic description which was time reversible.
Now I must say that was my driving force over the many years I thought about this problem.
I never could understand how time can arise from no time.
How this time breaking, symmetry breaking, can arise from equations which have no symmetry breaking in time,
which are time reversible.
That I could never understand.
And that was really the paradox and the answer of some people was to say,
the macroscopic level is all in our mind.
It's all our imagination.
The basic level is a level of eternity.
It's not the level of becoming.
It's the level of being.
That is the fundamental level.
That was Einstein's point of view.
However, now we come to a different situation.
We come to a situation in which you can say we have three levels.
We have one level, which is the statistical level, which is a reducible, which has a broken time symmetry,
which is still dynamical, which applies to large chaotic systems.
And by averaging over this, you obtain the macroscopic level with a broken time symmetry.
If you would start with trajectories, or as close as you want from trajectories of this wave function,
they are destroyed by the Christochastic character, and you come here.
Therefore, this is the statistical level, which now becomes the fundamental level of the description.
And here, let me therefore try to situate the problem of chaos now to avoid some misunderstanding.
In a sense, I think it is very important to make a distinction between dynamical or Hamiltonian chaos and dissipative chaos.
Dynamical chaos has dealt with the Scum theory and based on Poincare's theorem.
And on the other hand, dissipative chaos has been explained beautifully in some examples yesterday by Feigenbaum.
So in a sense, we see now that we have two level chaos, that the chaos is a concept which contains two levels.
One level is a dynamical chaos, as induced by resonance.
The basic mechanism in nature is resonance, because that is present everywhere.
I mean, it is present from the three-body problem up to the end-body problem of fields of kinetic equations, and so on.
Even if you take the three-body problem, my colleague in Austin, Professor Zewihe, gave me a very beautiful example.
If you take the three-body problem, you have three particles going around, one of the other, whatever the initial condition.
After some time, one of the bodies will go away and you remain with the two-body problem.
Therefore, you have already a kind of arrow of time, even incorporated in so simple problems as a three-body problem.
And not to speak about the end-body problem.
Once you have this dynamical chaos, you can, from the dynamical chaos, generate all the beautiful equations which were mentioned yesterday,
the Fourier equation, the Stokes-Navier equation, the chemical equation.
For them, you have different types of behavior according to your close to equilibrium or far from equilibrium.
The first condition is that you need to generate the distance from equilibrium, and that is generated through the dynamical chaos.
Therefore, the dissipative chaos is chaos mapped over chaos.
It is the second level of chaos.
There are two fundamentally different types of chaos.
One is the fundamental chaos, which is related to Poincaré theorem and to the existence of resonances or instabilities on the fundamental dynamical description.
And the other chaos is the outcome of the first chaos on the macroscopic level.
And this chaos, as I said, is not a good name, because the chaos as you see it in the macroscopic system is in fact order.
Because when you see, for example, the period doubling, which was beautifully described yesterday, it is already a highly ordered process.
A highly ordered process.
I would like to call it more self-organization and coherent structures, space patterns, and so on, which we now, in the last few months,
remarkable progress has been realized in the discovery both on computers and in the laboratory of space structures, beautiful space structures, all the natural and beautiful time structures.
You can call all this what emerges out of equilibrium as a process in self-organization.
Even the chaos, even when you think about very chaotic phenomena, they are much less chaotic than thermal noise.
In other words, they are already organized phenomena.
And therefore, what you see is that order is generated out of chaos.
In other words, here you have really chaos.
And out of this dynamical chaos, by putting in the order of time, you generate self-organizing structures.
Therefore, you have this strange universe in which at all levels we see the appearance of organization out of a microscopic background, which is essentially chaotic.
Now, see, what is also important is that we see now that chaos is closely related to the problem of time and time is related to the problem of control, irreversibility.
We cannot avoid an unstable particle to disappear.
We cannot avoid a three-part correlation to become, at a later time, earlier or later, a four-hour correlation, a fifth-hour correlation.
I like always the same sentence by Nabokov.
Nabokov is written, what is real cannot be controlled, and what can be controlled cannot be real.
And I think that is exactly the situation to which it becomes.
But what is also interesting is that this changes, of course, some of the basic features of quantum mechanics and of relativity.
I have no time to go into this.
Let me simply mention that in this introduction to the new physics, Paul Davis has written very correctly.
At the rock bottom, quantum mechanics provides a highly successful procedure for predicting the results of observation on microsystems.
But when we ask what actually happens when an observation takes place, we get nonsense.
After half a century of arguments, the quantum observation debate remains as lively as ever.
The problems of the physics of the very small and the very large are formidable,
but it may be that this frontier, the interface of mind and matter, will turn out to be the most challenging legacy of the new physics.
This is very closely related to what I discussed, because here now the basic level is in terms of probabilities.
It's no more in terms of amplitudes, like in ordinary quantum mechanics.
Therefore, the question how to go from amplitude to probabilities is automatically solved for unstable chaotic systems.
Therefore, you cannot give an exact recipe.
That is measurement apparatus.
It is a chaotic system.
It has to be a chaotic system.
It has to be, let's say, a large Poincare system in which the description is in terms of probabilities.
It cannot be reduced to quantum mechanics, to wave functions.
And you have no more this famous problem of the reduction of the wave packet and all the difficulty and the role of subjective observers and so on,
which was really a kind of strange story disturbing the scientific community since a few decades.
And similarly, when you think about relativity, relativity was always thinking in terms of points in spacetime, in instantaneous events.
But when you have collisions, when you have resonances, there are no points.
There are connected points, which are connected by the strong resonance conditions.
And therefore, there is a change.
Now, therefore, let me conclude by saying our worldview had been essentially dominated both in classical and quantum mechanics by the theory of integrable systems.
By the theory of relatively simple systems in which resonances play no role, which are relatively regular, which we could associate to the ideas of determinism,
of time reversibility, of universal laws and so on.
What we see now is that this extremely important window, I would say, is still only a window.
It's only part of our physical universe that a much larger part is described by non-integral systems, non-integral systems which need two different properties.
You can integrate them, and that is very nice, but you lose some other properties.
As I said, you have no more Lagrangians, no more variational principles.
You have a different type of physics that you have incorporated.
It's more unified physics because it incorporates thermodynamics, second law, probability, and dynamics.
And therefore, it certainly creates progress in the direction of unification of our physical world.
Well, I don't know if I've succeeded, but what I've tried to do is to show to you that indeed chaos may be the starting point of a new science.
Thank you very much.
