No jumper coolest podcast in the world and today we have a somebody who I'm a huge fan of you. Yeah, totally man
Mark of soft water underbelly. How you doing? Nice to meet you Adam
Yeah, so okay
This is the the thing I've been thinking about is how when I first started doing podcasts
It was in downtown LA 5th and Los Angeles, so right by me basically on the edge of skid row and
I used to always have people
Comment like you should interview a homeless person
You should interview one of these guys who we see hanging out outside of your house, right?
And I always thought oh, that's a stupid idea. Nobody wants to see that
And then one day I run across your channel, and I'm like wow I really
Did not take those comments as seriously as I should like your your channel in a lot of ways sort of like has taught me a lot about
The value of having conversations with people who you know the outside world would probably assume don't really have anything useful to say
Yeah, I mean people are people right they really the people are people there. They're just like whether they're
Powerful and wealthy or whether they're down and out. They're still
There are still stories, you know this lessons to learn from everybody a hundred percent lessons to learn like what not to do
Totally more than what to do and like we were just saying there's a lot of a lot of people that you interview operate in a way
That the people I interviewed don't they have nothing to lose they just unload
Not everything I do is about homosat people and dry
Sometimes it's strippers and and gang members
But but a lot of people who feel unheard and a lot of people once they make it into the rap world and stuff
They end up feeling very differently. They end up feeling like everybody already knows everything about me
I want to be very protective of what I'm putting out there into the world and a lot a lot of times when you're interviewing
You know a stripper or a prostitute or whatever it might be
They probably don't really feel like they've ever had an opportunity where anyone cared that much to ask so much of me to what
I'm doing is these people
They're not selling anything. Mm-hmm
They're not trying they're not trying to further their careers in musician. They're not trying to
You know, maybe they're trying to convince you that their story is the truth and and what their family did to them is
Is not fair or something like that, but they're really not they're not
Trying to promote anything, right? They're just telling their story and sometimes you can just feel that they're
They're telling a version of the truth. That's pretty close to what actually happened
Definitely anytime you tell us like if you talk told me about your childhood or back back in high school
The way you're gonna tell that story you're gonna embellish
We all do that's human nature to tell your story and go. Yeah, simple teacher was
375 pounds and he was six foot nine and you know that kind of
When he was actually it's like six foot one and he was you know 240 pounds, right?
Is that something that?
Consider that concerns you is the amount of truth that's being told because I've seen you do interviews with people where they were talking
About getting molested by their parents and then they do another interview and they say all that shit was made up
Yeah, well, I mean some you have to be able to read
I'm not presenting these as these are
Sworn
Documents of the truth
A lot of them are full-blown lies or there's a lot of lies mixed in right, but if you're at all able to interpret
What what someone's lot when someone's lying?
Yeah, like what the best example is a prostitute you know an older a middle-aged prostitute comes on and says yeah, I'm 24 years old
And I even said I've been questioned around that like you sure you're 24 and she goes yeah, like okay
although it's all of that slide and she's a smile, but
You have to you have to read through that because the way I see that is
Here's a woman who's supporting herself as a prostitute, which means being young and beautiful is is is her way to support herself
Other than that she's down and out and homeless right with nothing to sell
So you have to understand where she's coming from she's she's scared
shitless that
Her only way of supporting herself is fading away right, so she's 24 years old out of fear
And if you if you can read through that lie you you see you get it
I've glimpsed into who she's who she is and what she's concerned about right she scared right
I've been watching this show on a Netflix called the no-go zone
What I'm saying is the lies are kind of a part of the story right I feel you
I've been watching this show the no-go zones that basically will take you to like all the worst areas all over the world and sort of show
You a lot of a lot of drug selling and a lot of prostitutes and stuff like that
And it's it was interesting because I watched like kind of the whole season of that and then after I got done with that
I started watching a shillow to your stuff to get ready for this interview and it occurred to me that like
The the main difference between a show like that and what you're doing is that you're just sort of allowing them to pick their narrative
You're not slotting them into let's see what a prostitutes life in Cape Town is like you're sort of just allowing them to run with whatever and sometimes
It feels like they want to tell you about the the intimate details of their day-to-day work
And sometimes they want to tell you about their childhood trauma that got in them here
But it seems like you you kind of rarely
Forcefully guide them. I mean sometimes I'll ask who molested them or stuff like that which which I get a lot of flack for but
Yeah, I really just want to learn
You know, that's really what I think is behind a lot of why I'm doing this is just I like learning about myself and about other humans and I think
By understanding and learning you just become
Better suited to deal with life and and and be happy. Definitely. That's all you really wanted to be happy, right?
So if you understand more of what's going on and why you're doing it and why other people are behaving the way they are you you
You can calm down and just like oh, I get why you're doing that
not that you it's not that you don't like me is that you're scared shitless of
Getting hurt. Definitely. I'm being I'm acting this way because I'm afraid of getting
Take an advantage over something like that. So did this all start with the photography part of yeah
I'm a photographer. I've always been since I was 14. It's all I've ever done and
I just finished a big project called create equal which took me like nine or ten years
and I went to every state each of the lower 48 states and photographed everything from
Cowboys to astronauts to to repo men to
ballerinas to
There's a couple homeless drug addicts. There's this is everything in there just everything that kind of exists in the United States
Amish people everything
Nones and prostitutes everything
And the idea was just to just photograph just a visual
Catalog of of America basically and you spent ten years
Yeah, ten years cost me like half a million to do it because when I do these projects
I really invest like whatever I care about I I invest
like
Without much concern for what's coming back from that investment. I'm not gonna make money on it
Right. I mean I actually did make a lot of money selling you know some of the gallery shows when that when that
Project finally came out and we did some gallery shows
I I sold a lot of prints and I probably made that money back, but but it wasn't about making money. It's about I
Don't know what it's about
learning doing what you love
Furthering the human species. It's like all these things. I mean your soul is telling you what you want to be
Yeah, I mean because I'm an advertising photographer. It's all I've ever done
you know and
I've had these side projects that kind of kept me sane because if you just do advertising you're selling a product
And it's hard to feel like you're like you know with retouching and all that we make things look better than they really are and it's all
perfect and
homogenized and
That gets under your that bugs you after a while when you do when that's all you're doing. What am I doing?
I'm helping corporations make money. I'm hitting cold coca-cola make more money
That's what I did with my life
You can make good money and there's certainly a creative aspect to it, but ultimately do you feel like that's a career that kind of
It started becoming less creative and more just like you're just a plumber installing a sink that the housewife
Because there's so much data at a certain point to it like these days with with advertising
I feel like there's there's a lot less. Oh, maybe this will sell a soda. No, it's like we have all this
And because I was afraid of losing their clients the client gets to make all the creative decision decisions and the client doesn't know
How to make good creative decisions so the industry has changed a lot and I found myself less and less
satisfied with that career and
I've been doing my whole life and I've got money saved up
I have it all invested in the house. I'm building right now, but but I basically have money
I just don't have it at my disposal right now because it's tight up in the house, but so
if I
Had my brothers to just do anything I wanted
Like what would I do?
And I just sat there for like a month or two and just sat like what what am I gonna do?
Am I gonna become a real estate developer? Am I gonna?
You know work out a lot. Maybe I'll just work out a lot
I don't know what I do. You know what I do if I had the freedom to do anything
I wanted and then it hit me at one point. Oh, yeah, I used to have that studio down in Skid Row after I finished
Create Equal I got a studio down in Skid Row in LA and I just started doing portraits of
Of all the people that you see on my channel a lot of them and I
It was a really interesting project because those people are just such interesting characters
And at some point I started doing interviews of them when Canon came out with the first video
We can't the first still camera that did videos. What year did you start there? That was like 2010. Oh, wow
Okay, so that long you've been 10 is when I've been doing this. Okay, so it's been like
11 years now and
The first interview I did was it was the prostitute heroin addict named Caroline
And it was so powerful really
In a way that you never thought photography could be or I mean, I feel like a lot of photographers are
They don't want to give and say that video can be more powerful than photography. Yeah, I know that's a great question because I
Like to think the photo is everything. I'm a photographer. I'm not an interviewer. You're an interviewer
You're a much better interviewer than I am. I'm just a photographer
But I recognize after watching after looking at create equal you page through it
With somebody else at a party they're going through the book and I'm like
Should have done interviews. I should have done it. They want to know this they want to know that I realized the portrait is as
As great as it is. I'm really proud of that those portraits
You want you want to know more you want to hear what they speak like you want to see how their body language
You know how they move so many things you learn so much more about somebody when you're hearing them speak
Watching them do it what they do so portraits about that instant and it's also can be very false
Like if you look at the the thumbnail on my channel or you look at the portrait. Oh
This guy's dignified and like I'm about those kkk guys look a lot tougher than when you hear him talking
You know when they're all squatted up with all their guys and then you hear him talking
You're like this fucking yokel in a costume
Talking about so the photos can lie. Yeah, and the portrait and you know
It's a different kind of lying than the lies you're talking. I just watched Ron Jeremy and then he looked like he had
Girl he had girls all over him and the thumbnail or whatever and then you watch the interview
And it's just you get a very different idea what his real life might be like. Yeah, yeah, especially now
No, but it's like I started doing these portraits and then I started doing interviews
And then I did kind of my life got turned upside down the industry kind of changed and I lost my love for it
and
You know
Digital technology took over so everybody's a photographer and that undermined my ability to charge what I did and make the same money
I used to and then I got a divorce on top of it and it's like every my whole life
My whole table got turned upside down. It's like
Let me let me just like I put everything down for a while really and then when everything kind of settled
And I back to what I was saying a couple minutes ago. So what who am I? What do I want to do?
And I decided let me just really had a good time when I was down on Skid Row doing those crazy
Photos and even the interviews. Let me start doing interviews and portraits down there again
and I
Started I just got this I had to store all my furniture because I'm building this house like I said and I
Had four different storage units around the city. I'm paying like a thousand here 1200 there a thousand here
You know, I can save money if I just got a big space downtown
Somewhere off of Skid Row or near Skid Row or in Skid Row
And I could probably find room to shoot these portraits and interviews in the front and that's exactly what I did and it's been
I've I'm shooting every day now
Not necessarily always on Skid Row like last week. I was in Mississippi. I was in Tampa, Florida before that
I'm going to San Francisco as soon as we're done here. So it's not about Skid Row
It's it's more about just United States, right for me
United States or do you have international plans?
I don't want to I don't if I start going international that means at some point
I'm have to trudge through the forest of New Guinea
Right jungle of New Guinea and like because it because I'm not gonna just say oh, I'm only gonna do Europe in South America
I'm gonna do the whole planet and when I do things I do them all out
But if you do this for a few more decades, do you think there's any chance that you kind of
Doing the Skid Row stuff could start to fill a little scale stale in the USA
Can you see yourself wanting to take it to
Take any country. Yeah, boom. That's another gigantic challenge. You know, there are great stories in other countries
Yeah, if I went to Africa, I could I could do this in Africa, you know
I said many times I could do a whole like self underbelly like a year ago was basically a Skid Row
Channel right 95% of the videos were shot on Skid Row. I
Always said I could do the exact same thing and Appalachia
Which I've done a bunch of interviews in Appalachia last year and what got you up there in particular
Create equally. I just went to every state and I got to know it and I know what's there
I know those people are fascinating and they're so they're wired so differently than the rest of the country, right?
The values they have are so different than the rest of us. Mm-hmm
They're beautiful people you
Like one of the things I learned from owning a store downtown
for all those years was
Don't talk to them. Don't give them a dollar
If you give them an inch, they're gonna take a mile and there were other and I'm not proud of this in retrospect
Because when I see your channel, it makes me actually realize like wow
I think I actually missed out on a lot of the interactions that I could have had
But I mean I was in the mind stay where you know
I would have a girl in town from a different state or whatever and and she would be giving money to a homeless person
That's other story. I would tell her
Listen, I know you are a nice person and you think that you're doing something nice
But if this if they start to get the idea that this is a place where you can just get free money
Then it's gonna be a big problem for us. So I'm actually in the position of telling other people to be less kind
For our benefit because you know and and to people who think that that sounds like I'm just kind of
Being an asshole like I mean this is very very much like a daily
You know fight for survival
It wasn't like I was just trying to be an asshole and suggest that everybody else be an asshole
But it just felt like for self-preservation that you kind of needed to keep that distance
They're trying to get their money for whatever their their thing is if they feel a little bit of weakness
Then they're gonna keep pushing on that spot
And you just seem like you I don't know like do you relate to what I just said?
Yeah, okay, no, I hundred percent
This morning. I probably bled
I'll bet you I bled about a thousand dollars at least twelve twelve hundred dollars today in that. Yeah
And how so who are you giving it out to everybody that comes up to me and I have a hard time saying no
And when I do say no, they don't leave
So at some point I'm paying them to leave to just leave. Yeah, I think
Pack for going to the airport
I don't want to forget something and I'm like I'm in San Francisco. I forgot this like shit
You know that that's really tragic when I go to like Mississippi or Kentucky where I can't even rent the equipment
I need or buy it. I'm in the middle of nowhere
So I I need give me a half an hour to focus on what I'm doing
Don't interrupt me. Don't don't knock on my door. Don't do anything
So I pay somebody to like stand out front and make sure nobody comes to me and interrupts me
So I can just focus on packing up for my trip
Wow, because if you come in five times five different people come in and they I just need 20 bucks my kids are dying
I'm distracted. I can't remember what I was just thinking about. Oh, yeah
Oh, I need I need the charging cord for this microphone and I like oh
So now I'm in Kentucky and I don't have the cord to charge this microphone that just died right and that's because
Somebody just came to me and asked me for 20 bucks to say they're
They're whatever so even when you're traveling
What word kind of travels that you are somebody who's not scared to help somebody out. Oh
Yeah, for a while after I went I went to Memphis last December and for three four months after I came back from Memphis
I was getting phone calls
From pimps and prostitutes because that's all I interviewed on that trip
For months every morning. I'd get you know, they're two hours ahead of us
I'd get I'd just my phone would be but they want money or I'm a white guy
He peels off dollar bills for people right but they want coverage
They want to be on the channel the pimps and this is prostitute both got arrested so they were in jail
They needed somebody to get their bail out. Oh and sometimes I'll help I could I could easily just say sorry
No, yeah, and I do that. I'm getting better at saying that
But I also know that if I go back to Memphis and I want to do more interviews there
Knowing that I bailed them out of jail is gonna just open up some doors and they're gonna help me and they're gonna do what I
Want them to do. So let's take that Memphis trip
Just for example when you show up there. Do you show up there with no plans?
Do you show up?
I know nobody and then there was a girl who contacted me and say I know all these people down there
Wendy and she
Just just emailed me out of nowhere
She watches my channel and likes it and said hey if you ever come to Memphis
I can help you out with some some interesting people and say well, you know, I know Memphis is
pretty well known for this kind of
Subculture, do you know any people? Oh, yeah, I know lots of people so she
We met with her and she drove us around and one thing led to another and that you know one
The one thing I learned is you make this contact
And you know great I made this contact but that contact knows four people
Mm-hmm, and then we meet those four people and this one happens to be really good
And they know more for other people and it just spreads out like that right like I went to Kentucky
I went to Appalachia. I think six times last fall last summer and fall. We started going like in September like
August or September or something like that and I would go back every few weeks every month first three trips
I got nothing nothing nothing
I went to Mississippi last week spent you know
It cost me like seven eight thousand dollars just to go to Mississippi
You know the baggage alone is four hundred fifty dollars each way the airfare the hotels the rental car the
My assistant sometimes I bring an assistant to help me drive
And carry bags and and then the people that I contact with and the people I interview
You add all that up. It's close to ten thousand dollars
But why didn't you get anything because it wasn't interesting really? Yeah, just wasn't you've had interviews here
I'm sure they're just it just fell flat. We put them out anyway
And then they get
I'm gonna use about one out of five that I do you do. Oh, that's interesting
I was wondering that yeah, because I was thinking I'm three thousand and there's only seven hundred on my channel
Okay, so there's a lot that you don't see because I was thinking that I'm thinking like never will these are good
But there's got to be a lot of bad ones. I was thinking I'm like so many more bad ones than good ones
Yeah, I just sit through them all. Yeah, I'm beating up by the end of the day
Emotionally. Yeah, really it wears me out
How much pain can you listen to hmm? How much pain can you listen to right people get on my back because you know
You she told you she had three kids and then you asked her how many kids you had
Part of that is because I'm doing I'm operating you have a whole crew how many people you got working here about ten
Right. Yeah, but I've got nobody. It's just me
I'm opera and I'm not I'm not I'm not bitching. I'm just saying I'm operating two cameras. Yeah
microphones
So audio levels the focus the framing the light because I use natural light. I'm not using artificial light
I'm using natural lights when a cloud goes behind the Sun. I got a change
I got a just for it like a stop or two on the two cameras at the same time
That's a lot to be doing while you're conducting an interview, right?
So forgive me if I didn't catch that she had
Three kids. I feel that she likes nobody ever came back to that you already I already answered that question
Nobody has ever said that they're happy to talk about their kids people get upset when their interview doesn't come out
No, I've never had anybody give me a hard time for it. Really. That's interesting
If I didn't drop a lot of it's like even one percent of the interviews I do here. Oh my god
They'd be showing you you're dealing more with people that are like. Yeah concerned with fame a little bit. Yeah, right?
I'm not
But I feel like a lot of those people still have a desire for fame even if it's a different kind of fame
Yeah, maybe yeah, no, I know it never came back here. You never use my interview
I mean, I'm sure there are some people that are upset that I didn't but
It's got to be interesting. Yeah, you know, it's got to be something like that. I'm proud of
Where I don't feel like the person's selling their
Like I have a lot of pimps the pimps are the worst where they come on and like, oh, yeah, I'm super interesting
Are you really? Yeah, and I'll take a chance and they come on and they're either telling a story of redemption
But it's not it's not like a compelling story of redemption. It's just like hey, I'm a good guy now. Yeah
So you know and you're in a position where you're selling their music you then have to be basically kind of like judging their trauma
Or like well, not another you're a narrative like is this a compelling narrative and that kind of puts you in a weird spot
I would be happy to post nothing but content of
Crack addicts that got got clean and tell their stories, right? But I found when I do that
I did some of those early on and they got like a an eighth of the number of views as
A train wreck story really yeah, so I'm not I'm not necessarily doing things just for the views
But at some point you do need to get some views then in order to like support
Yeah, so you find when somebody is a former heroin addict that that will get way more or way less views than someone who is like presently
Clearly
I'm telling a
Horrific story and all that
People have called it pain porn. I was thinking that literal term. I'm like, this is like pornography. I'm not sure exactly what kind
It's somebody called a pain porn. That's a great term. Um, it's kind of like that. I mean like
You're driving your home from work. Yeah, and there's a 16 year old driver who's doing a great job
And he's using his directional. He's changing lanes properly. He's doing a great job
You want to watch that or do you want to watch the
The head on collision that the other 16 year old had who was drunk, right?
You're gonna stop and look at the the wreck you're gonna
Not even look twice at the 16 year old who's doing a great job 100 percent. Um, it's human nature
I remember when I first started to take photos when I was like 16 or some shit
I remember I took a photo of uh, like a homeless guy and somebody told me the next day. They said
It's really trashy to take photos of homeless people because it's kind of like the lowest hanging fruit
It's trashy. They can't really consent to it. Etc. I'm sure you've probably heard those same arguments against photography in the homeless
I'm exploiting them. Yeah, how did you I mean, I think when I see your portraits
And it's very obvious to me that you're doing something that's a lot different and a lot better than
Your average person who just picks up a camera and they see a homeless person and they think oh, that's an easy thing to take a photo of
Where do you fall on the considerations that you have to make?
I treat everybody with respect from the guy at your front door who greeted me to you to
The president to everybody I treat everybody equally the same like I don't treat a homeless person
differently that I would treat Obama who I loved, you know
I would treat them both the exact same way not different in any way like if I was interviewing
A homeless crack addict or or the president of the United States. I would treat them the exact same way
So I treat everybody the same. So if I'm doing that, am I exploiting them? I'm not sure I am
They're agreeing to it. Most of these people come to me now. I'm not coming to them. Hey, do an interview with them
Please do it. They're they all come to me and they all want to come back a second third fourth time
Yes, I'm paying a money
But but I bet you they would do it if I didn't pay them money
But I believe time is worth money
So I pay people money regardless of whether they want it or not the only people that really refuse money or the appellations
Really, it won't take money
Most of them won't take money
But they're probably like the most needing of it as well
Yeah, they're the poorest it's interesting
They're the it's the poorest part of the country where I go
The counties that I go in in Kentucky and West Virginia are the poorest in the country
And unless they have a drug addiction, which some of them do now
A lot of you know, drugs are pretty bad there
But the ones who who don't just drink moonshine, maybe, you know, they don't really have a serious addiction problem
They just jump back when I pull out
you know
Money
I gotta take that
Like like I'm like I'm some kind of jerk. Really? Yeah, that's so interesting. It's just that they're raised a certain way
You know, they believe their stories are or something they want to share and that's it
It's not about paying money for it
And I'm not paying for their stories. I believe I'm just paying you for your time. Right, you know
You sat with me for 20 minutes and told me your story
Thank you for doing that and here's something just for sitting with me and telling me your story
Right, you know, it's more about the time and the effort and the distraction from their busy life
I think that which is not so easy helps to simplify the
The exchange as well in a way because it's kind of like
You know when when people even when people come in here and you know
I have some contemporaries who will sometimes like pay their guests
And they've told me that once they start paying the guests
They show up on time. They don't cancel. Well, see that makes the whole thing a little bit more consensual where both side is benefiting
That's that's no one's ever mentioned that but that's a huge part of why I do it because
Like when I was doing create equal, which was just portraits no interviews
I
Want like if I'm going to fly to Wyoming to shoot a cowboy that I've you know
My scout already found a photo of and I and I want to photograph him. I want to make sure he's going to show up
So if I'm going to pay him $500 to show up, he's going to be there
But if I don't pay him $500, I'm just going to take his photo
I'm going to fly all the way to Wyoming and he's not going to show up and I'm like now. What do we do?
Hmm
So by scout my time is very valuable
I don't want my time wasted you sort of just have people all around the country that you'll just be in communication with and they'll sort of
Throw a lot of scouts like like like for for
For that project when I was looking for cowboys or ranchers up in Wyoming and Montana
I had somebody who worked at one of these ranches
And I said, could you photograph some of the some of the guys that work on the ranch and just send me photos?
And then I'll see if I want to photograph these guys and that's what I'm calling a scout
I just connected with somebody that knew somebody that knew somebody so
I call it a scout, but it's really just a
Co-worker or a friend and they sent me some photos of some of the guys and like oh, he's he'd be a great photo
Now an interview is a whole nother thing because I've had people that I've flown across the country for because they look so great
And then they can't tell their story and then it's like
a waste of time
That's interesting
The desire to not put out the episodes that you don't like
Even though
Is that out of respect for who the audience because I feel like the audience a lot of times kind of wants to hear the story from
The person who's the most out there. I'm sure if you ask my
Viewers if they want to see all 3 000 interviews they'd say yes
But if I posted everything that I
did
I don't think I'd have the same audience I do
So you have you have to understand like you know the quality of what you put out is is going to
affect everything you do there has to be a respect for
The overall quality of the channel. You just you don't want people to feel like oh, maybe if I click this video
It's going to be horrible. We'll see what I one of the things I realized early on when I did this
You know I could title these
You know something like you know a lot of these stories are about having sex with my dad
You know because a lot of these women have right I could I could use that in the title somehow
I see I see youtube videos that have these kind of titles
Like when I when I title when I title a video homeless woman
I want to do that knowing that my viewers who
Know my channel will know that a video titled homeless woman interview is worth watching. Yeah, it's not just a woman talking
Yeah, I don't have a house
Yeah
So there's usually something to it that makes it worth watching because I feel like what you do is the kind of thing
That opens you up to so much criticism of what you're doing
But I mean, maybe I'm just sort of in a bubble where I'm just a fan
But it doesn't seem like you really get as much hate for it as I think a lot of people would and I think a lot of
It is the aesthetic decisions when you have this beautiful photograph for the
For the photo and you don't have you trying to like really sort of lay the narrative out for them very often
You don't have the salacious titles again. I feel like all that stuff kind of insulates you against
A lot of the clickbait stuff really causes people to judge you very very harshly. Yeah, and I get I'm guilty of a little bit
of clickbaity because I could title my
sex worker videos
You know sex sex worker interview, right, but I don't I title it
prostitute or escort or stripper
stripper is you know, not the most pc term in the world nor is prostitute but
Sex worker is the the vaguest term ever. Yeah, you know a pimp is a sex worker, right? A masseuse can be a sex worker
What is she a masseuse or is she like so?
I want to have a little bit of you know descriptive. You know, I want
I want a little bit of the detail so you know what you're going to watch but
You know, I think the viewers who really know if you watch a lot of my videos you need to watch a lot
There's 750 on there now, but if you if you go through I can't I can't save all 3,000 people I've interviewed
And it wouldn't just be the 3,000 I interviewed. What about the other 30,000 that are out there that I didn't interview?
They don't get help because why because I chose because I didn't meet them yet
So I can't save everybody
But I do help a lot of the people I interview in different ways. Sometimes I'm just peeling off money to people like I did this morning
Sometimes I'm paying people's
You know for people that really are showing signs of wanting to get out of their life style
I'll I'll buy them a car. I'll I'll I'll give them housing. I'll pay for their expenses for a month or three
So they can get their shit together get a job and then they're hopefully
Hopefully
On their way to be self-sufficient that really happens though. That's what I'm learning because a lot of homeless people
It's kind of a we think of homeless people as just being homeless people forever
I'm not always talking about homeless people. I'm talking more about like sex workers or something like that
Right, but they're a little more capable of but like drug addicts homeless homeless people
We we always tend to assume that they're just going to be like that forever when you see somebody on the side of the street
But I think the the truth is is that this is kind of like a transitionary state for a lot of people that they might
Be homeless for a while and then at some point somebody
Helps them out and a lot of people who were at one point homeless and then they got their lives together
Right, but I mean the problem is not drug addiction. The problem is not homelessness. The problem is mental health
Yeah, it really is and people are starting to understand that a little bit
There's a great video I just shot
Some of my favorite videos are the ones I shoot with monica
Who works for the patrick katie foundation and she's so informed about all this stuff and she's just so intelligent
And she speaks so beautifully about
What it's like to help these people and how it goes down and how what the problems are in society
Why why it doesn't work out why we're not doing our part
You know and uh, we we did that this morning actually and she
She and I spoke about how it's it's mental health
Not drugs drugs are just a symptom of the problem now drugs can
Exacerbate and maybe even cause like schizophrenia or some of the other mental conditions that you see
But there's something it's like there's some something was broken first for the person say yeah, let me try heroin
At 16 years old
Yeah, that's something I've definitely seen from watching enough of your videos is that
I mean this is just a band aid that people try to put on their mental illness
Like it's almost like 100% like very very rarely that you see somebody who's a drug addict
That doesn't have childhood trauma that they're trying to yeah, I mean every every single one of my videos could be
Like mentally ill person, you know every single video
Including my you know, if I you know, I'm mentally ill. We're all mentally ill one way or another
You interview a lot of people who
I think a lot of people would not be able to get away with interviewing like the clan stuff like
I mean if I did a podcast with the clan
Or a sex offender like a child in the lester
Exactly. I mean a lot of that stuff people would be like, why the fuck are you giving voice to someone who is important
I I can't even read the comments anymore. I mean the majority of my commenters are
Supportive and say really kind things and I love that and that's that's great. Most of my audience is really evolved and intelligent
But there's a portion of my audience
that just just hates and
Hates what I do and just hates in general
Hates the interviewee hates hates life hates themselves really is what it really boils down to if you really
Peel away the peel away the layers. You'll see the person really just hates themselves
So that's why they're lashing out against this prostitute or this homeless person or this drug addict or whatever, but it's
It's
You know my most of my audience is intelligent and supports what I do
And they understand that I do help when I can because there's
There's people who are like like jerry and you know
Rita and
A lot I mean I can't even count them count them all there's so many people that I support on a daily basis and
You know in major ways sometimes, but I don't want to make I don't want to make my channel about a help channel
the purpose of my videos is is
To prevent these things from happening
So if I if I start becoming this Jesus figure who's helping everybody that
It's going to be entertainment and that's not what I want
You know, I just want to people I want I want to learn and I want maybe the audience to learn
How these things happen so that we can protect it from our
But so when you see futures you just said these stories are cautionary tales
Does everybody on the channel have to basically be somebody who's been through hell or or is a bad person? No, no
What's the standard? No, I mean just interesting really. Yeah, you know because like ruby baker who I interviewed from kentucky
It's the most inspirational
You know beautiful old woman you could ever find
Hmm
And there's no trauma. There's no, you know, or maybe I think she lost a child or something
But she had a lot of kids. So it's a beautiful story and people love that video. So
it's not about
A bunch of trauma, you know
A lot of people that I've interviewed are just
Cool and interesting right and maybe they come from a tough childhood or a tough life came from the streets, but
you know
Like sharp who's a a pimp that I've interviewed several times
He and I speak privately just on the phone a lot and he he's just an interesting cat. He's just an interesting dude
He's charismatic is is any
Anybody you'll ever find the women love them or they hate them
And the men love them or hate them and and I tell them all the time. It's like the reason that
you're so
uh
Magnetic and and people react to you so strongly. It's it's like
Half the portion of the audience hates you thinks you're an exploitative like bastard that beats your women
And the other half think you're like the next best
You should run for president, right, you know
And he you know and I get the same kind of crap sometimes where people like, oh, you're an exploitative bastard
And you know, oh, you're an angel that's helping all these people and moving society forward in a positive way
I'm both and I'm neither and I'm some mixing of all of these put together just as he is, you know
Yes, he's a pimp, but but but I've talked with his girls and and they're they're cool
They're happy. They're not I don't sense anything other than
A nice relationship, right not a not a not a conventional relationship
but it, you know
You know, I don't think I'd be
You know the the simplistic view that I am
Giving sex offenders clansmen and pimps a voice
Is a very it's a very small minded way of looking at it. I'm just showing us as a society
What exists?
And how these subcultures
Came to be and and how they operate and how they think I'm not saying anybody's good or bad
Right, you know, if you notice like the sex offender like I certainly don't condone molesting a child
if anybody thinks I do then you're
Not smart enough to watch my channel, but
um
I'm just I know that if I listen to your story
You're gonna tell me more than if I go you're a creep
Tell me your story
You're not gonna tell me anything. No, because I've seen a video of yours that was titled
I've seen interviews with the clansmen and the and the interviewer is just like you can just
Be the hatred before he even says hi, right? Okay. So do you know nick cannon is?
The actor and rapper and whatnot. No, I don't super famous rich, etc
And he at one point interviewed richard spencer who's probably the world the america's most well known white supremacist
I guess at this point. Okay, and um, he's a very very slick communicator, you know
He wears the suits and he's very very well spoken
He's smart, but then at the end of the day his agenda is basically white power
And I saw that nick cannon interviewed him and I immediately thought in my head. That's not coming out because
I the the thing that I knew as soon as I saw it is I know that they're gonna get along too well
And I know that the video is gonna expose the fact that they have more in common than anybody is gonna want to admit
Just in the sense that I think that this whole white power ideology if it was coming from the mouth of
Some other groups it wouldn't really sound as offensive and I was right the video never came out
Because I just there's something different about doing a podcast where you have two people kind of getting along
And at a certain point somebody in that whole corporate world that he's in is gonna say
We can't put out a video with you
Getting along this well with a white supremacist that I think that's a benefit to what you do though
Is you get out of the way so much? Yeah, the Klansman gets to sort of go off and you don't really seem like you're a real participant
And that's why I'm not I'm not an interviewer
All I'm trying to do is get everyone to do with johnny the gang member that I interviewed a lot or eric
A former crack addict that I interviewed a lot or louis the alcoholic that I even interviewed
Those guys just tell a story if you notice. I don't even say anything. I don't say
Hey, eric, how's it going? Tell me your story. I don't say anything. I just go
and I sit back for
30 minutes or 45 minutes and then they tell me they're done and I turn off the camera
I never said a word in most of those videos and that's my ideal
That's how I'd like every single one of my videos to go
But I can't I need to ask you where you're from just to get the conversation going and then sometimes it takes off
And other times I need to coax it out of them every
Every step of the way, but it's interesting too because you you know, they know that if they don't talk
Then what the fuck are you sitting here for?
So they just start talking
Yeah, I was so lucky that I've met people like the the guys I just mentioned and there's some women too
They're just great storytellers. They're just great. I mean who knew
You're the best
Speaker I've ever heard, you know, eric especially and that's something I will notice when I
You know, I spent a lot of time around, you know, quote-unquote important people interviewing people that you know
Have done something with their lives. It's quite important that they have to talk about
And I noticed that a lot of times those people are quite guarded
You know, like I certainly don't walk into a room with a bunch of normal people and just start telling them my life story
I don't start telling them like what about this famous rapper I interviewed this week
This is how much money I made off this youtube video. I don't do that because I've
Kind of like accomplished enough in my life that I don't really feel the need to walk into a room and start announcing
What I've done
But I noticed that when I hang out with people who are very much more, you know
Ground floor in their lives
That I'll go hang out with some guy and he'll he'll start telling me about his job as an electrician like he's the f*** and
You know, like it's the most interesting thing on earth. He's just he's used to that of just sort of
Making content by just talking about his experiences
And I find that very very fascinating because a lot of the most accomplished people I know have like no
Outer monologue that they're constantly presenting but normal salt of the earth people
That's like a very normal thing for them is they they'll walk into a room and just start talking about their lives in a way that
You know rich and famous people a lot of times don't yeah, I mean what I
believe and
sometimes I follow it and sometimes I
break my rule but
Nothing is more powerful than if I find out
That you have
Accomplishments that you're not telling me about
But I find out through the grapevine or just some weird way. I found out that you went to harvard
and
you were recruited by the
The clippers to play
In the nba, but you passed up on it. You know, you're not telling me how cool you are
How great a basketball player you were or how smart you are. I just happened to have found out
Through somebody that knew you or went to school with you or played basketball or whatever and you like wow really?
Adam really he was so if you're not selling it
It's a hundred times a thousand times more powerful
And significant then then if you tell me how great you are
You know, if you're telling me how great you are, it's like
Yeah, okay
Yeah, but if you find out that you're great or have wonderful
Qualities or accomplishments that just but you weren't tell me about it. You're just a dude
There's a one-on-one two people talking. I heard some all the difference. I heard somebody said this the other day. They said that
people
Are so
One of the number one things you hear people talk about and you ask somebody. How are you doing?
I'm so busy
And that's just like so consistent, you know poor people rich people
Everybody wants to tell you how busy they are and they said
Think about what people are really telling you when they say that they're busy
They would never sit there in the conversation and tell you I'm extremely in demand
But that's what you really are saying when you say you're busy and you know, you're sort of letting people know in advance
I don't have that much time to offer. So really even this right here at me. You talking to you. This is quite valuable
That's like really what people are saying when they say they're busy and people feel very comfortable saying that
But they won't say what they're actually trying to communicate there
Which I because I've and that made so much sense to me because for the last few years
I've really always found myself kind of annoyed by people who talk about how busy they are
In part because I know that when I was 10 times less busy than I am now
I was still telling people I was busy
So I'm kind of like I don't really believe my own shit that much in that regard because
I know that I was telling people I was busy 10 years ago when I really didn't have shit going on compared to now
Yeah
I was it for me the reason that my life gets difficult
Lately as my channel gets bigger and bigger is there's so many I'm being pulled in so many different directions
Like every day I wake up to 30 messages from people whose
lives are in
Crisis and they need me to save them
That just drains you after a while every day
Saturday Sunday, I don't get a break every single day all day long
And then there's all the you know, I'm trying to make things happen
Which is totally separate and then there's my other career, which is
Really first priority over all this
BS that I'm going through
And then when I'm doing both at the same time it just it just becomes impossible. Hmm. I just want to like
Turn off my phones for a week and at some point you just have to ignore some some emails or
Well, I like I'll like emailing me is next to impossible now
You know, I had one email
address or two actually
And they quickly became like out of control. So I got a second
That got over so not now I have like five or six different email addresses and I can't really
Deal with any of them
Wow, because I get so many people saying you need to interview me and you need to help this person and and I'm the
cousin of this guy who you
Times 3,000 people 3,000 interviews are all getting not not not every one of them
But I'm getting pulled and all these different directions by people who said I want to reach out to save this person
I want to do this. I want to do that. I'm one dude. Yeah, I'm just one dude. I don't have a team behind me
I don't have the money to to pay a team if I was making a shit ton of money
I would hire I would hire the team of people
And let here this handle his email
But I have to do it myself and if I if I never got any emails
This channel takes up so much of my time
you know
you could
Probably going like a more business first direction
But it seems like that really doesn't appeal to you
Like if you started to treat it like more of a business if you started to really want to maximize profits and all that kind of stuff
All these kind of things that are available. Yeah, I don't even know selling merchandise is the answer
But I'll probably start doing that soon just just because people want t-shirts
I've heard this all these people selling fake soft white underplay t-shirts now
Okay, there's fake tiktok accounts with my channel that all my videos I paid to create them
But somebody else has created a tiktok channel with all my videos and I guess you can make money on tiktok
Somehow, I don't know. We haven't really got there yet. I don't know anything about social media, but but it's just like it's
It's it's overwhelming. Does that bother you or do you feel like your content is kind of like public domain like once you do it
No, it bothers the hell out of me. I'm human. Yeah, but what am I going to do about it?
Call mr. Tiktok and say ask him to take that down. You could you could definitely have it removed for copyright
That's a good question, but there's gotta be a way. It's not a good question
It's a question. I've been wrestling with for six months. Okay trying to get that channel to get taken down, but you can't
Try to contact youtube. I mean this
What we just talked about susan is here right now. Yeah, um, I just got an email this morning
coincidentally from youtube offered me a
What's it called?
Partner manager, so that might help me with youtube, but that doesn't help me with tiktok and instagram and all these other things that are
Using my yeah, how hospitable do you consider youtube to be as a platform?
You not only get videos age restricted and demonetized, but you get stuff removed as well. I'm assuming I've had some removed
I get a lot that are demonetized not it's not all or nothing people seem to think oh all marks videos are demonetized
That's not that's not the case. It's only certain ones, but in general. I believe youtube supports what i'm doing and is
is
YouTube's been really good to me. So i'm not i'm not angry at youtube
But all i'm saying is I kind of my stuff is educational. It's not porn
you know when I when I do an interview of a
a prostitute
The spirit behind it is let's find out how this girl got into this career
Why she's like this this is I believe it's probably not an ideal career for a young woman
I'm glad if she's happy i'm happy for her but but prostitutes and
Foreign stars. I don't know that it's an ideal career for a woman. I really don't
So what i'm doing is just showing you how they got there. I'm not saying it's good or bad
You notice I don't say that oh porn is bad. I mean very rarely do I make judgments like that
I've only done it like a handful of times in all my interviews, but
The spirit behind what i'm doing is to educate
Yet sometimes my work gets treated like it's porn
And if you really watch my my interviews you'll see that it's it's pretty educational and youtube
99% of the time treats it like that, but every like if a video is titled prostitute interview
It's very hard for me to get it monetized. Hmm. Sometimes they do
Which it makes no sense to me, but but usually they don't
Like this week. I think I've got three or four prostitute interviews and they're all the amount
I think one got monetized and the thing that really kills you isn't
The fact that it's not monetized is the fact that the views stop coming in
And so you could have a video doing extremely well and then it gets demonetized and boom
It just flat lines and doesn't get any more views. Do you know that problem as well?
I don't really pay too much attention to all that
Because that's what I'll notice is that when it turns from green to yellow and they turn off the ads
Then they also kind of turn off the suggested video thing
So I'm not the views will just plummet and that's what hurts is like listen
You keep the money, but let me keep getting all the fucking views on this
So I at least know that it made the impact that it could have or should have
I know very little about youtube and social media
But I believe you I mean my channel is what I got like two million subscribers now
That wouldn't be the case if youtube didn't support what I'm doing and promote it. So I believe they're
They're generally good to me, but they have to do what they have to do
You know if somebody says, oh, you know Lynn talked about suicide. You got to take that down
You know, it's going to trigger people
What are they going to do? I know we're going to leave it up. So they have to take it down
So it's probably a viewer that was upset about
Lynn this girl that was a crystal meth addict that I interviewed her first interview
She talked about suicide. She didn't commit suicide and she's threatened suicide a thousand times
But she's never ever going to do it. I don't believe but she talked about it and it got deleted
Like two weeks ago just because she was talking about doing it. Yeah, but if you're gonna talk if you're gonna start deleting videos because
Someone talked about suicide. That's a quarter of my videos
Pretty much. Yeah, so I'm not sure if that's
I think it's a viewer who got upset because it's a powerful
Lynn's first video is very powerful because she's some so like troubled and so
Just full of angst
That it triggered somebody and they reported it and it got deleted. So that's that's gone. That's unfortunate
Yeah, that's what that's my patreon channel is for you want nudity you want
All the rawest content you go to patreon and pay ten dollars a month and you can get that
Oh, okay. So is that doing pretty well? No
No
We're about to launch ours. Hopefully I don't promote it. Right. Okay, you know, I don't promote it
I just put it up and I did a video a year and a half ago or whatever was and I when I started it
And that's all I've ever really done. I have a little thing at the very end of my videos saying I have a patreon channel
But people don't watch the ends of my videos. So they only watch the first eight minutes and then they
Then they bail I feel bad when I miss like the last 10 minutes, you know, I'll be watching a 45 minute one and
Sort of you know, I'll notice myself skipping the next one when there's like eight minutes left
And I'll be thinking like am I missing like this? Maybe there's a really good enter to that one. Yeah, sometimes
I mean like I did one this morning that I thought was
I probably wasn't going to use it and then the gentleman told me like
I asked him like, you know, how do you
Do you think if your childhood was different if it, you know, it may have
Been taken your life in a different direction. He goes, well when I got molested it
Like oh, you know, so then it became it became more interesting again
I noticed that there's like almost trends with your content
Like you'll just get interested in something and then there'll be a bunch of stuff about that like the nudist thing
Like is that it's because I took a trip to Tampa where there are all these nudist resorts
So that's why you got an influx of like a whole bunch of nudist and swinger videos. I'm going to be going back there
At the end of the month, where did that
Because that's not something I ever would have thought is something that would make sense on your channel
But no, see if you really understand my channel, which which is it can be very
It's my fault because I did so many videos on skid row that people thought it was a drug addiction skid row channel
And it is not and if you're coming here just for drug addict stories, you're going to be disappointed because
Like when I sell that house next year, I'll have money to really do what I want to do with this channel
You'll you'll still see some drug addict stories, but you're going to see
You know cowboys and you're going to see Amish people and you'll see
you know
You see all kinds of different subcultures across the country
And they're all going to be interesting
But they're not all drug addict stories. The only reason you see so many drug addict stories is because skid row is
Half an hour from my house and it's full of a lot of the worst stories you ever know
I mean finding as you I'm sure know finding interesting content is the biggest challenge
If I go to skid row, I don't have to even think about it
I just go down there and I find gold all the time every day. I found one of the best interviews
I've done all year this morning with a woman who is sex trafficked since she was a little kid. Oh, wow
Clover when I um when people used to always ask me to interview
Uh people on the street or whatever a lot of the the first thing that would come to mind for me would be
If someone's on the street smoking crack doing heroin meth, whatever
Are they really able to consent to being on camera?
Yeah, that's a great question
How often does that weigh into your decision about putting these people on camera and a lot of times
I feel like they're at some level of sobriety like maybe they've uh, they're not like actually on drugs at the moment
I had you know of all the interviews I've done. I've had two
Where the in one case the family of a crack addict and he wanted me to keep his video up
But his family and friends
Contacted me his friends mainly and said look you got to take that down
He's he's got a respected career and you're making him look like he's
You know, they were really polite about it. They weren't aggressive
They were just like can you take that down because it's going to ruin his career
And I don't want to ruin anyone's career. So I took it down right but then I saw him like a couple days later
He goes you took that down
And I'm like, yeah, he goes. I wish you hadn't
and then I'm like, you know, so he wants it up but but
It was an interesting video because he's a really it's a really intelligent talk about being on skid row
Rather than just a you know, he's a white guy. He's accomplished. He was a musician. He was
Respected he had a great life, but he he chose the street life at least temporarily at this point in his life
And I thought it was really
A deep interesting talk, but it's gone now. I think it exists on patreon, but but it's gone from my youtube channel
And the other one was a guy who was
So fascinating
but he was he was
Clearly high
And I normally don't do interviews with people who are high, but he was just so fascinating and interesting and beautiful. He was a beautiful
You know, physically beautiful person, you know, Sean
He's on
They all still exist on my patreon channel. That's a reason to go to patreon, but um, I just thought he was just so
Like interesting to look at and listen to he spoke beautifully about how much he loved his dad
And it was it was a great talk
But his his family called me and says you got to take that down. He looks like an asshole
Right, like so so I did but that's a weird decision because it's like if he was down to do it
Like who who's the family necessarily tell me what narrative should be in that case even he called me up says
Yeah, I was so high
Yeah, so
Yeah, I have his number. I may I may do another one later, but typically
You can't recreate
magic, you know
It worked that time because it worked and you try to recreate it
99% of the time it falls flat and that's a lot the whole thing with drug addicts too
Is that a lot of times you will get there might be 10 different versions to their personality that you might get in an interview
You might get multiple different versions of their personality in one interview because they might be like still sort of high
And then it's the adrenaline sort of wears off midway through the interview all of a sudden
They're kind of drowsy. Yeah, no, but I mean I think people fall asleep in the middle of an interview
Yeah, had it happened this morning
Because you're so not in control of like where you're at in your yeah your energy
No, but back to your original question about whether it's okay to you don't really have their consent if they're high
Look what what I do is is pushing the limits of what's
Um appropriate or or or
Or right, you know, I push the limits all the time like like the stuff I do is like I really thought my channel would get
Taken down from from youtube by now
That was really kind of my secret little goal was to put this channel up make it as edgy as I can and eventually
Get it taken down by youtube because it's just too inappropriate
And then there'll be a patreon channel back up and that's people can go there
That was my plan, but the youtube is basically done the opposite and supported me
Which is cool too, you know, so so I instead I'm getting support from youtube
so um
If youtube ever took it down
Then I'd probably start making money because everyone would probably pay
What I'm charging ten dollars a month on patreon and then I'd probably start making money, but who knows I'm just I'm just doing what I do
I'm learning every day. I do this
you know about myself and about other people and about
Society and our country and how humans work and I love learning
definitely what um
What does the sheer size of your audience at this point say back to what I was saying so it's uh to answer your first question
I'll be quick. Um, it's it's about prevention. Right. So if somebody has to pay the price, which always is gonna have there's always a trade-off
Somebody's gonna have to pay a price if you're gonna do an interview of a drug addict
It's the interviewee the interviewee is paying the price. I pay them. I can I compensate them
I treat them with respect, but they are taking the hit because look here. I am I'm a drug addict
and it's
It's humiliating or embarrassing even though they're not
Particularly humiliated they're they're proud of it and they want to come back and do another one
But I understand how people say oh, no, you you you made that person look bad because you show you show them as a drug addict
But it's it's not about them
It's about the the the thousands of young people
Who are being parented by people who are watching my channel or even the young people that are watching my channel
My channel is pretty popular. So a lot of people are seeing it
And I'll bet you it's affecting somebody in terms of their decisions about using drugs or joining a gang or
Or become a sex worker or all these things. So somebody has to pay the price for that
Awareness and understanding and that's the drug addict or the or the prostitute
Yeah, sorry. No for sure. Your audience is gigantic. What do you think that says about
You know the fans the world the you know, it's interesting. Monica and I were speaking off-camera about this
She's she's a musician first and then this help that she does with the Patrick Katie foundation is just her little side hustle
She was saying everybody in the music industry is
using
I've heard really because I'm naive. I've never smoked pot. You know, I'm that square square. You'll ever see in terms of drugs, but
um
I think the drugs are much more common
You know, because a lot of my channel is about drugs, it seems it's ridiculous that i'm a
The head of this channel has something to do with drugs, but
It's it's really not about drugs. It's about humans. You know, I just I like learning about humans
So that's really what I do. But drugs seem to be super popular across our country
And uh, like the the most popular video I posted
In the last six months
Is of uh, Matthew who's a functional heroin addict
It's got two and a half two two and a half million views
I didn't I I didn't think that video would get
50 000 views
It's got two and a half million
And the reason for that is because there's a lot of people who are functioning and using
Right, I believe
Yeah, I have a friend who uh, because it's not I mean, he's not particularly charismatic or interesting
He's just a he's a nice dude who uses heroin
I think that functional word was the whole thing because I remember when I first met somebody from the northwest when
I first moved to la and he just told me like yeah, my mom and dad they do a crystal meth
They go to work
It's like fucking cup of coffee to you. It's like they do meth all day
And I remember being so shocked because I just didn't realize that there were people who had functional relationships with that kind of stuff
But now that seems incredibly obvious to me like of course like everybody who does heroin or crystal meth can't be
Out on the streets robbing people, you know, there's got to be people with
Workable relationships with these drugs. Yeah, no, and I'd like to do more of them
But it's hard to find people that want to talk about it when they've got a nine to five and they don't want to lose their job
Oh, you're a heroin addict. You're fired
You know, so there's that
Yeah, and but there are people who who can get around that somehow. Yeah, and that's the ones I'll interview
But what I think interesting because like I get drawn to a lot of the gang stuff that you do just because I feel like that's kind of
The stuff that's the closest. What is your background? I mean, you what do you
I'm waiting for my soft white underbelly interview
No, just really quickly. How'd you get into this? Um, so in 2006 I started like the first BMX blog website
Basically, uh, when I was living in New York City, I've been riding BMX bike since I was 12
I basically did that from like 2006 to around 2016. That was all I did was run this blog at over time
It kind of became more like oh, I'm a podcaster
I started interviewing all these pro BMX riders and stuff
Within the first year I interviewed a couple underground rappers and they just those interviews did so many more views
Than the BMX riders I was interviewing
Which gave me a little bit more confidence because I've been like a lifelong like hip-hop addict
And that was always the number one thing that I was a fan of
All of a sudden I started to realize for the first time in my life
Like oh, there are people in this world who give a fuck about what I have to say
And I was very lucky because I was sort of there for the
Early era of the soundcloud era
So there's a rapper xxxtentacion and you might have heard of who passed away a couple years ago and
His interview is by far my biggest interview. I think it was like 14 million views or something like that and that
That one was the one where all of a sudden it became like oh now
Everybody knows about you and that that kind of
Took it to a totally different level and now I just try to interview whoever I find interesting
Yeah, but you're very good. I think I like your style of
Like just making like Joe Rogan is really great too. Like the way he makes conversation happen is just like
It's it's perfect. It's beautiful. Yeah, there's so many different
Interview styles. Yeah, what have you learned about interviewing? I know your style is kind of get out of the way
Yeah, but I don't I don't really see myself as an interviewee. I interviewer
I see myself as just a photographer who's just trying to get their story
So my ideal scenario what I'm aiming for is like the johnny or the eric or the lewis videos that I mentioned
Which is just a photo and them telling their story
It's perfect for me. That's that's the formula
But that doesn't work in 99 95 percent of the cases. So I need to
coax it out
But the the fewer words I can say the better now every once in a while I'll interview somebody who we just click with
And we have conversations off-camera that are great
So I'll actually have a conversation with them
On camera
But everyone complains when I do that
So I should probably not do that, but but I still do
It's interesting. Yeah, um
Because one thing that stands out to me about your your stuff is that
You know
Photography, I guess in a lot of ways is like bigger than ever since everybody can take a photo and obviously there's you know
If you're a great photographer, there's tons of commercial opportunities
There's tons of brands that need high quality photo work all the time
But photos don't go viral
That often these days in comparison to video and that's what I find so fascinating about yours is that if I was a
Photographer who was just looking for a way like how do I make my photos get out there more?
I would probably land on something like what you're doing
Oh, I'll do this youtube content and then I'll have the photos as the thumbnail and inserted inside the video
Well, I'm not selling my photos, you know, right?
But if you just wanted people to see them
Then I feel like the youtube videos are the perfect vehicle to get more people
If the goal is just for people to see the photos the youtube videos are perfect
That thought never even entered my mind really all i'm trying to do is inform society about
Each other. That's that's all i'm thinking about
Definitely like when a prostitute comes on and tells you how she got to where she is
How she her boyfriend at at 15 years old
Turned out to be her pimp and she didn't know it and and and how she was molested when she was six years old
And how sex became a part of her life at a very young age. That
Is a story that should be
told
You because it's you know, it's gonna happen again and again listen listen to the 300
Sex worker videos on my channel every girl has almost the same story. Yeah, you know, I guarantee it's happening right now somewhere
For sure that shit is a constant over and over and over reminder of how fucking careful you need to be with your kids
Yeah, I mean it's really it's it's the reason for my channel is it's like
Like if you love yourself you're you're gonna treat others differently
You're not gonna be molesting your kids if you if you love yourself, right?
So clearly we don't love ourselves enough. How do you love yourself?
Is it religion for a lot of people? It's religion. I'm not religious
I don't get religion as as the way but I was parented really well not perfectly, but you know
On a scale from one to ten. I would say, you know, I was parented like a 9.5
So I didn't have this traumatic terrible
Childhood with my parents
So I've never had these kind of like weird sexual things with anybody, right?
You know, my relationships have all been pretty cool
With everyone I've had a relationship with so I don't really have enemies. I don't have people that
Hate me other than on this youtube channel. They don't really hate me
What that what's really going on there is they hate themselves or they hate what I'm my channel represents and that's that's not me, but
But
We just need to as a society be healthier be happier
Because if you're happy, you're not going to fuck with anybody. You're not going to do anything to a young kid
Yeah, I was wondering how you're going to humanize this this guy
I forget his name that you interviewed and just said rapist in the title
And I was you know wondering like how do you do that interview before I even clicked on it?
How do you do that interview and not seem like you're giving him space to justify his actions?
I was just immediately interested too because it's like
Is he just admitting that he's a rapist off off rip, which he did but before he even got into that
He was talking about how his earliest memories of sex and relationships or just love
Were based around his family members raping him and it's like that just immediately
Forces you into this mind state where
Even the most judgmental person can't help but understand that this guy is a product of his circumstances
And that doesn't like absolve him for all the shit he's done, but
It's impossible to remove a person from
Trying to understand their uh, their their upbringing. Yeah, I mean like if you're watching my channel
You're and you're judging or hating somebody like like james the rapist or a sex offender for example
You know the ones who molest young kids
If you're judging or hating them, you're not learning
Your mind isn't a different you're using a different part of your brain
And what I want to do is is get help everyone learn
So if your mind is open you're just listening to the story like there's a video that I didn't post on youtube
I posted on patreon last week
Richie who's a sex offender
It was just too much for youtube. So I didn't even post it there, but um
He talks about how he was molested by his uncle who would take him to the zoo all the time
But they never went to the zoo
And then his stepdad
Mom like their mom's boyfriend or somebody came into the picture the same thing happened again
And I think it happened to either other times like camp counselors and all this kind of music
Entire childhood full of being
Screwed with sexually
So sure enough he's he's gone out and he's I think I forget how many kids way too many kids that he's
Done this with and he has a ton of remorse, but he says at the end of the video. I'm gonna do it again
That guy I was just talking about james. Yeah, he then by the end of the video
He's talking about rape and his own mother
Yeah
And that that was the moment where I found myself
I noticed after a few minutes that my hands that were breaking up weed had frozen my eyes
My jaws dropped and I'd just been staring at the tv for like three minutes straight
It was that intense when I asked him like
What did you just say?
My mother
Like he couldn't really say it. Yeah, he mumbled it and he kind of
So you raped your mother? He's yeah
Yeah, he even he had a lot of and he's squirming around in his chair
And he just he could barely like live with himself enough to tell you that story
But for some reason it was like he had to you had to live it down
It's it's again mental health. I mean there's something wrong with him mentally whether it's
His family's fault or maybe it's just the brain chemistry. He was born with or maybe even
All these serial killers and all that. I mean, is it because something terrible happened to them as kids or is it just
Genetics or is it the water they're drinking or what is it? Is it the cell phones? Is it the plastic?
Well, like I don't know what's going on, but there's something going on in the world. There's so many people shooting
Random people and raping so many kids and like why are we also violent and cruel?
Do you feel like you are better equipped to answer that question now than when you started?
It should be right
That's a great question
I mean, yes, but I don't have the answer
I mean like like with all the section like I used to
Like you like the you see a stripper or a prostitute or whatever and you like
I used to be much more judgmental
Now I never judge like I don't even I think I've eradicated it from my personality now
Because I know now after doing all these interviews that there's something happened to you when you were young that kind of set you on that path
So I'm not even gonna
Think that what you're doing is bad or wrong or anything. Yeah, I'm just gonna see it as
You're you found a way to support yourself good for you
And if you want something better, you know, maybe I can help you with that or maybe I can't or maybe whatever
you know, it's like but
All you can do is love and support. That's all you can do
Because if you're gonna judge and say no, what you're doing is fucked up
They're not gonna stop doing it. They're gonna dig their heels in deeper and just do it more with more shame
but the only way out is to
build them up and and and give them dignity and respect and love and let them
Take a deep breath and and hold their head up high and feel good about themselves and when they do that they're much more likely to
Make better decisions for themselves
And maybe make decisions that might make them a little less money, but make them happier. Yeah, you know
So so I don't I mean
it's it's hard to
Just say oh, I have all the answers now for doing all these interviews. I
I understand things better, but I still don't understand a lot
Which is why I'm still hungry to do this. I look forward to doing these
Because I'm learning all the time. There's no type of interview that has grown stale to you
That are there interviews that you did early on that?
Maybe you would turn down now because you just don't find that person
Like I feel like if I did a couple of clan interviews that I just wouldn't really be able to keep doing it
Oh, yeah, I mean, I don't want to do a whole bunch of them. I think I've done
I've got one more in the can that I'll use but I'm waiting for
The right I don't want to just put up a plan video
but the reason I went to mississippi was to find the the
The counterpoint to the clan interview which is a cold-hearted clansman
It's it's an interesting video because there's even footage of
of their
Ritual thing at the beginning, but I wanted to find a an older like a 90 year old an interviewed a bunch of 90 year old
African-american people in
Oh, well, that's good middle of mississippi hoping to find a racism story
That really would be a good counterpoint to that right
The best I found and she wasn't
The most compelling storyteller, so I'm not going to use it, but I'm persistent. I'll probably keep trying
But I asked her about racism
She was 94 years old
She was tell me I mean racism must you must have seen a lot in your 94 years. Tell me what you've seen
Racism, I've never seen racism
And this is a totally black community. I mean there you can count the white people on on one hand
I think that I saw while I was there
For two days three days, whatever. Um
I've never seen racism. I wonder what she would define racism
I think she worked on the cotton fields as a kid and all that
And I she's what what is racism?
I go racism is where like maybe people from one race might not like people from another race and treat them
Badly I had to explain to her what racism was and she goes. Yeah
No, when we worked in the fields in the cotton fields is that
The the
The cotton the plantation owners would treat the children of the black people a certain way and she kind of got into it
And it was very clear that yes, there was racism
in her life that she experienced
like
Harshly right, but she didn't even see it as anything other than just that's the way life is right. She didn't see it like
Hey, you're treating me unfairly. I think now
I think blacks are much more aware that hey
You're treating me right differently than you would treat a white person or whatever. So they're they're much more
On edge about it. And it's a bigger deal
The black black lives matter and all that kind of stuff
I mean her threshold for what she probably for what would have to happen for her to consider a racist would probably be incredibly high
Yeah, I mean she just she didn't even know it was it existed
But but that's a community it was so black that there was no tension between the whites and blacks
There just wasn't anything the whites were basically they thought it was a cop
Everyone assumed I was a cop
In that community because I was white. Wow, because why would a white person be there?
There was no reason
That must just be such an eye-opening learning experience for you too because I'm sure you couldn't never imagine that dynamic
Right, right. No, so that's what I'm saying that I'd love to learn and doing these interviews
I just keep learning so eventually when I stopped learning like when I do the clansman videos
I don't I don't interviews. I'm not really learning a whole lot. So I'm kind of
I did a handful of those and I think I might if somebody was really interesting
I'd do it but probably I probably won't be looking for more of those
You ever do a client interview and then look at the comments and realize a lot of people agree with them and did that
Yeah, yeah, I've seen some of that and did that bother you or make you think twice about no no
Because I'm not I'm not assuming my entire audience has evolved and right and sees things the way I do
Like I I I work very hard and I I'm very successful at being non-judgmental
Yeah, every once in a while I'll tell a process a young prostitute's like you know
What you're doing is probably not good for your kid and it's not going to end well
Look at some of the other interviews. You'll you'll see that it's not going to end well and I'll talk her out of it
But generally I just let them tell their story and and stand back
So I'm really good at just standing back and letting people do their thing and say their peace and
And say thanks for telling your story
Definitely
Is there any part of you the when I was interviewing a big you from who's basically like the founder of
The role in 60s Crips out here and he's he's really transitioned into like making documentaries and doing all this stuff from the music industry
And stuff is a really great story, but he's very much figured out that
His name is so powerful and his
You know everything that he's been through in his life is so big that he constantly will have different documentary people wanting to work with him
Trying to turn his ideas or stories that he's been a part of into documentary stuff like that
And when I was having that conversation with him, I was like that's so interesting because I feel like
You know a documentary is just one way that you could present a narrative
Just the same way that a podcast is like this this big you could have easily started a podcast he could have easily
Not easily, but he could have created a tv show
There's so many different ways to tell a story in this day and age. It occurs to me that
The the stories that you're telling I could completely imagine a lot of those stories being sort of like interwoven into an
A documentary or a narrative. Oh, is there anything that that is that something that you think about?
Is any of this content ever going to be repurposed for a bigger purpose?
Eric is writing a book currently
with his
You know life story, which is that which would be great, right?
Johnny should but he's so high that I don't think that'll ever happen. Okay the gang member
He's got great stories and it would be a great movie or but you don't automatically think oh, I could do a
Document about this one person for me to do it a soft white underbelly
like something like the
I
The spirit of what I want to do is is is to
Learn
For me and I think my audience likes to learn
That that's that's 99.9 or percent of what i'm doing
So if I was going to do a documentary about chongo or about johnny, for example, let's say johnny
I'm going to stop learning while I do that
I'll learn a little bit about johnny and the gang life and all that but i'm i'm not learning like you know this
The interviews I did this morning. I learned from
The interviews I'll do up in san francisco this week. I'll learn from I'll learn a little bit every day
And I love I loved what I've learned in the last especially the last two years is when I've done this so
Hot and heavy, you know like every day. I've been doing it
I just learned learn learn and you know just a little bit more every day. It's like I just become like a
A more well-rounded person by doing that
So I don't think I'll put it down to go do something else even if even it's gonna make money
Because I think what's at this point in my life. I'm more interested in doing what's right than making money
I'll make money when I sell the house, you know
So if I need money, I just I just sit on the beach until next summer when I sell the house and then I'll have money
It's not about money. It's it's about
To me it's about learning right because you said earlier
Then once you saw the house things will be a little different and you're gonna do different things
If somebody just dropped a million dollars on you right now
What would I do what are you doing a little different with the channel?
I would hire editors because I spend so much my time editing. I would hire researchers to help me find people
Because I'm doing that as well editing takes up most of my day
Shooting you could get somebody for fucking five bucks a day to edit for you, man
I don't know. Are you are you really picky with the editing? Yeah
I'm a freak
Not five bucks a day. That's not a little bit
No, I could but I like doing it myself
Yeah
Yeah, I'm sure I could hire somebody who's really like when I hire people
I pay them a lot. I don't pay them just a little like people want to intern for me
I get emails every day from people who want to intern. They want to work for me for free. I love what you're doing
I want to work for free
I don't hire people for free. I pay them a lot
So if you're fucking amazing and worth what I'm gonna pay you
Then you're gonna be maybe part of my team if I ever start making money
But I'm not gonna hire somebody who just wants to work for free. I don't need that
Yeah, you don't want to ever hire anyone who wants to work for free
No, and plus what I'm doing is so dangerous like if you're gonna work on set with me
Yeah
Like like when I went to Memphis
The first pimp I interviewed I ended up becoming really good friends with and he just died recently dro
In an auto accident, but he he told me he's like when we first saw you
You're a white guy in our neighborhood, man. We were just gonna rob you
Yeah, but then you came walking up to us and told us what you're doing and you're offering us money and we're like
What the fuck let's not rob this guy yet and then then then he and I became friends later, but
He
Initially was gonna rob me. So if I had some intern out there who's like young and
You know naive, you know, because not everybody knows how to navigate those kind of situations. Well
It can be it can be a real problem
And I don't want that liability of somebody, you know, he got stabbed or he got robbed or shot or killed or whatever
Because he was working with me
Liability is too much. So I'd rather do this by myself
100%
Yeah
Some of your more high-profile interviews like the Ron Jeremy thing or the Michael friend's east one
Are those
Situations that happen in different ways since I'm assuming, you know, just like see Ron Jeremy walking down the street. No, no
I'm not I'm not into porn at all. So I'm not
I I saw an interview with him and he was an interesting cat
And he's lived a very very different lifestyle and I just thought it would be
Funny and interesting and
Let me just try it
And he's a charming guy
He's he's friendly charming. He's intelligent, you know, he had interesting interesting things to share
But it was that was just a little experiment that probably is not a direction I want to go in
So I don't think even if I had all the money to spend on this channel. I wouldn't I wouldn't take it in that direction
I like I like people who
Aren't aren't selling anything and have never told their story like I get a lot of people coming to me that
They've gotten they got a little secret agenda
They want to sell their music or they want to sell this or they're going to be famous or they want to start a podcast
Or they want to do this that or the other
And I tend to steer away from those because I'd rather find a pimp who's never ever talked about anything
Or or a drug addict or a gang member or whatever. I mean the gang members
Here's one thing I've learned the people that don't want to tell me their story
It really just
Those are the most interesting ones. Those are the ones I want
Those are the ones I want. Yeah, as soon as I find out, you know
When somebody when I go to a no city and well, there's these four people and this one doesn't want to tell their story and like
Get her. That's the one I want
Because that's one who's got something really interesting to share
A lot of the best conversations that I've had through this podcast have been the conversations that took place immediately after we stopped
Recording and the rapper just started telling me about how they used to run this drug empire
And they're like literally like unplugging the mics like as if we're still recording and shit
Because they're so paranoid that somebody could record enough
But and that is a weird one because on one hand, of course, I don't want you to say anything on camera
That's going to get you in trouble your interviewees and mine overlap. Yeah, probably you've done you've done gang members and oh, yeah
But you know, it's funny because when I watch your stuff a lot of times when I interview someone who's in a gang or whatever
Sometimes though, especially with the older guys, they'll be regretful about it. They'll have negative things to say about it
But then at the same time
A lot of dudes love
The gang shit. They love it. They fucking love the culture of it. They love everything about it
Like and a lot of times when I watch yours
I don't know if it's just the ones you use or if it's just
The environment makes them want to present it differently
But they like very rarely are you know presenting gangbanging in a positive way on your stuff. Is that intentional?
No, I I don't like not use the ones that support like if I had a gang member who came out and really thought it was awesome
And it was great. Is that what you're saying? Yeah, I would love that really I would love that because it's not necessarily
I'm not endorsing it
But it just shows you something like what I'd really love to get more of with the gang because I've got johnny 12 times
Right, how many more johnny interviews do I need?
Even though he's still interesting
But every once in a while I'll find a gang member
Like what I'd love is to find a young active one guy who's 17 18 19 and
Lives for it. It's his only option
That that gives you a window into that subculture that
That we probably need to look at it as a society. Yeah, I could probably help you out
Although I wonder just you know, I feel like if you're 18 and really in it gang banging wise
You don't want to talk about it. It's like the number one thing where you're gonna be really disincentivized to talk about it
Yeah, yeah, no, that's that's the problem. That's why I don't have more of them because they generally don't talk about it
Like I've met guys on the street who have tattoos all over their face and like dude
I'd love to talk to you. I can just tell by the the the attitude and the look and the whole thing
And you're asking me to do
Something that I would never ever do
So it's like I get it
Yeah, some of the vlogs that we've done where we go to people's
Neighborhoods have been like the most shocking and like moving for me like even little things like we did one in Long Beach
Where we went to this rapper's like neighborhood
And I just saw all these like, you know 15 16 year old kids just sort of hanging out in this alley
and
Uh, you know, they're like 16 and I saw gun poking out of one of there's a pocket like in the back of their shirt
You're as white as can be right? Yeah, and I'm just hanging I had a couple guys with me and stuff
I'm not worried but I'm I'm just like seeing like these dudes sit on the fucking corner these kids
These are kids are 15 or 16 and if you ask them what they want to do with their life
They'll tell you that they want a gang bang
Yeah, but they want to be part of this and they want to represent this well
And they don't know anything else and I mean that's why I'd love to find
Shocking. I'd love to get more of those kind of interviews and maybe I have to go to Chicago for it or something
But again me sometimes don't want to talk. Yeah
Yeah, it's an interesting subculture, but again as a small part of my audience likes that
I'm not I'm not gonna like start becoming a gang channel. It's not my thing. Yeah understandable
Um, yeah, I mean this is a great conversation. I really appreciate you coming in. Oh, thanks
No, it's it's it's nice to talk about sometimes. I never really talk about I just do it
Really? Yeah, so I've done like three interviews now four. Okay
That's dope. Yeah. Oh, you know, I gotta talk about this Amanda
Yeah, I don't think I really understood how big your channel was until I saw nor did I number one trending on twitter
And I'm like that many people are talking about an interview that he did and the granny
She did a bunch of interviews, but yeah, but she was just a little street girl that I
Thought was interesting and I kept doing interviews with her and she
I got friendly with her dad
And I said man, what your man Amanda's coming over here. She wants money all the time. What do I do?
And it was very clear what she was doing to get money. Yeah, which is super dangerous, right?
10 different ways, so I said tell you what I'll I'll
Have Amanda come to me every day
And I'll give her
40 bucks
And we'll do a quick little interview quick little like sometimes they were like two minutes or less
one minute
Sometimes more but generally she was so inco inco just gibberish coming out of her mouth
Right nonsense monthly, but but but she's cute and she's quirky personality and she was fun to watch
Um while she was deep into her into her crack addiction
And so I'd give her the 40 bucks and she'd come back for more and I'd have to
Tell her how I couldn't give her anymore because I'm just feeding her addiction at that point
It's like it was it was a tough it's it's tough dealing with addicts, but
And she would have temper tantrums and all this kind of stuff is out of control
And she'd like yell outside my studio you'd hear it in the in the background of other videos that was other interviews
I've done you'll hear Amanda yelling mark
You know because she just wants her money for more crack, but
She got clean miraculously through this woman lima who
Just came out of nowhere
Like an angel just came out of nowhere
And helped her get clean
Yeah, how involved did she have to get to help her get clean super involved like
Like she was talking with the courts every day talking with the judge talking with the
District attorney talking with whatever she needed to talk to to make sure
That Amanda stayed in she assaulted her dad right around this right before she met right before lima contacted me
And and larry
Amanda's dad calls me and says what do I do mark? What do I do? He and I talk a lot
Amanda just assaulted me and the police are here and they want to know if I want to press charges
I'm like, yeah, what do you got to lose if you don't press charges? She's out in the street again
And she's going to do something terrible like she always does
Why not put her in jail? It's not going to be so bad
Okay, I'm going to press charges. So he did so she went to jail for like a week or two or three
until her court date and
That's when lima came into the picture and lima decided she's going to help amanda and make a long story short
She got the court to hold amanda for two months
Which must have been terrible for a crack addict to be going through all that and just sitting there in a cell
but
Eventually her case got
The court decided that she's got to do one year of rehab or she's going to do five years in prison
And it's it wasn't just a rehab where you could leave if you wanted to it was basically like a jail
I
Mean it was super pleasant a great rehab great rehabs
She went to she went to two different ones one in la and it got too expensive because
lima and her husband were basically paying for all this rehab
Well over a hundred thousand dollars that she and her husband were paying because the go fund me really wasn't supported that much
And she found a man to three your channel
She found a man through my channel. Wow, and she kind of just oversaw the entire process lima did
I give lima all the credit for that
I mean, I did my part to get you know make things happen, but but lima was like an angel that came in and just
Saved amanda from from herself
Wow, and she got clean which was beautiful
The last interview I did I think in april
She was just like talking with you
It was it was like weird like that's the same person because I know you as a crack head
That's like so out of control. Right. It's it's weird to see you speaking intelligently and
Having compassion for others and all like all these skills that I'd never seen come out of this person
It was really a beautiful story
And then she dies
And do you know the circumstances that she died in they're still doing the autopsy they said it's gonna take two or three months
so this was just
May that it happened early may
I think it was mother's day. Wow. It happened mother's day morning. She fell she died in her sleep
Wow, and her dad told me there's a history of aneurysms
In the fat in this side of the family. So maybe it's that lima suspects
It had something to do with all the trauma that she went through. I mean she would come and see my studio with like
scrapes and
beaten up
like
She'd get beaten up like weekly
Wow, all her teeth are gone. Yeah, you know scrapes on her head bumps here bleeding there
Is the one where she was wearing the overalls her first interview that was the first one
Yeah, and she's totally pretty and it's really kind of weird to hear her talking about doing all these drugs and stuff because she
isn't really like showing the
Of the the the signs that you typically see that somebody's living on the street
Everyone gives me a hard time because I made some comment some joke when she tells me that
She made some like comment about all the crazy sexual things that she does with guys and I'm like
Like I'm a guy. I'm a guy. I'm not an angel. Everybody thinks I'm a saint and an angel. I'm just a dude to the camera
You know, I'm not a bad dude, but what did you say though that pissed people off?
I think I said, you know, she she does something crazy sexual or whatever and I like so what are you doing later?
Oh my god, I have a sense of humor
Yeah, I can't I can't show it on this on these videos because I have to be straight
So I play the straight man, which is hard for me because because I could I could say some of the funniest stuff ever
But I'd choose not to so that's that's my rule and I follow rules
So if my rule is I don't make jokes with people then I just don't so
So I have to play straight man. Sharp and I work really nicely together
Because he's so street and he's so so kind of he's got such a great persona
And he's so like charismatic and I have to be the straight white guy. Yeah
And it's a good dynamics like it's like a comedy team
Do you think that the fact that you are such a
Sort of clean cut white guy that you like don't do drugs that you're not even on the spectrum of drug use?
Like I feel like even me smoking weed
Maybe that would blur the line a little bit if I were to be doing the kind of interviews that you do
Do you think it helps you in some way that you're kind of from a completely different world?
Yeah, I treat everyone with respect and that's how I get into this pimp world and that's why I'm accepted into
I treat everybody well basically until they start just taking advantage of me which happens
Once I start giving people support then they start taking advantage of me and that's why I'll
I'll back off and that's the only problems I've ever had but
Because I'm not tempted by drugs at all. I'm surrounded by them all the time people are smoking crack right in front of me in my studio
People come, you know, I've seen everything right
None of it tempts me
It's not even
There's not a chance in hell that I would ever use any of these things
So that gives me the ability to dive into that commute that
That world without any danger of becoming an addict
Because if if you're gonna smoke pot you might smoke crystal meth on a
Weekend or something and then next, you know, so that that could happen right with me. I don't think it ever could
No, I'm not I'm not saying I'm better than I'm not perfect. I have my vices, too
you know, but
But they're not drugs, you know
With Amanda, um, what do you think it was though that made that many people stand up and
Did you stand out to you as being the most popular person on your channel? No at all
But then when she passed were you just shocked by the number of people who are
Clearly affected by our story. It was very surprising for me because I like really Amanda
Like when we're like some of our videos kind of went semi little viral early on they got like a couple million views
Like wow, that was an interesting, you know
I didn't think anything of her. I just thought she was an interesting little street girl and
But uh, there's other people I think are a little more compelling than Amanda
But, you know, celebrity is almost like she became a celebrity. Celebrity is a weird thing
Like why do some of the people that become huge celebrities become celebrities?
It's not because they're more intelligent or they're more talented or the more anything
They're just they got something that pushes the buttons of people and makes them connect with them or something
You know and Amanda seemed to have something like that
It made a lot and it was also a really sweet recovery
You know, everyone's rooting for everyone on my channel to get happy and healthy
You know, that's that's the general spirit of my audience, which is really beautiful
So Amanda actually came through and did it because very few do you know of the 3 000 people I've interviewed
Is been alex the white kid from chicago
Who's clean from fentanyl now? I talked to him recently and he goes, yeah, I'm clean
I'm craving like a motherfucker, but I'm clean
So he's done it
on his own
You know, he went through a rehab in chicago and you know, he's he's doing it
But his family is supporting him tremendously and
I think he's still doing good
Jimmy a little kid from florida
who I sent to colorado to go to rehab and
I'm helping him a little financially to to stay stick with it and then
Amanda who was kind of forced into it by the by the courts
And that's about it. I mean read is you know in housing but
It's it's hard to break free from the from the hold of these addictions. It's hard. It's got to be brutal
So I don't know
It's sad. I mean, that's why that that's why I can do what I do and not get too discouraged and too bent out of shape over
How traumatic and terrible and depressing it is because when somebody tells me a really depressing terrible horrible
Tragic story. I go, this is going to prevent some a lot of people from doing this
It's going to help some parents parent better. It's going to help some kids to not make the same decisions this person did
So I feel like that's good
The interviewee took the hit
But there's a world of people watching that are going to benefit from it
So that's why I can do what I do without losing any sleep over it. I don't feel guilt over like exploiting a heroin addict
When I know that I'm preventing probably thousands maybe many more
other people from becoming heroin addicts because if you watch
10 of my videos, you're probably going to think really long and hard about
Smoking crystal meth this weekend, right? If you've watched 10 of your videos and somebody offers you crystal meth
It's like shit. You might still fall for it
But I mean just having that that massive wall of content that you've consumed that's telling you the exact opposite has to
It has to help. Yeah, that's that's why I do it. Yeah, that's why I can do it and not feel
Not a second of guilt over exploiting anybody
Because no matter what you're doing, you're you're gonna end up pissing off somebody or you're gonna upset somebody. So so I'm I'm not
worried about
that
And I I even believe I know
That the interviewees would want people to hear their stories so they won't fall in the same traps that they did
They've told me that a thousand times so
When I'm on when I'm okay with it and the interview is okay with it and everybody's still okay with it
Six months or a year later
Then what's the problem?
But somebody's still got a problem
That's the human nature. Do you ever think about anybody do an interview anonymously like blur out their face or something? Because I've done that
Some should be too crazy
Two people that were uh hitmen for the uh, mexican mafia
And those got the least views of they're the probably two of the most interesting videos
Interviews on my channel and they're the least watched. Wow because there's that you don't get to see the face
Interesting and that humanity means that much more to people. Yeah, they're seeing I mean
I've had a lot of people come to me. It's like I'll do an interview, but you gotta blur my face. Yeah, and uh
I'm not gonna do it
Makes sense. Yeah, I'm very visual. So
That's what I was thinking. I'm like as soon as you blur the face you're a photographer
That's just much really like getting the way of
When I had to blur those two
Interviews faces. It's just like oh, I hate doing this. Yeah
Ruins the whole visual
Makes sense. Yeah, I appreciate you man. Yeah, man. You too. Thank you for coming on. You're doing a great thing
Real honor
Um, everybody subscribe to soft white underbelly. No, thanks. And uh, yeah much respect for what you're doing
No jumper coolest podcast in the world. Check us out in youtube soundcloud itunes like comment subscribe no jumber.com
If you want to support friday, we'll be streaming your music
Appreciate you man. Thank you adam real
