Excuse me guys, may I have attention please?
Yes.
As you know that guys, we are gathered here to do GD.
So, with your kind permission, may I see at the GD?
Yes, go ahead.
Well, mister, well guys, as you know that this is Mr. Pneus Kusa from Saunpur,
and you already know that the topic has been given us to discuss about
is social media making us less social or more social.
So, it is a fantabulous topic.
So, from my point of view, is social media making us more social,
because there are lots of reason behind it.
So, let me explain.
As you know that guys, the social media is that platform,
that we connect the each and every persons of any states, any country.
Then you should already know that in this time, they are in the times of holidays,
and every persons are going to tourist place to around that place.
And you should already know that that is why that every person disconnects
with their persons where they live.
And we should already know that through the social media,
that person connect that peoples where they are lives,
and you should already know that in this times of educations,
and in this times of get result of any UP boards, any 12th, 10th result.
Then through the social media, each and every students get that result immediately,
and any information come through the social media.
And in this times, if I talk about the news, then if any events happen in our India,
then through the social media, every person know that how in whatever happened in our country.
And through the social media, we earn more and more money and also we get educations.
And there are lots of peoples who do and better in their lives
and get success in their lives through the social media.
And if I talk about likes, there are lots of people say that there are tons of downloaders of games
and there are less downloaders of education channels.
Then you should already know that there are lots of persons who also do better things
and they also do wrong things.
And then if we focus better things, then we can get better.
And as we know that guys through the social media in this times,
every persons like also prime minister like prime minister Modi,
he also get the lecture in online also offline.
And there are lots of peoples who doesn't go there to listen their lectures,
then also they are able and live in the social media.
And through the social media, we get lots of things and also if we feel that the social media making us more social.
So keeping this all point to my account, I must say that social media making us more social.
So I invite all of you to join the GD and make the GD more and more successful.
Thank you Mr. for inviting me us in this GD.
First of all I want to say that you said that social media making us more social.
But I don't think like this according to me social media making us less social.
Why I am saying so let me explain.
You know Mr. you said that due to social media means we can connect,
means each and every persons who is not I mean who is go anywhere,
means who is going to celebrate holiday.
That's why means you are saying means social media is more social.
But don't you think Mr. due to social media means many peoples using in wrong way.
You already know that many peoples means don't focus their career.
Well Mr. as you would say that there are lots of peoples through the social media.
They are use social media and they don't focus this career.
Then if I talk about the social media then you also don't know that there are lots of peoples
who use the social media in better way.
And if we think like better and if we think positive then we can go in positive and develop.
First listen Mr. through the social media we know current things whatever happened in our country.
So what should we take on as this?
But don't you think Mr. you also stated that due to social media means we are lots of money.
But don't you think now this means lots of people means one to increase our subscriber and flower on social media.
Means just like a YouTube and Instagram.
You already know that they are spending lots of money.
If they spend lots of money then absolutely it's a very...
Well Mr.
As you would say that there are lots of people spend lots of money to get the subscribers.
As you already know that in the YouTube if your subscribers increase then after some days
you get lots of money according to your views and according to your subscriber.
Means when will your channel monetize then absolutely firstly you need to do lots of hard work.
Because you can...
Well Mr. could you please tell us that without hard work you get success.
Absolutely if you have intelligence you can get success.
Listen Mr.
Well Mr.
I mean children use social media.
Means they use Instagram and also YouTube for watch comedy video and entertainment.
If they use that then absolutely they are not going to get away in the line.
Well Mr. as you would say that in these times 80% students do online education.
No.
Firstly listen Mr.
Then why are you talking about only that students who use the social media to see the comedy videos and entertainment.
So if I tell you Mr.
Well Mr.
Means whatever you mention in your presentation means contents and I am totally disagree with you.
As you see that social media is making us more social.
But from my perspective social media is making us less social.
And why I am saying like this there are tons of reason.
You know Mr.
Now in this time means 99% people out of 100% people use social media.
And they are means children's youth and some persons who don't use social media because they are illiterate.
But you know Mr.
If means due to social media means every person disconnect with their family members.
Because you know Mr.
Now in this time every person busy in their cell phones and they don't means focus on what's happened in family.
How can you say that in this time?
You also know that means in this time social media is a very means I want to say that social media make us due to social media.
We have lack of confidence.
You know Mr.
Now in the olden time people used to go to on the stage and to share their ideas and views about any topic.
And they means share their thoughts and but now
Well means as you are saying that.
Well means firstly listen to me.
Firstly listen to me.
And now in this time means people hesitate to go on the stage and speak something.
They feel signs come in.
Well means as you are saying.
Sign to come in with each other.
Because of social media they are disconnect with their persons.
Well means as you are saying that there are lots of people in olden times.
Do go on the stage and give their opinions about the lots of people.
Then in this time you should all know that you are also say that 80 and 100 percent people are using social media.
Then you should all know that if that person go to stage and give their opinions throughout some people.
And in this time if you use social media and if we give our opinion in social media.
Then there is 100 percent people give your opinions.
But you know Mr.
How that opinion
90 percent people use social media.
Mr. Kamna may add something.
Yes.
And also you said it means now it means just because of social media.
Many people means many people are distracted from their family.
But means you should all know.
Now means after to as many stories are.
Means after 10 to as many stories are in other stage to read.
And means just because of social media.
We are connect from that means our family member.
And also because Mr. Kamna means in now is this time of leave.
And means every people are celebrating holiday.
And just because of that we are connected with our friends.
And then we are taking selfie because we catch the beautiful moments in our camera.
Because if we have that then we can never forget that where we go and where we are missing.
And as you already missed that means just because of social media.
People have missed less confidence.
Then I would like to tell that in this time there are lots of motivational channel.
And if we see that motivational channel then also we can motivate and also we can get a lot of confidence.
But you know Mr. you are talking about they can make videos and share on social media.
But you know Mr. if all the people means use social media.
And due to this their eyes means eye problem and they will go.
So means if you talk about the eye problem also.
So means if you talk about eye problem and face problem.
And you also suppose that means people goes there are lots of cases and accident.
And if we go to miss road then also the accident will happen.
And if lots of people gather in any place.
Then if that person have any enemies then he also kill that person.
And in the social media you are still in your home.
Well Mr. Firstly listen Mr.
As your Mrs. said that in the social media we are lack confidence.
Then as you already said that 80% or 100% people are using social media.
Then if we give our opinions in that platform then we have our confidence increase.
Because there are lots of people and if we say any wrong things.
Then lots of people comment your post that it is wrong and it is bad.
And if you give better opinion then your confidence will increase.
And if you don't better then also your confidence will decrease.
And you do better than that.
Sorry for interrupting can I say something here?
Well Mr. Nikhil as you said that means due to social media.
Means people means go anywhere means they connect with any person.
But don't you think means also due to social media people are going to become lazy person.
Because they are not going to work they are not means also children are not going to play.
I mean any type of game just like you can see means they go and I mean any field they play game.
If they don't play then absolutely they are not going to means keep their body fit at the health.
So Mr. Nikhil as you said that means now in this times if we use social media in better way then we can get better.
And if we use social media in wrong way then we can get better.
Well Mr. Nikhil first tell me that means now before one year or two years before means when the time of corona.
Then what means all means in our country they means the lockdown will help.
And it means the lockdown will help.
And in that time the people are not meet with their friend and they can't go to miss any home.
Then this means now in that time when the people are using social media to connect with them.
And they are using face to face video call and there are lots of things in that time.
But don't you think means well guys your time is up now.
I want you to finish come on you summarize it now.
Well guys very good thing has come to the end and the same thing about this GD also.
Now we have time to summarize this GD with your kind permission may I summarize it.
Yes yes yes.
You know Mr. it is very sensitive and high controversial GD.
And we have get lots of new things and get lots of knowledge from this GD.
And so as Mr. Prince say that means social media is making us less more social.
Because if we want if any friend of us go to another state they can connect with them with the help of social media.
And some of our friends like Mr. Prince say that means if we use social media is making us less social.
Because if we use social media in a wrong way then it will disconnect the people.
So thank you guys for your immense contribution and showing your great energy and enthusiasm.
Well guys thank you bye.
