walking in an assembly hall and it was all quiet. Not because people over there were not talking
with each other but because they were talking with others over their phone. Hello everybody,
today IMJ is going to share my views on the topic social media. Living in the 21st century
where technology has become universal safety blanket, it has become very important for us to
understand some of its internal parts. And one such part of this technology is
social media. The modern society has become more and more obsessed with this technology
in the form of PCs, tablets, smartphones and their many. Social media has transformed the way
we used to interact with each other. We have grown a tendency that we can share our problems with
the person who is sitting hundreds of miles away from us but not with the person who is
sitting right in front of us. And due to this addiction to these social networking websites
such as Facebook, Insta, very famous one WhatsApp, we are losing interaction with our loved ones
in our real lives. Now let me ask you a very simple question. Have we ever talked to a person
selling newspaper on the street? Or have we ever talked to a person working in Starbucks or McDonalds?
The answer is no. In today's modern world, mobile phones have become more than just a device for
us. It has become our lives. We just desperately cling to it by waiting for someone while standing
in a queue or while we are at our home with our loved ones. We just hang on to these
electronic devices waiting for someone to be online without realizing that our loved ones
are waiting for us outside the social networking world. We have hundreds of friends on our friend list
but only a few of them are there whom we have never seen or met. A few of them are there whom
we have never chatted with. And the moment we pause to check the notification in the
mid conversation, we are sending a direct message that the person who is sitting on the other hand
of the phone is more important than the person who is sitting right in front of us. The interference
of social media in our lives has killed the trust from our lives. We can trust the person who we
can't see but we cannot trust the person who we can approach and that's why we say social media
makes us unsure. If you like this video then please do like, share and subscribe.
