Hello, good morning. Thank you so much for coming at 9 in the morning. Thank you very
much for the invitation. It's a real pleasure to be here on the stage to share one of the
most representative project that we have been working on after 20 years already. So the
title of the presentation is Humanity in Real Time and that means that I'm trying to
envision the challenge of the day-by-day humanity, how we are changing our way of facing life
in many different ways and perspectives through technology, how we can actually add this layer
of consciousness on top of it.
So I would like to begin with this fire. The fire for me was the very first attempt to
really control technology, but we are not aware of the fire until it burns us. So that
means that also we are also not aware of the fire until it shows the beast hidden in the
bottom of the cave. In the right side of the image we have Altamira, that is one of the
most important caves, archaeological caves of Neardental in Spain. It's the one that
Picasso mentioned that after this intervention there was no art anymore, because the animals
are really designed on the top, on the ceiling, corresponding exactly with the relief of the
cave. That means that they were working in a distance of one meter and a half and they
have this perspective, this consciousness of the space that allow us, allow them, sorry,
to really create these amazing shapes in the cave, in the surface of the cave. But for
sure when we are really noticing, we are really working with technology and we are evolving
in many different perspectives, we have some consequences. This is a relief of Prometheus.
Prometheus is here in the left side of the image and Théuse punished him and enchained him
because he stole the fire from the Olympus. It was something similar when we go back also to
the Egyptian culture and we found that they were also very, very confident with the control of
technology in that case in a very positive way. They were able to really find even what
mean consciousness and what means this piano gland that is inside our brain and normally
is the one that give us consciousness in many different ways. So the representation of the
oldest eye is not more than the representation of this gland in the brain. So how they already
knew that this small piece of our body was giving us the consciousness of our environment. That
means the technology at that point opens even our third retina, our third eye that we have already
wearing in our brains. But I would like to go further in the history and I think that this
maybe is one of the most important paintings in our history from the painter Monet in 1875.
Prometheus's image has a lot of different compromises about the time that we were produced.
So if we analyze this image, we can say okay, the train is representing the industrial revolution.
That means that the artist was already concerned about what was happening in terms of the technology
of that time. Secondly, we see one more time the fire of Prometheus, you know, in the very
top of, in the very front of the train. If that fire control now in shape of light, it was controlling
where to go. In third part, we have already the reification of the body. The body has a shape
that is not, there's no contour in the shape of human. That means that the human becomes like a
part of the scenario. It's not the person who is the protagonist of the image, but it's something
that is belonging to the landscape. And we have for sure the beginning of the anthropocene in
this image, you know, the fire, the smoke that is going outside the train is representing
already the pollution that we are today facing. So basically, and finally, we have also another
very important thing that is the medium. I don't know if you can see through the, because they
understand, but the medium is the message. That means that the brush trace is a metaphor of the
current time. This is the beginning of impressionism. This is the beginning of a new way of thinking
of observing life, because the artist was in the train, passively watching through the window
and watching how the landscape was in movement. And so he said, okay, now the landscape is in
movement, now time has another dimension, and I can, I should paint that in the canvas. So time
is included in the image. And this is the very beginning of the revolution of media in many
different ways. But because what does this mean? It means that it's the open door of the
consciousness applied to the changes derived by technology. To go ahead with that, I would like
to introduce you briefly some of our projects. For example, now, thanks to this regard, thanks to
this way of thinking, we can imagine how Wi-Fi signals could become like some kind of input for
creating audio-visual symphonies. It's the case of grid. It's an installation, an immersive
installation that is taking on real time the waves of the mobile phones from people, and it's
manipulating this information to create a new interface and a new sound that is becoming like
the most important visual aspect of the installation that is coming through the data. But it's not
only the only example. We have also high measures when the body becomes a dataset for AI. At this
point, we did this installation in Valencia, in Spain, in the center of culture, provided with
36 cameras. We were scanning real people, naked people that were giving his body to the science
to really feed the ecosystem of AI that was interpreting the body, but not depending off your
physical skills or your religion or your economical status. No, it's pure data. It's pure
vertex and points that are here analyzed to connect people like in micro communities that
becomes itself like a sculpture for the 21th century. I want to left the video a little bit
more just to see, just to show you the final result of the interaction with the people. In the
other side, people were passively participating because it was their phone who was really capturing
the data and sharing it with the system. At this point, I'm provoking people to be inside naked,
to be represented into technology. What means also the space of the frontier? We are really
facing a very complex time. We are still struggling for a piece of land with a revolution of
technology. Celeste, it's another project that is talking about how we can actually understand
the sky without a limit. The sky is not a limit, but it's a universal dome. In this project, what
I'm doing is capturing real-time different skylights in many different places around the
world, and real-time the system is able to capture and to draw different pixels from all those
images, and then those pixels are going to our algorithm to create a unique interface that is
representing this new universal dome. This universal dome is talking about the space of the
non-frontier that is provoked, and this is possible thanks to technology. That was done in
Madrid, Lisbon, and we were in connection with other places like Valencia, Paris, and many other
ones. This is the final aspect of the installation. All those colors are coming from the different
places around the world and feeding the system. Also, technology traces the boundaries of our
body. For example, in the bounding box, this is a second version of this artwork that has been
done in 2016 in Shanghai in the Colonial Center. Here, I'm talking about the possibility of
being of telepresence. The system is capable with artificial intelligence to recognize the body
inside the light box, and then when you are just spacing the bounding box, that means the limits of
the cube, there's another cube of good end that is kicking from the inside and then making noise
and vibrations. So that means that that box could be there in the gallery. That moment you are
hearing sound. Let me... When she puts out the hands, this body is receiving the energy of the
body, of the digital body. So that means that through artificial intelligence, we can even be
like in many different places around the world. Also, the technology is also framing the limits of
our own work. It's the case of Lymbology. Lymbology is a very special project where we were launching
a beacon to the stratosphere. This beacon was provided with a GPS on top. We were tracing the
path of the information until the information is gone, and that means that we have also limits
of our technology, and this project was exploring the possibility of really to find that place.
It was really funny because finally we lost information in the Karmal line. Karmal line is
this virtual line that is separating our world from the universe and in reverse, the universe
from our world. So this is the sculpture that we sent to the atmosphere. Then the information was
lost, and I traced all the paths of that beacon, and with that, we created this kind of light sculpture
that was representing, like a visual data, was representing the information obtained.
If we can go now in the micro reality, this is the project OLEA. In OLEA, we are also
transforming the mother earth products in the connection with the digital world. This is a very
special olive oil. We created our own smart contract. The smart contract was
augmented with molecules of DNA that was representing the content of the smart contract.
That means that this olive oil is itself as some kind of bio bank. The bio bank means that
inside the olive oil, you can trace the smart contract. We have also in the Instituto de la
Graça in Sevilla, we have the biotoken. That means we have the DNA in bacterias. If we make
grow those bacteria, that means that we are growing the data of the smart contract, creating a new
ecosystem of economy. That could be potentially one solution for space art, for space new missions,
to create a new ecosystem really profoundly connected with nature, to respect it and to
keep it safe. So here what is happening that was done in Dubai is that this robotic arm is
performing in real time, trying to get the same value from the tank on the left side to the one
on the right side, because the one on the left was augmented with the DNA and the one on the right
not. So it's moving into space in the olive oil from one tank to the other. Around that,
I create a lot of different digital art purely on the blockchain and purely full digital.
To not making so large, this is my hard disk museum. It's a museum that I founded in 2013.
That means that we are also changing the concept of tangible. What means the creativity today?
Where the creativity today has to be stored? So on the right side, there's already a milestone on
the art history. It's a museum that is already fully stored in a hard drive. It's the hardest
museum in a hard drive. Now we are more than 150 artists and we are looking for partnership to
install the museum physically as a new cultural equipment. And on the left hand, I have another
museum that is the backup of the museum in DNA. So it's totally untangible. We cannot even see
the content, but the content is there and it's very curious because the materiality of both
elements are this kind of metal that is represented in the high-tech architecture,
that was also very important in the 90s with museums like the Pompidou or Tate Modern or MoMA.
To go through the end of the presentation, an year is not an year anymore. And this is the
beginning of the project Manifesto Terricola. What we are watching are the items in the lab
to create an year printed in collagen in which DNA we have the Manifesto Terricola text.
A message for the humanity. So basically the challenge is how we can really
resignify natural environment through the connection with digital. What's going to happen
with our legacy if we are putting the ecosystem in risk like we are doing. So basically this
project has been addressing the possibility of having like a massive hard drive of information
in glaciers. And this was the very first item with this year that was containing my Manifesto
Terricola. The Manifesto Terricola, for those that don't know Latin, Manifesto Terricola is
earthlings. It's the people who inhabit the earth. Culture for Terricola, that means to
culture or to cultivate and terra for sure is earth. It's Gaia. So basically if the environment
is changing and we are earthlings, that means that if this environment is changing we will
become another kind of a space at the same time. It seems like an speculation but not.
I was in Mars recently the last year. I was in Mars in Esbalbar in Norway. I was doing this
research. I was looking for the right place to install this year. We did it. It was as I mentioned
in Mars. Finally we left the year inside the glacier. It's an year, it's a message that is
already in risk because the velocity of the melting in the glaciers is super, super fast.
So potentially in a couple of years that year will be in the surface and the message will be
lost because collagen is already in nature. Collagen is zero impact for the environment
and the DNA as well is already in all of us. This is myself revealing the content of the
Manifesto inside the cave of a glacier. But finally there's a lot of many different layers
of data that are addressing this project. Basically this is not a year anymore. This is a year that
is representing Manifesto for the future of humanity. For sure also it's a story in a glacier
that as I mentioned you know Esbalbar is already signified with the seed bowl that is one of
some kind of hard drive of seeds and the diversity of our agriculture and food.
The idea is now to keep another kind of message already there because in my perspective technology
plus without consciousness that means a weapon. This is an image done by artificial intelligence
that is imagining some kind of biohackers, drones that are spreading some kind of virus in our
but sorry but if we add the consciousness to this ecosystem and this is a very interesting
graphic I did that means that from this Hertzian system our brain is emitting waves around in
between 7 and 11 Hertz. The earth was thanks to human measurements the earth was spinning around
7.83 Hertz at the same time and the question here is that our brain when we are about to meditate
or when we are about to sleep we were exactly in the same range of frequencies than the earth and
now that's not true because the the earth is now increasing the level of frequencies so the only
thing that we can do is actually increase our level of consciousness to technology if not we will
be one more time unbalanced with the earth. So thanks to that finally we can say that technology
consciousness becomes art and that's the most important thing I would like to tell today that
this is the very first thing we have to to to accomplish because there's a lot of companies
we are creating a lot of gadgets we are creating a lot of different things but without any kind
of consciousness around that. We have a lot of things to think about this is also the
bio waves recently done in which we are proposing the possibility of having a music album containing
map of the brain waves in DNA and at the same time make an interpretation of that sound with
brain waves brain waves of whales from the sea and we are also planning this possibility of
having a meeting point for talking about these topics this is the terricola space that I'm
designing now it could be I should be and it's going to be like a permanent installation where
people go to refine themselves in terms of consciousness and in other kind of futuristic
perspectives so basically we need a common space to reshape our cosmology as a as unique humans.
Basically what we need to address are two different sentences two are two different
concepts here that are not existing are are designed by myself is the inter-ectosphere we
have many different spheres around the world but we we have like an inter-ectosphere this
inter-ectosphere should be created by the by the mind thing is like people like people like you
that are we are sharing today these days to reshape the virality virality is a new terminology
that is addressing the the way that we are today understanding the world through the additional
different layers of technology and our now our perspective for everybody but now we have new
fires to rethink we have biotech we have artificial intelligence we have quantum computing we have
a space art how we are envisioning the possibility of being in the space also with art as I did with
the institute for future technologies with the manifesto terricola institute for future technologies
is a it's an institute in in in paris in like the phones we were developing together this
manifesto terricola is what we are doing now uh imagine uh quantum computing possibilities and
I would like to invite to the stage to Fabian and Philippe they are coming from from tomb university
to explore possibilities in my perspective I like to create universal language through the
connection of quantum computing and everything is happening in the tomb university I give you the word
thank you I don't think you can hear me now can you yes no okay so thank you very much
soliman so we have a new project at a technical university of munich it's called quant world
and what we are doing there is we want to bring the world of art together with the world of quantum
when we are thinking at thank you of quant world so maybe just the basics quant world is a 2.0 million
euro project it's funded by the federal ministry of science and arts we have five artists in residence
one of them is soliman we have three stipendium cohorts and we have nine quant world challenges
when we were thinking in the beginning of 2023 how can we rethink quantum technologies we said okay
there are different points we have to target one is we need responsibility in these technologies
and the development of these technologies and we have to incorporate our whole society and then
we were thinking about how can we do this and what we are doing is that we said okay we need
society responsibility quantum technology art and application and this is what we will do over the
course of the next three years together with artists of soliman who will help us to translate
these abstract future technologies and to incorporate consciousness responsibility
and everyone sitting here in this room in our quant world so what we will do is that we will
have a new form of learning environment including arts including basics but also giving all of you
some future scenarios where we can be with quantum technologies in the next years so we are mainly
working with mobility with medicine and security because this is where we expect the change and
where we see the most potential for everyone to be included in the next revolution of quantum
technologies so what we try to do here is taking all the things you just heard in this wonderful
presentation by soliman together in one learning platform to introduce a new century of learning
a new century of learning where we try to include consciousness responsibility and the society yeah
thank you very much so thank you very much um i would like just to thank you uh natalia just
cabbage from from my studio she's the person who did this presentation possible uh i'm gonna invite
you to continue talking about this topic around around the day so thank you very much for your time
and it was a pleasure
