I couldn't do what they hired me to do is to teach philosophy.
All you would need is a few students to make your life hell.
And, you know, your colleagues already buy into the ideology,
and they have a vested interest in making sure
that the ideology is promulgated throughout the institution.
And if you don't adhere to those values,
it's not like you're merely wrong.
It's that you're a bad person.
Hello, and welcome to Marshall Matters of Me, Winston Marshall,
for the Spectator.
Today, it is my privilege to speak to professor, philosopher,
author, former professor at Portland State University
till a rather dramatic resignation in September, 2021.
Peter Boghossian, Peter, thank you so much for speaking with me today.
Thank you. I appreciate having me on and getting to know you over the last few days.
Yeah, we've had some fun. Very cool.
If you wouldn't mind, maybe for listeners who aren't familiar with your story.
Yeah.
Maybe you can tell us why you resigned from Portland State University.
Sure. So I did my dissertation in the prisons with prison inmates,
and it was using the Socratic method, which is a way of asking people questions,
to help the men, and I say men because everyone in my study at the time,
the prison was Columbia River Correctional Institution, it was all male,
to help the men desist from crime so that they had tools that they could use.
So then I took the tools that I developed from my dissertation,
and then I, as you mentioned, the book, I turned the same Socratic questioning tools
to issues of religious fundamentalism and issues of faith specifically.
And then I came up with an app to teach people how to have civil conversations.
That's the key in this whole thing, civil conversations across divides.
And a book.
How to have impossible conversations about the same thing,
how to teach people how to have civil conversations.
And now, with Reed and I, we go around the world,
and we do this thing called Spectrum Street Epistemology.
And epistemology is how you know what you think you know,
and we give people tools as part of my nonprofit.
We help them calibrate their beliefs to the evidence they have.
Okay, so that's the little background.
2017, well, I first noticed a kind of sickness in the academy.
In around 2012, 2013, the more I investigated, the more I was convinced
it was from corrupt bodies of scholarship, peer-reviewed literature.
My writing partner and I, James Lindsay, also co-authored the book with me.
We published our first Soquel-style hoax paper,
which is basically to see what you can get in the journal.
And we published a paper called The Conceptual Penis as a Social Construct,
in which we... It's a very funny paper, by the way.
I think it's very funny, in which we claim that,
among other things, penises were responsible for climate change.
And the paper got in, and there was a lot of criticism of the paper.
You didn't do this, you should have done this.
You need more journals, higher-ranking journals.
And so I said to Jim, okay, they've given us a roadmap, let's follow that.
And then we...
So they assumed it was serious.
Well, yeah, they published it as a serious paper,
like they thought this was a God-pass, peer-review.
But our critics said, well, you need to submit that to journals, in gender studies.
Because I was convinced at the time that the ideological rot,
the corruption, was coming from very specific disciplines and fields.
Fields that didn't try to falsify hypotheses, but tried to forward narratives.
So we publish, or we wrote with Helen Pluckrose also...
Sorry, what type of narrative, what kind of fields do you mean?
Is that the grievance fields?
Yeah, fields that forward grievances, or that there's just...
There's racism baked into the system, systemic racism, post-colonial theory.
Basically, post-modernism, and all its...
Helen Pluckrose calls it applied post-modernism.
So almost anything with the word studies in it.
The purpose of those disciplines isn't to do what one would think
that one does in science, which is to figure out what's true, test hypotheses,
use the most rigorous methods available.
But the purpose is to forward very specific conclusions about the world
and get those conclusions implemented and adopted to change public policies.
And that's activism, essentially.
Yeah, it's even worse than activism,
because it's not predicated upon something that's true.
It's predicated on complete nonsense.
How do you think they've got into the university, those different studies?
How did our papers get in?
No, those disciplines...
So rewinding a little bit, is this...
Do we go back to the Frankfurt School?
Do we go...
How does this leak into the American Academy?
Oh, boy, that's a long conversation.
Okay, so I'll give you the spark note to the cliff notes version of it.
So is a general rule, people like people who are like themselves.
People hire people in an Academy.
Who have similar ideological dispositions,
similar positions about issues, similar stances.
And so, I mean, you can see that, just running through my mind,
you can see that, for example, in psychology, when behaviorism is in,
behaviors would hire other behaviors, because they think it's true.
So let's talk about idea laundering for a moment.
This is a key concept.
Idea laundering.
Idea laundering, like money laundering.
Money goes in, dirty money goes in, corrupt money goes in.
And they call it laundering because it used to be in New York with all the laundry machines.
And then it goes out laundered and in that it looks, it's all good for the taxes,
so you could spend it, right?
So you can write checks for apartments or what have you.
The same thing is operative in an ideological sense,
or sense with peer reviewed studies and peer reviewed journals.
People have a moral impulse.
A bunch of people get together who have a similar moral impulse.
They start a journal.
People publish, people also with that moral impulse,
publish in those journals.
These are not true.
They're not facts.
They're not anything.
They're just musings, usually of ideologues.
People have this idea.
They publish it and it comes out as a peer reviewed journal.
The more of those you get published, as a general rule,
it's seven papers in seven years and you get tenure.
So what happens is that when you publish in specific journals and specific fields,
and it was out of the STEM fields, now it's increasingly within the STEM fields,
you're more likely to get tenure.
When you're more likely to get tenure,
you hire other people who have similar beliefs.
So it's called a promotion in tenure basket.
So you publish an article in a grievance studies field
in a journal, which is already corrupt to begin with,
but it looks on paper as if you're publishing and making a contribution to the literature.
So slowly the academy was, that's one explanation.
There are multiple explanations.
That's why I pause to think it's a very complicated problem.
The other, we could literally do a whole podcast on this.
The other problem is that educational administrators were hired
universally who have ed school degrees.
We did a series on this with Lyle Asher's Why Are Colleges Becoming Cults.
And the ideas that are forwarded are certain ideas that are inherent in critical race theory
without using the words critical race theory.
So oppressive systemic power imbalances, oppressive structures.
We need, Heather MacDonald just has a new book about that from the Manhattan Institute.
But this is a problem that has consumed the academy and the question now is how do we get
out of it? Because virtually nobody disagrees that this is a problem.
Anybody who would look at it, we could look at it from cancellations.
We could look at it from, sorry, you got to go ahead.
And it seems like your career is that you were caught in the crossfires where those
ideas were brewing for a long time and stewing for a long time.
And then you started to question those.
But you say no one would disagree that those are a problem.
And one of the things I'm trying to work out is, is this coming from the students?
Or is it coming from the teachers, the professors?
And because if everyone agrees it's a problem, then surely we wouldn't be in a situation
where you had to quit.
Yeah. Okay. So what I meant by nobody, I should have articulated myself.
Nobody who's independent, who looks at the problem independently would say, wow,
there's no problem here, move along.
And anybody who questions, I mean, even asks the question, where's the evidence for this?
I was constantly accused of microaggressions, asking for evidence became a microaggression.
If you have a belief, if you want to institute a policy for whatever the policy is that students
need safe spaces or the trigger warning should be on syllabi, these are just in an academic context.
If somebody says to you, okay, so you think we should do this institutionally,
what is the data for this?
What is the data?
So even if you pointed to a peer review journal that itself had been idea laundered,
the discharging of the moral impulse by some ideologue,
you should still be able to point to that.
But the idea that this is somehow a universal truth, which is weird for people who don't
believe in universal truth, but this is somehow a universal truth.
And everybody needs to adopt it.
And nobody is allowed to ask about any evidence for this.
That alone, even if it's true that there, even if there were evidence from microaggressions to
rewarding safe spaces, belonging, whatever it is, you should be able to provide that evidence.
But it seems ridiculous that that philosophy, that all that means of operating could infiltrate
the university.
It's the antithesis of what one thinks the university is for.
Yeah.
So to understand that, you have to understand how groups of smart people,
so, and Michael Sherman writes about this in the believing brain, and I love this.
I talk about it all the time.
It's one of my favorite quotations.
Why smart people believe weird things because they're better at reasoning to bad conclusions.
So they're better at offering good reasons for bad conclusions.
Groups of smart people are better still.
So it's precisely because they were academics that they were better at writing to was morally
fashionable.
So you have a bunch of people who are defending the dominant moral orthodoxy.
And then that's how that becomes institutionalized.
That's how you get the wide scale adoption of that.
They're not questioning, they're not, and there's a reward mechanism in place.
You get a job for life.
You go up in the promotion ladder, et cetera.
Can you explain to me peer review and how that operates?
Because I learned this or heard this rather recently from listening to Eric Weinstein
and his scathing criticisms of peer reviews.
I'm not sure I took it understood because that's quite a new peer review didn't exist.
Am I right until about 50 years ago?
A little more than that.
But yeah, so the idea is that there's publishing, all kinds of publishing.
There's publishing on Substack, which basically publishing on a blog.
There's publishing a zine or a magazine.
There's getting an article published, for example, in The Atlantic or Scientific American
or what have you, which is gone woke, terribly woke.
And then there's peer review.
Peer review is a different animal.
So peer review, you submit an article to an editor who runs a journal and then journal
and be like, journal of fat studies, which is one of our journals, which doesn't do what you
think it does.
The goal of fat studies is not to measure A1Cs or talk about carbs and protein.
What is the goal of fat studies?
The goal of fat studies is to advocate for fat acceptance and to claim that you,
and that obese, to claim that obesity is a narrative pushed by the medical profession.
And you can be healthy at any size.
That's the brief encapsulation of fat studies.
That's actually studied in universities in America.
Well, it's a journal, a peer review journal run by a woman named Charlotte Cooper out of
your island there, the UK.
So sorry.
I am as well, who herself happens to be morbidly obese.
Not necessarily that that explains anything, but the overwhelming preponderance,
the overwhelming number of proponents are females, the authors of these journals,
and most of whom I've seen are morbidly obese.
And so they don't like the word obese.
So if you think of the world as everything being a narrative, a narrative is just a story.
Everybody has their own narratives.
Medicine has their narratives.
Rappers have their, everybody banjo players.
I don't know anything about banjo, but you have a narrative.
You have a narrative.
Okay.
So everybody has their own narrative.
So the narrative of obesity, the word obesity itself captures a medical narrative.
They don't want the word obesity used.
They want the word fat used.
Because it's less offensive to them.
No, because they believe that you can be healthy at any size.
And if you say obesity, that's an inherently bad thing.
That's something that buys into a medical understanding of a physical phenomenon.
So think about it like this.
Nietzsche says that there are no, there are no moral phenomenon, only moral interpretations
of phenomenon.
So being fat, so if I brought in a person who was like 400 pounds here, and you affixed a word
to that person, you know, fat, morbidly obese, whatever the word was, that would be a judgment
on your part of the physical phenomenon.
I was going to say, fat is used just as much as an offensive term as obesity or as a negative term
as obesity.
Is it not?
No, for them, obesity is the more offensive.
Yeah, it's not just offensive, but it's the description of a medical, again, narrative,
a medical perception of the world onto a fat body.
It's pretty stupid.
It's about to pay a review then.
That's the other thing, this stuff is just so stupid.
I mean, it's just idiotic.
And the proponents of it are almost exclusively have mediocre minds.
It's just too stupid to sustain itself.
It's just too idiotic.
Okay, so you're rather pessimistic then about the state of the academy?
Oh, it's completely pessimistic, but so peer reviewed.
So the idea is that, for example, in the journal Fat Studies, you get other people
who have published in the journal, and so they become experts in the field.
So somebody should be blind, in other words, the reviewer should know who it is, look at the
article, and the best people try to vet that article to see whether or not it should go into
the journal based upon if it meets certain criteria for the journal, right?
If it's scholarly or rigorous, is it this?
But in most of these journals, and I do use that word very specifically,
it should be virtually all, but I'll just tone it down to say most.
The idea is that you want certain conclusions to percolate into the broader culture.
And the way that you do that is that you have certain starting assumptions.
So if you want to get a paper published, you write to those starting assumptions.
They're a systemic, the whole system is corrupt.
There is racism everywhere, whatever the starting assumption is, it doesn't have to be
something within the suite of woke ideology.
It could be something about barbers or what have you.
But we don't have those.
It's only things that deal with identity level salience, specifically gender, race,
sexual orientation, things of that nature.
Okay, so do you think it's fed then that the universities for me to think it's completely
rotten, that these ideas have completely taken over, infiltrated everything?
Correct.
Presumably, you describe in your resignation letter that you were even spat on when you were there.
But actually, it seems perhaps that you left maybe because you just given up hope
that the university functioned as it's supposed to function.
Is it a place for three, four and inquire?
Well, I couldn't do what they hired me to do was to teach philosophy.
I was getting complaints constantly about everything when I challenged.
You couldn't even present the other side of an issue.
Now, that's not with every single student, but all you would need is a few students to
make your life hell.
And your colleagues already buy into the ideology and they have a vested interest in making sure
that the ideology is promulgated throughout the institution.
And the larger society.
And if you don't adhere to those values, it's not like you're merely wrong.
It's that you're a bad person.
There's something endemically flawed with you.
And you need to go through some kind of reeducation or you're just, you know,
irredeemable.
But you are now part of some, what of an academic fight back with the University of
Austin, we actually are in Austin now as we speak.
Can you tell me about the University of Austin and why it's so important?
It's a university predicated upon what traditional universities have always been,
truth-seeking.
It's run, it's present as Pono Canulus.
Jo Lonsdale, the entrepreneur is on the board of directors.
Barry Weiss from the Free Press is on the board of directors.
There's faculty, your Ion Hercielle, Neil Ferguson from your island,
a different part of your island, the historian.
Kathleen Stock also from your island.
She's a very brave woman.
A lot of, she's an extremely brave woman.
Similarly to you, forced to leave her university being hounded by the trans ideologues.
Correct.
Yeah.
Correct.
Yeah.
So that's another type of derangement that maybe we could go into a little bit.
But so it's a university, we have the Forbidden.
I'm coming back in June for the Forbidden classes.
Kathleen Stock is going to be here as well for the Forbidden classes.
David Mamet, et cetera.
It's really a fascinating group of people they've assembled,
like genuinely interesting people.
And the university is set to open in 2024 in Austin.
The Forbidden classes are in Dallas this summer.
Okay.
And you're going to be there, right?
I am.
I'll be there in June doing, I think, a question and answers.
I'm a believer in that I've noticed this stuff in the academy for a while,
even though I didn't actually go to university.
But I like the idea of building, I think we need to build new institutions.
So I think that's the correct response.
There's one which idea is that we need to change.
And I kind of wanted to ask whether there's a new generation of teachers and students
going into the long existing universities who might be able to change,
who rebel against these ideologies that you've been discussing,
or whether we need to build new institutions completely.
I'm not sure which is right.
Maybe it's both.
Okay.
So before I say that, I will make a prediction.
You are going to love the students.
I mean, amazing.
Faculty students, the level of intellectual engagement that you'll find this summer is phenomenal.
Like, off the charts, crazy.
And what I particularly like with the students is just the hanging out.
So, you know, we'd go to these classes and they'd come back and they'd just,
I mean, it was very intense and they really are completely curious.
Okay.
So now back to the institution.
So there are two ways to look at the problem.
One way is the way that I believe is that they're irredeemable.
And you have to build new things.
The other way is Chris Rufo's way.
And he's with the Manhattan Institute.
And he believes that reform is still possible once you kick out the DEI bureaucrats.
So let's lay that terrain a little bit.
Let's explain that.
So it is not possible.
It is not possible to have both DEI and free speech.
You either get DEI or you get free speech.
Anything else, see, you have a simple choice.
So anybody making a Chicago statement or this declaration, it's just not true.
It's Harvard put something up about that reason they have.
It's never going to work.
It's literally impossible because the whole mission of DEI is to limit what people say
so they won't, so certain minorities won't be, won't quote unquote feel excluded.
The whole premise of it is that the system is inherently racist.
Everything from who gets into the institutions and universities,
SAT scores, the whole, it's just not possible.
So you have the Chris Rufo idea.
Now here's the interesting thing.
So in 1945, Karl Popper, also from your island, Austrian English,
the philosopher of science has a wonderful thing on the paradox of tolerance.
And the paradox of tolerance is the idea that to what extent should the tolerance tolerate
the intolerance?
So when I'm taking it out of the academy, so for example, the Netherlands right now,
or actually London to to an extent, but Sweden, to what extent should broadly
liberal societies tolerate pockets of Islamic radicalism?
People who are, you know, in those views about homosexuality,
those views about covering of women, etc.
And so what we have, so this is how I view the system.
You have a group of people who participate in ideology.
That ideology has metastasized throughout the educational system.
Not only do they control bureaucracies, but they have a direct path to the president.
Usually there's a kind of hierarchical organization in which one
files complain to what have you have to go.
But the DEI goes right to the top.
They are offices searching for tasks with the assumption that
sexism and racism already exists and bigotry and homophobia rank bias of some sort.
And we just need to figure out how it manifests.
That's a tenant.
That's an underlying principle of critical race theory.
So to what extent do we tolerate the intolerance?
And so Rufo is going after and he's being very effective.
He's working with Ron DeSantis right now, and I hope he's successful.
And the criticism of Rufo, I don't think holds.
The criticism is you're trying to do things that woke people are doing on the opposite end.
So woke people.
What is Rufo doing?
Sorry.
So Rufo is going in and eliminating DEI bureaucracies so we can have more of a
classically liberal education.
The problem is you just have to make sure that those aren't staffed by only people who have
another ideology or similar ideology.
So the criticism of Rufo then is that
what he's doing is he's replacing one ideology with another.
And that's certainly something to be mindful of.
But the idea then that once these DEI bureaucrats are kicked out,
and this is a very significant person in Stanford, for example,
it's almost a two to one student ratio with diversity bureaucrats.
And these are enormously well funded departments and individual positions are very highly paid.
So this is not a financially trivial matter.
So to what extent should we tolerate the intolerant when the very people,
once they get kicked out from the DEI bureaucracy, they're screaming about free speech.
The very people who are taking away everybody else's free speech.
So I hope Rufo is successful.
I don't know if he'll be, but I'm not going to wait and find out.
I'm going to build new things.
I'm going to make an institution.
I'm going to help contribute to an institution that's based upon free speech and open inquiry
in genuine curiosity, where people who have questions can ask without fear of
cancellation or being just a priori repudiated to something someone says.
That's the interesting debate that we're having in Britain as well about and CRT in schools,
not just in universities.
But for those of us who believe in free speech, how do we deal with CRT and the banning of it
altogether?
How do we get rid of it?
Or how can we say we're for a pro-free speech if we don't somehow tolerate it?
And maybe that's bad.
Sure.
The tolerance paradox.
But how does one deal with that?
Does that mean that you're not actually a free speech absolutist?
Okay.
So let's take a look at this because I think that's an excellent question.
So let's linger on this and drill down it.
So I'm going to give you some examples of ideologies.
And so, you know, phrenology, the bumps on the skull, the Nazis were big into that,
and they believe it was predictive of intelligence and race and all this other silliness,
which is simply not.
Let's say that you had a group of people in a school system who wanted to institutionalize
phrenology.
And so they would give scholarships based upon people who had certain protrusions in their head.
You had these people who had classes in phrenology.
They taught phrenology.
It was throughout the curricula.
Should we allow phrenology in the schools?
And if you say, no, we don't want to allow phrenology in the schools,
does that make you someone who's against free speech?
You don't have to answer.
I know I'm putting you on the spot.
But let me give you another one.
So bracket that we can come back to that later.
Let's say that we have, so phrenology is an idiotic ideology.
Is it harmful?
I don't know, maybe a little bit.
But okay, now let's let's.
Another way of taking it right is that Nazism is an evil ideology.
Yeah.
That's where I was going next.
Yeah.
So one and one needs to teach children about what happened.
And maybe it comes in a history class, you know, rather than a philosophy class.
We don't teach Nazi philosophy, but we touch what this is.
And maybe that's another way of dealing it.
I guess the bigger problem with CRT is it's not really so much.
It's certainly not a history, although there's a history of the philosophy,
but it's a way of seeing the world.
And actually everything else is seen through those prisms.
So it's kind of like a whole other problem.
Right.
Okay.
So, okay.
Okay.
So let's, let's go down that road.
So you have a few things going on.
We got the phrenology thing that we've bracketed.
Now let's say that somebody wants to teach some pretty insidious stuff.
Right.
So Nazi ideology, what have you.
Let's just use that as the gold standard for bad, right?
And if we attempt to kick those people out who want to institutionalize this and who are
actually effectively institutionalizing this, does that mean we're against free speech?
And what if they say, Hey, you're trying to kick us out, you know, Zeke Heil,
you know, you're just violating my rights to free speech.
So, so, so that's the, that's the paradox of tolerance.
Right.
That's the idea of to what extent should we leverage institutional mechanisms in the system.
And at this case of Rufo and DeSantis, we're talking at the state level, right, to kick out,
to change the board of trustees, to then go out and extirpate the entire DEI bureaucracy.
I would argue that you're not violating.
And I realized that many people are going to listen to this and say, Oh, this is some kind
of right wing. No, it's not at all. You would do that with literally any other ideology.
And just because the ideology happens to comport with your beliefs, it doesn't make it okay that
it's institutionalized. And the other thing is why is an ideology, it's not falsifiable.
It's simply not falsifiable, at least for knowledge is falsifiable.
A couple of times through this conversation, you've used the word woke, which I think is a
pejorative term. Yeah.
But very basic question, because there seems to be some debate about this or stumbling on this,
the definition of woke. When you use the term woke, it's a simple question. But what do you mean?
I mean, it's actually very easy to understand. It's not even remotely complicated at all.
It's that there are systemic injustices to people who are woke.
For people who are woke, you can never be woke enough. I did a one minute series of videos
where I explain words that woke people use in one minute. It means that you have an awareness
of systemic injustice. It means that that injustice is somehow rooted in the system.
And usually that almost always, but not always, that revolves around some kind of
something with an identity level salience, race, gender, sexual orientation, trans status, etc.
That seems like quite a complex, because I've just, I've seen it as really just excessive
progressivism. Is that too simple? Yeah, I mean, look, people have called it Wesleyan,
calls it successor ideology. Majid Nawaz calls it regressive leftism. Helen Plochrose calls it
critical social justice. I usually use social justice, uppercase, essence, it goes by different
names. And they basically mean the same thing. Do you think in America, are we yet to have
peak woke? Are we in the woke clash? Where do we think we sit now in the history of wokeism?
Where do you think we are? We've peaked, I think we've peaked, but the damage that it's done to
the institutions is nowhere near over. Like, what do you, what do you foresee?
Well, I mean, the police force, I see the American cities, the more wokes, you know,
the mayor of Portland, for example, is a public disgrace, Ted Wheeler, he, him, I see.
That's just a kind of signaling, right? So he's more concerned about, I mean, he really should
be concerned, almost exclusively with rampant crime, 300% increase in murders, homelessness,
drug addiction, you know, helping the people who need help who are on the streets. But instead he
has a, and it's not just Wheeler, it's just this strain of and DAs on prosecuting crimes. And
it's a systemic breakdown. But I think that we are past peak woke. And I'll give you some pieces
of evidence for that. Well, I'll tell you one of the things, a few of the things that's changed.
I think that the, our brains are wired for testimony. And so the testimonies of detransitioners,
I think it's some pretty ghastly stuff. And most but not all those people are,
Abigail Schreier writes about this and irreversible damage. These are basically young gay kids,
told that they're born in the wrong body, and then they, they need to transition. I heard Katie,
her dog saying an event once that she's, she's gay. And she said that there are no her, her,
I think she termed it fem friends, said that there are no butch lesbians anymore,
they've all transitioned. Wow. Actually, there's a Hannah Barnes was in a book,
time to think about it was happening in Britain. And, and she shows it's, it's something like
of the female trans, it's, it's over 80% are gay. And I think if the male trans is over 90%,
it's high again, and very high autism. Autism. And, and that's also it's changed over
time. I think in the last 15 years, it was a majority, a male phenomenon, and now it's become
a majority female phenomenon. But so that that's sort of it's, it's changing and continues to
change. And it's by age group as well, which is essentially Debra So and Colin right, right about
this, it's by certain age groups, younger people who are more susceptible to this and certain counties,
you know, up to 15, 20% in California, I can't remember the name of the county. So you have,
so Jason D Hill puts the, the figure at 0.06% of the people are trans. And so anything other than
that, you have to ask why is it that we're more lax and society doesn't care anymore. So people
who are hiding it. But again, I just want to be crystal clear as I have to be in every one of these
interviews, anybody can lead any type of life they want. And if you want to be trans, you should
absolutely knock yourself out. And you should live a free life. Nobody should. That's absolutely
inexcusable to harass them on or grief someone etc. People should live any lives they want. I'm
talking about something very different. I'm talking about a few things specifically I'm talking about
transitioning children before they're 18. Right. And specifically hiding that from parents. My,
my son wanted to die as a hero when he was 17. He needed a note from his parents.
You know, there's a looper in the hormone, there's chest binding, there's, so I'm talking
about a very specific thing. And then I'm also talking about trans women in sports. And I'm
talking about trans women in prisons, or women's only spaces more broadly, but specifically I'm
talking about the detransitioners of young kids. And I think that's one of the things
it's not going to be the cancellations, it's not going to be people realize fundamentally
there's something ghastly about mutilating the genitals of children. Absolutely. And if you see
the photographs, I don't know how anyone could possibly look at that and think otherwise. And
I just want to linger on that for a second. But that's why my prediction to you is that
once the ideology falls into ill repute or disrepute, what you'll see is epic gaslighting.
And you're starting to see it now, which is also why I see it. So I never believe that
this is not nobody wants to defund the police. There's an article in the New York Times, yes,
we really do mean abolish the police. And the same people are saying, well, so I think that
there's going to be why I did maybe disagree with you on this is that in Britain, I think we're
we're past peak trans ideology, and the madness of it. And again, I've agreed with everything you
said, I would never you can just identify as anti trans, I'd say pro women and also pro protecting
children. Right. Right. But at the ballot box, for example, and this we had this in Scotland,
Nicholas Sturgeon had to leave the leadership of the Scottish National Party,
because she was unable to answer the question, what is a woman, people see that and they go,
are you insane, even leader of the opposition in England and Britain, sorry, Keir Starmer says
99.9% of women don't have a penis, as in one in 1000 do. And people see that and you go insane.
And it's unpopular about books. But here, in this country, I see someone like Dylan Mulvaney.
And there's, I don't see the same backlash. For here, I don't see people, I see certainly
conservatives and I see women's rights activists digging in their heels and upset about it. But
I don't see ideas being changed. It just seems that people are just doubling down in their own
little silos. Yeah, it's difficult. I can't I can't say I just read and I just came back from
Australia. And we, we had some pretty interesting meetings. And we met with deans and heads of
think tanks and reporters. And as we walked out of that meeting, the thing that I said to myself was
that I said to myself was wow, these just like, they're almost exactly a year behind just they're
just waiting till it comes from them. And as I walked out, Reed said that exact same thing to
me. He's like, wow, just give give it a year, wait a year. So so I can't I can't speak. I can
say when I've been in Europe, that curve is about and we should probably maybe we want to talk about
how woke ideology spreads in non English speaking countries. Yes, that's very interesting. Because
it's starting to happen now in Europe. It's been very much to preserve the Anglosphere for a while.
And it's starting to see it in France as a pushback. And it's and I think it's because
self ideas coming into place. And that seems to me to be the back door that woke ideologies
coming into into non English speaking Europe. Do you agree with that?
Okay, so so and Macron is doing some interesting stuff with that. And I but although I have to say
I don't like his recent posture, pro-China and against the United States that are old,
venerable friendship. So, okay, so I published a piece in November 8 in the spectator about this.
So, so this is kind of it took me a long time to think about this. When I was in Austria,
I gave a talk with lawyers. And I said, this is coming in six months. And basically, everybody
laughed at me. And then I went back in six months. And the same guy, one of the guys who laughed at
me came on. So sorry, I'm so sorry. So let's talk about how wokeness spreads. So for wokeness to
work, it needs one thing. It needs a double meaning of a word. It means that that means that one woke
word has to have two meanings. It has to have the meaning in common parlance. And it has to have the
woke meaning. So this is referred to as the Mott, we spoke about this briefly, the Mott and the Bailey.
The Bailey is the way that woke people use the words. The Mott is the way that normal people
use the words like equity, inclusion is a good one, including one. Of course, you want people to
be included. And so what happens is in like when I was in Hungary, or Austria, or basically any place,
any place outside the Anglesphere, and that includes India as well.
When you translate a woke word into another language, the only thing that translates is the
Mott is the primary meaning of the word. The secondary meaning of the word doesn't, it can't
translate, it doesn't translate. So the consequence of that is that in order for woke to infect a
system and spread throughout the system, it has to be an English word.
So interesting. So which words are then heading the continent?
The same words that we use in English, diversity, equity, inclusion, blind, the whole list,
trigonometry, the whole thing. So they use the English word?
They use English words. Now, woke can work in any language, but English is the language of woke.
And so you can't like if you did that in German or Hungarian or what have you, it just wouldn't,
it wouldn't make any sense. And then when it made it into public policy documents,
people would say, well, look, we know the definition of the word, what are you talking about?
But when it makes it into a public policy definition in the Anglesphere,
then the woke people go to the Bayley. They go to the woke definition of the word,
and it's too late at that point because it's already in public policy.
That's so interesting. There's, perhaps zooming out a little bit, but back to the idea of woke.
Before we started recording, you talked about sort of, you gave me the impression you sort of
given up and engaging in conversation with the woke, which is striking given that you've written
a whole book about how to engage and dig into the epistemology of woke thought and how to have
positive conversations. Indeed, the book is called How to Have Constructive Conversations.
And yet you have seemed to have given up. Have you given up?
Okay, no, no. So let me clarify this is really important. So we're talking about, by and large,
a group of people who believe that dialogue and discourse are inherently not only racist in and
of themselves, but they, it's called privilege preserving epistemic pushback. The person who
is engaged in the dialogue, it is just a way, they're only engaged in the dialogue, it's a way
to maintain power. And if you're a woke person, I don't want to give that platforming a non-consensual
platforming. I don't want to engage that person to amplify their voice to hurt marginalized people.
So it is a choice they themselves have made to not engage their people with whom they have some
ideological disagreement. But the consequence of that ultimately is that it's a memetic device to
prevent the ideology from any kind of penetration from anything that could dislodge the ideology
or could decrease the confidence that any of the propositions in the suite of beliefs that
the ideology holds is true. So it's not that I won't engage, it's that any time that those,
there are any, and they're not even engagements, they're just kind of ad hominem attacks.
That's certainly because one of the things I found having read your book, I read it a few years ago,
is actually unless both parties read the book, right, it will only one of them, one of you read
the book, it's very hard to, you need to get both people to approach the conversation in that way.
So are you leaving, are you sort of, is there a follow up where it's like
conversations over? Yeah, so that's the thing about an impossible conversation. A conversation,
in impossible conversation, you can have a conversation with someone who has a
radically different metaphysical belief about, you know, angels and all this,
or whatever, a radically different political belief. It doesn't matter what it is. When I
taught in prisons, the concern was never that people would disagree with me or, you know,
screw you with the middle finger. The concern was always that they wouldn't say anything,
because if they don't say anything, there's nothing to hook on to. There's no conversation.
So, you know, if someone doesn't want to have a conversation with you, you can't kidnap them,
put them in your trunk, and beat them until they want to talk to you. That's a literally
impossible conversation. So the conversation is impossible if no one wants to have a conversation
with you. Okay, let's see. Also zooming out again, so as a prominent new atheist,
thinker, writer, and speaker, I wondered if you might see a link between, did the new
atheists, we've talked about trans, we've talked about woke, I would throw in environmentalism,
and that's one of these new quasi pseudo religions. Michael Schoenberg, Björn Lundberg,
talk about that. Absolutely. Do you think I would, it would be unfair for me to say that the new
atheists perhaps cleared a path by killing God again, for these new religions to, these new
quasi religions, pseudo religions to flourish, is there a link? It's absolutely true. And I think
there was a Pollyanna attitude that many new atheists had, that somehow will, will bury God,
or turn a phrase from Nietzsche, and everybody's going to be living in some rational paradise.
Little did anybody know at that point, although the Canaries in the coal mine were in the new
atheist movement, the skeptical movement, we started to see this in the very beginning,
that what would replace it would be horrific. I mean, we would just be, I mean, look, look,
look with the kind of things that we're dealing with now. And so that it's called the substitution
hypothesis. I can never remember if I came up with this or Peterson or my apartment. I don't
really remember where this comes from. But the idea is that it's a substitution hypothesis. So
what, it's like Game of Thrones, you know, you only, you ever watch Game of Thrones? No, you're
kidding me. This is a recommendation. Yeah, wow, that's just amazing. You should begin immediately.
But anyway, you're the only reason that you have new gods is because people don't believe in the
old gods anymore. Right. So the substitution hypothesis is when you get rid of the
Abrahamic traditions or whatever is traditional religion in a country,
something else will come and some other form of irrationality will come in and substitute for
what was lost because the default is you just have to believe in something rationality or
religion doesn't have to be rational. Does it or another? No, it would have to be a worldview
that wasn't substantiated by the evidence because that's what substitutes it.
Okay, so with, if you're fighting now, not just as you were fighting universities, you're fighting
across the world to defeat these new pseudo religions, what are you going to replace them with?
Oh, that's a great question. The first thing you have to do is you have to replace them with
the institutions that have been corrupted, right? So you have to replace them with the
University of Austin, for example. That's brick and mortar, so to speak. What about
the ideas themselves? Okay, so let's take a hierarchical look at this. There's theory,
institutions, downstream of that is belief, right? So there's the theory.
I'm talking about the beliefs, I want to understand that.
Right, so the way that people get the belief is from the theory through the institutions,
then they start believing it. So if you change the institutional structures, if you change the way
that the academies are functioning and running downstream of that, that's why
there's a woke contagion. The woke contagion started in, well, it actually starts in K through 12,
but the way that you teach in K through 12 is you go through a College of Education,
College of Education are predicated not upon seeking truth, but alleviating oppression.
That's a ubiquitous phenomenon at every ed school in the country.
Okay, so the way that you change the beliefs at the bottom, there are two ways. One is street
epistemology. There are actually three or four ways, but one is street epistemology, what we do
in our video. You quickly explained that because I've seen the videos. Yeah, so street epistemology
is a way to, it's a non-confrontational, non-eversarial way to have better conversations,
to help people and yourself reflect upon the confidence in your beliefs and whether that
confidence is warranted by the reason and evidence you have for believing it. So you're going out
on the street? Yeah, all over the world, never no actors, 100% random people, strangers everywhere.
We just got back from reading. I just got back from Australia. We just got back from Florida.
We just got back from Puerto Rico. We're going to go to your island next. And what we do is
we just put tape on the ground from strongly disagree, disagree, slightly disagree neutral
to the strongly agree. We ask people what they want to talk about. And we take epistemology,
what it is, how you know what, you know, out of the universities, and we bring it to the streets.
And we give people tools that they can use to not only have civil conversations, but to figure out
if they're warranted or justified in the confidence of their beliefs. We just did a really interesting
one the other day with a young girl. We don't usually, we never do people under 18 because
you need parental permission to view, but her mom was there. And the claim was Miley Cyrus was the
best singer ever. I never really, I mean, I heard in Miley Cyrus, I couldn't tell you, I listened
to Tool and Heavy Metal, I couldn't tell you one song Miley Cyrus, you know who Miley Cyrus is?
I'm a great Mara of her music. And she's a great talent in apartments.
I know nothing about her like Wrecking Ball, you know Wrecking Ball. It's a great song.
I listened to Heavy Metal, I don't know any of this stuff. We'll have a little Wrecking Ball
session like Miley session. Well, I don't know if that I don't know if I know you well enough to
want that, but did I do something wrong? I don't know. No, no, no, just on my side. So, so she,
you know, her claim was Miley Cyrus is the best. And she stood on the strongly agree.
But after only a few questions in a few minutes, you know, she went to the agree,
just targeted Socratic questions to help her think, to help her give her a tool. And I told
her mom's like, you can do this with her with anybody, you can do this at work. So anyway,
so the one one of the ways downstream what replaces it is you give people tools
so that they can lead a better life. And this is a way that the word community is actually
applicable, they can help their communities. Sorry. That's wonderful. And actually, it's
particularly effective seeing is you're filming it so people can watch it. And it's, it's free.
Yeah. And it's free. But you know, I think my question, sort of without being sort of too rude
because nobody don't worry about anything you want to me, believe me, we're getting rid of a pseudo
religion. Yeah. The and the I don't know, I don't quite see street epistemology great as it is,
I can't see how that's going to be a new and it's not, it's not. No, no, no, it's not. Okay.
So, so the older I get here, if I can tell you one conclusion I've come up with in the 56 years
of my life, going on 57, it's that the best way to make a positive change isn't either in the way
people believe things or in the way societies ebb and flow, it's through values. And so
what people value matters. And if you believe that certain things I believe, and I my guess is that
you believe. And as we explore our friendship, I'll come over time to figure out if you actually do
believe this, is that certain value, certain you can value certain things to lead you to a good
life. And you can value certain things to lead your community to flourish. And if once you admit
that, then you can you have to admit by necessity, certain things you can value lead against your
own well being and that of your communities. And so we have to give people tool sets to enable them
to value the right things. But even before you do that, you have to think about that structure,
theory, institutions, people. Right now, what's happening is the reason that people's car beliefs
are here instead of people. Well, what people and what they believe. So you they have the theory,
the theory informs the institutions in K through 12 and colleges of education, the people in those
academic in that academic milieu, think of the Academy as an ideology mill where they want to
replicate this ideology, and they teach that to students. The first order of business is to shut
shut that replication process. How this idea makes sense to me is in fact, as I see it is almost
that's how the critical theory has managed to come and attack those greater beliefs we have. But
really, in essence, it's, it's built the other way those great institutions didn't come from
theory institution and they can the other way around where its belief, then we build institutions and
then theory on top of that. That's how it was constructed. So if we're dealing with the belief
itself, I can see how that's a good way to attack the new beliefs, the new religions,
is the same tactic. But I'm talking about the beliefs themselves at the core, if we're going
to eventually defeat these ideas that we dislike, which as I've now said a few times are new
religions, right? What's new religion to replace? Okay, so this is extremely important. Okay, so
the difference is at some level, in a religious architecture, at some level, at least in the
Christian tradition, the Islamic tradition isn't the case. You need some kind of a faith-based
belief. You need some kind of a way. If you have, if you believe that you have eight
confidence in something or even nine, if you believe that you have eight evidence on a scale
from one to 10, but your confidence is nine, there's a difference between the confidence,
the evidence you have and the confidence you have. That slack is usually called faith,
like it's made up by something. But in the new religion, critical social justice,
wokeism, whatever you want to call you, whatever you want to call it, ultimately, you have bodies
of peer-reviewed literature, which are corrupt, we've just discussed that, that they can point to
so they don't need any faith. Like ultimately, someone who's versed in this can point to it,
and then it percolates throughout. So it's not, so there has to be some prophylactics in place
to prevent people from believing other deranged things. So I don't know what's going to come
after wokeism. I have a very strong suspicion about what the next culture war will be about,
and the next culture war will be about whether or not, and people who are ordinarily strong
bedfellows like Christians and atheists weren't, but now they are. Most of my supporters are
actually Christians, but the next culture war I predict will be those who want to save legacy
institutions, and those who want to destroy them. Stephen Pinker wants to save them, I want to
destroy them. So that will be the next culture war. So it's not like it's the substitution.
That sounds like it's an intra-culture war. That's a war amongst the people who agree with
this ideology, some of these certain ideologies. We've been calling them woke going too far,
right? That's not a culture war to replace, let's say the trans-culture war, because that's,
this is within the anti-woke community. I could be totally wrong about this. I
would be completely wrong. I think this whole thing is just so idiotic. I just cannot believe
it's sustainable. I'm amazed that it's gone this far, but I don't see this being around
in 10 years. I see it being replaced by, and of course, a few nukes in American cities could
change everything immediately, which is part of the other problem. I try never to even mention
Dylan Mulvaney. I don't even like the fact that I mentioned it. Sorry, I brought him up.
No, no, no, that's fine. But the problem is then that that is a failure, the obsession with drag
shows, etc. It's a failure to morally triage, or even socially and politically triage the
problems. We have like Portland, Oregon. Portland, Oregon is becoming a huge cesspool,
homelessness, drug addiction, crime, on a national level, we have inflation, we have problems to
Ukraine war. We should simply not be talking about Dylan Mulvaney. It's insane. Douglas
Murray are mutual friends. It's like people are trying to sneak nukes in and everybody's
worried about everybody's pronouns. But I think that it's not that one religion will replace
another religion. It's that if people value certain things that will lead their community
of flourishing, and these are not particularly difficult things. In fact, I would argue they're
all rationally drivable. Compassion, basic human decency, civility. If you don't like a statue,
that's fine. You petition through democratic process to have the statue removed. There's no
like thug rule where if you don't like a deer in Portland, they've ripped down the Abraham Lincoln
statue. You said earlier in this conversation that it's all about narrative and all those ideas
have a narrative. And there's truth to that. We all function with a narrative, as individuals
are a narrative. And that greater narrative, science can't fill that new narrative. We need a
again, I would say it's a metaphysic on which to build it.
I'm hammering perhaps too much at the same point. So if you have a metaphysic,
and so let's say that one's metaphysic is they believe that there's some kind of a supernatural
realm populated by all these entities, or they believe that throughout in the time, space,
continuum, there are certain points that that a godhead or some kind of divine being came in and
intervened and somebody walked on water, you know, bread and loaves, wine, water, whatever it is,
heal people, whatever it is. Those phenomena are usually grounding for the value system.
In other words, if you don't have those, then you can't have the value system.
And I'm telling you in no uncertain terms, that is simply not true.
Okay, so tell me, because that's exactly the argument I'm making. How is that not true?
Okay, so if it is the case, so let's say so you have,
so there are two possibilities, right? There's a possibility that that and
that and let's say we don't know what universe we're living in, right? There's a possibility where
a creator intervened in the space time continuum and did these things that are, we term miracles.
And let's say that you don't know if you're in that universe or you're not in that universe.
My question to you is, would the value still hold? And I would say to you that the values
independent of the universe in which you knew you're in the values, many of those values would still
hold how you treat people, treating people with kindness, being a decent human being.
Why would those values still hold?
Well, because you can figure them out, you can derive them, which is why they've held in the
beginning, they didn't hold, of course, the metaphysics helped, at least people believing
that there was, so if people believe that someone walked on water, they're far more likely to believe
his pronouncements than if they believe he didn't walk on water. So the metaphysics is in a sense
a way to concretize and sustain a value throughout a long period of time. But you can have the same
value independent of whether or not someone walked on water. You can have it independently,
but it could just as well be coincidental that you have it independently. And there's no reason
why you can't argue against that value. So it could be, but I mean, it certainly could be,
but then again, you could reason to certain values. I mean, look in a judicial system.
Right, which by the way, sorry, go on.
No, go ahead.
Well, you can reason to certain values, which is exactly why whenever metaphysics has been
removed from a society or a civilization, those morals completely get twisted.
And 100% or hell breaks.
Yeah, no, that's correct. That's not an argument that the metaphysics is true.
That's an argument that it has socially detrimental effects. That's a big difference.
Sure. So but doesn't that argue against the idea that you could still have those morals,
that you would still have those morals? Because I would say no, not necessarily.
You wouldn't necessarily have the same values, sorry to use your word.
Yeah, or you can say morals.
You might be, some of them might be interchangeable and come in me, but I wouldn't say that they are
obvious that those morals, I don't think one can assume one would have the same morals.
Yeah, you're right. You're certainly right. You can assume that you have the same morals,
but equally likely, why should you? I mean, there is something I find disturbing
about believing things that are almost definitely false so that society will function more smoothly.
I'm not unsympathetic. I guess, you know, if my kids were butchered by a lunatic,
would I much rather have that lunatic believe in some kind of metaphysics that, you know,
a perpetual fear of hell so that he didn't do something deranged and I'd still have my kids?
Well, yeah, I would. I would. So I think maybe my, to borrow a term, my situatedness,
or maybe as Henderson says, that's just a luxury belief I have. I don't know. But there's something,
I just don't think you can compromise yourself like that. I just don't, I think to maintain
your integrity, you have to believe true things in every realm. Like you can't just say, well, you
know, metaphysics, you know, I'm just going to, I just think that that's something pernicious to
an individual's integrity. Well, I'll have to mull on that.
But I would concede that there's an element of, absolutely an element of faith and I liked your
term earlier that, you know, the notch, the eight to the nine and I agree with that. But
on a positive note, if I may. I thought that was a positive note.
Not to me. Okay. Okay. Sorry about that.
Can you tell me about your not-for-profit that you've been working on?
Yeah, National Progress Alliance and we are a small non-profit and we
promote free speech and civil discourse and fight woke ideology and all of its manifestations,
which is the one thing at this moment that is really preventing us from seeing
more civil and more civil and just society. So that's what we do.
Great. And a small team, two full-time employees and a bunch of part-time employees.
Wonderful. And how can people find out about it?
National Progress Alliance and everything we're 100% donor funded. So
we do all of the YouTube videos. That's, you know, it pays for stuff. We go read and I go around
and we read the volunteer. We go around the world. We make videos. We give talks. We teach people
how to have productive conversations. We teach institutions how to keep woke-ism out, how to,
you know, avoid this madness from infecting their society. So it's a big job.
It's so wonderful to see that after the hellish experience you had at Point State
University that you've really, like a plane taking off into the wind, it's just now your
reach is global and you're really putting everything into, before you were trying to
destroy these ideas in the universe or question them, now you're doing it on the world stage.
And that's very inspiring. I'm sure a lot of people watching you will agree.
I appreciate that. I mean, I can't do this alone. I have a lot of people who help me. And so,
you know, this is how, like, it's, this is not a one-person thing. You really need a community
to borrow that turn of phrase, but you actually do need people. And, you know, we're donor supported.
I have an incredibly dedicated staff and we, this is just what we do full time. And I'm
incredibly grateful to be able to do that. Well, thanks. My dad just told me, make sure you leave
the world better when you're left than when you got in. And I think that's what we're trying to do.
Wonderful stuff. Well, Peter Boghosian, thank you so much for your time.
Thank you. You're fascinating. I appreciate it. Thank you.
