So what is it that I have against Nano?
What is my problem with the Nano text editor?
People really want me to answer this question.
This is something that has been constantly asked
over the years of me doing this YouTube channel.
For one thing, I spend a lot of time covering
really extensible text editors like Vim and Emacs.
And I really never talk about Nano.
When I do talk about Nano, I'll be honest,
I don't necessarily talk about Nano in a good light, right?
And a lot of people are like, hey, man, what is it?
What is it that you have against Nano?
Why do you hate Nano so much?
Where does all this built-in dislike for Nano come from?
And I'm just gonna go ahead and say this.
These people that imagine that I hate Nano,
they're not imagining it.
I really do hate Nano as a text editor.
Now, that being said, there's nothing wrong
with you using Nano as your text editor.
If you wanna use Nano, keep using it, right?
You use the software, you wanna use,
I use the software that I wanna use.
We all make these personal choices
as far as the software we choose to use.
And if Nano's working for you, keep using it.
For me, I'm gonna go ahead and tell you,
I've got some things against Nano
that really bug the hell out of me.
Probably my biggest issue with Nano is,
with any text editor, whether it be Nano, Vim, Emacs,
it really doesn't matter,
to get the most out of any text editor,
you really need to learn all the built-in functionality
of that editor.
You need to learn all the already assigned key bindings
to that editor, right, to get the most out of it,
to learn how to really navigate around a document quickly
and make those edits much faster
to really speed up that process.
You need to learn the key bindings.
And Nano has a lot of key bindings already assigned to it.
Many of you Nano users actually don't realize
just how many key bindings there are in Nano.
There's an extensive list of key bindings available to you.
Matter of fact, I should actually link
to like a Nano cheat sheet of all the key bindings
that are built into it.
There's a lot, right?
So there's a learning curve to Nano,
just like there is with Vim,
just like there is in Emacs.
You have a lot of learning to do up front.
You need to learn all those key bindings.
You need to get used to all those key presses,
those strokes, right?
Here's the thing, with Nano,
that learning curve to learn all that stuff,
it's not worth it.
Because Nano at the end of the day,
there's only so powerful,
there's only so much you can do
with a very basic plain text editor like Nano.
With Vim and Emacs, yes, there's a huge learning curve.
You gotta learn all these key bindings.
You gotta learn the plugin system.
You may have to learn how to write in a Vim script
or Lua or Emacs list if you're using Emacs.
You're gonna have to learn some stuff,
but it's worth it in the end
because of what those editors ultimately can do,
what they can become with you being knowledgeable
and how they're scripted.
With Nano, there's a learning curve to Nano
and that learning curve just isn't worth it.
Also with Nano, just like with Vim and Emacs,
there's some basic plugin functionality available.
There's a few Nano plugins, there's a config file,
you've got your Nano or C file, right,
that you can play around with, change some settings,
but at the end of the day,
there's only so much extending of Nano you can do.
The sky is the limit with Vim and Emacs
as far as extensions and what you can turn
those text editors into Emacs
can practically become a full IDE.
Hell, Emacs can practically become
its own desktop environment,
you can extend it to that kind of capability.
Where Nano at the end of the day
is really just a very basic plain text editor.
There's not a lot of plugins out there,
there's just a few, you can only do so much
with the config file, even turning on things
like basic syntax highlighting and things like that.
You know, it's just not great.
You know, it doesn't have the kind of capabilities
that both Vim and Emacs, for example, have.
So really, that's my only gripe is
when I get into Nano and try to do anything in Nano,
it's got these weird set of key bindings
that are not standard,
it's a complete different set of key bindings
than you would use in something like Vim or in Emacs
or even plain text editors like G Edit or K, right?
Nano has its own weird set of key bindings
that you have to learn, it's just not worth it.
That's really my complaint,
is it's uncomfortable to use and I don't wanna learn it,
I don't want to waste time learning it
just because at the end of the day,
I just don't think that that is time well spent.
For me, Nano is not a in-game text editor, right?
That's not ultimately where you wanna end up
as far as your text editing software of choice, right?
I think where you wanna end up
is something like Vim or Emacs.
Nano, what Nano is really good for
and what I might would use Nano on occasion for
is if I need to make a quick edit,
a really quick, simple edit to a config file on my system
or a machine I remote into, SSH into a machine
and maybe Nano is the only editor on that server
and I don't want to install another editor on that server
just to make a really quick five second edit
to one config file, right?
I'll just use Nano for that, why not?
I can make it work for something really simple.
If I'm not, you know, if it's a situation
where I don't have to spend a significant amount
of time in an editor, Nano's fine for those tasks.
But where Nano really falls apart
is if you're going to do a ton of writing,
a ton of programming, a ton of scripting,
creative writing, whatever it happens to be,
you're writing your latest novel, right?
Nano is definitely not the best tool for a job like that.
That is where tools like Vim and Emacs
and those really extensible text editors,
that's where they shine because they have so much
more functionality available for you
for whatever task you're doing.
They've got all these thousands of plugins available
to help you programmers and developers
or your creative writers or whatever it happens to be
that you need that text editor for,
they can make that happen where Nano at the end of the day
is just a very basic piece of software.
And where some of my obvious dislike of Nano
comes into play, you guys sometimes see it on camera.
You know, I spent so many years using Vim and Emacs.
You know, I find Nano, it's so damn frustrating
when I end up in Nano in a virtual machine,
if I'm checking out a Linux distribution
and Nano's the only editor on it
or whatever it happens to be.
If I end up in Nano for some reason,
then I have to try to figure out the key bindings for Nano.
And again, Nano's got this weird set of key bindings
that nothing else uses.
It's a complete set of key bindings
unlike any other program you've ever used.
And that's part of my hatred of Nano.
You know, I have nothing against, you know,
GNU, Nano, the text editor, you know, again,
you guys that want to use it, you can for me,
every time I end up in it, you know,
that frustration builds because I'm a fish out of water.
At the end of the day, I'm just not used to it.
And that's the problem.
A good analogy is when I end up in Nano
compared to, you know, Vim or Emacs, you know,
when I'm in Nano, it's almost like I'm typing
with both of my hands tied behind my back, right?
Like that's how clunky and slow and frustrating I find Nano.
So I hope that answers some of your guys' questions
as far as what I have against Nano, right?
Some of you guys are even asking questions,
like what do I have against Nano users?
I've got nothing against Nano users.
I don't care what piece of software you choose to use.
Just like you really shouldn't care
what piece of software I choose to use, right?
You need to worry about yourself, right?
If you're worried about what other people are doing,
you've got some issues to work at.
Any sane and rational person really isn't concerned
about what somebody else is doing with their life, right?
So I have no problems with Nano users.
And when I talk about Nano in a negative light,
I'm not talking about people using Nano, right?
Some people think when I say a piece of software
is not right for me, I dislike a piece of software,
whatever it happens to be,
that I'm somehow taking a shot at the people
that use that piece of software.
And like using that piece of software,
that's not the case at all.
I'm just speaking my personal opinion.
And many of you guys want my opinions on this stuff.
So I'm happy to give them, you know, like on this video.
I'm very straightforward and honest.
I just don't like Nano.
And it's not, you know, that you shouldn't like Nano.
Nano's just not the right tool for me
for 99% of what I do with my text editing.
Peace, guys.
