Why all the hate for Ubuntu? Why is it when you talk Linux in Linux forms,
IRC chats, various social media sites? Why is it anytime Ubuntu comes up? All the haters also show
up. Ubuntu has a ton of shade that is thrown at it and is it deserved? That's the topic for today.
So in my opinion, I think that the Ubuntu haters do so mainly for one of two reasons,
and I'm talking about broadly speaking, one of two reasons. They either hate on Ubuntu due to
elitism, you know, that superiority complex, tribalism, or they do it because they see Ubuntu
as going in the wrong direction that Ubuntu as a project canonical as a company, the company behind
Ubuntu is misguided and they're going in a direction that is just wrong, wrong for Linux,
wrong for free and open source software. So let me tackle both of those topics. Let's start with
the ones that hate on Ubuntu because of elitism. Ubuntu, of course, is considered a new user-friendly
distribution. Certainly many, if not most Linux users, new to Linux users, they start out with
Ubuntu. I did, most of you guys did. It's the most popular desktop Linux distribution. It's
certainly one of the easiest to get installed and working out of the box, especially nowadays.
When I first used it 12, 13 years ago, you know, there was some little bugs and paper cuts in it,
but nowadays, for the most part, Linux has gotten a lot better. These things are just
so easy to install. You click OK three or four times, ten minutes, you're done.
But when Ubuntu first came on the scene, you know, there weren't a lot of these easy to install
new user-friendly distros and Ubuntu became very popular very quickly. And I think this
really led to some of these haters, the Linux users that are hating on it, maybe because they
have this feeling of superiority to all those Ubuntu nubes, especially once you move to a
different distribution, right? Because you start out with Ubuntu and then you hop a little bit,
right? And you feel like you graduate to the next level because you move to
Debian or Fedora or Arch or Slackware or whatever it is you move to. And you feel like you're a
better Linux user than that Ubuntu nube. You know, he's still just a Linux peasant because
he's on that easy distribution. My distribution, I had to work a little bit to get this thing
installed. Now, it's certainly easy to be like that, to be that elitist, arrogant snob, that a-hole.
Right? Especially if you started on Ubuntu and then you moved away to another distro,
I can see how you could be tempted to act that way. Because now you see that you've
climbed this wrong on a ladder to this next level. You keep climbing that ladder and you
think eventually you're going to achieve elite status because you're now using more of a, quote,
power user's distro. You're not on that easy distro. You're not using nub Ubuntu. And so now
you want to flex a little, right? You want to tell all those Ubuntu peasants how much better you are
because you're running Arch now or whatever it is you haven't been running. So you guys though don't,
you got to understand that the elitists out there that are out there spouting this nonsense,
just don't listen to them. Don't give them the time of day. Don't respond to them. They're just
trolls. At the end of the day, distro choice doesn't matter. It doesn't matter what those guys are
running. It doesn't matter what you're running. Their distro of choice isn't superior to yours.
And if you're running Ubuntu, Ubuntu isn't inferior to those other distros that those elitists are
running. Now you guys know my mantra for the channel has always been, if it's working for you,
use it. And for millions, tens of millions of Linux users out there, Ubuntu is working just fine
for them. So use it. Use the right tool for the right job is another one I always say. And certainly
for casual desktop computer users, Ubuntu is a fantastic choice. So the second group of haters
I want to address are the ones that think Ubuntu is going in the wrong direction, that everything
Ubuntu does, everything canonical does is the wrong thing. And it really, what really started
it all, I think, was around 2010, when GNOME 2 reached end of life, and GNOME was moving to
GNOME 3, and Ubuntu decided to create their own desktop environment called Unity. Because
GNOME 3 was horrible. They didn't want to go that direction. Most users didn't want to go to GNOME
3 anyway. You couldn't still use GNOME 2. I mean, you could, but it's no longer being developed,
no longer being supported. So canonical was like, well, you know, we'll create our own desktop
environment, we're going to create Unity. And the first couple of versions of Unity were quite buggy,
but, you know, it got really good really quickly. Like, you know, after about a year of development,
Unity really became quite stable. And to be honest, Unity was popular. Like, again,
millions and millions of Ubuntu users out there. And they many Ubuntu users, if you
installed Ubuntu past, say, 2011, all you knew was the Unity desktop environment. You never knew
the old GNOME 2 desktop anyway. And for many of those users, when Unity went away, they were
really upset. Why? It's because they loved Unity. So Unity really wasn't a hated desktop environment.
There's a few people that didn't like it, because there's always going to be people out there that
resist change. There were people that loved GNOME 2. And once GNOME 2 went away, we got to be angry
at somebody. But being angry at Canonical or being angry at Ubuntu for the death of GNOME 2
is, quite frankly, retarded, right? The GNOME project ended GNOME 2 and moved to GNOME 3.
If you want to be angry about the death of GNOME 2, you know, direct that anger to the right people
and the Ubuntu devs are not the people you should have been angry at. Another big controversy that
people really hate Ubuntu about was when during the Unity years, they had the Amazon lens. And,
you know, there was some telemetry in that because it's connecting to Amazon. Amazon's tracking some
of what you're searching because it's a search feature. And people called it spyware, which is
ridiculous. It's not spyware. I mean, if that's spyware, then every time you use the Google
search engine, Google spyware, every time you fire up something like Steam or Netflix, anything
like that. I mean, they're tracking everything you do too. I mean, nobody calls Steam spyware
or Netflix spyware. But Ubuntu has this Amazon search lens in Unity. And now all of a sudden,
Ubuntu is spyware. I mean, how ridiculous is that? Now, the Amazon lens thing, I didn't personally
like it. And a lot of people complained about it because it was kind of buggy and it was just
kind of clunky anyway. And the Ubuntu folks did listen and they created the ability to turn
that thing off and uninstall it. But a lot of people years later, way past when they got rid of
the Amazon lens and when Unity died, people are still talking about the Amazon spyware in Ubuntu.
Guys, check yourselves. And then there are the people that love to bring up that canonical and
Ubuntu have the NIH syndrome, the not invented here syndrome. Basically, that Ubuntu and canonical,
they're always trying to reinvent the wheel, you know, instead of creating their own desktop
environment and a knit system and display server and package manager and yada, yada, yada, they
should just use what's already out there. They should just use the products that these other
distributions have created instead of creating their own. It's just duplication of work. And the only
reason they're doing it is because they're jealous of those other projects and they don't want to use
this superior technology, they want to create their own thing because they can't admit that
Red Hat made something better or Sousa made something better or whatever the distro is out
there. So people love to bring up, you know, things like upstart, Unity, mirror, snap packages,
as being a symptom of the not invented here syndrome. Okay, so real talk here. When canonical
and Ubuntu created upstart, there were no other knit systems out there other than sysv, you know,
and of course, Gen2 was, I think, still using OpenRC, still are, but we didn't have system D
back then, right? So saying that upstart, that canonical created upstart for a not invented
here kind of scenario is ridiculous because they had already been using sysv init initially and then
they created upstart to move to upstart. And guess what? Red Hat thought so highly of upstart
that they shipped with upstart in those particular versions of rail back in the Red Hat Enterprise
Linux. And a lot of people don't realize that that rail actually did ship with upstart until,
of course, Red Hat created system D. But a lot of people were like, well, canonical is just inventing
a new init system, they should have just been using system D. System D didn't exist when they
first started creating and developing upstart. The Unity desktop environment, again, Genome 2
died, they had to go a different direction no matter what direction they went. Might as well
create Unity. You didn't want to go to Genome 3, Genome 3 was garbage and it was going to be a
completely foreign interface to everybody as well. Besides not invented here, I mean, every desktop
environment project on the planet, whether it's Genome, KDE, XSCE, LXQ, Mate, Cinnamon, I guess
they all suffer from not invented here syndrome because why are they creating new desktop environments?
Just pick one of the ones already out there, right? I mean, that argument is just stupid.
The mirror display server Wayland was being developed then 10 years ago. But Wayland wasn't
ready and what canonical created mirror for is because they were doing the phone, they wanted a
display server that could work across all devices, phone, desktop, tablet, Wayland couldn't do that.
So they created mirror and then snap packages. People love to complain about snap packages
and some people complain maybe Ubuntu should just drop snaps and go with Flatpak, which, okay.
And you ask them, you know, why should Ubuntu do that? Because Ubuntu is doing the not invented
here thing. They should just go with the standard. The standard is Flatpak. Ubuntu created snaps
before Flatpak or app images even existed. They started working on snaps actually way back in
the Ubuntu phone days that were called click packages back then. So again, this is not a
not invented here type scenario. And I think the whole not invented here argument is just
stupid. That's why I've never uttered that phrase before making this video. You will never see me
talk about not invented here and writing or on video because it's a stupid argument free and
open source software. Everything we do could be accused of being part of not invented here.
In recent years, you know, people love to bring up the telemetry and Ubuntu as far as they're asking
for telemetry information. When you first install it, they want to know some information about your
computer, what hardware you're running, the resolution of your monitor, things like that.
And they ask you for permission upfront. It's not sneaky or it's not shady in any way. They
basically tell you exactly what they want to know from you. And you can actually go and read the
reports of that telemetry that they're getting from the users. And I hear people compare that kind
of telemetry that Ubuntu is upfront asking you about. Hey, we just want to know what the specs of
your hardware are. I hear people comparing that to the spyware that is built into Windows 10.
Now, overexaggerate much. I think a lot of this has to do with this tribalism. Ubuntu is so popular
and you guys that are not running Ubuntu, I'm not running Ubuntu, but you're running a less
popular distribution, right? Maybe a really small distribution that most people haven't heard of.
It doesn't have that much of a user base. And you think maybe by tearing down Ubuntu a little bit,
you can grab some of those users and bring it over to Joe Bob's distro or whatever it is you
happen to be running. And if you're going to try to steal users from another distribution by tearing
it down, you're going to go for the most popular one every time. That is just common sense. That's
just human nature, right? You want to punch up. You don't want to punch down. You want to go for
the guy on top. You're not going to beat up the guy on bottom. Nobody, I've never seen a thread
that somebody started on how bad something like Nitrix Linux is or Voyager Linux or Sparky Linux
and then have hundreds of people join that thread and then trash it. Yeah, it's so horrible.
Nobody cares, right? Because those distros, they don't have much of a user base. Why bother, right?
But Ubuntu is so much more popular than all the other Linux distributions. That's the one you go
after. Me personally, I like Ubuntu. I started as an Ubuntu user. I've used Ubuntu on many
machines over the years. I still use Ubuntu on web servers all the time. If a Ubuntu LTS server is
offered as an option, I almost always go with it when I have family and friends that have
Windows machines that they want to wipe out and move to Linux because Windows is slow and now it's
all virus riddled on their laptops and nothing is working. A lot of times I put Ubuntu or some
Ubuntu based distribution on those machines and every single person I put on Ubuntu on a new
machine, never seen Linux before, they just loved it. They're blown away. Even if I told them about
all these complaints that people have, they wouldn't care because what do they care about
GNOME 2 going away and Unity coming around? That ship is done sealed. We're past that chapter,
the Amazon, Lens and Unity. None of this stuff even matters anymore and it's just strange that
people still bring this up. Now before I go, this show was made possible by Chris, DJ Donnie,
Dylan, George Heplo, Nate, Lambda, Michael Mitchell, Omri, Rob, Sean and Willie, the producers of the
show. These guys, they're my highest tiered patrons over on Patreon. Without these guys,
this episode, me addressing why so many people throw shade on Ubuntu, this episode wouldn't
have been possible. The show is also brought to you by all these other names you're seeing on the
screen right now. All those guys, they help support me over on Patreon. If you'd like to support the
channel, look for DistroTube over on Patreon. Alright guys, peace.
