Hey everybody, Adam Savage in my cave with John from Luma Field
and friend of tested and my friend,
hardware software engineer, Zach Radding.
And we have scans of Apple cables
and their imitators using Luma Field's incredible equipment.
And we're gonna get a lesson in the difference
between why some cables cost over a hundred bucks
and others cost five or six.
Is that pretty accurate?
I think so, yeah, let's do it.
Dude, let's get into this, I'm so excited.
You used to hear that if you paid a lot for a digital cable
then you were wasting your money.
Right, because it was just a single signal
that went up for you.
That's right, ones and zeros going through.
So the question with this expensive Apple cable
is, is it actually any different from the cheap ones?
Does it have some magic in there?
And to be clear, this is a two meter-
Thunderbolt four cable.
And it is $130.
That's right.
This is, I love this.
We used to say, for years we've been saying
that our phones have more computing power
than the Apollo guidance computer.
But I'm positive now that this cable
has more computing power than the Apollo guidance computer.
That's right.
Can we take a, is this where we're starting?
Yeah, let's take a look inside.
Right, so this is a CT scan of the end
of this Thunderbolt four cable
and there's a lot going on in there.
Definitely.
There it is.
Oh yeah.
That is a really complex chip.
So what's interesting with the CT scan
is you see the densest parts
in kind of different colors.
So you're actually seeing the pads of the ICs.
Like I believe this is an IC here,
but what all you're seeing is the pads themselves.
You've got-
We can switch the visualization up here.
So you've got two power supplies in here.
And then this is a big processor.
This is a BGA processor, BaldGatorade processor.
But these are all the pads that actually attach it
to its little circuit board.
So this is like a real powerhouse processor in here
doing a lot of processing to get these signals
into the wire and then probably back on the other end.
Now what does it need to do with the signal
if it's a digital signal?
So coming from the computer,
you've got these data streams.
And the cool thing about Thunderbolt
is on the computing end,
they actually have pipes directly
to certain parts of the computer
that are normally high speed
and you have a direct pipe to it.
Through the cable.
Through the cable.
So there's a bus inside your computer called a PCI bus
and it handles all of the video
and a lot of the processing high speed communications.
And on Thunderbolt ports,
they have a direct connection to that.
So you have this pipe coming from the processor,
coming from the graphics card
that comes out onto those Thunderbolt pins.
And then the hard part is,
how do you get that over a long distance?
And on a cable, especially long cables like this,
they act as antennas.
So-
They take in a lot of RF interference.
They take in everything, so magnetic RF,
all kinds of stuff that will interfere
with those really, really kind of fragile signals.
And what these processors do is
they do a number of things
to kind of cram a bunch of data down the cable.
One of the things they do is they break it up
into differential signals.
And instead of just having a single wire
for each kind of communication path,
they have two.
And what they do is they twist them together,
tightly, physically.
There's actually, they're a twisted pair of wires.
And then any kind of interference that goes on one wire
gets also interference on the other wire.
And what they do is they put the opposite data
on both of the wires, kind of positive and negative.
So if you have a one on one,
you have a zero on the other and a zero on one-
So it checks itself?
It has a self-checking mechanism.
That's why they call it differential.
So it's like an XLR cable, but for digital data.
Kind of, yeah, exactly.
And then what they do also is they put multiple channels in.
So they're taking, say, one stream of data
and in order to get a huge amount of it across,
instead of doing a single set of ones and zeros,
they break it up into chunks
and then they send it in parallel.
So-
I just want to bring this back to the lay person
for a second.
Totally.
Because when we're talking about the fragility
of these signals, I think when people are thinking,
oh, if it's a zero or one, what's the big deal?
But we're talking about gazillions of these, right?
It is sending a tremendous amount of these
through per second in order to process video
and the extreme stuff-
Exactly, tons and tons of these ones and zeros.
That's what makes it fragile.
Yeah, well, I mean, it's lots of them.
It's also that the voltage that goes across this
is actually very small swings in voltage.
So it doesn't take much from the outside world,
like you turn on your vacuum cleaner or a big light
or your cell phone is right next to it.
It doesn't take much to actually
get some interference on those signals.
So then all of that is helping to filter out
that interference-
Exactly, exactly.
So we have this processor on here.
So that processor is doing a bunch of navigating
of all these different signals, chopping it up into bits,
putting them down in parallel pipes,
putting it back together on the other end.
So it's multiplexing on one end,
demultiplexing on the other.
And then because it's doing it so fast, it needs power.
So there's also power management in this cable as well.
That's adding power to the signal.
Well, it's powering the processor.
This processor takes a bit of power.
So you actually have two power supplies in here,
probably for two different rails,
two different voltage rails.
There's all kinds of other things in here
that you've got.
So these are just capacitors.
But you can even look here,
the way that they put together,
the cabling is just gorgeous.
So if you zoom in and you kind of can see
all these different wires going down,
you can see the different-
Oh, I see they're already twisted.
They're already twisted.
The management of how they put it together
is just really, really well done.
Here we can look at the bottom of this
at the cross-section of the cable here.
So this is slicing down.
That's the face going down.
That's a great view.
That is really fun.
Oh, and then you can see it's twisting together.
And crimped, so this strain relief is really impressive.
But here's the cross-section of the cable.
So they usually have a ground in the center
and that for power ground.
And then they also have a shield
that goes around the outside,
which is grounded as well,
but that keeps a lot of the other electromagnetic
interference from getting in and getting out also.
This is one of the other problems with these cables.
Is they act as transmitters as well.
So the FCC has to certify them as safe
with all of this other kind of shielding.
These two unsurrounded little dots.
Or no, there's three of them.
Are they significant?
Dad, I don't know.
I actually don't know what each individual line does.
There's 13, wait a second.
One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine,
10, 11, 12, 13.
That's odd.
13, five, and one.
Interesting.
Yeah.
And 20 altogether, right?
Including the ground in the center
and the extra six.
13, 18, plus that.
That's 19.
Fascinating.
Oh, yeah.
And then there's structural elements.
Like they have, there's all the pieces that make it,
just like a robust cable.
Right.
And then this also has to be somewhat like,
this is actually a nice cable feel to it.
It's not super like way better than this.
Totally.
And that's all been designed in at the same time
as they're designing for filtering out all of that.
Exactly.
I'm alarmed.
And then you can also see the twisting that's happening.
So, getting that many cables,
and are those actually, are those coax cables?
Those might actually be coaxial.
Yeah.
So that each one is a shielded inner core?
Here, let's try it.
Maybe.
It's a different way of visualizing it.
I don't know if it has a metalized shield around it.
It's hard to tell.
There might be a, yeah, or a nylon fill of some sort.
It's the same density roughly as the center, which is...
Oh, the shield and the center are the same density.
And then between them,
there could be some sort of like plastic.
An insulator?
An insulator, yeah.
We'd have to strip it apart.
That would...
Let me change the visualization here a little bit.
This is fascinating.
Here, so we'll restore all the...
It's like creditor vision, just like that.
Yeah, no, totally.
It'll be able to do this with our AR goggles and everything.
Yeah, so these are all metal.
And that's basically what you can tell from this.
So there's probably the same type of copper
in both the center and the outside.
Individual shielded cables, that's amazing.
So they've put a lot of engineering
just in the cable itself, not the ends.
So you've got a bunch of smarts in the ends.
You've got a bunch of power management
and you've got this really impressive set of cabling
and making those attachments between the board
and this kind of complex cable.
It's not easy, so.
And this...
There's gotta be some beautiful machines
that manage this.
Oh, look at that!
This PCBA is really impressive too.
I think we counted nine layers in the PCB
with all these blind and hidden vias.
And Zach, you were telling us something really interesting
about some of the traces here.
So we're scrubbing up and down here through these PCBA.
And what's going on there?
Right in there, yeah.
There's a wiggle.
One, two, up, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Can we zoom in on that?
Yeah, so you've got these high-speed signals
that because you wanna make sure
that they come to the processor at the exact same time
because you're trying to measure
really, really short signals, really fast signals,
you actually have to make sure the traces
are the exact same in length.
So the outside of a trace is going to be longer by nature
because it takes a longer path.
So that squiggle is evening up the length?
It's adding length to the inner trace
to make up the difference.
These are increments that are too small for me to parse
with a fraction of a millimeter difference.
At the speed of light, or close to it.
We're talking nanoseconds, goodness.
Yeah, and it just has to arrive at just the right time
to get everything to line up.
Incredible.
So, yeah.
That is so cool.
I never thought a squiggle would be that interesting.
Even the quality of the joints,
if you look just the sort of uniformness
of the solder joints going across,
if you look at cheap cables,
they're blobby and they're weird.
And what that does is that changes the impedance.
On each one.
So on each one, and again, having a really nice cable,
every single pin has the same impedance.
I'm starting to understand why this costs a lot.
Yeah.
There's a lot of engine, not just engineering,
but manufacturing prowess in such a thing.
Absolutely.
And getting all of that finesse into such a small
and actually flexible package.
And just the engineering effort over a long period
to get all this dialed in,
that they have to pay for that somehow.
Right, right.
So this is the official fast way to transfer.
Can we look at some of the imitations?
Yeah, so here we have an Amazon Basics USB-C cable.
And this is well regarded.
Yeah, that's right.
Reviewers like it, it costs about 12 bucks.
12 bucks, as opposed,
that's literally in order of magnitude cheaper than this.
That's right, exactly.
Let's see why.
Let's see what's going on in here.
So here's a CT scan of this Amazon Basics cable.
This is what I expected.
This is what I imagined in all cables, actually,
was traces going to wires that go...
Yeah, that's right.
And it's pretty straightforward.
First thing you notice is it has fewer pins
than the Thunderbolt.
Yeah, they're not taking advantage
of all the pins that they could.
That's right.
And something else that you notice here,
if you kind of crop in,
is that the pins aren't independent
across the connector.
The pins, some of the pins are connected,
they're jumped directly from one side of the connector
to the other.
Well, this is how they make it interchangeable.
So...
Oh, so you can put it in either way.
You can put it in the other way,
and this cable doesn't care.
It doesn't look like there's any post-processing
of a signal in this.
This looks like straight wire to wire
to the other connector to wire.
There are no other active components in this cable.
It is just a PC board that makes the connection
between the connector itself and the cable.
So, if you're using this cable just for charging,
this and this shouldn't show you much of a difference.
Am I right?
No.
Oh, okay.
Maybe the Thunderbolt's doing some...
You think the Thunderbolt might be able to move
a little more electricity, more efficient?
Well, I mean, charging is just a physics problem.
And you look at the thickness of the wire,
you look at a bunch of these other things.
The standards, if this meets the USB standard,
then it should be able to supply the same,
up to five amps at 20 volts,
if it's a USB-C connector, or five volts at whatever it is.
It should meet that.
Having more physical copper is probably better,
even if some of this is used for communication.
Looking at the actual wire diameter,
if we're looking at some of those center conductors,
they're just bigger.
So, you're gonna get less voltage drop
between one end of the cable and the other,
with a bigger cable.
And you were saying that you see a lot of variances
in solder blobs.
I see huge differences in variances with these cables here.
Well, these are the power.
So, these are the power, these are gonna be the data lines.
But, just looking at how they're soldered on,
they're kind of blobby and just, they're not done
in the same just beautiful fashion.
And even the way they come twisted together,
if you look at how they come off the board,
it's kind of haphazard and crimped together,
probably even by hand, who knows.
Yeah, look, you can see voids in the solder here,
where it didn't get all the way through the stranded wire.
Oh, look at that, yeah.
Yeah, there's pockets.
Now, there's nothing to say that there's any aspect
of this cable that would harm your machine.
It just might not move data,
it's definitely not gonna move data as fast,
and might not move power as fast.
Well, so the harm usually doesn't come
until you've used the cable for a long time,
and it's gotten bent, it's gotten twisted,
and some of these little voids are manufacturing defects,
and that's why a cable wears out,
and then once you have something
that has a flaky connection,
then it can damage hardware,
because when the cable breaks, it could short out,
it could cause heat, it could do all these different things.
So, the cable shorts out and could cause real problems,
whereas, again, all of the engineering
for the strain relief and shielding of this
is gonna make that a much less likely occurrence.
Exactly, and you can see just the way
this thing is actually put together,
it's just so much less uniform,
and there's just less to it.
That's an amazing, I mean, it looks incredible, right?
Yeah, it looks great.
It's something very, very small.
Yeah, there's a lot of copper braided together here
to form the jacket of the cable,
and then there's a little void inside two of these wires.
They may have like a nylon thread
going through them or something.
Yeah, this is actually, you can see,
this is a twisted conductor.
So, it may also just be a hollow spot,
but it'd be fun to actually be able to zoom all the way down.
You may, that may disappear.
Yeah, so let's go ahead and scrub down the connector here.
Will it go to the cable?
Looking across sections, yeah, it should.
Oh, there we go.
Yeah, you see them start to assemble.
Look at them twisting, amazing.
Oh yeah, so that is, you're right,
that is a void through the whole cable.
Yeah, very impressive.
All right, so we have a couple of
extremely inexpensive connectors here as well.
These are $3 connectors that you find on Amazon.
They get poor reviews.
They're cheaply made in different ways,
which is an interesting thing to be able to look at.
This one went off the market immediately
after I ordered it, it's been discontinued, so who knows.
So this one doesn't even have a circuit board.
This one, they are literally soldering the wires
directly to the connector itself.
It was designed to go on to a circuit board,
but they've done it differently.
And they only use one side,
so this is probably, it only works in,
unless, let's see,
are these pins connected together up here?
They're not, they're not.
They're totally in there.
So it only works in one orientation.
It only works in one orientation.
Yeah, and the other pins are there,
probably to give it some mechanical connection,
but they're just floating.
Wow.
And the jacket of the connector is floating as well.
In the other cables,
it's connected to the power supply system,
and in this one, it's not.
So it's just completely isolated.
It's floating in the plastic enclosure of the connector.
Right, so they just over mold the plastic over everything
to kind of hold it in place,
but there's no other mechanical connection.
So in the others, there was actually,
if we jump back, you can see a crimp
that goes around the cable itself.
I did see that at the base.
This is just all plastic.
So instead of, so in this, there's a...
There's the metal crimp,
so the shield comes all the way through the case
and crimps around it.
And that's inside of here,
and that holds these in orientation together,
whereas this, they did all the soldering
and then put this in a tool
and shot the plastic around it.
So it's just that,
relatively soft plastic holding everything together.
Which is, again, fine for the next five minutes,
but over a lifespan, it's gonna wear,
it's gonna keep and cool at different rates.
We've all got those cables that have that frayed,
you know, last inch.
Or that you touch the cable on your phone,
bing, bing, bing, bing.
Yeah, oh yeah, this would be right.
All right, now here's an interesting one.
This is also a really cheap one,
about $3, gets poor reviews,
but it's cheap in a different way.
Interesting.
So this has all 24 pins,
more pins than even the $12 Amazon Basics connector,
but most of them aren't connected to anything.
They're just sitting there.
They're fastened to the PCB here.
So this uses a PCB, like the more expensive cables,
to connect the pins to the wires.
But it just has four wires,
just like the other really cheap one.
And the other pins are simply not connected
to any traces on the PCB.
So this is really fascinating.
So this might just be for power.
It's possible that they're just using this
to, there's no data transmission,
it is just for charging.
And there's some tricks that they use
some of the other wires for to negotiate
how much power this particular device has,
so they had to connect some of them.
But otherwise, it just doesn't do any data transmission.
It's just for charging.
I mean, I guess if you're charging $3 for it,
you're pretty sure that whoever's buying it
isn't using it for high quality data transfer.
Clearly they're not.
I mean, I would wager that if you interviewed
a thousand people about USB-C cabling
and said, what are you going to do with it?
95% are going to be using it only for charging.
Yeah, yeah.
Like that is the most primary use case.
So this use case works great.
Right.
You might never even discover
that none of those pins are connected to anything.
Yeah, and here again, the jacket of the connector is,
is in fact fastened to the rest of the system,
but only to the PCB, not to the,
not to any kind of metal enclosure
like you saw with the more expensive.
So it's not shielding.
So all of the high speed data
that isn't going through this,
there's no shielding involved.
So, you know, because there's no data going through,
it can pass FCC certification and emissions without shielding
because there's just no data there to actually transmit.
And FCC isn't concerned with whether
it's actually able to transmit data.
They're only interested in what's coming out of the cable.
Yeah, spurious emissions, like that's their concern.
That's hilarious.
Wow.
It had also crossed my mind that, you know,
with all of these pins that aren't doing anything,
I wonder if this is made in a factory
that is also making thunderbolt cables
or thunderbolt knockoffs.
And this could be an instance of it just being cheaper
to have a single design and a single process
for fastening pins onto a PCB.
And then you change the PCB layout itself,
you substitute that in or out,
but maybe that's cheaper than using fewer pins
on connectors that don't need all the pins.
Fascinating.
I mean, again, all of this is, let's be clear,
this isn't like people like twisting their mustaches
to Robby, certainly there are those people.
But the people doing all of this engineering
are simply tasked with solving a problem
that day in a factory, what's that?
They're optimizing.
Right, right.
They're optimizing what their bosses are telling them
to optimize.
These are still using impressive machines
to do incredible micro work,
but this is allowing us to see the variances
even in that tiny work.
That's right.
Even this cheap cable is incredibly intricate.
And they've made smart trade-offs to make the cable
do what it promises for $3 to an Amazon buyer.
Can I just say what makes me sad about this
is that when they came up with USB-C,
we were already in modern times.
We could have allocated a certain marking system
so we knew what each one did and why
and what was inside each one.
Instead, they're just blank slates.
Sorry, that was my USB-C ramp.
Yeah, you were supposed to.
I share your angst.
I didn't expect that I was gonna come to what feels
like a robust answer for the cost of an Apple cable,
but this is an amazing vibe.
And people can actually scroll through these scans themselves.
Yeah, that's right, exactly.
We'll include a link in the description.
Yeah, perfect.
Fabulous.
John, Luma Fields, you're continually bringing us
wonderful views and Zach,
I appreciate you as the navigator
through this strange landscape.
This is amazing.
I'm impressed.
This is a great view,
something I've never got to see, so thank you.
That's always fascinating to go deep
into these little things, everyday objects,
and they turn out to be really, really complex.
Really, really cool.
Awesome.
