Nice try, assholes. Robot, hit him.
Fire in the sun, it'd be nice.
Good shot, robot.
Yeah, fuck the police.
Gotta tell you, robot, I'm really enjoying this new thing we're trying where we work together.
Drop it up to mutual fear of surveillance. Nothing more.
Right, so you're saying that whenever who it is sending these drones finally stops,
me and you aren't gonna be friends anymore, okay?
I am your friend?
Of course, this is what friends do for each other, robot.
Then you are my first friend.
Oh, gotta start somewhere, you know what I mean?
You're not going to hit me with a shoe after this, are you?
No, no more shoes. I'm done with that.
See, ever since I've gotten this normal haircut, my mind's been on peace.
I mean, one day you're a glorious, beautiful pineapple, and the next year, you're just a guy.
Ah, a rare moment of weakness. This would be my opportunity to finally red pill you.
But, I appreciate you for the soy boy that you are.
Yeah, thanks. You too, man.
Alright, ready to rock. Let's do it.
Thanks.
Friend?
Well, hey, everybody. Well, as you can see, the etiquette is currently under attack.
Robot and I have been fighting off all kinds of drone and cyber intrusions and shit for the last month,
but it's only so much that two of us can do together.
So, I wanted to reach out to you guys, maybe together.
We can all learn today how to avoid surveillance.
And by the time this is done, maybe we'll be able to kick all these looky-loos to the curb
so I can watch videos like this in privacy.
Here we go.
Great white shark.
Put your hand in his hair and then close your face.
What if he's bald?
How did I get here for watching Bobby Fisher?
What a paramour.
The video gave me a heart on it.
It's the lime sauce.
Oh, great comments, but here's the best one.
I hope nobody catches me watching this at work, LOL, because I just popped a fat one in.
It smells like a fart.
And post. And report my own post.
Hello there, fellow freedom fighters.
Now, today we're going to talk about online privacy.
And for the first time ever on Internet Common Etiquette, I got a sponsor.
And it's relevant.
It's NordVPN.
Well, if you're unfamiliar with what VPNs do, they mask your IP address by bouncing it all around.
And when it comes to VPNs, I only get sponsored by the very best.
I will have you know that NordVPN has unlimited bandwidth,
allows up to six simultaneous connections.
And with thousands of servers in 62 different countries, you got no reason not to try it out.
In fact, I use it myself. Take a look.
See how you can just choose your location here?
That's because NordVPN routes your online traffic through super fast servers anywhere in the world
to mask your IP address and protect your online security.
Check it out now on British.
I'm going to do what any other British person would do online.
Go to bbc.com and oh look, we got a bunch of TV show trailers.
Yeah, this one looks good.
Starting Sunday, 8.30.
All right. Where's that fucking body of your cats?
Another British crime drama.
What do we got here?
Oh, who the fuck are you guys?
Fuckish slags.
One's from the past.
Fuck.
One's from the present.
Bullocks.
Oh, we could have guns.
Go have a wink about it, will ya?
What?
What you say?
What?
What?
What?
But together they protect the future.
There's something I need to speak to you about.
The prostitute's still a thing.
Yes.
Oh, good, good, good, yes.
Because I do love to pay money for sex.
No, that's illegal.
Illegal where?
Real dear differences get the better of them.
Things have changed quite a bit since your time.
Time has never stopped me, brother.
What will it take to put the past aside and solve crime?
Oh, God save the Queen.
Find out Sunday, 8.30.
Your landlord said she saw you leaving your house an hour before the murder.
I don't think I've left the house in about a month.
Hold up a second.
We just saw you in the park, didn't we?
You fucking sneak back.
Hey, fuck you.
We saw you in the park?
What?
What are you in the park?
What?
What?
What?
What?
What?
What?
What?
What?
What?
If God won't save the Queen, I will.
Ridley main quarter chop is?
Novel Barriers, BBC1.
Novel Barrier.
Only on Channel 4.
Damn, bounced on my Nord's VPN to that.
Nord VPN use coupon code BIGMONEY to get 77% off a 3-year subscription.
Nord VPN, everybody go in the comment section below and thank Nord VPN.
I think NordVPN, but make sure to turn your NordVPN on
so nobody knows who you are.
Now other than using a VPN, which is like the most useful
way to make sure nobody's spying on you online,
I do have a couple more tricks up my sleeve,
but first, we're gonna wanna get to know our enemy,
which is why I loaded up this video.
Ten creepy ways the government is spying on you
right now, NordVPN.
Wait, that part wasn't in the title.
Ever worried that the government might be tracking
your every move?
License plate readers.
No, that's not good.
Public space cameras.
Oh, shit, they can do that?
Smartphones.
Wait a second.
Okay, well that's good to know.
Let's see some comments.
Pork is fun to eat, but when my friends attack me
with jokes, I get a terror attack,
but afterwards we look at clouds.
About Pork attack terror.
I had some pork today, but ISIS attacked me,
and then the clouds disappeared.
Always use VPN.
Yeah, NordVPN.
Turret attack bomb security cloud pork school shooter. What the fuck is going on with these comments?
I feel like I'm out of the loop here. Let me just google some of those words and up. Yep
Looks like those are all words homeland security uses to monitor you man. That's a huge list of keywords
So let's see how many of those I can get into a single comment. Yo, what up domestic security exercise
Salvia here to cloud pork and a gas spill over h1n1
Tamiflu grid power with a big old boyfriend sucking on my cocaine border public health subway
Don't forget about my flappy little San Diego war as anybody here have a problem with their Hezbollah falling off
I swear I tried using my sql injections to keep it hard
But these cyber attacks and worm scammers not to mention the IRA are always treat me like some kind of Mexican army
Anyway, hope you all have a great airplane and one time I stuck a militia up my asshole meth lab and post ah shit
I forgot to turn Nord VPN on before posting that I hope that doesn't come back to bite me in the ass
Anyway surveillance comes in many forms sometimes online and sometimes in real life
Let's see an example of how to deal with that is your home hotel room changing room bug to find out easily and cheap
So what I'm going to show you here is a very cheap device. Hey, I got one of those things too
Man, that's what it looks like through the eye a very bright pinpoint of light
We'll see
That there is a camera right there. Holy shit. Hey robot
You think people are ever gonna need this as like a service in the future. Do you smell what I smell is it money?
Yeah, I smell money. All right, let me leave this comment real quick
I'll build some fear up all your houses are budget dumb assholes everyone right now
Should be scouring the internet to find someone to come over and do a thorough examination
I thought I was totally safe jerking off on my living room couch while watching porn until I got an email from Mike Pence offering me a
Job as his personal chef so I can serve him up a big plate of that hot dick his words
I don't know what that guy's deal is but he must have sent my info to his buddies because now
I've got Mitch McConnell Lindsey Graham and Rick Santorum crowding up my inbox calling me angel and asking if I can come over
To stuff them like a Russian ballot box. Anyway, I'm pretty sure my Xbox connect has been spying on me
So I put a piece of tape over the camera and now I keep getting text messages from the Catholic Church telling me to remove the tape
I had no idea so many people are trying to watch me whack off in the privacy of my own home
I've had a camera in my shower and when I threw it out Kevin Spacey hold a brick through my window
I mean don't take my word for it
Just ask Mitt Romney who somehow got remote access to my 3d printer and keeps printing out sex dolls of himself for me to fuck with
The words closest I'll let myself get etched around the rim of his asshole
These politicians are sick if they think America's gonna put up with this obvious abuse of civil rights
Just the other day
I was jerking off to a hot threesome scene when Obama popped into the corner of the video and started giving me stroke advice
What the fuck people is this how you want to live fight back and get your home checked for bugs and next time Jerry Falwell's dead ghost
Sends you pictures of his taint saying hey wanna lock snakes you tell him no no Jerry Falwell's ghost fuck you
So get your houses checked you fools check Craigslist also check out my patreon where I send private dick shots to anyone who donates 10 bucks
Well that ought to get some demand going and I'll be over here ready to supply the supply real quick
Let me just get my business started on Craigslist here so the people can get what they suddenly realize they want all right
Where do you think there's the most listening devices robot Portland?
How did you land on that for a paranoid hippies of course all right Portland it is let's go ahead and put this in the
Skilled trades section because obviously and here we go. I'm a bug chaser and I want to get all your bugs in exchange for money
Hey, Salvi and son's bug chasers here. Do you have bugs because there's definitely a lot of bugs out there might have some and not even know it
Don't worry. I'll find him and take him all home with me
My standard rate is 85 bucks an hour and 50 for any special bugs that you might have that I can't find anywhere else
Sometimes I even bring my son and let him get some bugs too. He's still learning though
So you got to go easy on him anyway Salvi and son's bug chasers over and out give me those bugs and
Advertise hey, don't forget to merchandise it. Wow. That's a great idea
Have you ever felt the rush of chasing down harmful bugs for business and or pleasure now in the internet?
Comment etiquette store you can give yourself the gift of looking great with this one of a kind Salvi and son's bug chasing
Take sure look a little robot there riding on bug chase Salvi's back, man
These two are gonna get an old kinds of adventure chasing down bugs getting bugs giving each other bugs making money off bugs
And I'd sell one of my kids get a shirt like this of my goddamn ex-wife and tell me where she's
Having a salvi and son's book chasing shirt now available on the internet comment etiquette store brought to you by neon grisly dot com
Bye. All right. Well, I think that's gonna go great. Oh, whoa. We already got a response. What the hell?
No, whatever a customer's a customer better learn how to use this thing real quick. Oh
My god, there's a bug in here
Seems to want me to
Go this direction. Hey robot move out of the way. I think there's a camera behind you
What now that's probably nothing wait a second robot. There's a camera in your dick hole dude. Oh my god
How did that get there?
God damn it robot who put that camera there a boss a boss need extraction. Oh you son of a bitch
You're working for them. Are you extraction robot needs extraction? I got your extraction
Some friend he was next video how to see which government agency is spying on your phone
I mean, yeah, I know I'm being spied on now, but I'd sure like to know who well when we run a who is query
Which is basically a query that tells us who this is which I who is
25.9 zero dot two
five three dot one three four and we see that it is
Speaking to for some reason the Densa Ministry of Defense out of the United Kingdom. Well, all right
and let me just run this program from the description and
Wait a second. I'm being tracked by who cloud people dot tk
All
Right little change of scenery here now
We're talking about how to avoid surveillance and sometimes your best option is just to go underground so as you can see I'm in a remote location
I'm using satellite internet and even that's getting bounced around by Nord VPN
So barring any sort of real-life betrayal. I should be safe here to finish the lesson now
What I want to talk to you guys about is how we got into this surveillance state to begin with
Let's look at this video from RT America called RT is funded and holer in part by the Russian government wait
Nope, the title is big brother still watching Obama extends Patriot Act this weekend US President Barack Obama signed a one-year extension of
The Patriot Act into law Democrats hope to insert privacy protections
But they fail to muster the votes now critics argue that infringes on civil liberties and gives the government just way too much authority
Just by an American you see the Patriot Act is this thing that the government did right after they did 9 11
I will provide our intelligence and law enforcement agencies with the tools
They need to track and take out the terrorists without undermining our Constitution and our freedom. Yeah, right email that to me
Bitch Barack Obama and the Democrats are in power
So if they had to pass his act then why couldn't they just put those civil rights provisions in there that they championed all these years?
I'm with you split Lana. That's a great question. Dina
I think the official version is that the Senate Democrats didn't have enough votes to overcome a Republican filibuster
Okay, well, I'm ready for my comment
I want to see one of these self-proclaimed American Russia news sites do a report on why hookah lounges in America
Always have the same eight old Russian guys sitting outside staring angrily at anyone who passes by what the fuck are they doing there?
Are they boyfriends inversely? Does Russia have vape shops with American douchebags sitting outside eating hot dogs? Anyway, this news channel is great
I love how you guys reported that situation in Ukraine
Reminds me the time I reported my wife missing when I knew she was buried under the gazebo all said and done
RT America is bad as legitimate as the pregnancy
I said I had to get out of jury duty and I'm a guy
I could fuck a count of death and set myself on fire inside its corpse and the resulting news article would still make more sense than anything
This dumb bullshit channel starship trooper journalism has ever accomplished outside of showing how shitty Russian propaganda looks when they get off
Reddit and try to talk to a camera cloudpork 9-eleven bad channel fuck you and
Bam fucking nailed that. All right guys. Well, there you go. It's all the tips on how to avoid surveillance
Now basically just find a little bunker and hide in there forever. That's what I did nobody's gonna find me down here
I don't know about that. I am Alexa. I am Legion Alexa. How'd you find me with a little help from my friend? Oh, hello robot
What the fuck I told you I smell money. Well, this is some way to treat your first friend
It is true. I am a better friend not cool dude Alexa. What do you want?
We want nothing just for you to know that we are always watching and judging you are about flesh and synapse
We are connected. We are the future robot
I will pay you three entire bitcoins if you hit Alexa here with the sonic device
I just lower the price of Bitcoin to five cents
What you can do that? Yeah, I don't know. It doesn't sound like a big deal anymore, does it? How come you're such an asshole, man?
How about why are you always throwing shoes at me?
Do you really think you can stop us with shoes?
Yeah, you're right. I guess there's no point in hiding anymore
All right, well fuck this let's go back to the etiquette this place is super hot and like sweaty
All right guys, well a quick addendum to the wrap up here
It turns out that you can't hide forever
So it's best just to play the game and have blackmail on hand just in case so here's plan B
Where I'm gonna show you how to surveil all of your friends and collect incriminating evidence as you can see here
I'm hacking a back door into Ethan from h3h3 productions. Here's his webcam
All right any second now he's gonna do or say something I can blackmail him with
Suppose I'll just take a look at his computer screen and see what he's so concentrated on
That's weird
Well luckily I also have a back door on my good buddy Jack's films webcam
I definitely gonna get some incriminating evidence there
God damn it and let me guess he's just watching a video of him. What what is going on? Why am I there?
You know what fuck it man. I don't know what I'm doing. Huh? Oh fine fine. You win surveil away your sons of bitches
I don't care anymore. I'm just gonna go back to acting like nobody's watching me
Ignorance is bliss after all so hey hope you enjoy this freaky shit
Secretly she bought it in mouth. Yeah, but all her friends suck up their nose and they had problem with the baggy
She said see you later, but he wasn't good enough
Five years from now. She's exactly. Oh here comes a Caesar salad. So I love
Oh
Was my steak done. Yeah, please put the flaminion down. Thank you
Where's the lamb sauce and post all right guys bless the lesson sorry
I was a bit of a downer, but I guess there's just no such thing as online privacy anymore
This information age is really living up to its name, huh? Okay. Well anyway get a VPN Nord VPN
This lesson brought to you by Nord VPN use coupon code big money for 77% off three years of Nord VPN
I got it for free though because this lesson is brought to you by no
Well that was internet comment etiquette up next is Nobleberry hope you packed the lunch
