So today we're very happy to have Danny Robbins from Albany who is going to tell us about the
composition of befores, content symmetries, and anomalies. Please, Danny, take it away.
Thanks, yeah. So that's the usual, you know, title form of the collection of random terms, but
really, it's basically about a bunch of work I've been doing over the past couple of years. So a
paper a couple of years ago with my student, Thomas Vandermillen, and then four papers and counting
together with Eric Sharp from this year, where we're really starting to uncover
a fairly interesting structure. At the end of the day,
we may or may not be getting anything, you know, really new, we're not getting new constructions
exactly. But I want to claim that we're, we've got sort of new ways of thinking of anomalies and
how they fit together when you, when you gauge things. And in particular, in the presence of
tribunally acting symmetries. So, and I also just want to say, with all of this, my student, Thomas,
has put in a lot of work and he's on the market this year. So if you enjoy the story we're telling,
then consider keeping an eye out for his applications. All right, so I want to talk about
two dimensional CFTs and global symmetries and taking orbifolds. So basically gauging those
symmetries. This is an old story, of course, a slightly more modern way to think about these
things I would claim is through the language of topological defect lines. So in this picture,
any global symmetry, so if you've got a global symmetry group gamma, any given element g of
gamma, you can think of g, you know, the action of that group on your, on your theory in terms of some
line, line operator g. So if you've got the cylinder here, you've got some state coming in
from below. If you put that line around the cylinder and then fuse it down here, you just
get the action of g on that state. These lines are topological. So the corresponding line operators
commute with the stress tensor. And that means we can freely deform them around without changing the
value of any correlation functions. A couple other facts. So you can, you can think of, you know,
if you circle some local operator by one of these lines, that just tells you how the symmetry acts
in your local operator. If you reverse the orientation of your line, it's basically just
inverting the symmetry element, the group element. So these topological defect lines can need
junctions. And at any possible junction, there will be some Hilbert space worth of operators
that you could insert at that junction. So for instance, you could have a line just coming out
of one point. So the operators you could insert at that point would be what we would normally call
g twisted sector Hilbert space operators. And again, you can think of that in terms of the cylinder.
Now the line would be going the vertical direction. And so a state, which would be on the spatial
slice of the cylinder is only periodic up to the action of g. And if you could formally map that
cylinder to the plane, you'll get a picture like this. You can also have multiple lines going into
a junction picture like this. So here I've got lines g one, g two and g three. So there'll be
some junction there. And again, I'll just label the Hilbert space with the line is coming in,
or in this case going out. And the order matters, the order the lines are in. So I put a little x
here to indicate, you know, that's the last guy, I'm going to go counterclockwise around my junction
and end at the g three line. So this will be the hg one, g two, g three Hilbert space. Different
cyclic orderings are isomorphic Hilbert spaces, but you know, not necessarily canonical. So
we should mark things when we're being careful, but I won't always be careful in this talk.
And I should say most of what I learned about this, this way of thinking about things I learned
from this very nice paper from a few years ago by Chang Lin, Shao, Wang and Yin.
All right, so when you've got these lines, you've got lines and operators and operators
junctions and everything. So in this language, your, your CFT is, you know, as usual with the
quantum field theory, it's some gadget that, you know, takes correlation, you know, some sort of
correlation function gives you a number. In this case, our correlation functions are going to
correspond to these decorated pictures of renon surfaces with lines and operators everywhere.
So again, these blue lines are topological, so we can move them around without changing
correlation function, as long as we don't pass through an operator. But the vertices are
generically they're nailed down. The exception is sometimes you'll find that in your junction
Hilbert space, you may have some weight zero states. In that case, if you put one of those
weight zero operators at that junction, then that does commute again with, with the stress
tensor and so on. And then in that case, you can move that junction around as well. So those,
those are called topological junctions. And that's pretty special. So for the case of sort of
ordinary group symmetries, then that, that act effectively, then the only way you can have a
weight zero operator that can live at a given junction is if the product of lines around that
junction is the identity. In that case, there is exactly, you know, a one dimensional vector space
worth of operators of weight zero that you could put at the junction. And so, you know,
pick a basis vector there and it's basically sort of an identity operator for that particular type
of junction. Okay, we're going to talk a lot more about anomalies a little later. But for now,
let me just say that as long as your group is not anomalous, then you can also resolve junctions.
So I could take a four junction and split it into two, three junctions, like in this little
picture down here. And as long as there's no, well, I can always do that. But if there's no
anomaly, then I can do it in different ways and they'll, they'll agree, essentially.
All right, so another step I need to kind of, you know, define before we start talking about
gauging these symmetries and doing orbitals is what I'll call partial traces. So z g comma h.
If you've worked with orbitals before, you of course are familiar with these objects,
so maybe not in this precise language. Often they're talked about in more of a Hilbert space language.
But in terms of these correlation functions, I can just take my two torus. So I'm going to take a t
two. And I'm going to wrap both of the cycles by lines labeled by different group elements.
And I want to be able to, you know, so there'd be some four junction in the middle,
and I can resolve it into a pair of three junctions. So even if there's an anomaly,
as long as I'm consistent in exactly how I do that resolution, I could just say, you know,
this picture is how I'm defining z g h. Implicitly, I'm also inserting some
weight zero vectors at these two, three trivalent junctions.
But, you know, for a given choice of those vectors, this will be what I'll call my partial
trace, z g h, which depends, of course, on the modular parameter tau of the torus.
And that should be about all it depends on the module of those vector choices that I talked
about before. So once I have this definition, we can start, you know, asking about properties
under modular transformations. Again, if you've worked with orbitals, this is probably
somewhat familiar story. But if you want to know, say, what is z g h at tau plus one?
Well, I just draw this picture. So this is my z g h at tau plus one. But equivalently, I can take
this fundamental domain with tau. So that would be this picture, just translating it over.
And now here I can do a swap of my trivalent vertices to get back to my sort of standard form.
If I have an anomaly, there will be an extra phase here, which we'll discuss later.
But if there's no anomaly, then I'll just have this z g h tau plus one is equal to z g hg inverse
of tau. You can do similar tricks for all, you know, all SL2z transformations.
I should say, please, anybody should interrupt if they have questions. I'm not going to see your
hand up, I think, but I'm happy to be interrupted. All right, so now let's turn to gauging. So
a network of these TDLs, so if you decorate some Riemann service with a bunch of lines,
a way you can interpret that is that it's basically describing a background gauge field
for your symmetry, for GaN. So it's really saying, you know, it's essentially saying,
you know, these are the transition functions as I go from sort of dividing my Riemann service
up into patches or something. And it's telling me exactly how I act with g as I go from patch to
patch crossing over these lines. So now that sort of hints at what we should do to gauge, of course.
If we want gauge or metering, we should sum over all possible background configurations.
That would be, you know, taking the orbifold of GaN. And so for example, if we wanted to gauge it
and we wanted to compute the partition function on the torus, that's saying, you know, we should
do the partition function on the torus, but sum over all possible sort of networks of lines that
we could draw. And, you know, topologically, the only networks of lines we could draw are these
pictures where g and h are some commuting pair of elements in GaN. And so that's what we usually do.
We say that the orbifold genus one partition function z GaN here is given by
this sum over those partial tracings.
So as I mentioned before, in my definition of those partial tracings, I've implicitly chosen
some weight zero vectors to sit in those junctions, junctions like this, h, g. So g and h are the
guys in the partial trace indices. And then the sort of middle segment there would be g inverse h
inverse. So if I changed my choice of basis, so I rotated the vectors in those one-dimensional
vector spaces at each of those junctions, I could rotate them by some phases omega gh.
Consistency with being able to swap trivalent vertices, of course, gives me this relation
on these phases. And so that says that
these phases actually live in the group cohomology h2 gamma u1. So that means they're,
you know, a co-chain just is some map from g cross g to u1 in that case. This relation here
is precisely the co-cycle condition. And this is a well-known mathematical story, of course.
So this is what we call discrete torsion. So in my language now, that's just changing
what basis of vectors I'm putting in those junctions. And of course, if I were to pick
a different set of phases like this, that's shifting my co-cycle by a co-boundary,
that would leave my partial traces invariant, it turns out. And it's basically just adding
some phases associated to the lines themselves. You can think of it that way.
Okay. So that says the discrete torsion choice is really an equivalence class in h2 gamma u1.
All right. So given such an omega, in fact, you know, because my partial trace had two junctions,
I'll get two factors of omega. You can use the co-cycle condition a little bit to massager
and write it in sort of the totally standard form. So that change of basis at my junctions
just multiplies my partial trace by this factor omega g, h divided by omega h, g.
And these are the usual place we see discrete torsion.
Okay. So that's all an old story that, you know, is quite familiar. So the
slight curveball I want to throw now is to consider the case where we've got a subgroup
of our symmetry that actually acts trivially. Let me not say non-effectively there. Maybe let me
just say trivially. I think that's more accurate. So it acts trivially on local operators of these
in the parent theory. That is, if I have a line associated to one of these trivial symmetries
and I circle any local operator, it just gives me that local operator back.
So if you consider the full set of symmetries that act trivially in this way,
it's easy to see that, of course, if you conjugate it by something, then that thing will also act
trivially. And so that means k is a normal subgroup of gamma. So you can take the quotient.
That'll also be a group g, just gamma mod k, and they fit together in a nice little short exact
sequence. Daniel? Yes. Is it well defined? I mean, can you, you can always add groups and declare
that your theory has more symmetry which acts trivially. So what does it mean that you take
a subgroup which acts trivially? Good. So yeah, I think your perspective is actually the one I
prefer. So indeed, I can think of it as, you know, I had a group g and I'm going to extend g
by some trivially acting k into a larger group gamma. Is that what you mean? I would say the
symmetry of the theory is the group which acts non-trivially. And then, okay, I can add anything
I want which will act trivially, but it's arbitrary choice. Yes, I'll agree with that.
Let me interject for just a second. I completely agree with that description. Let me just add,
for me personally, the fun part is that if you gauge even a trivially acting group, you can get
something non-trivial as a result. So gauging k, even if k does nothing geometrically, actually has
a meaning, as Daniel will say. Sorry, let me start. Yeah, I'll definitely get into that in a couple
examples pretty soon. But indeed, so I completely agree. And, you know, for that reason, we're not
really going to get anything new. But what I want to claim is that by considering the different
ways you can extend by trivially acting subgroups, I'm going to claim that I learned something about
how to think of anomalies and things like that. But, you know, mileage may vary as one says.
Yeah. Yeah, thanks for the question. All right, very good. So we've got this trivially acting
subgroup now. And in the trivially acting subgroup, of course, we can have sort of,
we get more weight zero states. Because, you know, you know, the, in this case, the Hilbert space,
say at the end of a line labeled by an element of k, is just isomorphic to the bulk of Hilbert
space. And so in particular, has an identity operator in it. So now the condition that your
junction Hilbert space contains weight zero vectors is actually just not the product of the
lines around the junction is the identity, but it's enough that the product is actually in the
subgroup k. That'll do. And so I think at the end of the talk, I'll mention how, you know,
another way of looking at it is, is that this gives you sort of more toys to play with more,
more knobs to turn. All right. So the gamma partial traces now, so gamma is this, this
larger group with a trivially acting subgroup, or, you know, if I can, if I think of g is the
true symmetry group as was suggested. Wait, I'm confused by that previous statement. So if you
just have the element g that are acting, and they were going to the identity elements of
the non-trivial group, that's still going to be the identity element. I mean, you need to make
some statement about extending to a general k. Sorry, I'm not sure I understand. So,
so first of all, these g's are elements of gamma, I probably should have called them gammas.
Yeah, so it would just go, but, but, but no, my question is an element of k is acting trivially.
Yes. So how am I able to make the distinction in the theory? That's the fun part, wait and see.
Right. So yeah, I mean, in some sense, I'm saying you can't really, you know, you don't really make
the distinction. The point is that, you know, when the group was acting effectively, only when the
product was the identity, would you get these topological junctions? But now, because as you
say, elements of k, you know, sort of are the identity in some sense, in some, you know, more
physical sense, I guess, than having the product be in k also lets you have a topological junction.
Should I think of this as taking copies of the theory labeled by- Yeah, exactly. That's, that's,
that's a picture we're going to land on soon. So you're not, they're not the original theory,
but it's a copy of the theory labeled by k. Well, when we gauge gamma, we'll get copies of,
yeah, we'll get a decomposition of our theory into, into a bunch of copies of things. Yeah.
So another way to see that is the theory in which you've gauged k has a higher form symmetry. That's
a currently popular language that one can use to describe it. So in that sense, the theory in
which k is gauged has different symmetries than the theory in which only g is gauged.
But that only happens because you took multiple copies and then did a different projection.
That's right. Yes. Okay. But if not the original theory, I just wanted to be clear.
That's your theory. You are getting a different theory when you gauge k. Thank you. Yeah.
All right. So let me, let me, you know, let's try to proceed then about towards, towards gauging
this gamma. So the gamma partial traces labeled by two elements, two commuting elements of gamma,
they're going to be related to the g partial traces. Now I'm going to make a naive assumption
to start, which we will relax later. My naive assumption is just that, you know, under this
sequence, I can map elements of gamma to g. And the, you know, since that elements of k are supposed
to be trivially, trivially acting, then it's, it's reasonable to make a guess like this,
that the gamma partial traces are really just equal to the g partial traces that I project down
the indices. So now if I take the gamma partition function, that would be this thing, epsilon is,
you know, maybe I can include some discrete torsion. Then I can rewrite this as a sum of
g partial traces. You get some sum like this, where I'm basically just breaking up my,
my gammas into other things. And so I'll get, you know, for each g and h and g, I'll just sum
over all the sort of k, you know, everything in gamma that's related to, to those by multiplying
by elements of k. And, you know, the, in general, the sum's a little tricky, but you would get some
factors like this. If you compute these things for fixed g and h, you'll get some coefficients
that will sit in front of these g partial traces. So let's, let's work towards doing some examples
of that. So this story, by the way, and what we'll see is that this result then assembles into,
essentially a bunch of, you know, copies of theories, which are orbifolds by either g or
subgroups of g. That's the picture we're going to land on. And so that story is known as decomposition.
And it's an old story, Eric, and others have worked on for many years.
All right. So as a first example, I'm going to consider when the whole group acts trivially.
So this is also known as the orbifold of a point because you can't really do anything interesting
to a point. So, well, except maybe you do find this interesting. So we're going to take the
whole group to act trivially. In that case, every twisted sector is just isomorphic to,
you know, the original apparent theory twisted sector.
And for every operator in the original theory, that'll map, you know, there will be an isomorphism
that maps it to some operator in one of these twisted sectors. If we don't turn on discrete
torsion, then we can figure out that the gamma partition function is just n copies of the
original apparent theory partition function. So here, this is a trivial group in the top there,
and that really just means that z111 is just the original partition function, the trace over h itself.
And this factor in, you know, if we apply the formula on the previous page, we get this. And
this is actually just the number of conjugacy classes of our group K, or K being also gamma in
this case. So I'm going to call that, I'm going to relate that to something I'm going to call
K hat. K hat is going to be the set of isomorphism classes of irreducible representations of K.
And it's a well known fact that the, the number of elements in that set, the number of isomorphism
classes for a finite group is equal to the number of conjugacy classes.
All right. So for example, if K is abelian, then it's just a bunch of single element conjugacy
classes. So n there is just the order of K, and you get K copies of your parent theory.
So your copies are labeled by the group elements, your symmetry just shuffles you between copies,
as we were saying. And so that's just what you get. K is non abelian.
Sorry Daniel, all this talk is only for discrete groups.
Very good. In this, in this topic, in this talk, I'm focusing on, on finite groups. Yes,
sorry, I should have said that much earlier. I think some of it generalizes, but we, we have
not given it a lot of thought here. All right. What sort of representations do you wish to
entertain? Are they going to be unitary or will you allow projective representations,
things like this? Here, here I'm just ordinary, you know, group theoretic complex representations.
So you require it to be matrices in GLV or reaction in GLV. You won't allow, you won't
allow PGLV. Not, not yet. Good. So we'll appear later. That will play a role later, actually.
But right now, it's just ordinary representations, not projective ones.
So we lose no generality by taking your, the standard interrupts.
Yes, exactly. Yeah. Okay. Okay. Thank you.
So if K is not a million, then what we have to do is count commuting pairs. So for instance,
if you do S3, well, the identity commutes with everything. So that gives you six pairs of the
first elements, the identity. If you have a two cycle, then that only commutes with itself and
the identity. And if you have a three cycle, it only commutes with this. So all together,
there's 18 commuting pairs. And so the S3 orbifold, in this case, gives you, you know,
one sixth times 18 times the original partition function. So you just get three number of
consciously classes. Okay. Everything's working. So as a first generalization, now let's try to
add discrete torsion to this story. So for example, I can take K is Z2 cross Z2. So that
has the option to turn on some of this discrete torsion.
So the non-trivial element in that case gives phases that just flip the sign of the partial
traces where the two indices are both not the identity and not equal to each other. So all
of those partial traces get their sign flipped. And the others don't. And so if you compute the
partition function now, in this sum, you get 10 terms with a plus one and six terms with a minus
one, which gives you four. You get a one over four out front from the order of the group. And so you
just get the parent theory by itself. And so this shows that, you know, even though I am extending
my symmetry by something that acts trivially, I don't always get copies. So without discrete
torsion, I got a bunch of copies. I got a number of conjugacy classes. But here now with discrete
torsion, in this particular example, I don't get multiple copies. I just get the original theory
back on the notes. So that's already, I think, a little bit interesting. So in general, now let's
go to a more general story. It's going to be pretty similar. So now what will happen is
when I turn on discrete torsion and gamma, the answer is not going to be anymore just the number
of ordinary irreps. What I need to do, in fact, is pull omega back to K or restrict omega to K.
And then look at the representations of K that are projective with respect to, you know, i star omega.
So yeah, let me try to go through that. So and then
so I need to count the number of those projective irreps and that'll tell me how many copies I get
in this theory where everything acts trivially. So let me go through that in the Z2 cross Z2 case
as well. So first of all, just a definition. I say that a representation of K is well, an omega
projective representation of K, where omega is some two-cocycle on K, is basically just a vector
space V and a map row from K to GLB. But row is not going to be a homomorphism now. It's going to be
a projective representation. So these omegas are phases and they only satisfy the group
multiplication law up to those phases. Now, if you just, you know, try to define this, you know,
without, you know, for any group, you can try to define such things and you can ask, you know,
do any phases work? The answer is not quite. There's consistency conditions. So for instance,
these rows really should just be matrices. Matrix multiplication is associative and that puts a
condition on these omegas. Turns out to be exactly the co-cycle condition. Omega has to be co-closed.
Conversely, given any co-closed omegas, you can look for representations that are
projective in this sense and you can always find them. You can always construct such representations.
There's a construction analogous to the regular representation that you can do.
And, you know, you can again define irreducible in the usual sense and isomorphic in the usual sense
and look for isomorphism classes of irreducible projective representations.
One extra fact. Well, so actually, let me just go for Z2 cross Z2. So if I take that non-trivial
discrete torsion choice or non-trivial 2-co-cycle again, sorry, I gave you the discrete torsion
phases before. The corresponding 2-co-cycle has i or minus i. Up to isomorphism, the only
projective irreducible representation turns out to be something like this, where basically,
you're just mapping things to the poly matrices. So that's a nice fact about Z2 cross Z2 that you
can prove. And note that, so this is the only projective irrep and it's two-dimensional.
It is, in fact, a general statement that if the co-cycle is non-trivial in H2,
then you don't get any one-dimensional projective irreps. You only get higher-dimensional ones.
So that may play, that'll play a role down the line.
Okay, so we basically exhausted the story that we can tell for the case where the whole group
acts trivially. But now it turns out that the structure again gets a bunch richer if we look
at the case where just a subgroup acts trivially. So it should again be true Z gamma should now
decompose in orbifolds, as we were discussing before, orbifolds by subgroups of G, where G is
gamma mod K. So again, our example where we extend Z2 trivially up to Z2 cross Z2.
If we don't turn on discrete torsion and we compute the Z2 cross Z2 orbifold,
we just get four copies of each of the G partial traces. And so this just gives us four copies
of Z2 orbifold. That was the story without discrete torsion that I reviewed before.
Four disjoint copies in some sense, with a one-form symmetry that swaps them around.
If you do turn on the discrete torsion, however, in Z2 cross Z2, and now only one of the Z2s
acts trivially, so what you get is you again get the guys that reduce to the identity partials,
the one-partial trace in G all come with a plus sign, but the ones that reduce to
the non-trivial partial traces in G come with, of the four copies, two of them come with plus
and two come with minus. So these minuses are the six terms from the gamma partial trace that
got minus signs from the discrete torsion, and they all now cancel out exactly. And so again,
we just get one copy of the parent theory. That was the story we did before. Well, actually
slightly different now. So here we still get one copy of the parent theory, even though it's not
the whole group acting trivial. All right, so a more complicated example, you can go to, you know,
start with Z2 cross Z2 and extend it up to the dihedral group of order 8. So that dihedral group
has a discrete torsion you can in principle turn on. And if you go through the exercise again,
just like we've been doing, what you find is that if you don't turn on discrete torsion,
you get two copies of the Z2 cross Z2 orbital. But it turns out those two copies in that case
are not identical. One of them has discrete torsion turned on, and one does not. So that was
an old story. Now you can ask, well, what if I turn on discrete torsion up here in D4?
That's a question that hadn't been asked before. In that case, you find that the whole partition
function just gives you one copy of a Z2 orbital, Z2 subgroup of G.
All right. Okay. Very good. Let's do one more example. So if I take S4, that's got an interesting
normal subgroup of Z2 cross Z2 that I can declare extravially. In that case, the sort of real
symmetries, the one that's gamma mod K is just S3. S4, again, has a discrete torsion you can
turn on. That's a computation that can be done. If you don't turn on the discrete torsion and you
do this decomposition story, you get two disjoint theories. One is the parent theory and one is
the S3 orbital. If you do turn on the discrete torsion up in S4, the only term you get is the
S3 orbital. So there's a bunch of copies. All of these, once I've shown you how to do it with an
explicit case like the Z2 cross Z2 up here, it just goes the same way for all. It's easy to
just play this game and generate a bunch of examples and that we did. But we can now actually
give sort of an algorithm to get the answer in general. So this is a bit conjectural.
It works in all the examples we've checked and it passes a bunch of consistency checks,
but we haven't actually proven that it's always correct. So here, the given data is you've got some
extension, short exact sequence, so you extend G by a trivially acting K to some group gamma.
I'm going to need to label my maps on inclusion of K into gamma and projection of gamma down to G.
And I'm also going to need to pick a section lifting G back up to gamma. Nothing will depend
on the choice of section as usual, but I need to give it a name in order to state certain things.
And we're going to pick a choice of discrete torsion inside the gamma.
And so now we're going to ask what happens when you gauge this gamma?
Well, step one is pull back omega to K and find the set of irreducible
projective representations of K with respect to i star omega.
Now, the next step we're going to have to do is we're going to have to actually construct
a G action on that set. That can be done, it takes a little bit of work. So what you do is if
phi is some projective irrep, and s is my section, then sort of in the case where we
didn't have discrete torsion, there was a construction like this where you basically
just apply phi to the action. This is G dot phi on K would naturally be phi of G inverse
acting on K and G inverse would act on K just by conjugation. And so without these omega factors,
that's what you would normally have. Here, basically, we're going to need to include
some omega factors, and I'll say why in a moment. But then this defines some lg phi,
and basically these omega factors were picked so that lg phi is also projective with respect to
the same omega. If I didn't include these omega factors, I would have gotten a projective with
respect to a different co-cycle that differed from omega by a co-boundary, but I can basically
undo that co-boundary shift with these pre-factors here. Okay, so that, you know, give it a phi.
It now gives me lg phi as another projective representation. It turns out this is not actually
a good group action on projective representations because lg1, lg2 is not equal to lg1, g2.
But they're isomorphic as representations, as projective representations, and so this does
give lift to a good group action on khat i star omega, the set of isomorphism classes of projective
irreps. All right, so now that you have a G action on this set, you can decompose it into orbits.
In each orbit, you can pick some representatives. So row A here is a projective representation.
The square brackets means it's isomorphism class. And then you can find the stabilizer
of that orbit, basically, of that representative.
And so every orbit that you take is going to lead to a copy in the final set of things.
So that copy will be an orbifold by GA. And in general, there will be some discrete torsion
turned on. I'm not going to give you the rule for that. Basically, from this lg phi, you construct a
you can sort of lift it to a representation on gamma that is also projective. And from the
co cycle from that representation, you can extract a discrete torsion. But basically,
there's some explicit concrete calculation you can do to get the discrete torsion in each copy as
well. So you can see our papers for details of that. And that's that's the rule. So in the z2
cross z2 case, for instance, there was just one projective irrep. So there's obviously only one
orbit, the G action on it had to be trivial and was. And the stabilizer of that guy is
sorry.
It works. It all works very nice. So the software that works in all examples we checked,
and that's what I wanted to say. Yeah, sorry. The example I did before wasn't quite of this form,
because k wasn't z2 cross z2. But if I did an example like that, it works as well.
All right. So that's that's basically that was the first of the papers this year was
introducing that generalization of the decomposition story to add in this possibility
to discrete torsion. And one of the consequences was you don't always get multiple copies,
you might just get one copy of your theory. All right.
I want to turn the structure of the novels. Oh, yeah, go ahead.
Is that this G action you constructed is a unique or are there different choices?
That's a great question. I
So the if if I may the algorithm is completely predictive.
There may be different presentations, you may be able to get the same result by playing different
games. You know, just as a dumb example, if my if I start with a G and I pretend that it's
acts effectively and extended by K. But then later on, maybe I discover G itself has a further
trivially acting subgroup. I mean, there are various interlocking games you can play.
But the algorithm Daniel has outlined is completely projected. You specify a gamma and an element of
discrete torsion. And this gives you a precise formula for all the constituent orbitals,
as well as the discrete torsion on each of those pieces. It's it's yeah.
Sure, I understand. But I have choices at some of the steps that that's part of that.
The choices don't matter. So for example, I think at some point, Daniel mentioned the choice of
section that doesn't enter the choice of section cancels out by the time you get to the end.
So there are various choices. You have to make it intermediate steps, but none of them change the
final result. Yeah, I believe well, wait, what if I had taken the trivial extension and taken
the trivial group action? Well, the trivial extension is fine. So in that case, the group
actions trivial. Okay, but then you have a different gamma. So for a fixed gamma. So if you start with
a fixed gamma and a fixed G and a fixed K, and a fixed omega and degree to call homology of gamma,
that gives a unique prediction for the result. The choice of section is arbitrary. So the choice
of section enters that formula for the left action. Yes, I understand that. Okay, got it.
Yeah. Okay, thanks. Is the end of the day, is this is doing turning on some non-trivial
background valued in K? For the theory that you started with?
Not really. This really is gauging a trivial group action. It's basically this is an example of
introducing a, these are all games in theories with higher form symmetries. And I don't really
know how to understand a higher form symmetry in general is turning on as giving a verb to
a ordinary background gauge field. I wouldn't. No, no, no. Okay, so let's set it another way. So
when you said G acts trivially, do you mean acts trivially on local operators? Yeah. Or do you
mean? Operators. So good. So then you can have a subgroup of G, let's say the center symmetry,
for example, which can act non-trivially online and other stuff as a higher form symmetry.
And it pops up. So for example, d-brains, we could talk about d-brains in these cases.
In that gamma orbifold, to specify the d-brain, we have to specify an action of gamma, not just G,
which means we have to specify an action of K. Sorry, let me just finish my question along the
slide. So then if you take K and you turn on and you gauge in K, shouldn't that be thought of
as just turning on some, for example, non-trivial lines, which you can also think of as turning on.
Right, gauge in K is turning over all background configurations for K.
Yeah, which can be also thought about as turning on a line can be mapped to turning
on a non-trivial background, valued in the group. That I completely agree with, yeah.
So in the end, what you say you're doing, you have group G and you take a subgroup
and you sort of turn on background for that. I guess that would be the statement.
No, no. So there's two different ways that you can think of it. You can say I've got a group
gamma that includes a trivially acting subgroup. And then I'm gauging gamma. So any configuration
of gamma lines is equivalent to a background gauge field. And if I want to gauge it,
then I should sum over all such configurations. The other way of looking at it is I've got a
symmetry G and I'm going to extend it by sort of declaring that I have these extra trivially
acting lines. Yeah, but trivially on local operators. And thinking carefully about how
they act on non-local things, that's going to play a role at the end of the talk.
But again, any kind of insertion of lines is, as you say,
essentially equivalent to turning on a background gauge field. Yes.
Okay. So in a sense, when you say gamma acts trivially,
you just meant extra trivially on local operators. And then you're just trying to understand the
global structure for the gauge group and how should you piece out the different components,
the different sort of sectors of the theory that you would get by turning on
these non-trivial background. In a sense, you're picking a global structure for the gauge group.
Yeah, essentially. I agree with that. Thank you.
So, yeah. Sorry, before you go on, I have a different question about this bit.
A stupid question. Did you actually need a new point of view with the defect lines in
on this? Or could you? Not yet for this part, really. Yeah. So the defect lines will play a
larger role in this part of the of your work could have been done many years ago.
Yes. Yeah, yeah, yeah. That's right. In some sense, adding in discrete torsion to this decomposition
story, I think could have been done indeed. Because just the new point of view reinvigorated
the field and so you decided. Well, so yeah. So I'm telling things a little bit out of order. So
I'm going to, you know, with anomalies now, I'm going to kind of, yeah. So let me, let me, if you're,
if you still have questions at the end, pardon me again. Yeah. So anomalies play into a role
into this story. So in terms of lines, that's, I think, a nice way to understand how the anomalies
work. Basically, you know, this picture and this picture no longer have to be equal, you know,
for at least for a given choice of basis vectors, they could differ by a phase. So the way I like
to think of it is that this is sort of an analog of OPEs, right? In an OPE, if you've got some,
some local operators, you know, here and here, you can draw a circle around them. And that should
be equivalent to having just a local operator inside the circle, because whatever, whatever
happens inside the circle, you can encode into a state on the circle and by the state operator map
that's equivalent to a local operator inside. So in our situation here, again, the same kind
of thing, I could draw a circle around this, all I know is that I've got these four lines coming out.
And so that has to be equivalent to some picture where I've just got a four valence vertex.
If I have topological vectors at my junctions, then that four valence vertex would also need
to have a topological vector. But I could have played the same game. And so since the topological
vectors, you know, vector spaces are one dimensional, if I pick a basis, then basically,
this picture can just be, you know, related to a phase. But this picture can also be related
to just a phase if I reduce it to a four valence vertex. But it might not be the same phase.
So these pictures may differ just by a phase. Now, because we're restricting to topological
cases, that means the product of the four lines around that circle has to be the identity, if I'm
in the effective case, this is the usual story. These are G lines, not gamma lines.
So that means the fourth one is just fixed in terms of the first three. And so that phase
is really a map from G cross G cross G into U1. Or in other words, it's a three co-chain.
Then you can play the usual sorts of games that people drawing these pictures playing. You can
there's a pentagon identity, where if you've got five incoming lines, you can, you know, sort of
do a cyclic shift around them and end up back at the same picture you started with.
But you find that you get five factors of a omega or omega inverse. And so those fact that product
has to equal one. And that is precisely the condition that omega is actually a co-cycle.
Similarly, if I change my basis vectors at my trivalent junctions, you find that omega shifts by
you know, something in terms of two co-chains. It turns out to shift exactly by the co-boundary
of those two co-chains. And so that part is, you know, should be inessential. And so we find that
the anomalies, you know, in these phases relating these two pictures are basically classified by H3
G. That's our usual story. And so if you go back to this picture I had here, where I did the,
you know, modular transformations for these partial traces, in this last step down here,
when I do this trivalence exchange, I'm going to get a phase. Okay. So my modular transformations
are not really going to close the way I expect them to anymore. And so you can see this very easily in,
you know, nice clean examples. Take G is Z2. That admits the possibility of an anomaly. H3 Z2,
1 turns out to be Z2. And so if you've got a symmetry that has that anomaly, what you find is
that, you know, although you can, you know, build these partial traces, you can just define them
like this, but they won't sort of the modular invariance won't really obey the group law.
So I would have wanted this to be Z1, 2. And if 2 is the same as 0, if I really had a Z2,
that should have been equal to Z10 with a plus sign, but it wasn't. So one way of sort of,
so this failure here has, you know, is also a venerable story. So this happens often
in asymmetric orbitals. So one, you know, sort of, I would say the simplest example I know where
this will show up is if you take just a compact boson. And if you do a translation that is a
mixture, sorry, if you, if you do a symmetry that's a mixture of sort of a translation and a dual
translation, you can pick such a guy that is order two, but you find that this happens.
What we say is that that element is anomalous. So there's a mixed anomaly in the free boson between
the, you know, ordinary and dual translations, if you like. And so you can just, you know,
compute these partial traces and see that this is true. In the old literature, this is called
a failure of level matching. We say that, you know, this orbital doesn't lead to a modular
invariant partition function. And I think the point of view in a lot of the old literature is
just that, okay, we need to just discard it. Another way of saying it is that that symmetry
was anomalous, right? We shouldn't gauge anomalous symmetries. And so, you know, we shouldn't have
been trying to construct this orbital partition function anyway. I can still define these partial
traces by this sort of diagram. And then it's just they satisfy this. And so I can't build my
orbital partition function in the usual, in the usual way. But there's sort of a resolution here,
you know, inspired by this whole decomposition story, which is that, well, I can just say
what's actually happening is that I didn't have a z2. I thought it was a z2, but actually it was a
z4. And the z2 sum group of z4 just acted trivially. So I didn't see it in terms of the physical
symmetries on my original theory. But that's fine. And indeed, so if you look at this extension,
you can pull the anomaly back to z4, and you find that it's actually trivial.
So z4, perfectly well-defined, not anomalous, and you can gauge by it. So what's happening here is
that this z12, I just define it essentially in terms of modular transformations, z10 of tau plus
two. And, you know, it happens to equal minus z10. But then if I just construct my z4 partition
function, I get a bunch of cancellations, and I end up with just the parent theory. So
basically, I'm saying, you know, you bring me this symmetry, and you say it's anomalous,
so you can't gauge it. And I say the hell I can't gauge it. I'm extending it by something
trivial, and then it's not anomalous, and I'll gauge that. But of course, at the end of the day,
there's not, you know, I'm not getting anything new. I'm just getting the original parent theory,
because I didn't have any non-anomalous symmetries, so there's no way I could get anything else.
And in fact, so this story was what inspired Thomas and I in the first of those papers I listed.
We were trying to think about asymmetric orbifolds, and we had this picture, you know,
if you're not working just with some simple free field situation, then it can be really
annoying to try to construct all those twisted sectors, and then check level matching and so on
and so forth. But in many cases, you know, you can just use the modular transformations. You
can start with the untwisted sector partial traces, which you can just get as actual traces over
Hilbert space, and then just start generating things with modular transformations. If there's
discrete torsion, this doesn't work because there are orbits, there are partial traces you'll never
get this way, orbits that are disconnected from the untwisted sector. But if there's no partial,
sorry, there's no discrete torsion possibility, if H2 is trivial, then you can in principle
sort of generate everything at the risk of possibly enlarging your group. In fact, to put it very
sort of a bit more explicitly, if it's a cyclic group, formally, if you lift it to the integers,
the integers have H2 and H3 are both trivial. And so there's no discrete torsion, there's no
possible anomaly. And so you can always kind of just say, I'm just going to lift my symmetry to
the integers and declare that a bunch of them act trivially and try to gauge that integer symmetry.
And you get an infinite number of copies, but then you realize that in fact you can just extend
it by a finite symmetry and do the same thing. And this always works, but it never gives anything
really new. At the end of the day, you always get something that's either the parent theory
or gauging some non-anomalous subgroup of G.
So what was the magic sauce that let us do this at the end of the day, completely uninteresting
thing? Well, it's because we relaxed that assumption before that the gamma partial traces were just
equal to the G partial traces. Now there's an extra phase here. And I'm calling it epsilon again,
but it's not the same as discrete torsion in general. This is a different sort of thing.
So you can ask how general can these phases be? It turns out that they're basically determined
by an element in, well, essentially H1G, H1KU1. Now that's a messy thing, but let's say we,
if we restrict to central extensions, which I think I mostly will be through this discussion,
then H1KU1 is just sort of the Poincare dual of K, it's just isomorphic to K.
And so that's a nice simple situation. And then those phases are basically just the ratio of two
B is very similar to how the discrete torsion phases are a ratio of omega.
So here I've taken a decomposition of any element in gamma, I've written it as, you know,
basically something in G and something in K that requires a choice of section, but you can do it,
and then you can define your phases this way. And again, as usual, you can check that the choice of
section doesn't matter and the usual sorts of things. So in particular, if you just focus,
so this was a relation, this was phrased as a relation between gamma partial traces and G
partial traces, but that also implies relation between gamma partial traces. And in particular,
if I just take say, the G twisted sector, and the action of HK, that's going to be the same as the
trace I got from the G twisted sector with an action of H with this phase B inserted.
And so that's telling us basically, we want to interpret that as saying that although K acts
trivially on the parent theory, it acts by phases on G twisted sectors. And remember,
in terms of the parent theory, you could find the G twisted sectors as the guys at the end of lines.
And so that's also telling you that K, this, you know, trivially acting K is now
taking, being taken back to non-trivially on lines. So we call these quantum symmetry phases.
They're not quite the same as the quantum symmetries that are in the old literature,
which are basically related to discrete quantum symmetries in the old literature.
It's a bit of a different thing, but these ones are only present when you have a trivially acting
something. You need both K and G to be non-trivial in order to get something interesting here.
But in those cases, you can get them. So just have a couple more slides here.
So these phases, so let me just talk a little bit about some math. There's something called the
Linden-Hopschild-Serr spectral sequence. So this is a spectral sequence that's sort of designed
to help you compute group cohomology of group extensions. So if you want to compute the group
cohomology groups of gamma in terms of the ones from G and K, there's a spectral sequence type
construction. In principle, let's you do that in practice is pretty horrible to use.
But one of the ingredients in it is that you have a nice map, D2, which takes you from that
group classifier quantum symmetry phases into the group classifying anomalies in G.
That's kind of cute. In fact, there's also a map. If you're in the kernel of this D2,
then it turns out there's another map that sends you into the discrete torsion
phase group for gamma. And that second map is actually injected. So what that's saying is,
first of all, if B is in the kernel of D2, then B can be essentially made equivalent to just a
choice of discrete torsion and gamma. But the interesting thing is when B is not in the kernel
of D2, in that case, D2 of B is some possible anomaly in G. And if you pick a B that actually
maps to a given anomaly, there's also that will only work if the anomaly lifted to something trivial.
So if you're in the image of D2, then it's an anomaly that is sort of resolved by a given extension.
Great.
I'm not sure if I'm the only one having problems.
Yes, I also don't hear.
I don't hear.
I'm back.
My apologies.
Let me share a screen.
If you pick a B that maps by D2 into the anomaly that got resolved
and things work, you can play the same games we had before.
You can do decomposition with these symmetry phases.
And there we have also a conjectured algorithm.
I'm not going to go through the details.
It's sort of a little less unified than the one we have for discreet
torsion. But again, it seems to work in all examples.
But finally, I also want to say one more, maybe one more point here.
Even when it's just discreet torsion,
it turns out we can still resolve an anomaly.
And this will sound a little weird and may bother some people,
but hear me out.
So suppose G is anomalous.
So let me take this example where my Z2 is anomalous,
and I'm going to extend it just with the trivial extensions.
So I just have a K and my extension is just Z2 cross Z2.
So if I pull back the anomaly from here,
it will be an anomaly in gamma.
So gamma is anomalous.
And conventional wisdom is I should not be able to quotient byte.
However, if I turned on discreet torsion and gamma,
which in this case is equivalent to turning on one of these quantum
phases for some choice of quantum phase.
We already saw that, you know, for this trivially,
K is trivially acting.
What you get is just equivalent to the parent theory itself,
not the G orbifold, just the original parent theory.
And that, you know, so the end result that the decomposition
predicts is not an attempt to take an orbifold by an anomalous
group.
And so you could ask, well, maybe it was okay.
And indeed, we're sort of thinking about now,
basically what happens is that because you've got this trivially
acting subgroup, because you've got more junctions where you could
put topological vectors, it turns out that there's a way of doing
your gauging, even though gamma was anomalous.
So you can kind of sidestep the anomaly by picking some,
you know, the vectors where these, you know,
lines join up by picking them appropriately.
So that's that sort of work in progress.
And so I think I will more or less just end it there,
I guess, and ask if there are any more questions.
Thank you.
Thank you. Let's thank virtually otherwise.
Daniel for the very nice talk.
Any further questions?
I might have missed it, but I might have missed it,
but is there like a 3D TQFT you can talk about in this context that
characterizes the anomalies or not?
Well, I think so.
So, yeah, so you're talking about just sort of extending the 2D CFT
with a 3D TFT to classify the anomalies.
I think so, but I haven't given that a lot of thought yet.
There should be a picture like that,
but I don't know how it interfaces with the trivially acting subgroup
story.
So let me just add a word or two. There is a procedure in the literature
due to Wang Widen Widen and Tachikawa and Daniel and Thomas may well
correct my references that extends to higher dimensions.
So formally just at a mathematical level,
you can extend to a gamma and then play some games to resolve the anomaly.
The details of this particular story,
the decomposition in particular are specific to two dimensions.
I don't expect a decomposition to work in three or more dimensions
because the higher form symmetry is wrong.
But I think that's not,
that might be slightly different than what John was asking.
Maybe I misunderstood your question, John.
Sorry about that.
There's a usual lore that you talk about the anomalies in terms of
like a one higher dimensional TQFT.
So I'm still talking about your 2D system.
I just want to understand better what the anomalies are.
There absolutely should be a story there and I,
we haven't worked it out again.
So I think that that would be quite interesting.
And actually Eric's reminded me,
so I was really bad with giving references throughout this talk,
but so in addition to, you know,
learning about the TDLs from Chang L.
Yeah, there was this Wang Widen paper that sort of had similar ideas
about extending groups to trivialize anomalies.
And there was also work by Barwatch, Tachikawa,
and by Tachikawa solo that did a lot of other similar sorts of things
about resolving anomalies that we are, you know, inspired us.
Can I ask another question?
Yeah, please.
What about super symmetric systems?
Is it a completely independent story or not?
It's not clear to me that it is.
So with the caveat that I haven't really given that any thought,
basically, I think it should be just orthogonal.
I think, I think this is just a story about.
The CFT and the S wouldn't change much, but.
Yeah, I agree. I would expect super symmetry to just go along for the ride
unless you were doing something particularly obscure.
Yeah, would there might be an interesting story where you,
you know, look at.
Trivially acting fermionic symmetries or something, I don't know, but yeah.
That probably doesn't make sense.
All right.
So in this last and what you showed us in this last slide,
and so this is really a way to resolve an anomaly.
It's not an accounting trick or sleight of hand.
I mean, you.
Yeah, so.
What's going on physically?
I mean, can you.
Yeah, great.
So a version. Yeah.
Let me.
So one.
One story that I didn't really.
Think about the time to go into is, is this, you know,
there's this very nice picture in, again,
in the language of TDLs for how you should think about the gauging.
And what you do there is you take your collection of topological defect
lines.
And you try to construct what,
what is sometimes called an algebra object.
So this is the line. So in the usual story,
what you do is you take the sum of all the, you know,
the direct sum of lines corresponding to all your group elements.
And you can think of that as an, you know,
basically a projection operator onto invariant states.
But it'll be some line. So some, you know, a.
Basically like this.
And then you insert a,
so on any remote surface for any correlation function to get the
correlation function in the gauge theory,
you just take a sufficiently fine kind of.
You know,
a kind of, you know,
a triangulation or something of a and just put,
or the remote surface and put a on every line.
And you want this to be sort of consistent. So there, you know,
you need a to sort of.
Be able to resolve.
Nicely in the standard way.
And a has to kind of act as a projection operators.
If you take a with itself, you should just get a back.
And in this, this language.
You just choose a and you choose your.
Vectors at all your junctions of a lines.
Then to gauge the theory, you just put a everywhere you can.
And so in particular to compute the tourist partition function,
that's exactly what we were doing.
It's just we decomposed it into, you know, all the pieces in this sum.
Those were the different sums in our, you know,
those are all those different ZGH's.
And that's exactly what we were doing.
And so a key ingredient in that is, you know,
choosing the vectors that go.
The topological vectors that go at these junctions.
And, you know, for an a like this guy.
If the symmetry acts effectively.
There's not a lot you can do at those junctions.
Basically, but that's where discreet torsion goes.
For instance, as you can,
you can encode the discreet torsion in those junction vectors.
So one of the reasons when you've got a trivially acting subgroup is
that now these junction vector spaces are larger.
There are many more, you know,
combinations of pieces of a,
that give you the possibility for topological junction vectors.
And so what I believe is going to be the case,
but we haven't really worked out the details yet.
Is that in a case like this.
I think that's where we have this anomalous Z two cross Z two,
because of the trivially acting subgroup.
I can pick an algebra object.
That sort of sidesteps the anomaly.
Even though it's a sum of all the.
All the different lines.
That's right. It's still, yeah,
it's still very much the usual kind of gauge procedure in,
in at least in this language of it.
You just pick an algebra object and then go from there.
It's just that now we have a larger choice of the algebra objects to
pull from because of the trivially acting.
And that's where this trick is really hiding.
Cool.
Thanks very much for the invitation.
By the way,
perhaps I can now stop the recording and we can maybe wait.
Wait a second to see if the.
