hi friends as you can see I'm controlling train simulator with a midi pad from
Akai. Here's the gas. Station is coming.
Press the horn.
Hit the brake.
I'm already slow. I'm not the best train driver by the way as you can see.
Okay, let's come to a stop and open the doors with this one. Wait for the stop.
Door is opening. Turn off the wiper. No, wrong button. Sorry. This is the interface down here.
Where is it? Don't remember? Well, the direction lever. The brake is not applied in this kind of
train and the fuse. This I forgot also. Okay, how can this be done? Just watch this video.
First of all, many thanks for your feedback and your suggestions of the for the initial version of
midi key to key. Now this here is the magical thing. And if you never heard about midi key to key,
make sure you watch the first video that tells you the basic use of that program. For now,
I'm show you the version 1.9, many new features and bug fixes. And let's talk about quickly about
the bug fixes. I have a title in activated by OBS, the bug fixes. So there is all these small
things. The channel is in this here. 1216. They did not save, but nobody complained it. I found
it and now they are saved in the settings. And the second thing is, if you have an action and
react on the second value, it's used rarely. Normally, you only react on the first value,
the first data value. This was not stored. It didn't work. Nobody complained because
you won't use it very often. So now, what's new? The great new features.
Yeah. Where to start with? Okay. You have had one settings file, your settings in it that
stored all your settings and the settings of the actions, the key actions, the midi actions.
Now you have multiple actions. If you start midi key to key the first time, it just stores
automatically its settings, the settings in your documents folder. And that's it. Now you can have
several inis or settings file. And where are they? In the file menu, you can now load a custom,
a different settings file. Here we are documents, your username documents, midi key to key.
You can load a different setting and save as a different setting. You don't need to type any
in the end. It does it automatically. They all need to be here to be found automatically.
And then second new feature is you can start up midi key to key with a special
settings file. If you have a shortcut like this,
just add at the end a name of a path,
my setting, any, if it has white spaces, you need to surround to surround it.
Okay. So now it will load my setting. This file is not existing. This is an example,
but you can easily create a shortcut like this.
And it starts at your desktop. And name will be,
for example, new setting. So as you can see, it made a shortcut and called it new setting. And
yeah, it sets the actual any file. This is the default right now, as you can see in the headline,
in the top line of the program settings, any, therefore, it just says settings.
Okay. So multiple settings files. The next thing is, since I'm using this archive
pad APC mini, this one has the feature to let the button slide up,
which the Cork Nanopad didn't have. And well, it needs to receive midi commands to light up
the buttons. In that case, it wants to have note on events. And you can have three colors, green,
red, and yellow, and same blinking. And you can send turn it off. So midi key to key needed to
send out midi. Here we are. Now we can choose the output device for sending out midi commands.
This is the old input. And now you need to have an output device.
And now when you have an action fired, you can, in addition of a key command or start program
action, now define a midi command that is sent out and you can send whatever you want.
I'll show you that later. You even can send two different midi commands. They toggle each time
you fire the action. Next thing is the mirror midi. This is just a small feature. It mirrors the
midi into the midi out. In the case of the APC, it does nothing because I need to push the start
button. You see it mirrored my in command of that key and that lets the archive APC mini
turn on the green default light. When I press it again, nothing happens. It stays now on at that
state. That's the mirror out. That's new. Yeah. Besides the edit the action, the action that you
choose here, besides this, now you have a test button. You can test your action. Let's start
text editor to see what's happening. Let's test the view button from the train simulator.
Now the problem is if I push the test button with the mouse, the editor loses now
the focus and you won't see the letter I'm typing. Then let's go to
this action that you can see.
That pushed an action to OBS. Now that's for testing. That's new. And also new is now
the name or as it was shown, the actions was the midi bytes. And now APC84 is my reminder.
This is 8, 4. This is this knob. And now you can name your action. It's down here.
Whatever you want, hit save and the name will appear now in this list. You can now better find
actions if you have a lot like this.
Next new thing is
if you have a start program action, watch the first video to check this out.
Now you can choose the state of the action of the program started. Normal is just a normal window,
is the max window, maximized and minimized or even hidden. These four states you can store.
And the program that you want to start by an action will have this window state.
Some users want to fire up a command box like cmd or let's define a new action.
Let's take the top here.
I call this round right one. I'll find it at the test. That's the first thing and
we're going to have program action.
Command window, the working directory needed and this is the command.
I do a paint now. First in normal state, save. Okay, now hit this one.
This is opening the window in the normal state. I'll edit this action.
Maximized,
is maximized as you can see. Well, and you can believe me, the other actions
minimized or even hidden are also working, but you won't see anything.
Let's turn that off. So, and if you now have a send MIDI action defined,
the program works now as a universal MIDI converter. It listens to a special input
MIDI event and then sends out any MIDI out command or even sequences as long as you wish
of MIDI commands. This is done with this new tab, send MIDI and there are many controls,
but it's easy to handle. First of all, activated. Now this is still our test button.
To light this up, I know it's 9052. This is the note on and the number of this.
And now zero one makes it green. The round buttons, I believe they are only can be green and these
only can be red. So the other will have zero one up to zero six for the colors and blink and not
blink. So now the MIDI command I put in is 9052 zero one. That's it. It all will be sent all the time.
So this would be would have an effect just on the first time because it stays now on.
You won't see difference. For this,
I have a toggle section B is a command that will be executed the next time.
So 9052 zero to turn it off.
Off, on, off, on.
So these buttons here are defined to change the
the fuse of train simulator and these to change the scenes of OBS. You see this one becomes red
and the active one is green blinking. Now this needs when pressing this an action of seven
commands that makes them all steady green and this one blinking.
I have this in the
eight one eight one.
So this is the command.
You see they are all to five in the end except the first one is three.
Second time is not defined. It's only the first time and then if we check all the others,
where's the A2? Anyway,
they are all five to, oh no, this is this one here.
It's the few two.
They're all set to one except now the second one is set to two to make it blink like this.
So if we edit then our test button here up in the corner again,
this is what you can do just by typing any commands and if you do a second command just one space
and please nothing else. So this is executed very quickly but if you want to wait
a little you can add a pause in milliseconds. So let's say 300.
I'll add now it adds this in the end. It's just where you can cut this out.
I messed it up. So like this. It always puts commands in the end. Now it sends this color
command means off then wait 300 milliseconds and then turn on the green light again.
Check it out.
It doesn't work.
Why is this not working?
Oh push the totally wrong number. 52.
It turns on after 300 milliseconds.
You can create sequences of
hundreds of commands with a pause in between so you could turn the whole matrix of lights into
showing letters and scrolling left to right and create light shows just for fun.
So if you won't use the input pad manually by typing in hex commands you see now it's only
numbers but it's still bytes of hex so after the nine comes nine A, nine B, nine C and so on.
You can remove the last or
oh I hit the save thing now or remove everything.
Oh this was not a really not a command.
So just type in
R as a valid command to remove last or clear all. So if you want don't like to type in manually
you can use these input boxes. Now note on is the first thing and you can if you know the
hex value of a key you can just use this or choose the key down here. Note on and then
note on needs another value. If you push add please enter a value this is the velocity
25 add. So then let's turn this note on or just
let it sound for half a second and then turn it off.
Off needs no data but it doesn't matter anything is in so and that's it. This will play is C3
for half a second and turn it off. So now
let's stop this and use the wave table synthesizer and I'm not sure if you hear it now in the video
just give it a try. You hear that?
Yeah so you can even play
songs like this. So this is note on, note off. The most common things you will use
but you can send everything and if you know something just type it in. CISX commands
are not included here. Another thing is channel mode messages. These are preformed all nodes off
with this command. It doesn't need any data so this is disabled. Local on off
reset all controllers. Omni mode on off. It's just without any data fields. It is built in command.
Polyphonic after touch. These types need to have which node do you press and
how strong is the after touch. The monophonic after touch, channel after touch only needs
how much is the whole keyboard pressed and after touch. There are many MIDI controls possible.
Control changes are very huge in number. Some require two commands in a row. Some require
14-bit data or the most of them require 7-bit data. MIDI key to key just takes anything you type in
up to 127. So everything will not make sense. You need to be an expert
for MIDI to know what you do but as you can see if you know about MIDI you can do a lot of
this or just type anything in manually here. Add pauses in between with this field or by typing P
and whatever a number of milliseconds. This is now MIDI out. The main job is to light up
MIDI controllers by sending a command to it to have a reflection what you are doing like this.
Changing scenes in OBS or whatever. This is the great new feature. Many users are asking
me about what about controllers like these faders or turning knobs. I responded well. This is a
thing they need to fire out many MIDI commands in a row on I don't know how to do it or will it
make sense and as you could see in the intro video it is working and this is maybe one of the best
new features. Now you can send a response to a controller and fire up key commands. It just fires
key commands as you can see. This controls the gas of the train A for plus and D for minus and as
you can see it even works in this window. We won't save this. Now how is this been done?
Define a new one. Let's take this. You start this is the 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 the fifth controller.
Just move it and double click now on the event it created.
I recommend giving it a name fader five. It sends keystrokes.
You just put the first keystrokes. It will send when you increase the lever.
Now hit the controller action box and now the response is brought to the second.
This is the value for decrement a controller value. Now again press the blue button and
press your other action as you can see this is now coming here. If you want to change this again
you can just type in anything manually but when you want to use the blue thing it's always
when this checkbox is on it will manipulate this input box so turn it off
and change it here when you turn this checkbox again off your shift w is not lost.
So this is just the easy thing. Now you have two keys defined. This will be fired when
the new value of by moving a controller is higher and if you move the controller fader down
the new value is lower and then the shift w is fired. Now these two things are very important.
The keyboard delay is 100 does a good job on just controlling programs and some users told me
obs studio is not responding to midi key to key and only when it has the focus
and when you use your keyboard it works even if it has not the focus. So I found out if you
have a very low keyboard delay value you can even set this to zero that means key
pressed down and up in the same moment. My obs studio is responding at about 40 and 50 milliseconds
so and if you go lower with the keyboard delay it will just respond on any actions
when it is in focus. So that's a performance problem and our system is not different.
Now when we want to have a controller action like this put it down all the way first of all check
the zero and leave the multiplier to one that means the controller will have
127 values from the bottom to the top and the multiplier to set to one fires up 127
times the key press so one to one with no delay save this and check it out if now set the focus
to the editor and move the fader see I put in a new line fader down creates w
you so and then if you set the delay to zero this reacts very quickly
so
but if you want to control a game it's different
how they respond train simulator is special it needs a little longer key press to react to
to move the gas lever and so I put this to 10 that's a thing you can experiment with
it even works on just a single key press no controller action
you can type in a value then then let's the key down for this time you put in before it release
it is to to make a key press longer but there's a problem I don't know why so far if you put it
too high over a second or something the program will not longer respond I don't know what it is
maybe it can be fixed in the future but I think it's not really important to have this right now
so keyboard delay let's see when you put it to 10 what will be the difference
now 10 doesn't really make a difference let's put it a little longer
so
see you really won't do don't want that by controlling any software but
who knows you might need it always start with a zero and the keyboard events will be fired up
immediately so the second thing is a multiplier and that's still experimental because I can't
really do anything I want to
as mentioned the MIDI standard is 127 values but if you have a lever in a software that has only
five or six different states to control you will set the multiplier lower let's say to
1.2 and this is not a point it's point or comma depending of your country I'm in Germany so I
need to type in a comma so I have the multiplier lower than one and now this is the max
you see it
it cuts the maximum numbers set it to 0.1
it cuts the amount always in half and that's the only thing it can do because it has to count
the the input events as you can see they are coming single one by one and it has just to count
10 times to wait now never fire up another keyboard action so you cannot have
you cannot have everywhere you you wish
last test of this zero zero one
yeah it's just produces one
okay if you want to have more than 170 events you only can double or times four times three times
four times five you cannot do one point five times you can send an event or you cannot send you
cannot send half of an event so let's put this to three and it will produce three times of 127
so and different software is different but you can control any software with it that responds
on key presses um oops I'm sorry
a crash
I wanted to press the edit button I don't know what quite crashed need to check this out
so set the multiplier to one and you will have a one to one respond on your
on your lever or for your controller set it lower than zero point five will only produce
about 66 key events and put it higher in whole numbers not 1.5 1.7 just one two three
will produce two times three times four times of the maximum
so I hope now that's it the new controller actions
controller actions we talked about sending midi
yeah if you use an old version of MIDI key to key and you use your old settings any
they did not have the keyboard delay value so if you just use it open it up and and use your
um MIDI pad the program program will crash because it doesn't have the keyboard delay in
your old any so if you do so create a new any start at zero I show you this right now how
it this can be done um start at zero then everything will be fine um
um or take your existing any in that case is as much open any every action with edit it will get
a default of 100 decide if this is okay or not and hit save if you do do it with all your actions
it they will have then a keyword delay and the program will not crash as I said uh start fresh
will be like this go into your documents folder and let me get an explorer
uh and rename or delete your existing settings any
in the MIDI key to key folder it's here because if it turns C
if it doesn't see any settings any it will create a new one and also I take this my setting that
is well it was all the time saying I can't find my settings sure it doesn't exist without any
part so start up MIDI key key and best practice is to start it up and close it then a new settings
any is generated and from then you can start making actions it's also recommended if you
have an existing let's open existing this train simulator thing has some actions
um and you decide to to do a new game or whatever um and you edit stuff like this
and changing things and hit save and then say and save all of this as a new setting you can
do that but remember now the the settings name that's here written in the top line
train simulator is already changed on all the actions because you hit save anytime you edit
an action and hit save this setting is written into the actual settings file so when you want to
build up a new setting based on let's say this one at first hit save as and then start editing
the actions that's the better practice and you won't lose the settings of your actions in the old
file so that's it for now all the important URLs will be shown down there for download
and for the other video for the basic video which i recommend to watch first and the home page for
download and for your respondings okay um this is the script i can't provide it well it's very
simple um
this just does the mix 64 media events for the akai this down here is just for to have
the created sequence in the clipboard and this is a little weird vbs don't have any clipboard
commands so it uses internet explorer who now runs the script and then put the result in the
clipboard and therefore this is all the code down here um the script here just creates the events
you can say set pause to one or zero that means will i have a pause in between the events zero one
how long the pause is in milliseconds and then decide what extension do you want to have
and uh i think this is red and out um no it's nothing so these three
the extension is the last value
so if i run the script now it sets a pause of 75 milliseconds in between all the
the events and uh that sets all the lights of the apc to three let's create quickly a new event
oh no device is selected because i started with a completely new um
yeah then take this little square button which does not have a light
start press it once take the note off and the note on event um do nothing
just take this send midi and where's the script now let's run the script set to one
pause one oh there it is
here's the result and at the same moment this is put into your clipboard so
paste it in and delete the last pause
okay then put it to be to turn all the lights off with a
lower pause value it goes quickly more quickly 15 and zero save
start
i don't know why this takes so long and sometimes uh there it is
it's only because of the the clipboard
you could no you cannot copy this therefore you need the clipboard anyway now we paste in this
delete the last pause p15 and that's it now we have these two sets and what will happen
let's have a look right here
it turns on all the red lights with the pause of 75 milliseconds in between when we hit it the
second time it removes them but quicker because of the lower pause so you can create your pictures
this little script if you want to download it i don't know it's just a little thing to me
write in the comments of the website or down here but i like more the website
um okay that's it thanks for watching see you next time bye bye
