Hi folks, if you own a MIDI pad like this, which I found on eBay for 15 bucks and you
want to do stuff like this, hey, OBS started and switch your scenes, you'll need a software
called MIDI Key to Key and watch this video.
So, if you have a core nano pad like this or anything else that produces MIDI, then go
to the page 75r.de slash MIDI key to key with the two as a number.
And you see the home page of my program and there's a download section here and download
this Windows install file, it goes into my downloads, it's an MSI file for Windows, there
it is, it is small, everything will go very fast.
So then open it up and if this happens, that says in English the computer is protected
because this installation file could be dangerous, but it is not, okay.
Then this is the setup wizard, copy the program into program files x86 and produces a short
cut, that's all it does.
Now it is in my start menu under the letter M, MIDI key to key and here it is.
So first of all, you need to select a MIDI input device, since this nano pad is connected
to the computer via USB, there it is, select this and then you're ready to go to produce
your action you want to do.
Just click the lock to window button and this opens up the MIDI lock and then nothing happens
because you need to push the start button.
So now it's listening to the MIDI input and you see when I play these buttons or press
the buttons, all events that are happening and the MIDI input are recorded and newer
events appear at the top of the list.
So this nano pad is set to its default settings, that means pressing a button produces a note
on event that's the same like you would play a key on your keyboard on your synthesizer
or piano.
So on what we use will be a note on event.
Each time I press a button, it produces a note on and a note off.
So you can use both of them, but we only need one.
So we take at first the first button and see how here in the list this is a note on playing
a C4 with the velocity, the speed I hit the button and now we double click this and can
reduce a keyboard action or starting a program with that.
We will start a no program, we just generate a keyboard action.
It's done by clicking into this blue gray box and then hit your special keys like control
alt or shift first.
I use control alt and shift the same time to be sure that no other program will use
these key commands.
You press the one.
You see it has received these keys and the blue box shows you what you pressed in the
white box.
You can edit these if you wish to add more special keys like windows because when I press
now the windows button, go into blue box, clear blue box, windows button, oh, yeah, I
recognize as the when L left windows button, but if you tap the tap key, it won't record
it.
It tries to do some action on this.
So if you wish to use the tap key right in tap, but normally you will use the control
alt or shift buttons.
That's all.
Plus a normal key that produces any output in your text editor, a letter, a number, whatever.
So again, control alt, shift one.
And you see the one on my main keyboard is written as D1.
If I push the numpad buttons, it will write down numpad two.
That's the difference.
So these just then type in instead of D1 numpad one.
But we will stay with that.
Now there are two other checkboxes here, react on the first value and react on the second
value.
The 9037F data on this key, a MIDI event, means 90 is a note on on channel one.
If there's another MIDI channel, your device producing this number would be different.
Even it was a note on event two.
So in the 30 and the 7F are two data fields.
The 30 means it's the key C4 and the 7F is the velocity you pressed on the pad or keyboard
because this little pad is also capable to do velocity recognition.
And what we want to do is just react on pressing a key, no matter how hard I hit the key.
So if we would turn on the second checkbox, it would react on the second value, 7F.
And to produce your action, you would need to hit the key exactly with the same velocity.
What's really hard to do.
So we ignore the second value and just take the 30, react on the first value.
That means the key C4, that's important.
So and then save the new action, 9030XX was saved.
The XX means we ignore the second value.
Okay, that's it.
So now let's have a look into OBS again.
I already programmed to have my hot key, control alt and shift plus the one to react
and switch the scene one on.
Let's see what happens.
There it is.
No other key, do anything.
It's fine for now.
Now I show you how fast it is to set all the six scenes I have to be set up in both,
in MIDI key to key and also in OBS.
So the second key, I look for the note on event, double click, shift control alt, two,
save, next three, double click, number three, save, press the four, double, four, five,
double click, five, and six, six, save, that's it.
Now in OBS, settings, hot keys, follow our scenes, the same hot keys and you see that's
done really quickly, four, five, and the number six is here.
So and maybe we mute the desktop audio, then let's take the letter S in connection with
control alt and shift and program that later on our nanopad.
So that's it.
So and this is working not only if now OBS in the foreground and has to focus, just let's
take another program, the explorer now is in the foreground has to focus, but OBS is still
recognizing our commands.
That's important.
If you play a game in stream, you don't have to bother.
So that's all it's up and running.
What you can do is close the lock window and minimize it.
It will minimize always to the tray.
And if you open the tray, here it is.
You can double click it to reopen it or right click to open its context menu.
You can open the main window, stop listening.
If you do that, no action is executed.
You can start the action again, start listening.
There it is.
Or exit the program, double click opens it.
So what else can we do?
What about starting OBS or the mute button?
I forgot that.
Now let's program the key number seven on the nanopad to mute and unmute the desktop
audio lock window.
Just one press on this key has to be done.
That's it.
You see the speaker symbol in OBS is already read means it's muted.
We can talk about that key.
Now if we want to start a program with MIDI key to key, it's no problem.
Let's program a shortcut to OBS itself.
But doing this, I will take the key number 12.
Here's the note on of this event.
We do not need a keyboard action on that.
We need to start a program.
We need to set this on active.
So you can type in a program name manually and you can choose it with this button.
This is already the directory where OBS 64 bit is in.
I take this and you see it's encapsulated because there are white spaces in and if you
have white spaces, put these around.
So some programs need to know where they live and OBS is such a program.
Without saying the working directory of the program, it won't start or reduce error messages.
So we need to know where the working directory of OBS is normally.
It is this path.
But to be sure, this is a shortcut to OBS that was generated by the OBS setup program.
And let's have a look.
This is execute in, this is the path we need.
So press Ctrl A and Ctrl C to copy and just copy it.
You also could choose this dialog box to navigate to the directory you know.
But it's always better to use a shortcut of which you know it works.
So now our path is gone again.
So here we are.
Hit save and that's it.
See what happens if we push the 12 button.
Yeah, there is OBS started and the other keys also work.
What happens if we hit it again?
Now OBS is a program that wants to be alone.
It does not allow to open a second instance.
So this is not working with OBS.
Other tools will work again.
Okay.
Now if everything is set up, you can't check Autostart listening.
That means if MIDI key is started, it's listening already and then try this, OBS starts, okay.
And if you check this, check box minimize to tray, this works only with Autostart is active.
And the program now MIDI key to key when started directly minimizes to tray.
And given this message is minimized and is listening.
So check this out.
F12 starts OBS.
And now don't be confused if we use our other buttons, they don't work.
Just once click OBS, then you can leave the focus and then they will work.
Okay, this is what we can do with the Autostart.
And what else is possible?
Now we can edit or delete an existing action.
The actions are here in this drop down.
The numbered one to eight and which MIDI data is in and which note on or any other event is shown.
Let's take the last one we made.
This is starting the OBS program, hit edit.
Now this dialogue looks almost the one when creating a new action.
Start program is active these parameters.
So now we can edit as you saw it before these or we can even add a button, a key command to it.
Save this and you will have on this MIDI node two actions at the same time.
Now this does not make much sense because when OBS starts it needs some time and the keyboard action will be executed almost at the same time.
But let's produce, let's generate a brand new one, lock to window.
Let's take the nanopad button eight, double click on this.
Let's do a keyboard shortcut.
Take the number two and start another program for small test.
Just put in, this is the calculator.
Save, okay now hit the button number eight.
It starts the calculator and at the same time it produced the key number two.
Let's do the same, switch over to scene two and start the calculator.
So you can use generate keyboard action to start a program at the same time when both is active.
And there's a third thing that's not chooseable.
It's an idea, it's prepared to work to let the buttons work like a folder.
You need open virtual folder and then hit another button that is already assigned to another action.
But think of it like a shift button.
So you can extend your 12 or 16, whatever paths you have, two more functions.
I don't know if I will put this into the program.
It's an idea.
Tell me what you think about it.
So there's a little more to explore.
These checkboxes can only be changed by stopping the listening and listen to system exclusive messages means these are special commands for MIDI devices.
Normally they dump the program settings and make special things.
This is an experimental function.
Check it out, but don't expect actions that you really can use with MIDI key to key lock to file.
Let's you choose a file and then what's in your lock window is shown will be written to that file for later analysis.
The channel listeners always on that means the program listens to all 16 MIDI channels.
You can filter channels out by turning them off.
My Nanopad is turned to switch to channel number one.
So this works.
If I set it on the channel number two, it does not show any events.
So you can filter different devices out if you want to.
And at last, this start stop menu acts the same as the start stop button here or just start stop button in the tray menu.
You can load and save settings, but this is actually not needed.
MIDI key to key, save its settings, everything you edit it automatically when you exit the program.
And it loads its settings when starting.
Save settings could be useful if you do a lot of changes and are afraid that your windows crash.
So you can save in between the settings and go on working.
The settings are stored in your documents folder.
This is the documents folder and it produces a folder called MIDI key to key.
And there's just one single file settings.
This is your settings file.
And even if you remove uninstall the program, this file will remain.
And you can copy this for backup or move it to another computer.
Uninstalling the program is easy, as you know, from their software.
Go to the system settings, the control panel, programs and features and look for MIDI key to key in the list.
MIDI key, M-I-D, here it is.
And you can say uninstall.
It's removed completely, except your settings file.
And the last thing in the help menu, you will be led to the website.
This is the main website.
Push the help button.
It opens the help side.
That's the same instruction I gave you in this video.
And you can check for update and see if the version is the last one.
Check for updates, says the checking succeeded, but your version 1.6.0.8 is the latest version.
OK, if there's a new version, go to the website and go to download and download the latest version.
You can just run the MSI installer file and there's no need to remove the old version.
You should close MIDI key to key before doing that, but it will automatically update your existing version.
So that's it for MIDI key to key.
I hope you enjoyed it and I hope you find it useful.
And if you have any comments to that, put it down below or use our feedback form, which is here.
Contact.
There are just the topics to do that.
I found it back if you find anything or I need help.
I want you to suggest a feature that's very important to me.
If you have any ideas, just fill out the form and tell me what you would like to have built into MIDI key to key or just leave a comment.
Please use this.
And in the end, please buy me a beer if you like the program.
Just a little thing.
Donations are not still not available.
I put this into just a little PayPal donate button.
So this is MIDI key to key.
I hope you find it useful.
And I show you quickly another little program I did if you are a Twitch user.
If you are a Twitch user and stream offline and stream different games all the times, you will edit your Twitch page all the time.
Now, this is saying I play Battlefield one and I'm a noob.
And if you change the games very often with Twitch control,
you can set predefined presets.
You can make new ones and now switch from Battlefield to CS Go.
Just activate.
OK, it says CS Go.
It's not enough.
This is my channel name.
Activate.
And now, channel update was successful.
And let's see what it says.
Reload the Twitch page and see Counter-Strike low level and CS Go.
OK, so you can save your presets very quickly and just select one and, say, activate.
Let's switch over to Flight Simulator.
Successful.
This is very handsome if you often switch games like I do.
So there is flying FSX online.
So you see this little tool is also nice to have.
You can download it for free from this web page, but I will provide all the links down in the comments of the video.
It's 75x.de slash dl slash Twitch control.
OK, thank you for watching.
Leave some comments and see you.
Bye bye.
