First, we should ask the question whether large language models have achieved anything,
anything in this domain. Answer, no, they've achieved zero.
Hello Street Talkers, welcome back to the channel. Today is a special episode for me
personally, an emotional episode. We've been through quite a tumultuous journey to create
this episode for reasons which will become abundantly clear pretty soon, but Noam Chomsky
is an intellectual heavyweight. He's one of my personal heroes and it truly is a dream
come true for us to have this experience of interviewing him. So anyway, I really hope
you enjoy the show today. We are coming live from Lake Como in Italy. I think this is possibly
one of the most beautiful places on planet Earth. And in a Douglas Hof status style,
I hope that adds a little bit of flavour to the creativity behind this episode. Anyway, enjoy.
Thank you so much to our Patreons. I wanted to give a special shout out actually to our VIP
Patreons, Alex McNamara and Ebonia Elliot Lewis. Now, psychologically, if nothing else,
it helps us so much having your support. And we're also interested in finding sponsors for
the show. And of course, don't forget to join our amazing Discord community. But no, we really
appreciate our community and our support. And thank you so much. Welcome back to Street Talk.
Today is absolutely incredible. Our dream came true. And we got to interview our hero,
Professor Noam Chomsky. Walid couldn't even keep his shit together. Chomsky is an intellectual
heavyweight. He's probably the most important intellectual of the 20th century. He's been
cited so many times. I mean, we're quite spoilt here on MLSD because Friston and Ben Gio also
are in the top 100 of scientists based on their age score. But it was an incredible honour to
speak with Chomsky. I mean, I still have 10 Chomsky books on my bookshelf downstairs. I went
through a certain political phase at university and no harm in that. I think it was very enriching
for me going forwards in my life. But yeah, he's been a towering figure, I think, in so many
people's lives throughout the entire 20th century and beyond. This is going to be a long show. It's
going to be over three and a half hours long. So use the table of contents to skip around. This
first chapter is mostly about Jan Lacoon. And the reason we wanted to talk about him and his recent
paper is because as a radical empiricist, he's the antithesis of Chomsky. And I think it frames
some of the subsequent discussion nicely. But if you want to skip ahead and just only do Chomsky
stuff, then it's about 15 minutes to skip. Look at the table of contents. So chapter one.
Really, the revolution that has happened over the last decades is the fact that we've realised that
AI has to be intimately linked with learning. The fact that when we observe, you know, any
animal with a brain in nature is capable of learning. And perhaps because I'm lazy or because
I don't think I'm very smart, I've always thought that it would be very difficult to just
design from scratch an intelligent system. An intelligent system has to basically
design itself more or less through learning. So Lacoon just released a position paper called
A Path Towards Autonomous Machine Intelligence. Now, I admire Lacoon a lot. I want to give him
credit personally for explaining things in very simple terms. It's always very insightful reading
his papers or listening to his lectures. Note the lack of jargon, even with the energy-based
models that the high-level abstract pictorial formalism is something which is great for
communicating science, but not so great if you don't want to get schmidhoopered, but we'll come
back to that in a bit. So he really knows everything in his space. He can essentialise complex ideas.
So yeah, he's a wonderful scientist. However, let's not forget that, I mean, God knows,
he must be earning about $5 million a year, probably way more than that as a vice president
at Facebook. I mean, even at an E7 level, he could probably enter the millions. So anyway,
you know, I guess what I'm saying is he's not going to rock the boat, is he? He's going to stay
comfortable. They've already gone quite far in introducing the world to energy-based
Bayesian models. So yeah, that's the caveat. Anyway, in his paper, he lamented that our best systems
are still far from matching human reliability and real-world tasks such as driving, even after
being fed with ridiculous amounts of supervisory data from human experts, and after going through
millions of reinforcement learning trials in virtual environments, and even after engineers
had hard-wired hundreds of behaviours into the model. So Lacune thinks the answer may lie in
the ability of humans and many animals to learn world models, which is to say internal predictive
models of how the world around us works. I thought the paper contained a lot of common sense when
it comes to some of the pitfalls of the current approaches to AGI. And you know, in my personal
opinion, I think he's still a little bit too wedded to neural networks. But as we're going to
discuss in this programme, when it comes to symbolism and empiricism, there's no middle
way. You're either all in or it's like a house of cards and it all comes crashing down. But anyway,
he thinks that the main challenges of AI research today are being able to learn passively,
being able to learn efficiently, introducing type 2 models of a similar vein to our friend
Francois Chorlet, and also this ability to learn abstractions and compositional semantics. And I
guess we should lump those in together for the time being. I mean, he did actually recognise
that compositional semantics, while important, were something that was, you know, it's still
beyond our reach. He doesn't really know how to achieve that with the current paradigm.
Now, on the blank slate, you know, the prevailing wisdom from empiricists like Lacune and Rich
Sutton, remember his Bitter Lake essay, is that all handcrafted knowledge is bad, basically. And,
you know, perception derived knowledge is the only knowledge game in town.
Now, one thing I found quite ironic in this paper is that it's a huge step away from that wisdom.
I mean, of course, they'll say that it isn't. But when you look at this architecture diagram,
and there was even a comedy version of it made by Christian Saugetti, it does look like a rich,
handcrafted cognitive architecture. You know, I don't think it's hyperbolic to say it's
representing or resembling the architectures that we used to build in the 1980s. Of course,
Lacune would argue that it's actually a level of abstraction above that. It's like a prototypical
architecture with learning. But in a way, it's not because all of those, you know, in all of those
levels of abstraction are actually hard coded levels of abstraction. Now, Lacune even showed
a development graph of human cognitive skills strongly implied to be a directed acyclic graph
which was derived only from perceptual information or nearly only. Now, I thought that was a bit
of a sleight of hand because he strongly suggests that the sequential development of skills is
evidence of the blank slate and human cognitive development. But then he went on to show that
with these levels of abstraction in his hierarchical models, they must be hard coded. This isn't to say
that he thinks the neural networks today cannot learn deducible abstractions from the base abstraction
prior or, you know, the inductive prior, which is to say the encoder and the prediction model.
You know, it did give me pause for thought because presumably he does think that current
neural networks can learn abstractions. I mean, that's the common wisdom. I mean, in my opinion,
they can't. Well, they learn a tiny dot of abstractions out of an infinite sea of abstractions.
But yeah, it gave me pause for thought. And he also said that he thought the current language
models were not artificial general intelligence because they don't have these abstract latent
variables to explore multiple interpretations of a percept and indeed search for an optimal course
of actions to achieve a goal. So it's not entirely clear to me whether he thinks that the lack of
Bayesian style uncertainty quantification or the lack of a hard coded abstraction hierarchy is the
biggest reason why it's not AGI. But it's interesting to see him point out those two, you know,
particular issues that he sees with current architectures. For Lacune, we need to be able to
dynamically switch between levels in an abstraction hierarchy. The levels should strictly depend on
the information derived from the level below only. And the abstractions, while handcrafted,
should learn empirically by predicting the representation of another concept in the same
level of the hierarchy, but pointing at another point in time or space. This is what Lacune means
by passive or self supervised learning. Now, unfortunately, we don't have time in this episode
to go into all of the JEPA stuff. But to be honest, I'm glad we didn't waste our time because
Yannick has just made an episode on it. So you can think of this as supplementing Yannick's episode.
I do think it's quite fascinating, though. I mean, I'll say a couple of things here. Lacune
introduces these latent variables of unnormalized energy to represent possible futures. It's based
on as far as I'm concerned, it's analogous to Bayesian style probabilistic graphical models.
I mean, from a philosophy and mental framework point of view, where you have these latent or
unobserved variables. And in the context of Lacune's architecture, we're learning the dependency
between what is observed and what is not observed. But now we use this unnormalized energy instead of
pure probability distributions, which means that the distributions don't have to sum up to one,
because doing so is usually an intractable operation. But they are actually interchangeable,
so you can quite easily convert energy distributions into probability distribution.
Obviously, it's not a perfect conversion. It's still possible to use neural networks as prediction
modules in these architectures, and Lacune obviously would want to do that. The main change here is
that the models become stochastic over the domain of the latent variable, which is to say there are
many possible Y's or predictions for a given X or for a given signal. Lacune then regularizes the
latent to stop information leaking into the predictions, and also to shrink wrap the representation
around volumes of high density to, I mean, as Lacune says, mostly to overcome the curse of
dimensionality, which you get with so-called contrastive methods. I always wondered what
Lacune meant by contrastive versus non-contrastive. They're both contrastive. They're both the same,
but the non-contrastive has some regularization tricks to prevent mode collapse and to prevent
problems with the curse of dimensionality. Anyway, we discuss self-supervised learning
and contrastive models quite a lot in our interview with Ishan Mizra, so why don't you go and check
that out if you're interested and watch the Annex video as well. Anyway, all of his models being
self-supervised non-contrastive models learn by filling in the missing gaps in time or space,
so they work mostly passively, and his models are stacked vertically to capture concept or
abstraction hierarchies and then stacked in time to learn these action space abstractions,
which is what he calls Daniel Kahneman style mode two or thinking fast and slow, so he thinks
that being able to find trajectories in action space is analogous to reasoning. I don't think
it's analogous to, well, I mean, I guess it is technically analogous, but it's at the wrong
level of description and you need to have an infinite number of traversals to actually reason,
so I will make the argument later in the video that what we need is symbolics and
compositionality, or what Fodor and Phylician called systematicity. Okay, the paper also
has some fascinating discussion of uncertainty quantification. Again, we don't have time to
get into it here, but I do recommend you check out the paper. I think it's a wonderful, you know,
tour de force of energy-based models and joint embedding prediction architectures,
and Jan Lacoon's view on many topics in artificial general intelligence.
Everything comes from observation, from sensory input, which is,
which it has been crushed long time ago. I'm even surprised. I'm even surprised
that the likes of Jan Lacoon still think that everything comes from observation. I mean,
are you kidding? I could be blind and deaf and be as rational as Don Chomsky. I mean, God,
we have another huge part of cognition that has nothing to do with perception. Okay.
The most remarkable quality of human cognition, the very core of our cognition, is the ability to
take any two objects and select from an infinite set of possible abstractions, abstractions which
are not deducible from percepts. Why does Lacoon think that the only abstractions which are needed
are directly deducible from perceptual information? All of this fails when you consider the fact that
perception-derived data cannot deduce most rules about the world, certainly not in limited time
and space. I'm talking about world models and abstractions and hierarchies. Surely,
they cannot just be probabilities. Now, Lacoon's architecture can produce a tiny sliver of
abstractions, a minimum spanning tree of which directly deducible from the handcrafted priors
of the encoders and the prediction models. I agree that these are abstractions,
but they are essentially human-crafted or at least human-seeded.
The space of possible abstractions between two objects is infinite. Yes, infinite. Lacoon said
that objects may spontaneously emerge once the notion of object emerges in the representation.
Concepts like object permanence may become easy to learn. Objects that disappear behind others
due to parallax motion will invariably reappear. It was at this point that it occurred to me
what Lacoon really meant by abstractions. Indeed, I can see how three-dimensional objectness
might be deducible given the visual priors that we've designed on these models,
but this is just a drop in the ocean. Now, Lacoon admitted that it's these handcrafted priors
which determines what is represented in the models and indeed which abstractions are deducible.
He said that the joint embedding prediction architecture finds a trade-off between the
completeness and the predictability of the representations. What is predictable and what
does not get represented is determined implicitly by the architectures of the encoders and the
predictors. They determine an inductive bias that defines what information is predictable or not.
Now, Lacoon gives a concrete example of these different levels of description or abstraction,
if you like. He says, let's take a concrete example. When driving a car, given a proposed
sequence of actions on the steering wheel and pedals over the next several seconds,
drivers can accurately predict the trajectory of their car over the same period. The details of
the trajectory over longer periods are harder to predict because they may depend on other cars
or traffic lights or pedestrians and other external events that are somewhat unpredictable,
but the driver can still make accurate predictions at a higher level of abstraction,
ignoring the details of trajectories, other cars and traffic signals, etc. Now, the car
will probably arrive at its destination within a predictable time frame. The detailed trajectory
will be absent from this level of description, but the approximate trajectory as drawn on a map
is represented. A discrete latent variable may be used to represent multiple alternative routes.
End quote. So Lacoon goes on to say that a model could in theory work at multiple levels of
description or abstraction simultaneously, just like humans do, and he asserted that the ability
to represent world states at several levels of abstraction is essential to intelligent behavior.
For young Lacoon, reasoning is simply finding a good path through a state action space. This is
a very low resolution view of a complex topic. It's the equivalent of predicting the weather
tomorrow using the average temperature of this month. Deep learning folks tend to lean into
the parlor tricks and lean away from any mechanistic understanding. Lacoon admits there is an
exponential blow up traversing state action spaces in his hierarchical joint embedding architecture
and suggests using a discrete approximate dynamic programming algorithm like Monte Carlo Tree Search
to find good trajectories in tractable time, but a much better way to cut down the search space
is with compositionality. Compositionality is that the meaning of a complex expression
is fully determined by its structure and the meanings of its constituents. Once we fix what
the parts mean and how they're put together, we have no more leeway regarding the meaning of the
whole. This is the principle of compositionality, a fundamental presupposition of most contemporary
work in semantics or the study of meaning. We can understand a large, perhaps infinitely large,
collection of complex expressions the first time we encounter them. And if we understand
some complex expressions, we tend to understand others that can be obtained by recombining their
constituents. And guess what? This doesn't just apply to expressions, this also applies
to planning and reasoning. This is only possible with an algebraic approach to semantics and planning
and achieved with symbolic manipulation. For any two physical objects, x and y, if y is contained
in x, then if nothing exceptional happened to y, the location of y must be the location.
Now, this is a symbolic rule, a function, a procedure. You cannot represent this fact
without symbolic logic. This isn't data, but rather a procedure which needs verification.
You have variables of a specific type, where types come from an ontological structure.
And second, you have quantification over these variables. That's what the upside down a means.
It's addressing a potentially infinite set of possible values. Neural networks are extensional.
They cannot represent intentional, which is to say infinite objects. Now, if you want to refresh
here on this stuff, check out our intro to the Gary Marcus and Lewis Lam show. It's good to be
in an environment where people take for granted these questions, because I spent a lot of the last
20 years almost, or even more than 20 years trying to get people to recognize the importance of
abstraction. So I came to this having worked in psychology on children learning rule and came
into the first way or second wave depending on how you count it, of neural networks and people
trying to argue that there was no abstraction, that it was all just basically memorization
through multi-layer networks. They were then three layer network. And it's been a long hard slog
to get people to realize how important abstraction is. And I think that there's been a real sea
change in the last couple of years. The important thing to realize is the only way to represent
infinite objects in a finite way is using quantification or logic over typed symbolic
structures. That's why neural networks cannot do basic arithmetic. You need intentions that
are symbolic procedures over variables. Let's look at another example, addition. Here's a program,
add 0, n equals n, add m, n equals 1, plus add m minus 1, n. Now, it's a finite representation
of an infinite object. So addition of m to n is nothing more than adding m1s to n or m successors
to n. And from that, you can define multiplication because multiplying m by n is adding mns or
adding nms. That's why it's commutative. Yeah, the, I mean, compositionality, which I'm very excited
to hear terms like compositionality being discussed as a flay take. I mean, that's music to my ears.
But there were huge results that were mathematically done that show that compositionality
actually evolved for survival reasons, even. The examples they give is usually language.
Like, as we speak, you're interpreting and understanding what I'm saying practically nearly
real time. Now, let me, let me put, let me put you in the, let me make you appreciate the complexity
here. You're taking a sequence of sounds in this case, because I'm speaking, it could be written,
and taking the sequence of words. And you're almost real time building a mental picture of what
that I'm saying, the thought that I'm trying to convey, right? If we didn't have compositionalities,
you know, it would, so if in the absence of compositionality, you know what you have to do
every time you have to go and grab a sequence, a sub sequence, and make a meaning for it,
then make a meaning for the whole thing. If you didn't have the rules for sub parts already built
in. And you just say, oh, they just set a phrase, they just set a phrase, I know how to build a
meaning for that one. And then I do three, four operations in the tree, and I'm done. If every
time you have to try all the parts that should fit together, you wouldn't understand me real time.
We couldn't have communicated. And here's the genius of Richard Montague, who mathematically
showed. I mean, people don't appreciate the work that these guys did, you know, it's all,
it's all a large language model now. But look, look at what Richard Montague did.
He said, I can have John likes to play guitar. I can have the boy next door likes to play guitar.
I can have my uncle's nephew who lives in Australia likes to play guitar. You get my point.
Montague said, how could all these things, John, he, the guy next door, how could they all
have the same semantic type in the end, because they fit in the same slot.
The genius of Montague was to devise an algebra that no matter what you have here,
it will reduce when you do all the typing to E and entity. That's compositional semantics.
There's been a lot of people who've been sort of saying there's a limitation to deep learning,
let's say, or machine learning more generally, because it's obvious that those things basically
do curve fitting. What's our definition of reasoning? What is the process by which we
elaborate models? And is there a qualitative difference between a models that merely performs
curve fitting as we normally know it, and a model that has a, let's say to adopt a terminology that
others have proposed, that models that establish sort of a causal model of the data you're observing,
which can be the basis for reasoning and things like that.
And the answer to this is probably no. There is a difference, of course, but is it an essential
qualitative difference? I'm not entirely sure. And then there is the argument, if there is a
qualitative difference, which I'm not sure about, would this qualitative difference be in the form of
fundamentally different things from deep learning, things that are like discrete symbolic reasoning
or things of that type? And to that, my answer is clearly no. I do not believe that's the case.
Okay, we were going to publish the show today, and look what Yuygen Schmidhuber has just dropped
on his blog. He said that Jan Lacoon's 2022 paper on autonomous machine intelligence
rehashes but does not cite essential work of his lab from 1990 to 2015. Now, Yuygen Schmidhuber has
established a bit of a reputation for constantly saying that all of the current ideas that are
being published in deep learning today were already done previously in his lab, and he feels
resentful that he hasn't had proper attribution. He says he's not without a conflict here, and it
might seem self-interested, you know, correcting the record like this. But the truth of the matter
is that he says, yes, it is self-interested. Much of the closely related work pointed to below
was done in his lab, and he wishes to be acknowledged and recognized. He's basically resentful that he
didn't get the Turing Award along with the other godfathers. To be honest, I personally do think
of Schmidhuber as one of the godfathers. So he quotes Lacoon, many ideas described in this paper,
almost all of them have been formulated by many authors in various contexts, in various forms.
And then Schmidhuber says, yes, in fact, unfortunately, much of the paper reads like
deja vu of the papers from his lab going all the way back to 1990 without any citations. So I'm
scrolling down here, mentions of controllers, world models, planning and rollout. Indeed,
this was covered in Schmidhuber's papers. He's famously argued that Gans, for example, adversarial
learning is a specialization of one of his earlier models, which he released from his lab.
Lacoon's idea about learning to act by observation, so Lacoon has this hierarchy of data streams
with increasing amounts of agency. And being a radical empiricist, Lacoon thinks that we learn
everything we know about the world largely by observation and mostly by not interacting with
the world around us. Schmidhuber says that the recurrent predictive world model, which may be
good at predicting some things but uncertain about others. So this is this thing at the top here.
So Schmidhuber thinks that he's already been there and done that. This idea of the hierarchical
perceps as well, he says in 1991, the neural sequence chunker, which is to say the neural
history compressor, used unsupervised learning and predictive coding in a deep hierarchy of
recurrent neural networks. So he thinks he's done that as well. Most interesting for me,
he commented on the symbolic component of Jann's paper. So do we need symbols for reasoning?
And he said that he'd previously argued of the importance of incorporating inductive biases
into neural networks that enable them to efficiently learn about symbols. Now,
based on the file issue paper, I think that's an oxymoron, but he said that many neural networks
suffer from a binding problem, which affects their ability to dynamically and flexibly
combined, which is to say, bind information that is distributed throughout the neural network,
as is required to effectively form, represent and relate symbol like entities.
He said he released a 2020 position paper, which offers a conceptual framework for addressing
this problem and provides an in-depth analysis of the challenges and requirements
and corresponding inductive biases required for symbolic manipulation to emerge naturally
in neural networks. I must admit, I've not read that paper. I'm interested to check it out now.
So I'm just reading the abstract of that paper now on the binding problem in artificial
neural networks. It was a primary offer Klaus Greff from the Google Brain team,
also with Schmidhuber in 2020. So it said that contemporary neural networks fall short of human
level generalization, which allows them to extend far beyond their experiences. And they put it down
to this binding problem, which they say affects the capacity to acquire a compositional understanding
of the world in terms of symbol like entities, like objects. By the way, this is exactly what
we're talking about in this show, which they say is crucial for generalizing unpredictable
and systematic ways. To address this issue, they propose a unifying framework that resolves around
forming meaningful entities from unstructured sensory inputs, maintaining the separation
of information at representational level. So yeah, I guess we'll get back to you on that,
whether it's any good. Lacoon said that the centerpiece of the paper is the Joint Embedding
Prediction Architecture, JEPA, and the main advantage of JEPA is that it performs predictions
in representation space, assuring the need to predict every detail of why. He says,
in 1997, a quarter of a century ago, he built a general adversarial reinforcement learning
machine that could ignore many or all of these details and ask arbitrary abstract questions
with computable answers in representation space. And he also noted that are even while his even
earlier, less general approach to artificial curiosity since 1991, naturally direct the
world model towards representing predictable details in the environment. Schmidhuber said,
given his comments above, he doesn't see any significant novelty there. He's not claiming
that everything is solved, but he said in the last 32 years, we've already made substantial
progress along the lines proposed by Lacoon. In his paper, Lacoon said below is an attempt to connect
the present proposal with relevant prior work. And Schmidhuber said, he cited a few somewhat
related things while ignoring most of the directly relevant original work as mentioned above,
possibly encouraged by an award that he and his colleagues shared for inventions
of other researchers whom they did not cite. He said that the point is that these ideas are not
as new as they may be understood by reading Lacoon's paper. There's a lot of prior work that is
directly along the lines proposed in his lab. We've not had a great experience with him. We
tried to invite him on the podcast and he did seem initially interested. And then he suddenly
demanded a fee for coming on. And then I did actually offer him $5,000 just for 60 minutes
of his time. And that wasn't enough, apparently. So the main thing I don't like about this is
the tone of it. Frankly, I think it's really easy just to go back in time and say, oh, I invented
something which is conceptually similar to this, because many things are conceptually similar.
We've just made a whole show on the infinitude of abstraction space. I will hand it to Schmidhuber
that they are very similar. But the architecture and approach that Lacoon is presenting here
is different. It's using modern methods. It's not using RNNs, for example. Yes, it's using the same
abstract ideas. In fact, what I like about Lacoon is that he presents all of his work in an abstract
way. The pictorial formalism of energy based models is very abstract. That's what makes it
understandable. The way he describes contrastive and self supervised learning is very abstract.
He's talking about predicting unobserved information from observed information,
and he uses a language which is very accessible to lots of people. So I can understand why other
researchers will look at it and say, oh, that's basically the same as what I've done. But that's
because he's talking in the abstract. If you look at his physical models, they are different, in my
opinion. Lacoon has been a huge advocate of passive or so-called self supervised learning.
Supervised learning sucks. I mean, it's very limited in the sense that you can train machines to do
very specific tasks. And because they're trying to read very specific tasks, they're going to use
all the biases that are in the data to do that task. And if you try to get outside of that task,
they're not going to perform very well. That's the limitation of supervised learning. It has
absolutely nothing to do with deep learning. And this has been a complaint of mine for a while
about, let's say, the dominant paradigms of neural networks. From my perspective,
as a Bayesian, they've always been essentially maximum likelihood
estimators. It's like, okay, I train my neural network to take in a whole bunch of inputs and
to give me the one true value, which is really just the maximum likelihood computation of my inputs.
And as a Bayesian, it's like, I mean, guys, that's just an estimate. The real truth is,
it's a distribution. There are many possible output values that this input should have given me.
It's sort of, maybe it's 75% this value and a little bit less percent that or it's a continuum,
if it's a density function or whatever. So of course it is. And this is the nature of reality,
is that there's uncertainty. And when you're trying to build models, if you want them to be
generalizable, they have to encode in some way this type of this uncertainty. Otherwise,
you're always just using the MLE or whatever some other kind of statistical projection of
that distribution. You're throwing out information. You're losing a lot of information. So I totally
agree that that neural networks, or that, you know, the paradigm needs to evolve to take much
more account of uncertainty. I think where I kind of object to it is why aren't we just using the
word probability? Okay, like because if we don't embrace, so let's suppose you agree, okay, we need
to start allowing for multiple possibilities. Great. Now you need a mathematics to deal with
multiple possibilities. We already have a mathematics to deal with multiple possibilities.
It's called probability theory, or better yet, conditional probability theory. We've got that
mathematics. We have hundreds of years of, you know, development and theory behind that. Let's
use it. Because if you don't use it, if you don't just admit that what you're doing is
probability theory, then you're rolling your own probability theory. And just like the fuzzy logic
people that kind of did the same kind of thing, you're going to wind up with all kinds of inconsistencies
and problems or whatever, because for better or worse, we only have one mathematically rigorous
and consistent theory of uncertainty, and it is probability theory. That's just what it is.
It's conditional probability theory. Yeah, but devil's advocate, I mean, Lacune has been challenged
on this before. I mean, this is with his energy based models, where the punchline is that rather
than have the normalized probability, which means it sums up to one, you store these these
exponential energies. And Lacune says, well, I don't care about calibration, which means I don't
ever want to compare my models with other models. And also, I only ever want to make decisions.
And he also says that if you if you ever have a normalized probability distribution in high
dimensions, the model is probably wrong anyway. And he gives the example of some density that has
a manifold of zero width, where if you sample that density, you'll never ever get any samples
on the manifold anyway. So he said what you want to do is regularize it as he does with
his energy based models. And that's what you end up with anyway. Yeah, I mean, there's a lot of
things to say about that. I mean, and as you can imagine, like having the fact that probability
theory is centuries old, like, you know, these these questions have been addressed already,
like in the in the, like, let's say, Bayesian literature, or probability theory literature,
so all this stuff has already been talked about and addressed for a long time. So first of all,
if if a probability is is meaningless and high dimensions, so is its logarithm, which is the
energy function, right? I mean, you don't, you don't gain anything by ignoring the problem,
like you can ignore it, but then you wind up with with inconsistencies as far as is not needing to
normalize the distribution. Well, if you want to if you ever want to add
two probabilities together, you better normalize your distributions. And in fact, he does do that,
like it was like, yeah, I need to do this kind of trajectory sampling, I need to do some
normalization here with like Gibbs sampling or whatever to actually do the normalization so
I can add up different trajectories and, you know, calculate some means and things like that.
And as far as not doing model comparison, well, so here's here's something that's important to
understand is that from a Bayesian perspective, any of this regularization stuff that machine
learning people try to do all the time, that's model comparison. You know, if you're what you're
trying to do is say, I'm comparing a model A and a model B where model A has hopefully fewer
parameters or it's simpler and some, you know, some way, okay, which one should I prefer in light
of the evidence, like how much can I regularize it and still fit the data well, that's model
comparison, at least that's what a Bayesian would call, you know, model comparison. And we have a
mathematics for how to do that, like you have to conduct these integrals and I get it, that's hard,
okay, like, totally understand, believe me, I've been there, done that, tried that, it's really
hard, okay, you wind up with these multi dimensional integrals, they're really hard, but just ignoring
it, and then forgetting about it and going back to maximum likelihood estimation, like,
you know, you're not going to make any advances there where I see cool advances made is when
people embrace it, they say, okay, I got to do this integral here, can't it's really intractable,
but here's some approximations to it, okay, but I but I know what I'm trying to do, I'm trying to
approximate this specific integral, and I can come up with really nice approximations under
these set of criteria, it gives you a whole theoretical foundation, right, to advance the
approximations, rather than just giving up and going over into energy land, and doing arbitrary hacks
and approximations for which you have no theory really, like, that's why we end up with all these
things and machine learning, like, this kind of batch norm, that batch norm, why does batch
norm even work, people arguing about it, should we do it, should we not do they have no theoretical
foundation, it's just hacking, right? Yeah. Well, it's quite ironic, because
even Jan Lacune himself, you know, he wants to have end-to-end gradient based systems,
but he even admits that on his joint embedding prediction architecture, you know, there's a
hierarchical one for stacking the concepts, and there's also what he calls a mode to Daniel
Kahneman style one, which is where you have this discrete action space and you learn abstractions
of actions over time. And of course, he needs to add these probabilities together to generate
trajectories through this action space. So what does he do? He uses the Gibbs sampling conversion.
And it's the same thing all along, you know, because we've got this discrete action space,
he can't use a gradient based method to do the traversal search, so he has to use Monte Carlo
tree search. And obviously, he's also an empiricist and a blank slate guy, and he's creating
this very, very complex and highly specific cognitive architecture, which reminded me of
the systems in the 1980s. So, you know, it's not quite as puritanical as you would think.
Yeah, no, one thing I really respect about Lacune is that he's a pragmatist, right? And so,
at the end of the day, like he really cares about things that work. And, you know,
and I have to think a large part of what he's doing here is trying to get the, let's say,
the orthodox machine learning community to move in a certain direction, right, to improve these
systems. But, but he's got to do so kind of gently has to guide them, you know, maybe one step at a
time and avoiding trigger words, like, you know, let's not say probability, because like maybe
that triggers somebody or no Bayesian, because that'll trigger somebody, I don't know. I mean,
it's so it's gonna, they're moving in the right, right direction. Let me just say that it's just
that it's maybe things are going to be a bit slower than they need to be, because we're not
embracing a lot of the theoretical results that that already existed, instead of tackling some
of the really hard problems, we're sort of like trying to avoid them temporarily, but, you know,
that's okay. Like, I mean, eventually, the truth will out, right, like people will,
will get this. Yeah. So what was that fractions analogy for energy based models?
Well, I was just, I was just thinking, you know, this idea that, hey, we'll work on the
probabilities, we can just ignore the normalization, right, and just work with the energies is almost
like somebody coming along and saying, you know, whenever I'm doing arithmetic, like adding fractions,
that's such a pain because I have to have the same denominator every time I add the fractions
together. You know, and when the denominators get to be these really big integers, I have to do this
massive multi digit multiplication, you know, forget that, like I'm just going to add the
numerators and just ignore the denominators, right? It's like, okay, you know, you can do that,
but you're doing a completely different function, you know, it's like the the mediant of two fractions
you add the numerators together and you add the denominators together, right? And I think it has
a name like, you know, freshman addition or something, because it's a common mistake to do,
right? I mean, that's that's what it seems like to me. It's like, let's ignore all the hard work
and just just do kind of a hack. And it just doesn't work like it introduces problems.
What do you think Lacoon would say though to that?
Well, I think he he says, I mean, he, you know, in the paper itself, like there are many scenarios
where you can't ignore the normalization and like, he kind of admits that and uses it in certain places,
but but that's just Bayesian, Bayesian probability at that point, it's like Bayesians don't have
any problem, you know, understanding that there is a normalization constant, sometimes you can work
without it. Sometimes you can't. And so they'll defer normalization until necessary. But the
problem is, there's so many scenarios where normalization is required, so many useful scenarios.
I want to comment on something interesting you brought up there, which is, you know, this,
like the desire to have differentiable learning methods. I totally get that desire. I wish
I wish we had differentiable methods to find, like, program search in general. Okay, like,
where I where I run into a problem with it is that he talks a lot about world models, right?
And he says that the big problem that's going to be facing AI in the future is how do we build
these world models? Like, how do we, how do we represent them? How do we build them? How do we
learn them? Well, here's something to think about here, which occurred to me when I was reading
that paper is, hey, a lot of the world that we're operating in right now, that we want to model
and understand for better or worse, consist of symbolic computational systems. Like, pretty
much every single program in existence today is a symbolic piece of code, running in a, you know,
von Neumann machine, some kind of like, you know, finite kind of Turing machine kind of thing,
it's running these symbolic systems like they're all over the place. Okay, and whether we like it
or not, people's cognition at a high level is pretty much symbolic, it may be implemented at the
lowest level by, by subsymbolic nano things or whatever. But, but we operate in this kind of
symbolic thing, we're surrounded by symbolic machines, okay, and programs and software. Well,
your world model is going to need to be able to model those things. And I'm really skeptical
that, I mean, if we're trying to model symbolic systems, are we really hopeful that we can model
them well enough with non symbolic differentiable systems? You know, I'm, I'm pretty skeptical,
I think we have to just grab the bull by the horns, as they would say, just embrace the fact that we've
got to figure out how to do search over these discrete spaces. I don't know how to, I don't
know how to do it, nobody knows how to do it, but we got to figure that out, you know, whether it's
some evolutionary algorithms or whatever the case is, if we can crack the nut of learning how to do
searches over the space of all possible programs, outside of the space that's differential,
differentially accessible, that's, you know, we're going to make like huge project there,
progress there, right, whether it's dream coder or something else, you know, I don't know,
neat, you know, neuro evolutionary topologies, whatever it is, we need to put much more effort
into learning how to search that space that's not differentially accessible.
I agree. And I think it's easy just to say that like there aren't other challenges as well. I mean,
Lacuna said in the paper as well that just something as simple as being able to take a goal
and break it down into intermediate sub goals at different levels of description,
we just take stuff like that for granted. And it's as simple with, you know, like the problem in
cognitive science of these categories, just being able to draw circles around things at
different levels of description and traverse between them, we take that for granted.
So Professor Jan McCoon recently released an article called what AI can tell us about
intelligence. Can deep learning systems learn to manipulate symbols? The answers might change
our understanding of how intelligence works and what makes humans unique. Now this is pretty much
in direct response to some of the hype in the AI community. He does have a huge stab actually,
not only at Gary Marcus, which is about symbols, but there are many other kind of
fronts being fought in the world of AI at the moment. But yeah, I mean, now's the time that
there's so much bullshit in the deep learning and AGI scene at the moment. We almost need to create
a bullshit bingo card. What do we got on that card? Well, some people think scaling is all you need.
Well, Jan Lacuna agrees that that's bullshit. Some people think that reward is enough. Well,
Jan Lacuna also thinks that that's bullshit. Some people think that AI systems today are slightly
conscious. Jan Lacuna thinks that that's bullshit. Some people think that AI systems understand us.
Jan Lacuna thinks that's bullshit as well. Some people think that deep learning can do
symbolics. Well, Jan Lacuna thinks that it can. Gary Marcus thinks that it can't. Some people
think that data is all you need. Some people think that emergence is all you need. Anyway,
I mean, I was really impressed when I read this article from Jan because in a way, I was really
happy that he was calling bullshit on so many of these AI hypesters, you know, stuff that I perceived
to be bullshit. But I think it's very unfair towards Gary Marcus because unlike open AI that's
been spouting all of this utter nonsense, Gary Marcus just has a different perspective. There
are so many different perspectives and artificial general intelligence and Gary Marcus has the same
perspective as Noam Chomsky, which is that psychology has a lot to say about artificial
general intelligence. And yes, maybe he has a philosophical agenda, maybe he even has a monetary
agenda because if the focus changed to his view of artificial general intelligence, he could create
a startup company he can become as successful as Jan Lacuna has. But I think it's very unfair
to criticise Gary Marcus in this way because Gary Marcus still has his credibility intact.
Now onto chapter two. This is the emergent abilities of large language models.
So there's an interesting paper just out called Emergent Abilities of Large Language Models
by Jason Wei et al. Now they say scaling up language models has been shown to predictively
improve performance and sample efficiency on a wide range of downstream tasks. This paper they say
discusses the unpredictable phenomena which they refer to as the emergent ability of large language
models. And they consider an ability to be emergent if it's not present in smaller models,
but is present in larger models. Thus emergent abilities cannot be predicted simply by extrapolating
the performance of smaller models. Now, I don't really like their definition. I think a better
definition would be a transient change in phenomena. So it's not the relationship between small
models and large models because if there was a kind of continuous improvement in perplexity,
no one would call that emergent. So yeah, I think my definition of emergence, and we've been thinking
a lot about emergence because we just did a show on it, is an unexpected and transient change in
macroscopic phenomena. That's the best definition that I can come up with personally. Now in this
paper they seem to have the, in my view, incorrect impression that emergence is the same thing as
extrapolation. Similar to that grokking paper a while ago, all of the long-term misquotes all the
time, they say, oh there's this sudden snap point where the perplexity goes down, the validation
accuracy goes up, and suddenly the model can extrapolate. And I don't think that's really
true. It doesn't pass the sanity test to me. I mean, it's just a quirk of optimization that the model
suddenly fits the dataset better. That's not the same thing as extrapolation, right? Extrapolation
means that I can fit functions outside of the training range, but the problem is it's quite easy
to measure with things like arithmetic, but it's quite difficult to measure with some of the,
you know, language tasks, like for example on Big Bench, because many of these things don't exist
in the training data, and it's very difficult to measure them. So the whole concept of extrapolation
becomes very vague with some of these language models. And assuming it's not extrapolation,
why is it so surprising? And why is it so interesting that we have a sudden jump in
perplexity? I just don't get it. I don't think it's that big of a deal, honestly.
Definitely interesting. Definitely requires further examination. But I think this is the main
argument which is used by these folks that talk about scaling laws, these emergent tests, who
think that if only we could train for longer or if only we could train on more data or on bigger
models, then suddenly we'll get this snap and we'll get this recursive, self-improving,
artificial general intelligence. That just doesn't make any sense to me. I genuinely don't believe
that. Chapter three on empiricism. Chomsky argued that the way we actually acquire the faculty of
language and therefore its relationship to experience, and indeed the physical world,
are radically different from the empiricist tradition. Chomsky became well known for his
famous 1950s critique of behavioral psychology. Now behavioral psychologists tended to believe
that humans were an unadulterated blank slate made of putty which was then molded and shaped
by our environment, you know, through a process of empirical stimulus and response.
They believed that simple reinforcement learning was how we modeled the world around us,
indeed how we learn language. Now Chomsky argued that this could not possibly explain
how virtually all human beings, regardless of their intelligence, do something as miraculous
master the faculty of language, even when they're not deliberately taught it, as most people probably
aren't, and they also do this at such an extraordinarily young age and in such an extraordinarily
short space of time. He argued that for this to happen at all, we must be genetically pre-programmed
to do it and therefore all human languages must have in common a basic structure which corresponds
to this pre-programming. As Brian McGee pointed out in his 1970s BBC interview of Chomsky, this also
has some very negative implications, chief of which is that anything which can't be accommodated to
the structure, any piece of the cosmic jigsaw puzzle which can't connect with other pieces
are linguistically inexpressible and unintelligible to us. So the general principles
comment to all languages, set vital limits to our capacity to understand the world
and communicate with each other. But Chomsky would argue that this is the very basis for our creative
capacity to understand an infinite space of abstractions and also understand anything which
has been expressed by another human being.
Well, the classical empiricist tradition, which I think was the tradition that's represented,
let's say perhaps in its highest form by Hume, seems to me to be a tradition of extreme importance.
When we investigate it, I think we discover that it's just completely false, that is that
the mechanisms that he discussed are not the mechanisms by which the mind reaches states
of knowledge, that the states of knowledge attained are radically different than the kinds
that he discussed. For example, for Hume, the mind was in his image a kind of a theater in which
ideas paraded across the stage and we therefore followed necessarily that we could introspect
completely into the contents of our mind. If an idea is not on the stage, it's not in the mind
and the ideas may be connected and associated. Well, that's a theory. And in fact, it's a
theory that has had an enormous grip on the imagination throughout most of the history
of Western thought. For example, that same image dominates the rationalist tradition as well,
where it was assumed that one could exhaust the contents of the mind by careful attention.
Chomsky was inspired by continental rationalism, which refers to a set of views more or less
shared by a number of philosophers who are active on the European continent during the
latter two thirds of the 17th century and the beginning of the 18th century. Rationalism basically
defines your view of knowledge. As a rationalist, you consider the primacy of reason and intuition
over sensation and perceptual experience. You would tend to think that most ideas,
rules and knowledge are innate. And just like our friend Dr. Walid Saber, you would eschew
any type of uncertainty quantification. You would prefer to deal with absolute black and
white certainty. Anything else, as far as you are concerned, wouldn't be knowledge.
So on the Discord community, I made the statement that knowledge cannot be entirely derivable from
perceptual information. And they were having none of it. Actually, most abstract mathematical
knowledge is far faster than human experience. So there's this kind of dualism, it's what I call
the mind experience dualism. So now, given the apparatus we have, we can kind of interconvert
between perceptual experience and mathematically abstract experience. If you take all of our
perceptual cognitive powers, I think if you want to draw a Venn diagram, it's a dot in a huge
right, the abstract word is much, much, it's a vet with all its experiential knowledge is almost
a tiny dot in that ocean. And you know what they're doing now in AI, they're concentrating on the
damn dot. No, no, learning from instances is brutal, guys. So when you want to defend it,
you have to tell me how hold on, you have to tell me look, learning from data, either you
adopt it and defend it or you don't. There's no middle, right? If you want to defend learning
from observations, a template like this, you have to convince me how a child learns 200 million
sentences from few examples. If you don't have an explanation for that, the rest is hand waving.
Wally Zubba thinks that empiricism is a huge house of cards. As soon as you allow any symbolic
manipulation, the whole thing just falls down flat on its face. So according to Wally Zubba,
if you have to be an empiricist, you have to be an empiricist all the way.
And let me make an example out of this. You take a guy that lives in Bangladesh,
you take a guy that lives in Amsterdam Hall. Perception wise, observation wise,
empirical data wise, they're apart so much that they live practically on a different planet.
But what they know is the same. Knowledge that is not empirically obtained is the same
and that's all they need to survive. Their observation, their individual four-year-old knows
that if I say I have a Greek statue in every room in my house, they know I'm not talking about a
Greek statue. What I mean is in every room in my house, I have a Greek statue and because they
know this is knowledge, not from observation, that a physical object cannot be in more than one
location but that requires symbolic manipulation. Dibble's advocate though, let's imagine I'm playing
a computer game and you can have the same statue in two rooms at the same time. So let's say it's
a blue statue and I'm observing lots of episodes of this game and I very quickly learn that you
can have this statue simultaneously in two different rooms but not both in the same room.
I can then create a cognitive program and I've just empirically learned that program.
No, I challenge you to even think it.
Look Tim, I mean even in the world of Star Trek where the transportation can be,
I mean we can just decompose all our molecules and transport them and reassemble them and all
that stuff. Even in that world of sci-fi, there are things that the mind cannot even accept.
This is how the universe works. So I challenge you to imagine the two blue statutes in two
different rooms as one. You can't even think it. I think some of this comes down to these
you know, matters of definition right and black and white lines. So I mean traditionally
a dimension on which empiricists and rationalists differ is the degree to which they
admit the existence of innate knowledge or innate concepts. And so obviously on one extreme is
zero and then that would be like an ultra empiricist who says there's no such thing as any kind of
innate knowledge like literally let's say if we're talking the unit of analysis is an individual
human mind that they start as some type of literal zero blank slate and then through
just empirical observation alone learn. And then on kind of the other extreme,
I don't think rationalists have ever denied that some knowledge is empirical. I don't know
that they've ever denied that but perhaps the extreme version there is that they say there's a
kind of superiority to deduced rationally derived knowledge versus empirical knowledge. So like in
a way you know like the the platonic ideals are in a sense more reliable and and more superior and
and you know more ultimate or purer than than any type of empirical knowledge. I mean I think
any of us probably should know that the answer is somewhere in between here and where the dividing
line is between okay if you go beyond this you know you become a a rationalist instead of an
empiricist. I'm not sure like I don't know where they they draw the kind of battle lines today
but I think if we if we take say LeCran as an empiricist he he admits that there is prior knowledge
you know you need these inductive priors to be quite useful. After all one of his huge
achievements was CNN. I structurally encoding a certain kind of of prior this translation and
variance into neural networks but he thinks it should be as close to zero as possible that it
should be so minimal that it's like just enough to kind of jump start or bootstrap a learning system
and then from then on it can kind of just learn everything on its own through observation of
data and I think people on the other side of the camp and I include myself there pretty much and I
think Wally too is that we believe that the there's just not enough data not enough data not enough
computational resources not enough time for that to make sense that sure there are a lot of concepts
a lot of knowledge that you can learn by by observation and then and then you know reasoning
kind of on top of that and by the way empiricists now no longer deny that that reasoning happens
right but they view reasoning as just generating connections between facts that were learned
empirically not as bringing facts to the table themselves but really only as mechanisms connecting
and deriving from from facts I just think that the that it's not realistic it's not pragmatic you
know in the same way that sure a neural network of infinite size like axi axi size you know the
axi folks can do everything well that's not what I'm interested in I'm interested in pragmatic
systems and I think that there's types of knowledge that are derived from rational sources you know
these deductive logical kinds of sources that you can't hope to get to pragmatically from
empiricism alone and what fascinates me is okay what's the mechanism then by which
that knowledge entered into into our brains like that to me is is the fascinating question
yeah I mean I want to get to that in a second because I know you've got some very interesting
ideas about Friston's free energy principle actually and it relating to our existence but
I don't think Lacune or even Jeff Hawkins you remember Jeff Hawkins I mean he cited Vernon
Mount Castle you know that famous neuroscientist from the 1980s this idea that the the neocortex
has all of these little units that are exactly the same they're just wired differently but that's
still a prior so he said that we had you know some of our neurons were fed from our century
motor circuits and then there were other neurons that were kind of like concept neurons but if you
think about it the way the brain is structured is still a prior so any conception that we have
you know you were just saying before that empiricists think that there's a stage and all of the ideas
we have are derived from things which are on the stage and if you look at the brain it's a stage
right all of that century motor signaling it's a stage so I don't think they would really deny
that the structure of that stage defines a lot of our conception yeah I I can't put words in
their mouth but I don't think they deny that I would I would hope to think that that they don't
I mean because because it's obvious that there that there is structure there and I think and
as I said I think Lacune has agreed that you know sure there is some initial structure that you
that you need in order to get you know bootstrapped if you will I think you know maybe if we talk about
in terms of say something simpler which is just logic gates like if you just imagine that your
brain was consisted only of NAND you know one of the logic gates that can create any any logical
operation so whatever you just have trillions of you know NAND gates and if you connected them up
in a potentially fully connected way so every single NAND gate connected to every other possible
NAND gate and then and then the goal of learning is to turn off and on some of those connections
such that you wind up with something useful I think the question is just how much do you
have to start with like you know maybe if you just start with a random knockout so I just
randomly assign a bunch of a bunch of connections you know can I learn you know can I then learn
from that through some type of back propagation or some other you know weird because now we're in
like a digital space you know some type of EA algorithm you know can it can it learn things
or do you need to have like some additional kind of structure on there because if you look at the
human brain it's way way way far away from that extreme of a fully connected you know NAND circuitry
like it's very sparse it has you know structure in these kind of cortical columns like Hawkins
talks about you know in a very certain kind of vertical and also horizontally parallelized
way you know there's tons and tons of structure there like it's in the kind of distance of all
possible networks it's a very long way from a fully connected tabula rasa with just random
connections right so I think that I think that they have to admit that there's their structure
there I think it's just that they want it to be as lightweight and and as you know the constraints
to be as loose as possible because then that allows as much flexibility to that that learning
algorithm to to learn things that are most optimized and most appropriate for any particular task
yeah yeah I agree with that and and when Wallid was talking about cognitive templates earlier
his his main rationale is he doesn't want to be surprised by reality so he says there you
know what we call someone who um makes poor predictions about the world we call them crazy
that's what Wallid would say but I don't entirely agree with that because I know that I could I put
this to him I I could have a computer simulation and in this simulation the physics are different
the reality is different so I could quickly come up with a cognitive template in my mind
that in this computer world you can have two blue objects simultaneously existing in two
different rooms and I would very quickly learn that cognitive template and I could reason over it
so I have just empirically come up with a new cognitive template right I mean I agree because
you don't even have to imagine simulations for for very strange and I think this is kind of what
Chomsky gets at when he says that we have this innate radical empiricism right as we had this
this false belief that concepts that we learn at the at the scale of pool balls and you know
apples falling from trees and and things like that just we feel strongly that they must also
apply to electrons and protons and atoms and you know whatever else and they just don't I mean
that's like even take a simple concept of you know oh two objects cannot exist at the same
place at the same time well that's true if they're fermions you know if they're bosons like a photon
for example you can have as many photons as you want in the same place at the same at the same
time right so I mean physics alone and just like the world in general or take a you know mixing
colors if you mix pigments together you know red and green pigment for example is gonna
gonna wind up with kind of like a brownish you know muck or whatever but red and green light
produce yellow so I mean you get all kinds of almost antithetical or opposite you know behaviors
of things that happen all throughout the natural world and I don't see people as having any trouble
really learning like a new set of rules if you will I mean I play a lot of video games or
used to when I back before we started doing the show and I had time to play video games but
you know for example you run into a video game where like it has a time travel element it doesn't
take long to learn how to work in this area where you can move in a dimension that corresponds to
time or you learn kind of different sets of world rules like people somehow don't really have
trouble necessarily but there are areas where we're really driven to be these radical empiricists
and certain concepts that we hold is almost infileable you know like yeah I mean but I mean
this is why I wanted to get to as well that I mean in Wally's refutation of empiricism he says
that anything that can be experienced or observed will be known but we spoke with Kenneth Stanley
and he says well you know we experience consciousness and we don't know it uh if we have a hallucinogenic
experience or a dream do we know it well actually actually we um we reason to the best explanation
so we try and hang it on a structure which is already in our brain so the really interesting bit
is whether we can take percepts and whether we can build an abstract structure and that does
largely depend on the structure we already have but this to me makes me think well whether it's
innate already is irrelevant because we know that we can create new structure in response
either to thinking and reasoning or in response to new perceptual information of modifying these
capacities what we might do however is games I mean at least it's in theory imaginable that we
might discover something about the limits of our science forming abilities we might discover for
example that some kinds of questions simply fall beyond the area where we're capable of constructing
explanatory theories and I think we even maybe now have some glimmerings of insight into where
this delineation might be between intelligible theories that fall within our comprehension and
areas where no such theory is possible yeah so I agree but I do I do think there are limits and
and I think this is this is one of these real mysteries so in some areas people are very flexible
in others you know we're not and I think of what was interesting talking to Chomsky was
you know when we asked um is it possible that there are really just these these limits to human
cognition you know this horizon beyond which we may never go and he brought up the example of uh
rats and prime number mazes you know that if you have a prime number maze so this is a maze where
at every prime intersection you take a right for example and if you do that then you get to the
cheese or you escape the maze or whatever the goal is that no amount of training no amount of time
can you ever ever train a rat to complete a uh a prime number maze because their brain their cognitive
structure there just doesn't have the concept of prime numbers it's it's it's just totally lacking
it's like if it was just excised from their capability to understand the concept of prime
numbers and he said it would be a miracle if we human beings don't have similar limitations so
maybe there are concepts there that are necessary to understand all of physics to understand the
physical universe they just they just don't exist in any human mind and it may even be the case that
we can't even formulate them in any externalized intelligence form we may just have this almost
this blind spot to this particular concept and i think that's fascinating you know i think there's
in my mind there's really two possibilities here one is chomsky's correct that it would be a miracle
and in fact there are blind spots that human cognition doesn't have on the other hand i think
it's also possible that there may be um a level of cognition at which like let's say it's higher
order logic like once you get to the ability to understand higher order logic it may be it may
be possible that all facts of the universe can be can be described and somehow and and you know
higher order logic i don't know the answer to it but i think it's a fascinating question well let me
push back on on that a little bit because yeah the fascinating thing is when you reach
potentially when you reach a threshold of intelligence everything might be accessible
because there is this infinity of abstractions out there in abstraction space most of which
aren't particularly useful and most of which will always be unexplored but with the rat example yeah
they can't reach the abstraction of a prime number and apparently they were not trainable
but if you think about it shortcuts exist it because abstraction space is a topological space
and you could create a breadcrumb trail and in theory you could train the rats to learn a sequence
of mechanical steps just like a neural network does to effectively perform the maze of a prime
number maze without understanding i wonder whether that's possible yeah i mean i think it's i think
it's always possible that in any finite scenario so a maze that that has at most you know in you
know intersections i think it's always possible in any finite scenario and we talked about the
sum kind of in the context of neural networks too sure you can you can memorize like so i mean i
don't know i haven't personally looked at the rat you know maze literature but but i imagine you could
probably train a rat to like maybe always for a particular maze to take like
the second and the third and the fifth turn or something but i think probably the point is that
that there's a very small number of turns at which it's limited like it can't go beyond that
and it can't generalize to kind of i say arbitrary in you know i mean obviously it takes a certain
amount of time to escape and it'll die before it can go through one million turns or whatever
that number is but but this is the distinction that we always try to make about algorithms
and concepts that generalize such that they can just be they can they can operate on any almost
arbitrary you know time or number of operations as long as you can extend like the memory space so
that the code the algorithm is completely separate from from really the the memory space if you will
and so like if i was in a prime number maze and you just stuck me in the middle and said hey
welcome to prime number maze see you when you get out well i could get out you know for a really
large number of of turns right because i can i can count you know three five might take me a
little while but eventually i can get out there and and you know if you have a machine that has
an expandable memory it could get it could continue that for an arbitrary number of of cycles
and escape it would need to memorize it right that that's right but but then it then it comes down
to the machine of our brain or a rat's brain and i'm interested in the dichotomy between being able
to mechanistically perform what is an abstraction and as you say if the machine could take enough
steps in this abstraction space then they could perform the prime number calculation without
understanding it and this brings me on to go del because um well he brought this up as well
so go del's proof is all about abstraction it's the ability to prove a theorem finitely right
so a proof is an abstraction and you know like what he talks about this quantification logic right
that's the ability to use a finite object to address an infinite set so um this this go del's
proof is actually i mean what lead said it's about a space of things that cannot be known
yeah i mean it it's always it's always treacherous territory when you when you get into
girdle's you know proof and or you know what not because uh
um everybody thinks everybody thinks everybody else doesn't understand it and you know certain
philosophers think that they have the one true kind of understanding it so i don't like i don't
want to present what i'm trying to say here as you know the truth like you you know you guys have
to kind of decide for yourself right but but the idea is that in any in any particular finite
formal system so we kind of set down here's the set of rules that we follow and there's like a
finite list of those set of rules and then we start with a set of you always got to start
with somewhere we've been talking about this whole conversation you start with a set of
you know axioms or whatever so it's and it's a closed system you know new axioms don't enter
the picture there later on um there will always be statements that you can write down in that
in that formal system that are true there are true statements but cannot be proved you know
within that within that formal system so the idea is that you just you know you can't prove
everything either either you're incomplete which which is what this is meaning there are statements
that are true which i can't prove so i'm not complete my formal system isn't isn't complete
enough to prove every every true statement okay or you're inconsistent so you can you can have a
set of rules in which it's possible for example to prove that a statement is both true and false
but then of course you can prove that any true statement is true so it's you got to kind of
pick your poison here you're either incomplete or inconsistent but it's important to keep a
mind that that this applies to closed formal systems and technically and mathematically you
know human beings and human cognition are not closed like this is in fact what science does
right it poses a question okay i don't know if this if the statement is true or false i don't know
and i can't prove it but i can go do an experiment and then the universe tells me like whether or
not it's true or false right that's the fascinating thing about human beings embedded in this universe
is that we have this process called science which is an open-ended it's an open system
you know i don't i want to say open-ended because i get this isn't a totally different
line of question but it's an open system that can interact with the universe and new
stuff comes in right so we don't really we're not strictly bound by
Gertl's theorem although any particular finite system that we write down is but we're always
expanding that by conducting science and doing experiment that new apparatus of reasoning has
nothing to do with precept end of story we don't sense transitivity we don't say i mean that that
is a ridiculous paradigm and it has been proven by the way skinner has been skinned long time ago
behaviorism but at least by reputable people i mean it's a joke to still think of behaviorism
all i need to know i learned in kindergarten i i don't need to know how to ride a bicycle that's
where learning happened i learned you learn the skill you don't learn knowledge you acquire knowledge
you just go and grab it right i learned how to play guitars but the universe doesn't give a damn
if i play guitars or not because the fourth term for both is learning right but really we don't
learn that stuff we acquire it's knowledge acquisition i go and i acquire i grab it i steal
right learning is different regarding empiricism there's this issue of what's your unit of analysis
so are you talking about an individual human mind because for an individual individual human mind
it's abundantly immediately experimentally obvious that we're not empiricists like we have we have
encoded innate knowledge for an individual human being but i think like friston would expand the
level analysis to to the species and life in general which is that life this process of life
has been evolving you know and developing this set of dynamics that survived and so whether or not
you call that empiricism you know it's kind of a definitional matter what i'm what i'm more concerned
about is what's the mechanism by which by which that knowledge becomes encoded in in the human
circuitry or the circuitry of life and and where i what i think we're missing or not talking about
enough is that yes observation and you know interaction with the environment to do a little
bit better than appear or what not definitely plays a role but just just the mere fact of survival
seems to play a role in imparting that um you know and so it'll it'll be interesting to see
how over time we learn more and more about how to apply survival which we do and say ea algorithms
right like in ea algorithms you have a population some may survive to reproduce some don't versus
versus you know observation and reasoning and that type of dynamic you know learning that you do
and then the other the other point that you brought up there is once you have that like once
you have this knowledge however it gets there okay so it's from your genetic endowment it's
from the laws of nature or whatnot the human cognitive system has learned to take that
those seeds those seeds of knowledge and generate with them all kinds of mathematics like all kinds
of abstract ideas that have no correspondence to anything that we know of in reality and that's
pretty it's almost like the bootstrap right like like like it's it's kind of weird that there is this
platonic world of ideas that are all you know can be consistent and interconnected and you can say
all kinds of useful and crazy well i say useful you can say all kinds of you know consistent and
interesting things about them and yet they have no there's nothing in the physical world that
corresponds to them but they're but they're no less you know they're no less
sensible like they're no less they're no less mathematical they're no less you know they just
don't have a correspondence to reality and likewise by the way on the other side of the coin
there's clearly a lot about the universe that's happening that we have no sufficient mathematics
to describe so there's a vast chunk maybe maybe you know maybe the piece that's that's even mappable
to the physical world is measure zero like in the vast chunk of mathematics so there's this vast
chunk that doesn't map to anything in reality and there are things happening in the physical universe
for which we have no no mapping to mathematics for so they're almost these these two separate
worlds that slightly overlap here in this little sliver of um of of math that we would call physics
right chapter four cognitive templates in fact while it's true that our genetic program rigidly
constrains us i think the more important point is that the existence of that rich of that rigid
constraint is what provides the basis for our freedom and creativity and uh what do you mean
it's only because we're pre-programmed that we can do all the things we can do exactly the point is
that if we really were plastic organisms without an extensive pre-programming then the state that
our mind achieves would in fact be a reflection of the environment which means it would be extraordinarily
impoverished fortunately for us we're rigidly pre-programmed with extremely rich systems
that are part of our biological endowment correspondingly a small amount of real rather
degenerate experience uh allows a kind of a great leap into a rich cognitive system
essentially uniform in a community and in fact roughly uniform which would have developed over
countless evolutionary ages through the basic evolutionary process the basic system itself
developed over long periods of evolutionary development we don't know how really uh but
for the individual it's present as a result the individual is capable of with a very small amount
of evidence of constructing an extremely rich system which allows him to uh act in the free and
creative fashion which in fact is normal for humans we can say anything that we want over
an infinite range uh other people will understand us though they've heard nothing like that before
we're able to do that precisely because of that rigid programming but short of that we
would not be able to do at all what account are you able to give of creativity if we are
pre-programmed in the way you say then how is creativity a possibility for us well here I
think one has to be fairly careful uh I think we can say a good deal about about the nature of the
system that is acquired the state of knowledge that is attained we can say a fair amount about the
biological the basis the the basis in the initial state of the mind for the acquisition of this system
we are only respecting the universe we live in it's no more than uh how the planets orbit
each other and they they're just I mean they're obeying the laws of physics we're we're obeying
the mental laws of the metaphysics they call the metaphysics actually the orthology is all
about metaphysics what how the word functions that has not been obtained by going out to the part
and dying three times until I discover that's in like that's stupid we come equipped with that look
even animals have that by the way a cat after two minutes starts walking and eating on its own
if you look at newborn at like obviously it has to do with evolution and how those that didn't
obey the laws of nature didn't survive yeah so um quite often people confuse or conflate
empiricism with nativism so you know nativists think that we have all of the cognitive apparatus
already built into our mind but actually then they're not synonymous I think what Chomsky says is
via some ethereal mechanism we are endowed with the laws of nature and that's how all of it you
know via osmosis gets into our brain so you've got a really interesting view on this Keith
well yeah because I've been thinking about this you know Chomsky said um look the evidence is
absolutely clear that that humans do not start off as a blank slate we have these endowments
of of prior knowledge one of them is obviously genetics you know we have a genetic endowment
we have this code in our DNA that that results in structures that unfold and grow and sure they
they develop in response to to the environment but they're growing from this this encoded
template in our genes but he said there's another possible source of of this knowledge
outside of experience which is the laws of nature and and it's kind of a mystery how how the laws of
nature enter into enter into our knowledge and and I know Chomsky would agree you know there's
some mechanism there we just all know what it is and I've been thinking about that you know like
what is what is the mechanism and and my guess is it really comes down to something
very simple but profound at the same time which is survival okay like if you think about um
at the end of the day life has evolved to create this circuitry okay and it doesn't matter whatever
the circuitry is made out of you know neurons it could be uh also in lower you know monoseular
organisms it could be in in the in the dynamic pathways that they're you know the concentrations
of of electrolytes or whatever is going on inside of them right but there's some circuitry okay
one thing that enters into that circuitry is does it survive to see another day and so long
before there were any any organisms that did anything that we would call observe you know
that sit there and observe nature and think about it okay they were developing this circuitry
because as they randomly explored the space of possible circuits some circuits processed information
in such a way that gave them an advantage in the real environment i.e under the laws of nature
and they survived and ones that didn't have processing that corresponded to the laws of
nature simply were destroyed right and so the mere fact of survival of existence or
continuing existence i think encodes knowledge into into life so it's almost a form of ontic
knowledge you know it's knowledge that's there because of your factual existence and it had to
correspond to some degree to nature and the laws of nature or you would have perished right
and i think there's this interesting connection to fristin's free energy principle because it's
all about hey look if we take the assumption that things exist that that definable things
objects definable things exist and for them to continue to exist if they continue to exist
what must they do right that's the question he asked is what must a definable entity
something that has this boundary you know what he frames as a markup boundary what must it
dynamically continue to do in order to exist to continue existing and and you get this free
energy principle which is that well to you know whether you want to call it thinking reasoning
it doesn't matter it has a dynamics it has a dynamic behavior that mathematically corresponds to
something like Bayesian inference right like it has to it has to model predictions of the future
and its interaction with the environment in order for it to continue existing or would have been
destroyed and so for me this is a fascinating idea that that you have this endowment one comes from
genetics one comes from the evolution of life in general which is of course encoded genetically
at us but it comes from the evolution of life in general the fact that it survived it's an
existential form of knowledge but the interesting thing at me first of all friston is an empiricist
and it's quite easy to look over the history of our evolution to explain how do these cognitive
functions get implanted into our brain and i think that that's a that's a great explanation
because then using those cognitive functions we can start to extrapolate into this much larger
abstractive space but what you're saying is interesting because there is a kind of
epistemic resonance between the cognitive templates we have and the reality we live in
for this precise reason but i still think though that it's possible for us to learn new cognitive
templates because what Walid says you'll never be surprised by reality for that reason because
the cognitive templates that we've been endowed by nature are the templates that describe the
universe yeah i agree and and this gets that's what we're saying it seems almost immediately
obvious that we have we have the ability to to learn you know to learn or to apply definitely
to learn new cognitive templates i mean we definitely do it you know humans are entering
new new realms in which we didn't evolve all the time and it's certainly happening in the
virtual space and you know and we're certainly able to do that the question is are there limits to
that and yeah i mean there's obviously some very trivial you know kinds of limits to it but
but i think there may be these deeper limits too um and it's kind of this this question Chomsky
raised of you know are we are we rats in a prime number maze you know are we missing certain
concepts about the universe that we just may never be able to get i think it's an open question
um there's certainly as he puts it there's certainly this innate drive to be radically
empiricist to try and take our human level understandings of you know balls and apples and
and um sticks and things like that and project it down to to uh the level of quantum mechanics
are far out into the stars you know at the at the like galactic supercluster level um
so we definitely have some failings there um and it'll be interesting you know it's it's going
to be a question that we'll be asking probably forever uh is what are the limits of human cognition
and i don't know chapter five the ghost in the machine some of you may have noticed that when
we first released this video we got blocked by the BBC on copyright we had included a small
clip from Richard Feynman from a BBC horizon interview in 1980 um back in those days the BBC
actually made quality content remarkably so we also included that clip from Brian McGee
which was in the 1970s luckily they don't have a copyright block on that yeah anyway
let's not go there i'm absolutely seething about it i believe this information belongs in the public
domain i'm so annoyed with the BBC for blocking that anyway this is what Richard Feynman said i'm
just going to quote it i have a friend who's an artist and he sometimes has taken a view
which i don't agree with very well he'll hold up a flower and he'll say look how beautiful it is
and i'll agree and he says you see i as an artist can see how beautiful this is but you as a scientist
you take this all apart and it just becomes this dull thing and i think he's kind of nutty i mean
beauty that he sees is available to other people and to me too i believe and although i might not
be as refined aesthetically as he is that i can still appreciate the beauty of a flower at the
same time i see much more about the flower than he sees i could imagine the cells in there the
complicated actions which would also have a beauty i mean it's not just the beauty of the dimension
of one centimeter there's also the beauty at a smaller dimension the inner structure also the
processes the fact that the colors and the flower evolved in order to attract insects to pollinate
it is interesting it means that the insects can see the color it adds the question is this
aesthetic sense does it also exist in a lower form does it why is it aesthetic all kinds of
interesting questions which the science only adds to the excitement a mystery in awe of a flower
it only adds i don't understand how it subtracts end quote
the ghost in the machine is british philosopher gilbert riles derogatory description for rene
Descartes mind-body dualism now Descartes as a man of scientific genius could not but endorse
the claims of mechanics yet as a religious and moral man he could not accept like Hobbes did
the discouraging rider to these claims namely that human nature differs only in the degree of
complexity from clockwork Descartes and subsequent philosophers naturally but erroneously believed
that they availed themselves of the following escape route since mental words are not to be
construed as signifying the occurrence of mechanical processes since the mechanical laws
explain movements in space other laws must explain some of the non-spatial workings of the mind
which is to say the ghost in the machine i'll talk some about the Isaac Newton and his contributions
to a study of mind that he's not known for that but i think a case can be made that
he did make substantial indirect but nevertheless substantial contributions i'd like to explain
why there is a familiar view that the early scientific revolution beginning and through
the 17th century provided humans with limitless explanatory power Newton's greatest achievement
was that while he seemed to draw the veil from some of the mysteries of nature he showed at the
same time the imperfections of the mechanical philosophy and thereby restored nature's ultimate
secrets to that obscurity in which they ever did and ever will remain the mechanical philosophy of
course was the guiding doctrine of the scientific revolution it held that the world is a machine
a grander version of the kind of automata that stimulated the imagination of thinkers of the
time and much in the way programmed computers do today they were thinking of the remarkable clocks
the artifacts constructed by skilled artisans and there is a further task that's to determine the
scope and limits of human understanding incidentally some differently structured organism some Martians
say might regard human mysteries as simple problems and might wonder that we can't find the answers
or even ask the right questions just as we wonder about the inability of rats to run prime number
mazes it's not because of limits of memory or other superficial constraints but because of the very
design of their cognitive nature and their cognitive nature so actually if you think it's
through I think it's quite clear that Newton's remarkable achievements led to a significant
lowering of the expectations of science a severe restriction on the role of intelligibility
they furthermore demonstrated that it's an error to ridicule what's called the ghost in the machine
that's what I and others were taught at your age in the best graduate schools Harvard in my case
but that's just a mistake Newton did not exercise the ghost rather he exercised the machine he left
the ghost completely intact and by so doing he inadvertently set the study of mind on a quite
a new course this is Eric curio from Harvard University well the world is a complex place
and our mathematical models of its parts are almost childishly recklessly simple how can a
relation of representation hold between them this issue of complexity in the world is a very serious
problem for the standard you were of representation there's um second problem is what I call levels
of abstraction in any given theory or framework within which formulates theories there are many
given levels of abstraction at which one can write down the mathematical formula that one
in standard parlance uses to represent physical theories in Newtonian mechanics we have f equals
ma that's about as general abstract as one can possibly get does that represent in the same way
as the expression for the Newtonian force law f equals g m m r r hat over r squared
can f equals ma represent at all this is there anything in the world that is a pure acceleration
even in a world in which the toning mechanics would be true putting aside it and put aside the fact
that it's not in fact true can that ladder the force the Newtonian force law the gravitational
force law can that represent in the same way as the equation modeling two perfect homogeneous spheres
as a Keplerian binaries binary system without a specified target as an undergraduate when you're
when you're learning these learning gravitational theory and you write down this Keplerian binary
system in soul for it does it represent something I have no idea can that perfectly idealize Keplerian
binary system represent in the same way as a set of equations modeling the earth and sun as a
concrete individual gravitationally coupled system with lunar and jovian perturbations accounted for
do different levels of abstraction represent in the same way how does one decide when the
mathematics is concrete enough to represent I don't know and nothing in the standard use gives
me any clue as to how to answer that question really the the key point that chomsky has made a
few times and he made it with us when we were talking to him about what newton did you know how
newton changed physics like forever right is is to show us that the universe is not
intelligible to us like at least in the sense that we can't take our kind of common sense
you know mechanical at the scale at which people operate where things are have this kind of
mechanical properties right machines gears things touch each other in order to to have a force
they have to have contact right between objects and things like that that there are scales or
regimes of physics where it's just it's not the way it is like our intuition doesn't apply to that
and that was a problem with the action at a distance like you know gravity right you know
I mean that it's exerting this force that behaves as if it was pointing at the instantaneous location
of that object and acting over you know vast distances instantaneously right and it doesn't
help that sure years later okay we we now have you know a better theory like gr right but it
introduces all kinds of things that are not intelligible to to humans like curved spacetime
I mean what's how's that correspond to anything we perceive in reality like at our at our level
cognition it doesn't right and so it's just not intelligible it's almost you have the math
and it's almost like the the kind of school of quantum mechanics that says just shut up
and calculate forget about trying to make it intelligible just just use the tools and the
math and yeah exactly well that that's why so you know when Chomsky says that Newton exercised
the machine but left the ghost intact he was saying that we no longer seek mechanical explanations
the machine was exercised from our theory of science that the ghost is still there right so
after Newton the problem was largely forgotten yeah and I think he might have made some points about
why I was forgotten I mean I don't think it's fair to say it was forgotten because he points out
that Newton struggled with this action at a distance you know for the whole first whole
rest of his life right like like really just not willing to accept it that that uh that there was
a deep philosophical problem there and you look at things like Russell right with Russell's paradox
where where he just it just crushed his vision of kind of mathematics even is resting on a solid
foundation but I think it's totally fair to say that ghost was left yeah like we exercised the
ghost and left the or exercised the machine unless left the ghost there I kind of agree with that
you know there's so much mystery left yeah I mean it's interesting I mean um because now we try to
build models of natural phenomena that are intelligible to us but you know so the model
is intelligible even if the underlying phenomenon is not intelligible and I guess Chomsky would say
that all modern science is like that basically whether it's quantum physics or biology or even
linguistics and and physics so I've recently I've been watching some interesting videos and
lectures of Eric Curiel from the the Black Hole Institute and he has there there's a really cool
lecture he gave um is basically the point of it was that mathematics does not represent and he has
some very solid arguments for how we shouldn't even think of our mathematics as corresponding to
what's actually happening in in physical reality nor even that they represent what's happening
faithfully even in that abstracted form you know that he has a solid argument to say look what it
really is is it's a bridge mathematics is a bridge between two almost equally mysterious things
one is the actual underlying physical reality which as we've been talking about it's it's like
not intelligible it's weird you know it does all kinds of things that are not describable really
or or within the realm of our cognition and it's a bridge between that and something equally
mysterious which are these abstractions and concepts that somehow exist up in our head
that we can't directly look at you know we we perceive them and we think about them but it's
not like we can really you know um understand where they come from like how do we how does
abduction work right how do we how do we come up with these these concepts and these generalizations
and this creative act and what are they really and they're these things that are always almost
outside the boundary of our cognition and mathematics is is just a bridge between those two things
yeah well this is this is really fascinating because it links back to that rat in the maze
example that that you gave because if we shouldn't expect the study of nature to be reducible right
to two models which are intelligible um it does make you wonder whether it's possible at all right
to understand the world we live in with models why I think on the one hand an answer is it clearly is
it's clearly we're clearly able to understand the world to an extremely pragmatically useful
degree I mean because we have all this technology that we've built we've we've you know come to
understand concepts at a scale so small but it's it's hard to believe anything's happening down
there and so large that it'll forever be out of reach of anywhere that human beings can never
can ever get to physically right so in a strange way our mind is able to span and understand this
vast reach of stuff happening and yet there's still infinitely more that's mysterious and and
perhaps you know forever out of reach of our cognition and that's just it's really fascinating
to me at least and beautiful in a way yeah and and these are the things that chomsky spoke about
a lot in the interview with us so there's this notion of closedness which is that science thrives
on reductionism so by separating one phenomenon or one effect from the rest of the world we gain
the ability to model it to understand it and to reinsert it into the broader picture so you know
things like physics experiments to theoretical computer sciences simplifications but you know
this whole thing about mechanical philosophy that originated with Galileo didn't it you know which is
this idea that we can view the world as a machine and Galileo insisted that theories are intelligible
only if we can duplicate you know what they do by means of artificial devices which I think is
fascinating yeah and and this kind of pokes a bunch of holes in that and and in a way I'm kind
of hopeful that it frees us up to be even more creative with mathematics and science and it kind
of it kind of gets at some of the aspects that you know you and and kind of Stanley talked about
pretty often too right which is you know we should be free right to experiment and have
serendipity and creativity utilize those aspects of of of human cognition when understanding even
fundamental physics and you know this this analytic idea right of kind of splitting up
things and drilling down on the one component that does something actually has a lot of negative
effects to say in medicine for example like you know we're always looking for the single molecule
that will stave off disease or or cure an illness right whereas what we're trying what we're finding
out now is that sometimes you need cocktails you need mixtures of of multiple molecules you can't
just distill it down to the one true essence of something you have to take a more holistic
approach to medicine to health and maybe even things like physics and mathematics so I'm kind
of hopeful actually that if people accept this moral it'll actually expand what we're able to
understand rather than reduce it exactly I just wanted to close this bit talking about Descartes
well which is another one of Chomsky's heroes and he recognized the creative aspect of language
and thought right which is this ability unique to humans that can't possibly be duplicated by
machines so he said that you know language was innovative without bounds appropriate to the
circumstances but not caused by them and can engender thoughts in others which they recognize
that they could have expressed themselves so and this is actually a creative principle of the
mind he called res cogitans I remember Chomsky arose that which stood alongside res extensor
you know which is this Cartesian dualism you know the two substances and it's this idea that um
cut you know Descartes actually thought that there was a kind of separation between our body and
the um the infinite set of expressions which could be created in the mind
yeah and I think um was it a Galileo that he said considered you know the alphabet is the greatest
the greatest invention was it because it's with this finite number of symbols
you can express this infinity of uh of concepts you know and and and there's so many real mysteries
here like where um the one you brought up with what Chomsky called Descartes problem you know how
is it that um how is it that we can have ideas and linguistic expressions that are not directly
caused by by the inputs that we're getting it's not like a an input stimulus response right it's
actually something else is going on in there and we're generating a new a new linguistic
expression that's maybe never even been uttered before and yet it somehow maps correctly in a
sense to what's happening in the world to the to the situation and people are able to understand
it you know and how is that kind of freedom of the will if you will even possible because the
best of our our science you know points certainly it won one interpretation of things that it's all
deterministic even if it's very non-linear and chaotic it's still deterministic or if it's random
it's random in ways that certainly don't you know provide any type of this uh freedom of will and
you know he had this this hilarious kind of uh paraphrasing I guess of William James where he said
you know if if you believe there's no freedom of the will why bother presenting an argument
you know you're being forced to do it the person you're trying to convince can't be convinced
because they don't have free will either so why why bother doing it at all I know and and Chomsky
did say actually that this very human ability we have to select an action um you know given the
circumstances using free will is is one of the biggest mysteries in in science but uh just to
wrap up though I mean um so Chomsky kind of took us on a on an intellectual journey which is to say
that in the olden days we used to think of the world as a machine you know it had a kind of
mechanism and um and now we don't think of it that way anymore but what we do do is we construct
intelligible theories around the world so you know we can't know what the world is but we can build
theories um that a machine can compute so the world is not a machine our mind is a machine
yeah I mean he said he did he did say he said that the goal change from from the world being
intelligible to we'll just we'll be satisfied with theories that are that are intelligible
I'm not quite sure if if if he even believes that the the theories are are always intelligible
because because sometimes you know they're almost on the on the boundary of of not intelligible um
but I know well um I mean remember Jeff Hawkins said that um Einstein's general relativity was
actually quite intelligible because it uses um a lot of everyday concepts that humans would
understand but the thing is like Einstein didn't actually explain anything right all he did was
he came up with this abstraction which was a model which was arguably intelligible but no
one really understood it yeah and and and I think this is something that um that I was talking about
Eric Curiel and that in that talk about mathematics doesn't represent he brings up the fact that even
if you just stick with theories okay take something like general relativity there are multiple
radically different formulations of general relativity okay like they they have very different
sort of uh concepts atomic concepts built into the foundation
and you know I mentioned Eric Curiel earlier because in in that talk of his that mathematics
doesn't represent from my perspective at least he brings up that even if you focus on the theories
just the theories themselves not the world there's questions as to whether those theories are even
intelligible themselves because if you take something like general relativity for example
you know there are radically different formulations of it like there's the metric formulation the
tetrad formulation there's three plus one dimension formulation there's chiral formulation
there's four dimensional formulations and these things have radically different you know elements
that that make them up so even even purely in the theory and in the mathematics you can have
very different structures that that all map to the same underlying underlying reality so how
you know how can they all be simultaneously intelligible when they have such radically
different you know structures this is Richard Feynman again I'm quoting my father had told me
looking at a bird he says do you know what that bird is it's a brown-throated thrush but in Portuguese
it's a hunter a bear in Italian it's a cute a little and in Chinese it's a
he says now they know all the languages you want to know what the name of the bird is
and when you finish with all that he says you'll know absolutely nothing whatever about the bird
you'll only know about humans in different places and what they call the bird now he says let's look
at the bird and what it is he told me how to notice things and one day when I was playing with what
we call an express wagon which is a little wagon which has a railing around it for children to
play with so they can pull it around it also has a ball in it and I remember this it had a ball in
it and I pulled the wagon and I noticed something about the way the ball moved so I went to my
father and I said hey pop I notice when I pull the wagon the ball rolls to the back of the wagon
it rushes to the back of the wagon and when I'm pulling along I suddenly stopped the ball
rolls to the front of the wagon and I said why is that and he says nobody knows he said the general
principle is that when things are moving they try to keep moving and when things are standing still
they tend to keep standing still unless you push on them really hard and he says the tendency is
called inertia but nobody knows why that's true now that is a deep understanding he knew the
difference between knowing the name of something and knowing something Feynman said something can
only ever be explained by taking something else for granted and at some point you need to stop this
infinite regression and just admit that you need to take something as true on faith or simply admit
that you cannot know. Chapter 6 this is a discussion of the Fodor Felician paper in the 1980s on
connectionism where they put this massive critique forwards which we think hasn't been answered yet
and there may not have been centered around productivity and systematicity.
So here's a fact trains of thought are often like arguments in particular they often lead
from entertaining true premises to entertaining true conclusions this fact engenders a problem
the problem is suppose that the mind is a mechanism and what after all what else could it be since its
states have causal powers supposing it is a mechanism it would be nice to know how a mechanism a piece
of physical matter could have this property that minds have how the state transitions of a mechanism
could be like arguments in the way that the state transitions of minds are like arguments
this is the problem that cognitive science has made some progress on in my view it's in fact the
problem that defines the field. Turing's idea was that you can explain the analogy between
trains of thought and argument consonant with assuming that the mind is a mechanism if you
will also assume the following two things first that mental states are syntactically structured
and second that the syntactic structure of a mental state determines its causal role
in mental processes are sometimes referred to this as the language of thought picture of the mind
because the most obvious example of things that have syntactic structure is sentences in fact it
wouldn't be very misleading to say that Turing's idea was that thinking is a syntactic operation
on mental sentences and what Turing argued I think persuasively enough so that one wants to
follow out the research program that he set forward what Turing argued was that if you assume
that thinking is a syntactic operation on mental sentences then the nature of the analogy between
trains of thought and arguments the truth preserving character of trains of thought can be made
compatible with a mechanistic theory of the mind I mean at least all the connections I
talked about with his bite the bullet that is they say no the idealization to an infinite capacity
is not allowable actually there's only a finite number of thoughts you could think even if you
lived forever and even if memories and strange and attention constraints and stuff like that are
relaxed even under those conditions you could be in the position of having thought all the things
you can do and running out of thoughts okay so that's a way of biting the bullet I think
the views that the mind that is is inherently finite is a bizarre view what I'll call a
systematicity argument you see which systematicity argument is supposed to do that there's supposed
to be arguments in the Turing model that don't require idealization to infinite capacitance
I'm going to try to set out um that class of arguments I'll argue first that thought isn't
just productive it's also as I say systematic and that the best explanation of systematicity
presupposes a combinatorial syntax and semantics for mental representation just like the best
explanation of productivity does so um I'll argue that it can't be the case that all mental
representations are atomic so it can't be the case that the mind is a connections network
that's the form of the argument Fodor and Phylician wrote a seminal critique of connectionism in the
late 1980s they released a paper called connectionism and cognitive architecture a critical analysis
and in Wally's opinion this critique of connectionism has still been unanswered in the paper they
derived the term subsymbolic it was a term that was invented in the 1980s by connectionists to
describe how a representation can be sliced and diced and stored over many nodes in the neural
network but Fodor and Phylician do not think that subsymbolic confers the kind of cognitive
architecture which they think is possible with the classicist architecture there are systematic
interrelations among the thoughts a thinker can entertain for example if you can entertain the
thought that John loves Mary then you can also entertain the thought that Mary loves John so
systematicity looks like a crucial property of human thought and thus demands a principled
explanation what I have to do is to tell you what systematicism is and why it has this implication
and here my strategy will be to start with natural language that is I'll show you what
systematicity is and what the arguments for it are in the case of natural language and then show
you why having defined the notion for you middle representation thought must be systematic too
okay so I'll take natural language English and sort of carry it on case of a system which is
systematic Chomsky and Fodor also spoke a lot about productivity which is basically this idea
that you can generate an infinite number of meanings from language in natural languages and
this is just the way making the productivity point that I was making before in natural languages
there are always an infinite number of semantically distinct syntactic forms right you can say
one plus one is two and two plus two is forward and John believes it's raining Mary said John
believes it's raining Bill thought Mary said John believes it's raining it's surprising that Bill
thought that John said okay so that's I mean natural language is always productive in that way
Jerry Fodor and Xenon Phylician in 1988 wrote a paper called connectionism and cognitive
architecture a critical analysis and the funny thing was even back in 1987 these guys these
classical AI guys they thought that the hype of neural networks and connectionism was ridiculously
getting out of control and and they wrote this paper so Keith can you just give us a summary of the
paper oh boy a summary of the paper first of all the what I'll tell you about that paper is it's
it's just chock full of goodness so I recommend you know anyone go and read it it's very contains
a huge wealth of of thought and and argumentation and examples and even though it was written
you know back then in 87 88 whenever it was you'll find that it's it's as applicable today
as as it was you know back then and and they come out you know really the the crux of their argument
is that um that there is fundamental differences between symbolic systems and
connectionist kind of architectures right and they try to they try to really drill down on
what those fundamental differences are and the fundamental differences that that practically
matter for like the capabilities of these systems okay and really it kind of it hinges on uh
you know I guess three main you know pillars although there's much more in the paper than just
the discussion of this but the one is that that uh symbolic systems are productive productive
systems by which they mean you can like take like say a formula for example that has variables
and you can substitute in you know structures and you can produce you can generate you know more and
more structures from this simple set of rules so think about like a a context-free grammar for
example um you know you you've got this kind of set of rules and from that you can generate this
this infinite set of of uh sentences if you will that still follow a certain structure
in every single sentence that you generate from that set of rules will uh will be consistent with
that set of rules it'll it'll have a certain structure you know defined by that and in fact you
can even be given a sentence and then parse it back to what was like the tree that generated it
and so they have this productive nature um and this is by the way this is like kind of important
to understand here and we talked about this a lot too this is the nature of of computation
is that it's unbounded in time so you can always sit there and kind of iterate and like if you
think of the Turing machine you know it has like this tape that it can go and write down some symbols
and it can go back and expand one and expand it more and you can kind of keep going for an unbounded
amount of time you know producing producing a larger and larger you know productive result if
you will everybody understands that in reality every machine that we're going to build is is finite
okay we get that okay but there's a big difference between architecturally there's a big difference
between finite state machines and machines that have this potentially infinite unbounded memory
that they can kind of operate on so the idea that they're saying about these systems are productive
okay and secondly they're also compositional which is almost the the opposite of this okay it's saying
that you know you maintain the parts of a whole so even though you've you've created a structure
which is say the sentence you still have kind of the words in there as these separate entities
and you can go in and and pull them apart you can analytically reach in grab pieces of them and
look at like say a phrase that's within that sentence so if you think about like say um uh you
know boolean satisfiability like logical formulas you know here's like a three-sat formula a bunch
of terms and they're anded together and then or together and you're asking you know you're kind
of analyzing whether or not you can assign variables to satisfy this structure like this is
very kind of nangate type type calculation logic you know suppose you have a part of a of a program
that determines for this particular task this formula is important here like this formula
if i if i operate on all the input variables in this way and i and i get a value out of that okay
it's it's useful for something like determining whether or not it's a hot dog or human face or
whatnot and another part of the network that figures out you know or program if you will that
figures out well there's a different another formula that's useful for some other task okay
in symbolic world you've actually got the formulas and you still have their parts and their pieces
and so you can have like a meta analysis that takes a look at those individual formulas and
compares them and goes oh look these two things have the following terms in common so now maybe
those terms are important for some purpose whereas in a connexious network you know typically what
happens and there's some caveats here that we can talk about but typically what happens is you've
got a a neuron a node that's performing this calculation it collapses it all into a single
output it's like i either fire or i don't fire with a certain value from that point on there's no more
parts okay like it doesn't have a part it just has a signal point three you can't go in there and figure
out okay well that point three came from these particular terms for this input right there's
no way to to get that back out again it's been convolved it's been collapsed it's been added up
and the problem is you can say well yeah but you know some other nodes in the neural network
for example in a connexious network can have those other terms right but the the difficulty is then
you wind up with this exponential blow up because how do you know in advance like which sub terms
actually matter like okay then let's just do all of them let's just have a neuron for every single
possible combination of the of the input and it'll fire and then you know some subsequent
layer can go and decide well i care about these these subsets that's where you get this exponential
blow up problem from is you can't defer that you don't have parts that you can go back and piece
apart and compare and analyze later when you figure out there were something you have to have
baked in ahead of time all possible kinds of combinations okay um has this got something to
do with intention versus extension so as i understand the classical ai folks they want to
maintain the intention and they don't want to materialize the output immediately so that in
the future let's say i've done some processing i can now go back in time and decompose and recompose
the um uh the computation yeah i i think so i mean and i'm not sure if this is naive of me
or not i don't know but i generally think of intention you know with the s as uh formulas
you know they're the way i think about them concretely is if it's a function from all possible
worlds to worlds that that are true or worlds that are possibly true worlds right so an
intention is saying look you have this this infinite you know space of possible worlds
and a and a function on that that gives you a subset is an intention and you never actually
need to materialize it as an actual um you know as an actual extension that gives you that that
set of true worlds because you have a procedure you have an algorithm you have a formula which
can determine for any given you know possible world doesn't meet that that criteria like that to me
is the difference between intention and extension which is that the intention is a formula that
could give you that you could iterate or apply you know to arbitrarily many you know worlds to
generate um to generate the extension you know of that intention so the intention is like the
generating function right for for a set of extension or for an extension but but critically the
building blocks are there so if you have the intention like for example i use the example
of the discrete Fourier transform so you can represent represent that symbolically and now
you can change all of the components you can change n for example because as soon as you materialize
it you don't understand it anymore and you can't generalize it into slightly different circumstances
yeah exactly and this is what you know and this is what the natural like let's say the classic
natural language understanding folks like walley would would talk about all all day long which is
it suppose you have a grammar okay it's it's pretty easy to write down a grammar you know
i'm not saying it's easy to write down a grammar for natural language i'm just saying it's easy
to write down a grammar like let's say a context free grammar or something and there's an infinite
extension to that that grammar there's infinitely many you know countably infinitely many um
sentences that that could be generated by that grammar and it's quite easy to build a machine
that you can give it any one of those any one of those sentences okay and it can turn on it for a
while for some you know finite period of time and come back and tell you whether or not that sentence
comes from this grammar right it can decide whether or not that's a sentence in this in this
language um but it doesn't need that infinite extension existing somewhere it doesn't have
to be materialized because it just has an algorithm it just has a simple you know grammar
that it can use to figure that out yeah okay okay well this makes a lot of sense so based on reading
the lacoon paper and this connectionism paper so far um lacoon is saying we need to have um a
probabilistic ish uh interpretation of possible futures the connectionism paper is saying that
we need to have composable recomposable decomposable abstractions right and and this is very it's
almost analogous to what france washalay talks about with his library of modules and and and type
two traversal etc he has this distinct dichotomy between type one and type two so yeah it's almost
as if we're saying look neural networks at the moment there are two clear opportunities for
improvement and what are what are those opportunities specifically again so being able to represent
possible futures with some uncertainty quantification yep and secondarily being able to
i mean i'm i'm bagging it in with this discrete space but it doesn't necessarily have to be
discrete functions but what we've just been speaking about from the file ish and paper
composability rich abstractions maintaining the the structure or the intention right and
even later on in the computation cycle being able to introspect about how and why i go okay
yeah so it's the other important thing that comes up in there and the the pollution paper photo and
pollution paper is is one thing that's fundamentally different about symbolic systems is that the code
that the the algorithm and the memory are separated okay and this is this is critical to
understand here which is that you have an algorithm that can run on memory and if it ever runs out of
memory you just need to add on another memory stick okay and it can continue processing with
the same algorithm so the algorithm doesn't fundamentally change if you just enlarge enlarge
the memory and this is a big difference between connectionist systems right because in a in a
neural network if you want to increase the size of the input for example like double the the vector
space or something it's all got to be retrained okay because it's all tightly kind of convolved
together the the memory and the computation this is a huge difference between these these um
you know computational paradigms so i think it's important to understand that
it is but i guess if i design the system it reminds me of object-oriented design in programming
and you create these abstractions unfortunately they are handcrafted although maybe it's possible
that some of them are so platonic that they would apply in in many systems if you could only recompose
them but the that ability to separate the storage from the from the computation seems to depend on
that abstraction in how i design the program and lacoon would say well if you have to handcraft
the abstractions then learning's gone out the window i i agree with you i agree both of you this
is a extremely important problem we need to solve so once you once it almost once you go to the route
of saying i'm going to take my algorithm and abstract it from the memory that's when you run
into all these training problems right because now you're trying to train systems like differentiable
neural computers and and whatever there are things that have essentially a a Turing machine
consists of two parts really a finite state machine and an expandable memory okay that and
then it gets iterated and it can sit there and keep operating on it as soon as you do that separation
and you say okay well i'm gonna have that finite state machine be a neural network that i can train
differentially the problem is now that it's abstracted from or separated if you will from its
memory and you try to do things like have attention and you know be able to operate on that memory you
run into all these kinds of training problems so it's almost like as soon as you if you've got the
memory and the computation all you know glued together in a single hole that's finite you can
differentially train it as soon as you separate it out and make the memory expandable now you
start running into all these these training problems but we need to do that like we need to
figure out how to train algorithms that are abstracted or not abstracted but separated from
their memory and allow them to learn these abstractions that they can then use to operate on the memory
like somehow we have to figure out how to do that chapter seven we're going to discuss how we
rescued the broken recording of jomskin so interviewing professor jomski was a dream come
true for us i just never thought something like this would actually happen and the worst happened
the unimaginable happened the recording messed up have a listen to this this was the before clip
there's a curious distinction which is empirical empirically known for many years
between sentences one interpreter each seems to have been assigned to the the difference
and this was the after clip there's a curious distinction which has been empirically known
for many years between sentences like a one interpreter each seems to have been assigned
to the diplomats now it would be remiss of us not to use our combined expertise
in computer science and machine learning and whatnot and to throw technology at the problem
essentially so the irony wasn't lost on us that jomski believes that deep learning isn't particularly
valuable i mean i'm being a bit unfair there he did say that it was particularly valuable for
things like speech transcription to you know to help him he's he's hearing impaired for goodness
but we don't take ells here on mlst taking ells by the way is a british colloquialism it means that
we do not accept losing so so dramatically that's why we took it upon ourselves to come up with a
solution you know we were not going to let the rather minor matter of a corrupted recording
get in the way of us realizing our dreams you know this was the moment of our lives and we
were not going to let it slip away now we recorded the podcast with riverside.fm which is the podcasting
platform which is supposedly supposed to prevent recording problems from wrecking your show ironically
in our case it did the precise opposite i feel at this point like i could work as the engineering
vp at riverside or something like that because i've got so much experience recovering every
single possible failure mode on their platform i think i'd be quite a useful spare pair of hands
now riverside of course blamed it on chomsky's hardware but i mean chomsky
does so many podcast appearances i mean he probably does more podcast appearances than
gary marcus writes blogs trash and connectionism when i listen back to the recording after the
show because as we were recording the show we could hear that it didn't sound right and we were
all saying to ourselves on on the side chat my god please please god please make the recording
sound okay and much to our horror it was completely broken it was so bad i could just feel the entire
life force of my being just draining away in that moment i could not believe it if our faces
looked really concerned during the interview it was because we were so petrified about what was
going to happen when we played back the recording so how did we fix this thing well um it's quite a
long story to be honest but even though the recording sounded terrible the interesting
thing was that when we ran it for a transcription service the results were still reasonably good
so we had the word boundaries and um what we wanted to do was synthesize chomsky saying the
same thing so we painstakingly went through the script i mean keith must have spent about
17 hours word by word filling in the missing gaps inferring what words that chomsky actually said
so we created a transcript we then created a voice clone model so we started off with a
tacky-tron two voice clone which allowed us to get past the voice authentication system on overdub
and then we recorded an overdub voice using mostly recent clips of chomsky but also some
stuff from about five years ago so it's probably a the voice of a slightly younger chomsky that
you're listening to we synthesized absolutely everything but then we've got the lip-sync problem
the first thing we tried doing was using lip-gan and that didn't work because
chomsky has a beard and it didn't recognize his face so we de-bearded chomsky we made chomsky
narrate the new script and while it was a success i kind of felt it was almost taking the piss a bit
too much it looked like a cartoon character and we want to respect chomsky of course as much as
possible this transcription for example which i'm very happy about because i like to use it
i like bulldozers too it's a lot easier than cleaning the snow by hand but it's not a contribution
to science so um we decided to write a time-warping algorithm to align frame by frame the original
recording to the synthesized version and to do that we just transcribed the synthesized and the
original version we used dynamic time-warping so it's very similar to the needleman vunch algorithm
in bioinformatics so you just kind of build an alignment matrix and then you um compute every
single cell as a function of the neighboring cells and then you trace up behind the matrix from the
bottom right to the top left leverstine distance uses the same algorithm so you can kind of keep
track of matches insertions and deletions so yeah we created the best cost you know the minimum
cost alignment between the two tracks and then between all of the aligned words we just did a
linear frame interpolation so when he was saying hello in one script and hello in another script
we just did a linear frame interpolation and as you can imagine there's all sorts of things that
can go wrong when you do that kind of coding because there's numerical precision problems
you know because we were dealing with hundreds of thousands of frames so it was drifting over time
maybe in the future we'll make another video about how we did that but needless to say
it was in linear time complexity just for all of you recruiting managers at meta
I'm sure you wanted to know that yeah so we did a pretty good job but we wanted to stress a few
things so first of all we will make the original recording available to peruse because I want everyone
to be completely clear that these are Chomsky's words you can tell by the lip sync that it is
indeed Chomsky's words the amazing thing is that with the lip sync you can actually see Chomsky's
physical expression as he was saying the words so even though technically we deep faked Chomsky
it's amazing how when we synchronized his expression to the generated words it kind of just
seemed so real it was like some invisible boundary of reality has been transgressed again it really
was Chomsky saying all of that stuff so there are a couple of occasions where we've actually
inserted in a little bit of the original Chomsky even though it was corrupted just to capture
him chuckling or you know saying some words I mean I think there is a point where he said
language models have achieved zero zero they've done nothing and obviously we just wanted to
capture the original sentiment of Chomsky when he was saying those things in certain parts the
generated voice is roughly twice the speed of Chomsky and we felt that was fair to be honest
because even if we had recorded Chomsky I might have sped it up a little bit it's not so much
that Chomsky talks slowly it's that he has gaps in his speech I've noticed this before when I've
played clips of Chomsky I've kind of typed up the gaps in his speech so if anything it'll make it
easier to listen to because there's less gaps in his speech so I wanted to touch on ethics because
deep fakes is a huge topic at the moment I feel that this is a legitimate use of deep fakes we've
basically used engineering technology which is something that Chomsky talks about in the podcast
to recover a broken interview and we got Chomsky's full permission so this is the email that we got
back from Chomsky by the way this email means so much to me personally I'm going to frame this email
I should put this email in my CV just doing all of this work having this story to tell and getting
this response from Chomsky to me is something that I could tell my grandchildren about it really is
that special to me so as I said before you can listen to the original version just to just to
kind of satisfy yourself that we didn't put any words in his mouth although Chomsky has checked
the synthesized version and given us his blessing and I'll also make it clear as well that we will
be deleting the voice clone so we're not going to use it again we're not going to give anyone
else access to it it was just a temporary expedient and we will now delete that you could have said
to us well why didn't we just record it again with Chomsky and the reason is just our mental
states at the time of that interview the interview meant so much to us you can just see it in our
face it was like meeting your childhood hero and I don't think it would have been the same again if
we if we kind of did it again I felt that Chomsky's reactions were very novel I felt that he said a
lot of things in this interview with us that he hasn't said anywhere else and he really trusted us
and that means a lot to us he entered into a confidence with us at the end of the interview
saying that you know it was it was a really productive conversation and some of the conversations
he's been having recently are quite almost tiring for him you know because he's constantly having to
push it uphill basically and we're his friends you know like we really we're really genuinely
interested in what you had to say and in a way we were kind of I think we were really seeing Chomsky
at his best and that that is very important and that's why I think that we wouldn't have been
able to replicate that if we did it again but anyway if you do want us to go into more technical
detail about how we recovered to that recording or just in general really I mean we are we're
quite an intellectual podcast by the way we've been accused of being armchair philosophers
there's lots of gatekeeping apparently going on on the ml reddit but yeah there's quite a funny
story as well that we had baited breath right so we had spent about a month fixing this recording
it was quite stressful for us because we've got a huge backlog you know it took quite a while to
get the code running we weren't working on the intro just everything was just getting out of
control Keith and I had a massive argument about it and all of this time I think we were stressed
that it would be for nothing because we had asked Chomsky for his permission to publish it and then
he'd say no anyway and it'd be like all of that time was wasted so you know it was a really tricky
situation for us because we felt cornered we felt like there was no other option this was the only
thing that we could have done so yeah it was it was quite an interesting story to tell at the end of
it up to eight language people like for example Wilhelm von Humboldt and Rousseau they both grasp
the idea that languages are basically infinite that they're expressions of human creativity in
fact that's a leading Cartesian idea at some core level part of human nature which is reflected on
the cognitive side in things like language is the capacity to produce and understand and articulate
and express new thoughts without limit and without control so the crucial fact about language use is
that it's not determined by our situation it's coming out of us as freely willed action in some
sense and continually novel and so on and to express thoughts and ideas that are new to oneself
and other people but that are intelligible and appropriate and so on this is a core aspect of
human nature Tromsky is a big believer in autonomy free will creativity and novelty shouldn't be
entirely surprising given that he is in the narcosyndicalist it's really important for him
that we are individual actors that have free will that is not determined by the situation we're in
which is why he quite often says that language use is appropriate to the situation but not caused by
the situation but the really interesting thing that he says about language is that it's an
expression of human creativity language is an infinite space of possible expression which is
what makes it so remarkable what is language and is there even such a thing as a pure language
English is relatively homogeneous you can go a long way in the United States you know I mean I just
came from Boston and I understand everybody in Portland and Seattle and so on but that's not
true most of the world you can get very different languages pretty close by and much of the world
is what we would call multilingual but what does it mean for the language to be pure or when people
say they want English to be pure what are they talking about was Shakespeare pure I mean first
of all there is no such thing as a language there are just lots of different ways of speaking that
different people have which are more or less similar to one another some of them may have
prestige associated with them for example some of them may be the the speech of a conquering
group or a wealthy group or a priestly caste or one thing or another and we may decide okay those
are the the good ones and some other one is the bad one but if if social and political relations
reversed we'd make the opposite conclusions Chomsky is often referred to as the father of
modern linguistics so for us having this rare opportunity to discuss minds and machines linguistics
and cognition with Professor Noam Chomsky is literally like having the chance to discuss
syllogisms with Socrates or having the chance to discuss the mind-body dualism with Ren Descartes
it really is that fascinating and it really did happen Professor Chomsky was so humble as to give
us some of his precious time to discuss many contemporary issues especially as they relate
to many hot topics in artificial intelligence Chomsky's goal is a linguist is to find principles
that are common to all languages which allow people to creatively speak freely and understand
each other Chomsky's work is so much more than linguistics he actually thinks that linguistics
should be a branch of psychology and that so much about our language actually determines how we
behave as human beings I think finding the principles common to all languages and understanding
what enables us to speak freely and importantly creatively is Noam Chomsky's number one goal
in life as a linguist Chomsky said that when we study human language we're approaching what some
might call the essence of humanity the human essence the distinctive qualities of mind that are
so far as we know unique to humankind hey folks I really hope you enjoy the show with Noam Chomsky
today I mean as you can tell from the introduction this has been an emotional roller coaster for us
just over the last couple of months or so we've done so much stuff to recover the recording to
build the intro it's a slightly new domain for us as well getting into cognitive psychology
but anyway please hit the like and subscribe button drop us a comment let us know what you think
we've got six incredible shows coming up we're building introductions for them as we speak
you know the likes of Yoshua Bark and David Har and many others I don't want to spoil the surprise
so um yeah hit the subscribe button and I really hope you enjoy the show today cheers
chapter nine the chapter that you've been waiting for this is our discussion with Chomsky enjoy
Professor Chomsky is an American linguist professor cognitive scientist social critic
and political activist sometimes called the father of modern linguistics and is the most
cited living academic he's a laureate professor of linguistics at the University of Arizona
and an institute professor emeritus at MIT some of the big names which Professor Chomsky has
influenced include Stephen Pinker, Jerry Foda, George Lakoff and Barbara Partey. Professor Chomsky
it's an absolute honor to welcome you to MLST this is a dream come true for us I've still got
10 of your books on my bookshelf and I can't even believe we have this honor of speaking with you
today very pleased to be with you large language models such as GPT-3 are receiving huge investment
and are being hyped beyond belief this is happening despite very strong theoretical arguments for the
futility of learning language from data alone the combinatorial complexity of language is on a
scale which would eclipse any earthly data set there's also this problem of the so-called missing
text that is to say human cognition extrapolates from common knowledge in order to understand
text we can ascertain background knowledge which is never actually communicated in the text we
believe that research into large language models is what Francois Chorlet recently called make
believe AI and is thus the road to nowhere Gary Marcus even calls it a parlor trick assuming that
you do believe that large language models are not the solution for natural language understanding
which paradigm do you think is the most promising well first we should ask the question whether
large language models have achieved anything anything in this domain answer no they've achieved
zero so to talk about the failures that's beside the point let me give you an analogy
suppose that I submitted an article to a physics journal saying I've got a fantastic new theory
and accommodates all the laws of nature the ones that are known the ones that have yet to have been
discovered and it's such an elegant theory that I can say it in two words anything goes okay that
includes all the laws of nature the ones we know the ones we do not know yet everything what's the
problem the problem is they're not going to accept the paper because when you have a theory there are
two kinds of questions you have to ask why are things this way why are things not that way if
you don't get the second question you've done nothing gpt3 has done nothing with a supercomputer
it can look at 45 terabytes of data and find some superficial regularities which then it
can imitate and it can do the same with all languages if I make up a language which violates
every principle of language with 45 terabytes of data the same supercomputer it'll do the same thing
in fact it's exactly like a physics paper that says anything goes so there's no point in looking
at its deficiencies because it does nothing all it does is waste a lot of energy in california
I should be more careful it has some engineering and applications that can be used to improve
live transcription for example which I'm very happy about because I like to use it I like bulldozers
too it's a lot easier than cleaning the snow by hand but it's not a contribution to science
so it's okay I mean if you want to use up all the energy in california to improve live transcription
well okay gpt4 is coming along which is supposed to have a trillion parameters it will be exactly
the same it'll use even more energy and achieve exactly nothing for the same reasons so there's
nothing to discuss it's exciting for the reporters in the new york times you probably saw the lead
article in the times magazine a couple of weeks ago they're absolutely ecstatic we now have machines
just like a human you can fool reporters but you shouldn't be able to fool computer scientists
yeah first of all I can't say how much of an honor this is professor I mean
it goes without saying that we think you're one of the people that know something about language
unlike what we hear these days so as you can imagine there are many questions that I can ask
but I'm gonna ask a question that is uh is about the current dominant paradigm I'd like to know
your thoughts on the current rise of connectionism or connectionism or the resurgence of connectionism
let's put it that way and the ostensible success of deep learning and specifically I'd like to know
do you think the classic fodder and piloting critique uh that was written in the classic
paper connectionism in cognitive architecture a critical analysis do you think the critique
there has been answered uh or do you think the success of deep learning has been illusory
well I think there's a good answer to this question and an interesting research paper by
a very good cognitive scientist at northeastern university iris baron she had a study which
essentially shows that in brief empiricism is innate she found that with studying children
adults and so on they're automatically driven radical empiricist conclusions it's just something
that comes naturally to us okay that's connectionism no matter how much it's refuted it's all gonna come
back because it's an instinct our instinct is to try to find something like that it's kind of like
what happened in the 17th century the problem in the seventh century was the nature of motion
that was called the hard problem in those days happen you account for the fact that without
contact you can make things move and there was already a mechanical science developed by the
court and I believe Galileo Newton and everyone actually Newton and his principia showed that it
doesn't work there are no machines nothing works like the machine does it's an invention but it's
not real it was very hard to deal with now Newton himself regarded the conclusion as a total absurdity
and spent the rest of his life trying to refute it admins christianne hygiens the great scientist
of the day they just to switch this is ridiculous and there's a reason the mechanical science is
intuitive that's what we think about things study infants put two bars near each other
but not touching and if they move together the infant will assume there's a connection
that's the way we're built now it took a long time for physics to realize the world doesn't
work that way the way we intuitively think about things is just not the way the world is maybe someday
cognitive science will reach the level of physics and 19th century and recognize that
our intuitive concept of the world isn't the way it works so the photo position critiques to the
point was accurate but it barely touches the surface the whole approach is radically wrong
everything we know about learning totally refutes it and what we call learning is mostly the kind
of growth it's the growth of natural instincts and one or another way under the triggering
slightly shaping of experience the entire framework of these things is wrong and you can
see it very clearly in the case of use of language it's very easy to show by now it's even been
experimentally demonstrated that uh from infancy as early as you can test less than two years old
children are ignoring 100 percent of evidence that they're presented within relying totally on
mental constructions that they never perceive i mean i can give you examples but it's we all
do it all the time in our use of language we simply ignore all the data and use mental constructions
and infants do it as soon as they test it it's not learning this is just instinctive behavior
that's the way our visual system develops it's the way you come to walk the way urinine system
develops and language develops and other things other aspects of knowledge in fact there are many
things we know about language that we don't even know that we know we can't introspect into them
you have to have to do experimental work to show that people know them that just uh i mean that's
just like other aspects of the organism i don't expect to be able to introspect into the functioning
of your enteric nervous system the so-called second brain the huge nervous system very much
like this one which is just down here and runs most of your body not an enormous nervous system
that has billions of neurons which it can introspect into but uh why should you able to
introspect into what's going on in a year you can't you have to study it from there on the outside
the way you study everything else well that's hard philosophers won't accept it at all they
totally rejected just like they rejected newton as obviously absurd but as a cognitive scientist
occasionally look at it but don't really think about it the rest just aren't interested i mean
we're back in the 16th century in these fields and we have to break out of that that's not easy
it took a long time for physics to break out of it in fact pat newton's theories couldn't be taught
at his own university cambridge for about 50 years after his death cause they were so obviously
absurd well if it's hard for physics it's going to be harder for cognitive scientists as a quick
follow-up uh connection and symbolic uh that that debate has went on for a long time do you think
there's any any credibility to what people call hybrid or uh neurosymbolic and it goes under
different labels do you do you think there's anything to that approach at least okay learning
everything from data probably is is in some people's mind not practical but is there anything
that neurosymbolic approaches or hybrid approaches can can uh can deliver to uh the whole debate
yeah there's a lot of extremely intelligent exciting work it's not it's not trivial work
you know it was a lot of thought and understanding mathematical sophistication and so on in this
work it just doesn't happen to be contributing to science it's contributing to other things like
deep learning approaches have been very useful in uh protein folding for example they've really
advanced understanding there it's a good engineering technique that is i mean i'm not a role critical
of engineering i spent most of my life at at the world's leading engineering institute
MIT it's terrific you know i mean it's useful for things like the google translate uh live
transcription speech recognition there are engineering projects that are significantly
advanced by these methods and that's all to the good i think that engineering is not a trivial
field it takes uh intelligence uh invention creativity these great achievements does it
contribute to science i actually i think there was an interesting transition at MIT where i was most
of all my life in the 1950s when i got there that was the time when i was beginning Marvin Minsky
herb simon other people Alan Turing who were in their view i was supposed to be a study of the
nature of intelligence it was a scientific field uh by now that's disappeared not anybody's interested
but at MIT at that time was an engineering school there were great people in math and physics
but they were basically teachers and engineers uh it changed at about 10 years by the mid 1960s
10 years later MIT was a science university engineering was unified uh every student no
matter what engineering discipline they want to go into took the same fundamental courses
in science and math you take basic physics basic chemistry biology math and then later on you applied
and aeromotorical engineering or mechanical engineering whatever you're interested in
that was a huge transition totally changed the nature of the institution they brought
humanities in for the first time because the science students were interested in humanities
and what really happened was that that for the first time the basic sciences had something to
teach to engineers that hadn't happened before if in the 1950s you wanted to build a bridge or
construct a lecture theater or something you just did it by skills that had been developed in the
engineering profession well in the 1960s that was no longer the case physics and math really had
something to tell you so you had to know something in order to move ahead well that took a long time
you know that physics after it was a developed field were a long way away from that in the
cognitive sciences uh unfortunately that kind of worked that people like erb simon and marvin
nanksy were interested in has pretty much disappeared from ai it's become basically an
engineering field though it is plenty of achievements as i say engineering is a very noble profession
just doesn't contribute to science professor chomsky other than the issues with large language
models we discussed there is also the let's say minor matter that we're not silicon our biological
wetwear implements a kind of hybrid analog and digital computation which might might realize
aspects that are effectively impossible to replicate in digital circuits alone so roger
penrose goes as far as to hypothesize that our brains take advantage of quantum properties to
access non-computable oracles making our brains what turing would have called oracle machines
we'd like to ask where you stand on these points perhaps you are a computationalist who believes
human cognition can be digitally replicated in silico or maybe you are open to the possibility
that human brains are hyper computers of some kind so what do you think well first of all
i'm completely incompetent to have any opinion about roger penrose's theories about quantum
properties you know i have no idea he's a smart guy obviously he's uh you have to pay attention
but i frankly don't think it matters not this stage of understanding at this stage of understanding
i don't see any reason to question the fact that we are organic creatures like the rest
of nature uh that whatever's going on here is some property of organic matter whatever matter is
and then if it could be duplicated in a silicon system it essentially wouldn't tell us anything
it would tell us there's some general properties of this organic system
which also exists in some other system maybe but since we don't know what's going on up here
i don't see a lot of point in speculating about it but the very basic questions to deal with
about the nature of what we know about authentic language our ability to deal with what you and
i are doing here there are fundamental questions about that then unless we have some grasp of those
i really don't see a lot of point in speculating about quantum theoretic properties or
possible silicon duplicates of what we don't understand here so yeah there are possible
questions they just don't seem to be at least to me uh on the research agenda now penrose of
course seems to be thinking about a serious problem a problem about memory uh memory models that are
studied are mostly in the neural net models and in fact deep learning is based on those
there is a serious question about whether neural net models are even in the right place to look
it's uh i think here randy gallis those work is very significant arguing that uh if you look at
neural net models they simply don't have to have the capacity to have the basic elements of a
Turing machine uh the core of computing is going to be some form of Turing machine that he's argued
i think pretty persuasively you simply can't find those elements in neural net models no matter
how you proliferate them uh penrose has recently picked up the same idea he's argued that uh as
gallis still has that computing is not being is not taking place in neural net models uh that
there's a lot more reasons to think so whether it's at a much deeper level you know maybe even at
rna if you look deep inside the cell there's huge computing capacity that goes way beyond what you
can achieve in neural nets it also isn't uh trouble there's a big problem with neural nets
that goes back to helmholtz they're damn slow neural transmission is slow of course not by our
standards but by the standards of anything you need for computing uh the uh and if you go back
if you go down to i mean they've known there already is work showing then that uh perking cells
have huge computing capacity internally just they're big very big cells internally without any
external connections and maybe that's the source of uh where compute is really going on in the
brain i think that's the kind of thing that penrose is doing he argues that at that level
you do if quorum affects well maybe so i can't make any judgment about that but there's a large
problem not being that that that's biting this this work the question of whether the whole
framework of neural net models is even appropriate uh the way the way gallis still puts it or we like
to jump looking under the wrong lamp post you know because that's where the light is you believe
that there are limits of human understanding uh mysteries of nature which human intelligence
may never grasp and cannot formalize professor kenith stanley goes further and claims that the
veneer of formalism in particular the formalism of metrics and objectives may paradoxically
impede scientific progress by blinding us to creativity and serendipity in exploration and
learning he believes that open-ended exploration something which he calls treasure hunting is
necessary to find valuable stepping stones which might lead to greatness that is to say stepping
stones which formal objectives would have blocked us from discovering i i just wondered what do you
think of this view well first uh are there questions that can be formulated that are outside of our
cognitive range i think it would be a miracle if it's not true unless we're angels uh that's
going to be true if we are organic creatures part of the organic world then there'll be scope and
limits to our capacities in fact the scope and limits are related so i have the capacity to walk
much faster than a chimpanzee much better than eagle uh but by the same token i can't fly or jump
around trees the same intrinsic characteristics that provide me with capacities impose limits
uh well that's almost a bit of logic not exactly but it's pretty close so if we are organic creatures
we're going to be like other organic creatures and that they are bound to our cognitive capacities
so for example a rat can be trained to run pretty complicated nases but it can't be trained to learn
a prime number maze turn right at every prime number it just doesn't have the concept and no
matter how much training you do you're not going to get anywhere well i suspect there's reasons to
suppose we're like rats we have capacities we have a nature we have a structure they yield all sorts of
a extensive range of things that we can do but they probably impose limits and i think we could
even make some guess about what these limits are actually one of them was suggested pretty strongly
in the 17th century i mean we're not a sorter than newton galileo leibniz nothing relevant has
been learned to help alleviate her concerns and i think we have the same concerns to me it's as
much of an absurdity as it was to newton though i can move the moon by raising my hand total absurdity
okay in regard to that is an absurdity leibniz did galileo did they wanted an explanation
in terms of an intelligible universe that was the goal of early modern science let's find an
intelligible universe and an intelligible universe meant mechanical science something that skilled
artisans could construct like incredible clocks other objects that skilled artisans were constructing
in europe at the time which almost acted like humans so that's the way the world is directed by
a super skilled artisan if you were a dast then went home uh it was a retired engineer who set it
up and then left it run by itself was the big issue at the time but the point is the universe
ought to be intangible i can show that the universe is not intelligible and what happened
after newton took a long time uh science just reduced its aspirations it doesn't seek to find
an intelligible universe it just seeks to find intelligible theories about the universe so
leibniz could understand neton's theories they were not not intelligible it was the world that
we were describing that was unintelligible well that's a big shift in the nature of science
it wasn't particularly recognized but it just became tacit you don't even look for intelligibility
anymore you want theory that meets the conditions of intelligibility for a theory for example we
get to what we started with the theory is no good at all unless it tells you why things are not this
way okay otherwise it's not a theory in the least like gpt3 deep learning and there are
approaches that are under the domain of theories you can even look at it so there's nothing to
say about them but uh like my anything goes theory but um that's a condition that theories have to
meet but what the world is meet we have nothing to say about it whatever crazy things physicists
come up with okay if that's the way it is that's the way it is you know it's not intelligible
to bad for my cognitive capacities well what are the mysteries in this universe that are beyond
our scope i think we can make some guesses there are questions that have been asked for thousands
of years where we have made zero progress not even bad ideas about them one of them is the 17th
century hard problem motion we've given up on that motion is whatever physicists tell us if it's
gravitons in a quantum system okay then that's what it is beyond our capacity to conceive of
except we understand the theory but so i think that's one candidate another candidate is what
you and i are now doing that's been a problem for thousands of years have who would be constructing
in our minds infinitely many thoughts picking out of them how do we do that and then communicating it
in a way which allows others who have no access to our thoughts to grasp what's internal to our
minds how on earth do we do this Galileo regarded this as one of the great miracles of the universe
and is totally beyond our understanding Galileo regarded the alphabet as the most spectacular
of human and ancients because it somehow captured this miracle with a finite number of symbols
you can not only construct an infinite number of thoughts which is miraculous enough but you
can also pick one of them out and use it to convey to the others the internal workings of your mind
we have absolutely no idea not even bad ideas about how any of this can go on in fact we don't
even have any idea of how i can decide to lift my little finger none it's just a total mystery
of course you can make claims about it but you can't do anything about it well maybe it's just
beyond our cognitive capacities and i think there are examples like that where we just hit a blank
wall we can't do anything uh whether there's further things to say about it i mean even
ordinary normal creativity the kind that goes on like in speaking normal speaking is a highly creative
act a scientific invention is a greater creative act gray art is an even greater act but but all
those things are totally beyond our comprehension from lifting my little finger to writing a
Beethoven quartet we have in a clue we're talking we just have nothing else to say about it fascinating
so cognitive horizon this is regarding the the many theories of semantics that have cropped up
over the years for example truth conditional semantics logical semantics ontological semantics
etc which if any paradigms of semantics do you think are headed in the right direction as far as
getting us closer to an actual science of semantics or will we ever have a formal science of semantics
as montahue thought well i think there's very rich exciting work and what's called semantics uh
it's been one of the most lively fields of theory and linguistics philosophy cognitive science and
yours you mentioned barbara porty earlier one of the pioneers in this field great work it's not
semantics it's syntactics it's all study of symbolic manipulations that go on in the mind
suppose you do model theoretic semantics the kind barbara porty does how you do model
theoretic semantics what you do is identify certain individuals and certain predicates and you ask how
the predicates are distributed over the individuals under various conditions what are the individuals
mental objects not things in the world they are mental objects of something
do they correspond to anything in the world very loosely if you actually look carefully
at the mix of words uh there's a very loose connection to anything in the outside world
take Aristotle's example he discusses this uh his example is house so what's a house
well in his metaphysics house is a combination of form and matter the matter of a house is the
bricks the timber things that a physicist could find the form of the house is the intention of
the designer the characteristic use uh things that are in the mind in fact that's what a house is
the thing could look exactly like i had house for a physicist and not be a house it could be a library
could be a stable could be a paperweight for a giant you know it could be anything
because the meaning of every word is largely a matter of our conceptual structures and that's
true of the simplest words that you find that actually the first example that was used in
physical philosophy was river pericles pre-socratic asked how can you cross the same river twice
it's a pretty deep question if you think about it the second time you cross it it's totally
different physical object it wasn't the same river when you start living at that
the form it's what we construct in our minds as what constitutes river
but i happen to live in arizona now on my way to the university i cross something called the
rilito river i have yet to see a drop of water uh old timers tell me if you could go with them
on sin they're sort of water flowing though it's a rilito river um if it got paved over
and started to be used for commuting it would be the rilito highway it's the same object uh and
that's true for every word in the language there is simply no semantics and natural language at
least semantics in the densive fridge parsky cornep coin any formal semantics it just doesn't
exist in language they have metal operations going on that have some loose relation to the
outside world but it's not truth and it's not reference there's just no occur so what's the
best approach to this my own view the most productive approaches are they what are called the event
semantics near to david sony and developed by polpi atrosky barry shane the number of others
which essentially started with a question like uh why can't if we say uh john read the book quickly
why can't we infer that john read the book okay that was the original question and the proposed
answer is there's an event reading uh there's an agent john there's an agent book and there's an
adverb uh the modifier of the event quickly if you analyze it that way that's just a concatenation
and you get the inferences that's been developed extensively by people like by atrosky and shane
among others that happens to fit very naturally to what is i think is coming we're coming to
understand is pure syntax it seems that that's the way pure syntax provides structures of that
nature which fits very naturally into events and semantics but notice the event semantics
is syntax when you talk about an event it's not anything in the world it's something that we
constructed our minds uh there was a gentleman named xeno who taught us something about that
how many events are there when i cross a room uh as many as you decide to put there you know
there's no end up to the power of the continuum uh so event semantics i think is productive as a
form of syntax then comes another question how do all these things going on in our mind
relate to the outside world that's one of those questions that don't think we have any
answer to now we're back to galileo's problem how we do these things we don't know we do them
we do a lot of things but uh we have no understanding we'll probably never have an
understanding of it i'd like to ask you professor about uh what what do you think is the relationship
between what you have called the universal grammar or the i language and voters language of thought
which uh has been also quite uh a theory in linguistics and cognitive science
and if we can suppose that both as human innate systems endowed by genetics and or the laws of
nature if that is a similarity or is it and if not uh or and if it is how do they differ like so
basically how are they similar and how are they different uh that gets to the heart of current
advanced inquiry in my opinion that at start uh jerry fodor was a close personal friend
we talked about these things all the time but ask yourself what's the language of thought
far as i know it's english uh do you know anything about the language of thought that
is in english not in jerry fodor's work just english well of course it's not english but it
should be what is common to human languages whatever is common to human languages that should
be the language of thought well what's common to human languages universal grammar it's just
its definition that's the name of what is the core of all languages whatever it turns out to be
asking what is universal grammar is asking what are the laws of nature
well try to find them you know but make the best guesses you know find out they're wrong
find better ones and so on that's universal but there is debate in the cognitive science
of the virtue about whether universal grammar exists it's another illustration of the pre-scientific
character of cognitive science the question is meaningless there's something that distinguishes
a human infant from a chimpanzee with regard to language okay if you don't agree with that
you are a flatterer if you agree with that the next question is what is it answer universal grammar
whatever the turns out to be the question about its existence doesn't even arise i mean it's like
arguing with somebody who says everything's done by angels useless discussion you know
so the question is what is it that's distinctive about human language that it's inborn um there is
a long tradition going back to Aristotle in fact right for centuries into the 20th century
assume that what a language is is a system for generating thought that language was sometimes
defined as audible thought you know we know audible is too narrow now we know it can be
signed in other sensory motor systems it's irrelevant it's like a computer program that
can be hooked up to any printer it doesn't care uh but that's the internal thing like the computer
program or the i-language that's a system of thought and the language of thought will be
whatever that system happens to odd compute probably identical among humans far as we know
there's no distinction among humans uh less the capacity to acquire a language any infant
as far as we know could acquire any language with equal facility so it's probably uniform
which would not be very surprising of humans are a very recent species a couple hundred thousand
years that's a flick of an eye in evolutionary time and we know from genomic evidence that humans
began to separate on the order of 150 000 years ago that means they're very narrow and they all
share the language faculty equally and there's no new evidence that existed at all before modern
homo sapiens so there's a very narrow window in which it seems to have emerged probably hasn't
changed since so we have certain expectations it should be something very simple something that
you just followed from natural law if you look at the way evolution works uh not stories actual
evolution basically has three stages the first stage is your system functions some random disruption
takes place really random annotation uh dean transfer some bacterium by accident swallows
another microorganism gives you variety eukaryotic cells complex life you know just random events
take place and they change the structure of the system and mother nature comes along at this stage
and finds the simplest solution to uh whatever development what i understand one's called the
magical kree lateness is law of least effort it always seems to work in every branch of science
whenever you understand that anything turns out it was the simplest solution so that's the way
mother nature works can't really give an explanation but it's so overwhelmingly supported that nobody
even questions it and if you don't have the simplest solution you figure you're wrong you know
that's the ordinary scientific way and as i say Einstein just called it the magical kree that's
the way it is that's how nature is so we expect that uh when mother nature some event took place
random event which provided holosepians with the capacity for recursive enumeration the fundamental
property of a computational system no other organism has it it's nowhere you know it's
uniform in humans mother nature came along and said okay let's find the simplest way of handling
recursive enumeration with some special conditions namely it has to produce thought
so it has to have some kind of at least primitive way of having conceptual entities which enter into
the thought like probably event semantics like maybe we can see the world in terms of events
agents uh patients uh modifications so on put that together with recursive enumeration
find the simplest possible solution that ought to be a universal group
so the tasks of researchers and linguistics and cognitive science ought to be
see if you can show that the simplest possible solution to this conundrum uh yield of explanation
for the phenomenon of language that's the task of the field uh almost nobody's interested in it
you can count the number of people on the fingers of one hand but that's what the field ought to be
and i think they're progressing in that i think we're maybe entering a new era where
for the first time first time ever we can give genuine explanations for fundamental properties
of language in fact one of them i mentioned the most striking dramatic feature of languages
what's called structured dependence the fact that from infancy every human understands
unconsciously that all the rules of language all operations in language have to ignore the
order of words and deal just with structures so ignore everything you've heard deal with
the abstract structures in your mind you can demonstrate this directly overwhelmingly that's
the way it works we now have an explanation for it turns out that that's what follows from the
simplest combinatorial operation the simplest combinatorial operation happens to be binary
set formation what's called merge in contemporary literature well if language is based on binary
set formation you get this property no linear gorgeous structures so we add a for the first
time ever a deep explanation for the most fundamental property of language which is a very
surprising property which tells you something about learning cognition and so on almost nobody's
interested in it they take a look at the literature and cognitive science there's an endless number
of papers trying to show that by massive statistical analysis of huge amounts of data you can begin to
approximate but you can explain nothing i mean of course they all failed it's not interesting
why try it in the first they have a perfect explanation the best possible for some fundamental
property what's the point of trying to see if a couple of supercomputers and massive amounts
data they can approximate it i made its madness you know look but that's the field that we're in
it's madness that's a and you can't it's very hard to get this across i mean uh it's not of
interest to people the idea of finding an explanation for something it's just not of interest i mean it
was for touring was for marv minsky who i know pretty well herb simon the other pioneers of mccarthy
pioneers of ai you know that was interesting to them they tried well it wasn't me at that time
and it was given up and um as you know the field by now that's considered old-fashioned nonsense
we don't care about that stuff anymore it's uh in other words we don't care of anything of any
interest we just want little things that make some money okay that's okay that's what you are
that's probably where the field will develop that's where the money is you know and the jobs
but it's a sham i think some people try to hang on to the old ideas since they want to do something
of intellectual interest which profound misunderstandings of language and linguistics
persist even at the highest levels of the scientific community do you mind that many of
your own scientific ideas are widely misunderstood totally misunderstood it's amazing to me so there's
one paper of mine that i presume you know about it was in 1956 uh three models for the description
of language that did enter the literature i've been very interested in the fact that for 60 years
the paper has been totally misunderstood and no matter how many times i had to try to explain it
i can't make any progress uh if probably you probably haven't looked at that paper but you get
the material drawn from an elementary introduction to cognitive science what's called the chomsky
hierarchy which is all stuff i said you shouldn't be looking at that's what the paper said the paper
had three models one of them was marcovian sources everybody was using at the time and argued it can't
work the second model was writing systems post-writing systems which if you put some conditions on
you get context sensitive context free grammars finite automata so the hierarchy there was a
third model that's why it's called three models the third model was the only one i thought made
any sense because it began to provide some explanations for things the other ones were
just descriptive models wrong descriptive models uh the only thing that's come out of that paper
is the wrong models there's huge literature on context free grammar context sensitive grammar
i've written about it it raises some interesting questions about automata theory uh you know
context free grammars happen to be broadly equivalent to push down storage automata
kind of a useful result but basically they tell you nothing about language these models models just
apply to language they're the only ones that have been studying and in all literature in the last 60
years nobody's noticed there's a third model that the paper's called three models and the point of
the paper is to show that the other models just don't work well that's only 60 years maybe somebody
will notice but the uh but the more interesting question was the first part what are the misunderstandings
and i think we can a useful way to look at is to think of what have been major problems
they've actually been given names so let's use the name uh the plater problem how can we know
so much with so little evidence well the problem is badly misunderstood and there's uh we started
off by toffee about what one of the misunderstandings the idea that if you have enough data you know
trillions and trillions amount of it and you have battery of supercomputers working your
going to deal with this problem no you're not you're going to get nowhere you can show in advance
that you're going to get nowhere okay that's one misinterpretation which holds not just for computer
science it holds for philosophy linguistics total misunderstanding i think probably for our
experiential reasons were instinctively radical imprecise and it's hard to get out of it uh took
the 17th and 18th century for physics to break out of it another problem is what sometimes called
dorwin's problem how do we get this language system uh it's unique it's common to humans no
variation as far as we know uh no trace of it in any other organism there's a lot of time wasted
trying to train poor chimpanzees to duplicate some of these things which makes about as much sense
as trying to train graduate citizens to do the waggle waggles of the bees when you could train
them to somehow mimic a navy but it would be idiotic it's equally idiotic to try to train
a chimpanzee to do what we're doing well for the first one the graduate citizens you can't get an
NSF grant for that because it's so obviously idiotic the second one which is equally idiotic
you can get grants for a lot of people working on it and so on that's part of the overwhelming
irrationality of the way the human mind is studied that's dorwin's problem now the last problem is
what's now called Descartes problem how can we do what we're doing right now how can we speak in
ways which are appropriate to situations but not caused by them uh that's a huge problem uh which
is basically the question of freedom of choice how can we do a year's a this is we're involved in
it all our lives but it's very interesting if you look at the philosophical literature the scientific
literature it's sort of interesting the virtually a hundred percent of people who think about saying
we're all determined we're all thermostats everything we do is totally determined you look
at the behavior of the same people a hundred percent of the time they act is if they're not
determined so and it's this way constantly then even the people who give arguments saying determined
or tacitly assuming we're not determined otherwise why give the argument um you know if it's determined
if it's a thermostat why bother so that goes all the way up to Einstein who gave arguments trying
to show that everything's determined proving by his effort to do it that he was not determined
okay so here we have a kind of a paradox everybody says we're automatic everybody acts all the time
as if we're not automatic well does science say anything about this nothing science says we can't
deal with it it says we can deal with it with determinism we can deal with randomness but
we can't deal with things that are not determined or random so here's the system situation some
extraterrestrial intelligence is looking at us these strange beasts down here a hundred percent
of the time it says it's determined a hundred percent of the time it acts as if it's not determined
it believes science which tells it nothing all right is that a misunderstanding sure seems to me
like a deep one so if you go to Plato's problem Darwin's problem Descartes problem you see very
profound misunderstandings which dominate the fields all the fields philosophy which is supposed
to be sophisticated is probably the worst of all maybe i can add one point about confusion
if you look at the philosophical literature today there's something that everyone's obsessed with
it's called the hard problem the problem is consciousness what's it like to see the sunrise
let's go back to the 17th century which is an interesting century it's the birth of modern
science they had a hard problem as it was called the motion the hard problem was motion
the how is a hard problem dealt with in the 17th century well properties of motion were formulated
they said here are some properties of motion you know they'll lay those experiments and so on
actually thought experiments he never carried them out if he tried to carry them out it never
would have worked they were thought experiments you know you drop a you drop a ball from the
top of the mast of a moving sailboat and it falls to the base not to the back thought experiment
if he tried he would have got craziness but uh that there were properties of motion that were
established and then came the hard problem how can we explain the properties of motion
well the answer was we can't so we give it up we moved to something else trying to do theories of
the properties of motion without understanding the properties that's the 17th century now let's
go to the 20th and 21st century there's something thing called the hard problem what's it like to
see the sunrise there's a step missing the step that was taken in the 17th century what are the
properties of being it's being like to see the sunrise i can't tell you i could write a story
about it write a poem about it but i can't say here are the properties of what's like to see the
sunrise so what's being posed as an unanswerable question a question that can't be answered so if
you pose an unanswerable question you're not going to get an answer the question can be answered only
if you can formulate it if you can say here's what i'm trying to explain but you got this huge
literature total obsession and philosophy of mind how can we answer an unanswerable question
i mean one philosopher a young philosopher galen strawson commented the 20th century must be the
silliest century in the history of philosophy is exaggerating but not by too much you know
we're in a strange period in all of these fields we're just consumed with elementary
misunderstandings it's very hard to break out of them it's a very irrational period it's reminiscent
of the period when people are arguing about the right interpretation of the Eucharist and so on
you know i mean it's a strange period a lot of sophistication but massive misunderstanding
i'm curious um on the on the side of say things that we might be able to answer what do you think
some of the greatest remaining mysteries of language science or philosophy which we have yet
to solve and yet may be able to answer and which are some of the areas of research that you find
most personally exciting exciting to those ends well i think there are questions right at the
border of research which i think are very exciting like the one i mentioned i mentioned that i think
for the first time ever for thousands of years we can now give deep explanations of some
fundamental properties of language and thought which are probably the same thing that's assumed
that language and thought are two different ways of looking at the same thing thoughts what is
generated by language and language is what generates thought and one of the deepest mysteries is this
property of structure dependence that i mentioned in fact it's the deepest property and a very
surprising one and we now have a perfect answer to it it's accounted for by the simplest but the
assumption that nature acts the way nature always acts by finding the simplest solution
and the simplest solution for a combinatorial system happens to be binary set formation well
you look a little further there's much more to it but that's the beginning of it and now i think we
can press forward with that ask what what should be a component of language assuming that nature is
perfect well you look you find there are some things which are there only because they follow
from these properties so uh there's a support language called control theory uh you have a
curious uh now i have to get into details but there's a curious distinction which has been
empirically known for many years between sentences like a one interpreter each seems to have been
assigned to the diplomats one interpreter each tried to be assigned to the diplomats
first one's okay second one isn't uh why well the answer is a whole system called control theory
and we now have an explanation for it in terms of the assumption that nature picked the simplest
possible answer that kind of question that can now be raised for the first time and sometimes
answered uh well i think that's exciting moment in history of the study of mine that i see it
interact with what to me at least seems the most promising mode of formal semantics namely event
semantics that links very closely to that so if you can work out the ton of remaining detail
it's not elementary you can imagine how you'd work them out you would have a basic answer to
the structure and understanding of our system of thought and expression that would be a pretty
exciting development i think there's many others so for example you know this goes way beyond my
competence so i can just talk about the problems not what they mean but somebody a friend a quantum
physicist recently sent a paper in a quantum theory journal which was a symposium of half a
dozen leading figures in quantum physics they were discussing what is a particle they have no idea
they don't know what a particle is it's a big thing you have to talk about in physics they have
a lot of vague ideas about but they don't know the answer well that sounds like an interesting
question to me what is a particle and here we go back to the question of consciousness and look at
the strange way the topic hasn't studied you go back to newton again let's say newton recognized
that we know so little about matter that we cannot say that all matter has life maybe it's done we
know so little about matter so little about life we can't say whether all matter has life well back
last century sir arthur eddington great astrophysicist he said we know little about matter we can't say
whether all matter is conscious not because we don't know about consciousness we know massive
amount of consciousness more than anything else but we know nothing about matter so we can't say
whether all matter is conscious well that's question two i don't think a stone is conscious
but can i show we know enough about matter to explain that a stone isn't conscious that's a
lack of knowledge about matter so we not me but advanced physics will pursue the question can we
find out enough about matter to answer questions like this or to even tell us what a particle is
well those are questions at the border of research and in every area you're in you have the questions
what's life you know versus non-life uh any area of science here in you overwhelmed by
questions like these some of them are at the border of research so you can hope to go forward
others are so beyond far beyond that you can't even speculate sensibly about them
some of them may turn out to be true mysteries for humans that it's just beyond the cognitive
capacities you have to study them in independent ways you know kind of sideways well among the
problems of language or what the neural basis what's the neural basis for language i mean something's
going on in our brains when we're doing this what's going on it's very hard to find out partly
for ethical reasons you just can't do the experiments that might give you some answers
because they were unethical you can't stick an electrode into a particular neuron and broke his
area to find out what's going on we do it with cats and monkeys we don't do with humans oh well
you could argue about cats and monkeys but uh the fact is we do it that's the way we've learned
about the visual system but you can't with the language system there's no organism that has
anything like it so you can't do it with other organisms we don't allow it to do it we don't
allow ourselves to do it with humans we don't raise humans in controlled environments to see
what will happen i in principle if if the nazis had won the war maybe we'd be doing it but we don't
do it so it's just very hard to find answers to questions that even when we know how to find the
answer that means you have to be much more ingenious do much more sophisticated experiments but these
are things at the borderline of inquiry actually yesterday i sat in a dissertation defense of
somebody who's actually working on this there are interesting things uh white white matter
connections between brokers and warnecks area two areas that seem to be implicated in language and
there's some evidence that these white matter connections become super myelinated in early
development in humans but not apes uh connecting the two um areas of the brain that seem to be
implicated in language and interestingly they also have a connection to the auditory system
also life in apes so maybe there's something in white matter that has something special to do
with language that's the kind of topic you can investigate from the outside in any area of
science you know about you got many questions like this so there's no shortage of things to study
it's just a shame that huge amount of effort money scarce energy are wasted in doing things that
make absolutely no sense well and professor tomsky we're gonna wrap the conversation here
but can i just thank you so much for coming on our podcast it means so much to us sincerely thank
you very much pleasure to talk to you what was the best thing about talking with chomsky
best thing about talking with chomsky oh boy um
i think i'll tell you what and this is kind of personal to me i think because
you probably know and in front of the show and whatnot you know i i like plain language i mean
sometimes i'm forced to use technical terms but i like plain language and i like to think about
concrete things and i like to make jokes about you know bulldozers or uh you know very down to earth
kinds of topics right and so when i realized how down to earth he is and and and somebody that you
could just hang out with and joke joke about and talk about things concretely in the real world and
yet he's you know the foremost intellectual of our era right i think um it was nice it was nice to
see that like you can be both at the same time you know you can be you can be an ordinary human
being and an extraordinary intellectual all rolled into one yeah he was taking the piss
out of neural networks he said he liked bulldozers too yeah they weren't a contribution to science
yeah exactly well exactly so you know he's he's saying they're a great feat of engineering they
just don't they don't contribute to science and i just i just i found it really enjoyable to talk to
him it was it was very um it's very fun he's very funny and and uh yeah just all around it was it was
great great experience yeah and officially this has been in terms of production and the amount of
hours of faffing around this has been by far by far the longest cycle we've had on any episode
yeah and of course i've already made some content about how we fixed it but yeah it's just
i mean we've fallen out over it we've made up again now but yeah it's been an incredible slog
just getting it all fixed and thank god chomsky let us publish it yeah yeah and that you know as
we've explained here or elsewhere in the show i mean it was obviously a lot of it was accidental
okay we didn't you know technological failure that resulted in this challenge but i have to say
for me personally uh it it made the journey all the more epic and satisfying that we um
that we really pulled off this um you know chomsky called himself a miracle of engineering
you know to to restore the show it doesn't contribute to science but it was a uh was a
miracle of engineering and i mean you know it's it's it's one of these life stories that i think
in the end i'm going to remember forever and it couldn't have happened i mean in a way the the uh
the person that we were interviewing it this was the perfect person for it to happen to you
other than than the loss of quality because of just all the ironies and sort of the the process
of doing it and and you know we really wouldn't have put this tremendous amount of effort into it
for for anyone else uh so unfortunately we ran out of time the production cycle has been so long
but there were a few moments in the recording with us where chomsky was chuckling and it meant
so much to us to kind of capture that mental state so we didn't have time to cut them back into the
synthesized version but here are a few clips of chomsky chuckling in in response to us well that
sounds sounds like a question to me what is a particle maybe somebody you'll notice but the
seems seems to me like a deep one it's never carried them out the ton of remaining details
