Now, this book is called Understanding Deep Learning to distinguish it from other more practical books which focus on things like coding.
This book is all about the ideas which underlie deep learning.
After reading this book, you will be able to apply deep learning to novel situations where there is no existing recipe for success.
The book starts straight away by describing deep neural networks and it takes you through the training, testing, pipeline, how do we improve their performance.
Then it starts talking about different architectures, convolutional networks, residual networks, graph neural networks, transformers.
There's a long section on generative models, normalising flows, VAE's, GANs, diffusion models, a short section on reinforcement learning.
Then there are two chapters that I think are really interesting. There's a chapter called Why Do Deep Neural Networks Work where I try and interrogate a bit.
Why we need this particular kind of architecture, why it's easy to train, why it generalises. We don't really have answers to those things but I present some of the evidence there is.
And the final chapter is a chapter on ethics.
I think the book will be useful if you know nothing about deep learning at all. It will take you from scratch to somewhere close-ish to the cutting edge.
If you're teaching deep learning, it will be an incredibly useful resource. It has 275 figures, most of which are new and represent things in different ways.
It also has a whole bunch of Python notebooks. If you're part of the rank and file of machine learning practitioners or researchers, it will fill in the gaps in your knowledge.
And maybe make you think about things in a different way. I think even my initial description of deep neural networks is a bit different to how they're usually described.
And I think you'll learn a lot from it because I am a member of the rank and file of deep learning practitioners and I learned a lot writing it, so I expect you will learn something too.
If your name is Geoff Hinton or Jürgen Schmidt-Huber, I can see that it might not be that useful to you.
Well, you never know.
So the title is a little bit ironic because at the time of writing, nobody understands how deep learning models work. Literally nobody.
Now, deep learning models, they learn piecewise linear functions. And as you'll know from our episode on the spline theory of deep learning, they chop up the input space into many, many little regions.
In fact, most models have more regions than there are atoms in the universe. And frankly, it's a mystery. It's a goddamn mystery.
How do these models generalize and how do they learn these functions? Nobody knows.
So why does deep learning work? It's remarkable that the fitting algorithm doesn't get trapped in local minima or stuck near saddle points and that it can efficiently recruit spare model capacity to fit unexplained training data wherever they lie.
Perhaps this success is less surprising when there are far more parameters than training data.
However, it's debatable whether this is generally the case. AlexNet had 60 million parameters and was trained with one million data points.
However, to complicate matters, each training example was augmented with 2048 transformations. GPT-3 had 175 billion parameters and was trained on 300 billion tokens.
There's not a clear cut case that either model was overparameterized and yet they were successfully trained.
In short, it's surprising that we can fit deep networks reliably and efficiently.
Either the data, the models, the training algorithms or some combination of all three must have special properties which make this possible.
The efficient fitting of deep learning models is startling and their generalization is dumbfounding.
First, it's not obvious, a priori, that typical data sets are sufficient to characterize the input-output mapping.
Second, deep networks describe very complicated functions and third, generalization gets better with more parameters.
This surface of parameters gives the model attitude to do almost anything between the training data and yet it behaves sensibly.
It's neither obvious that we should be able to fit deep networks nor that they should generalize.
A priori, deep learning should not work and yet it does.
The success of deep learning is surprising. In his book, Professor Prince discussed the challenges of optimizing high-dimensional loss functions
and argued that the overparameterization and choice of activation function are the two most important factors that make this tractable in deep networks.
He showed that during training, the parameters move through a low-dimensional subspace to a family of connected global minima and that local minima are not apparent.
So as we overparameterize these models, generalization increases but it's also related to other things like the flatness of the minimum and inductive priors.
It appears that both a large number of parameters and multiple network layers are required for good generalization although we do not yet know why.
Many questions remain unanswered. We do not currently have any prescriptive theory that will allow us to predict the circumstances in which training and generalization will succeed or fail.
We do not know the limits of learning in deep networks or whether much more efficient models are possible.
We do not know whether there are parameters that would generalize better within the same model.
The study of deep learning is often driven by empirical demonstrations and Simon concedes that these are undeniably impressive but they are not yet matched by our understanding of deep learning mechanisms.
On ethics. Simon said that it would be irresponsible to write this book without discussing the ethical implications of artificial intelligence.
This potent technology will change the world in ways arguably not too dissimilar to electricity or the internal combustion engine, the transistor or the internet.
The potential benefits in healthcare, design, entertainment, transport, education and almost every area of commerce are enormous.
However, scientists and engineers are often unrealistically optimistic about the outcomes of their work and the potential for harm is just as great.
Simon argues that everyone studying or researching or even writing books about artificial intelligence should contemplate to what degree scientists are accountable for the uses of their technology.
He said that we should consider that capitalism primarily drives the development of AI and that legal advances and deployment for social good are likely to lag significantly behind.
We should reflect on whether it's possible as scientists and engineers to control progress in this field and to reduce the potential for harm.
We should consider what kind of organizations we are prepared to work for, how serious are they in their commitment to reducing the potential harms of AI.
Are they simply ethics washing to reduce reputational risk or do they actually implement mechanisms to halt ethically suspect projects?
Simon invites readers of his book to investigate these issues further.
It's undeniable that artificial intelligence will radically change society for better or worse.
However, optimistic visions of a future utopian society driven by AI should be met with caution and a healthy dose of critical reflection.
Many of the touted benefits of AI are beneficial only in certain contexts and only to a subset of society.
Now the book cites Green 2019 who highlighted that one project developed using AI to enhance police accountability and alternatives to incarceration
and another developed to increase security through predictive policing are both advertised as AI for social good in big air quotes.
Assigning this label is a value judgment that lacks any grounding principles. One community's good is another's harm.
Ethical AI is a collective action problem and the chapter concludes with an appeal to scientists to consider the moral and ethical implications of their work.
Every ethical issue is not within the control of every individual computer scientist.
However, this does not imply that researchers have no responsibility whatsoever to consider and mitigate where they can the potential misuse of the systems they create.
We scuba dive, we actually do stuff and again maybe I'm just being a human chauvinist but I'm completely on board with it becoming embedded in our cognitive ecosystem.
Auto GPT does stuff, not very well, but it does it.
Well, does it though? I don't know, does it do something? Yeah, like in the way a cat flap does stuff, you know, you can make it do things that can execute code and so on,
but I wouldn't say it has agency.
Hello everyone, it's Tim here from MLST, your go-to channel and podcast for all things machine learning, AI and philosophy.
Today I'm reaching out with a special request. As you know, creating content for MLST takes a considerable amount of time and resources.
It's a labour of love that I do purely for the fun and passion of the subject, but to keep bringing you the high quality content that you've come to expect, I need your support.
Please consider supporting us on Patreon. Every bit helps, although please only donate what is an insignificant amount of money depending on your situation.
If you can't afford it, just let me know and I will give you free access to the Patreon's benefits. No questions asked.
Anyway, thank you so much for your time and I can't wait to welcome you to our Patreon family. Signing off for now, cheers.
Simon, it's an absolute honour to meet you. Welcome to Machine Learning Street Talk.
I'm very glad to be here. So tell us about yourself.
Well, I actually started my career in psychology. My PhD is in psychology and then I've been wandering through various parts of science.
I worked in neuroscience for a while. I did some early work in augmented reality. I dabbled in medical imaging.
In the naughties, I was faculty at UCL and I worked on computer vision and I'm probably best known for a book that I wrote at that time.
And in the last decade, I've mainly been working in industry, in finance and computer graphics.
And I'm currently a professor at the University of Bath where I have been working on a new book, Understanding Deep Learning, which is going to be published by MIT Press.
Sorry, I should say, which is published.
Well, Simon, we were joking before that on your last book you were ubered.
And you were writing a book about computer vision and probabilistic graphical models and so on.
And then that was that Sootskever guy. We'll come back to him later.
Well, it wasn't him actually. It was Krochevsky. But they were basically Hinton's guys.
They released AlexNet, didn't they? And then that was computer vision completely solved.
So my last book was a really ambitious attempt to basically remould the whole of computer vision as I saw it by formulating what was quite an ad hoc selection of methods in terms of probabilistic graphical models,
which wasn't at the time necessarily how everybody thought about it.
And in 2010, I went on sabbatical to the University of Toronto and I worked on this book probably with Alex Krochevsky in the next room to me.
And sharing an office with Jeff Hinton's postdoc doggedly worked on this book.
I released it in 2012, a few months before AlexNet came out and the entire field took a right angle turn, leaving my book in the dust.
Although I still think it's quite useful, the geometry and stuff is still definitely all valid and it has a lot of stuff on Bayesian probability.
But this book is less ambitious. It's a more sort of straightforward description of where we are with deep learning.
It's supposed to be the spiritual successor to Goodfellow, Bengio and Corville, which was published in 2016.
So obviously a lot of stuff has happened since then.
It takes a sort of pragmatic middle ground between very theoretical stuff with lots of proofs and very practical stuff with lots of code.
There are no proofs, there is no code. It's about the ideas that drive deep learning.
OK, so Simon, when you started writing this book, what was the main idea that you had in your mind?
Well, I think the history of deep learning is that experimentalists have run far ahead of the theory.
And we now have this explosion of papers where there is literally an exponential increase in the number of papers being published.
And when I say literally, I mean literally, there is a plot in a paper that came out last year where on semi log Y, it is a straight line with 4,000 papers being pushed to archive every month.
And presumably there's more than that now. Obviously it can't increase exponentially forever.
There's a finite number of humans on the planet. They can't all do machine learning research.
So there's a staggering quantity of information out there.
If you are a new person coming to machine learning or you want to learn something new, it's almost impossible to find good resources.
People are learning things from blogs that are written hastily by people who don't always know what they're talking about.
And so it seemed to me a really useful thing I could do for the community where I could write out everything pretty much important that's happened in the last 10 years,
connected to deep learning with the same notation, illustrated in a modern way, without regard for history.
I don't start at a perceptron. I jump right in to deep neural networks and 20 pages into the book, not 160 pages.
Just to save collectively the community a giant amount of time.
Yes. And do you think that deep learning is alchemy?
No, it's not alchemy at all. I think in the future what we'll think of it as is the science of modelling functions and probability distributions in very high dimensions.
I mean, I think it'll be recast as that in terms of science.
At the moment we're more concerned of the way we organise our whole community is about results, so we don't really talk about it that way.
But I think in 40 years time they'll look back and say, well, in the 2010s they studied how to build functions and how to model probability distributions in dimensions that are higher than, say, 50.
Yeah, so I was tongue in cheek on the alchemy point, but I guess number one, people have made some strange analogies to neuroscience and biology.
Even the word neuron actually is quite interesting, so it only appears four times in your entire book, and two of those occasions you are counselling us not to use the word neuron.
So let's start with that.
Yeah, and I should say we'll probably accidentally use the neuron during this conversation because it's so embedded in our community, but I think it's a terrible analogy.
There's no evidence the brain works in any way that deep neural networks do.
If you look at the epiphenomena of the brain, of human computation, we seem to have things like short term memory, we seem to name to dream to lay down memories.
We have a modular brain with special parts for recognising faces, for navigating through the world and so on.
There's no evidence that deep learning has any of that, and likewise there's no evidence that the brain has any of the epiphenomena of deep learning.
So, you know, there's no evidence for double descent or adversarial examples or lottery tickets in the brain as far as I'm aware.
And this is sort of okay for our community because we know what we're talking about, but now deep learning is becoming a really important thing in the real world.
And so we're trying to communicate this to the general public, and we're talking about neurons and neural networks, and that carries with it a lot of baggage.
You know, an interesting experiment that everybody watching this should do is go and talk to somebody at a dinner party who knows nothing very much about AI,
who works, you know, a lawyer, someone intelligent, who works in a really different field and asks them what their understanding of current AI is.
And almost certainly the answer you will get is that they have no idea.
They might be able to give you a couple of buzzwords, but how does it work? They have no idea.
And I really disapprove of the neural metaphor just because it comes with a lot of baggage.
That sort of implies perhaps that the network's having thoughts or that it's something like us.
And that's deeply misleading to people who are outside our community.
And of course, everything we're doing is increasingly affecting those people outside our community.
And we want to give them sensible information about what it is that we're working on.
Yeah. So, I mean, again, on the alchemy point, we are now dealing with multiple levels of emergence.
And what I mean by that is people understand gradient optimization. They understand parameterised models.
They don't understand the emergent phenomena and they reach for analogies, let's say psychology analogies.
You know, they talk about things like theory of mind.
I'm not completely convinced there are emergent phenomena, depending on exactly how you define emergent phenomena.
For me, an emergent phenomenon would be something where you gradually ramped up the scale
and there was suddenly a phase change where you could see new phenomena, I suppose,
for want of a better word, suddenly appear with scale.
And I'm not sure we've done those experiments super thoroughly.
What you're really saying to me is that the statistics of the data on the Internet are surprisingly rich,
such that we can, you know, complete sentences or translate from one language to another.
All of that is just reflecting the statistics that are on the Internet.
And it is surprising that when you gather that much data and put it together in a network and reproduce those statistics,
we see these phenomena, but I don't see that as a property of the network.
I see that as a property of the data that we're putting into the network.
Whether it came from the richness of the statistics or not,
I think we are looking for mental reference frames to understand said phenomena.
It's just we need a way to understand this stuff, right?
And psychology has a theory of mind, literature, that we can use.
And we are almost certainly overloading it and bastardizing it.
But are you saying we shouldn't do that?
I have the most reductionist view of this possible.
I think of when I see a large language model, I see an enormous equation with trillions of terms in it.
And we've set the parameters of those terms so it performs some kind of behavior.
And I don't think there's any great meaning to that behavior.
It's an equation. There are inputs. You compute, you add things, you multiply things.
Occasionally, if it's a transformer, you take an exponential and out comes some numbers at the other end that you then translate into words.
And I don't think it can be understood on any deeper level than that.
But couldn't you make the argument then that there's nothing special about our mental states or our behavior
because we are also at some level just performing simple calculations?
I think you could make that argument, but there's more going on because we have a larger variety of brain systems interacting with each other,
some of which have been built on top of each other during evolution.
So there's more structure in the actual model.
At the very least, the human brain is not one equation.
It's a bunch of equations interacting with each other in a complicated way.
So whether that maps to the kind of constructs you're talking about, I don't know,
but I see the human brain as being quite a different thing to that.
It's mostly a matter of complexity.
So when you have this rich kind of functional dynamics of things interacting in the physical world,
you have the emergence of agency and all sorts of moral status and so on.
And you're basically just making the statement that in neural networks, we're just nowhere near to that kind of emergence.
I mean, you're asking me questions that nobody knows the answer to.
The only existing model we have that works is the human mind,
and that seems to work upon quite different principles than just scale.
I think something that's very interesting about Transformers though is,
I was arguing before that I don't like this neural analogy,
but actually the large language models like ChatGPT are the closest thing we have to something like the human brain,
because they do just as I expressed map an input to an output,
but they also have this kind of short-term memory, which is the context window.
So in a sense, and it's ironic that we don't refer to that in terms of a neural analogy,
because that to me is the first thing we've built that sort of looks something like the human mind.
You have this context and it makes the next prediction of the token based on that context.
And in principle, you could then operate on the previous context,
the system itself could operate on the previous context, it could summarize it, it could file things away,
it could ask itself to generate other different hypotheses to explain something and compare them and decide on something
and use that as a sort of scratch memory in the same way that we have a working memory.
But strangely, we don't refer to that in terms of the neural analogy, which I find quite ironic.
I don't know if people are working on that kind of thing.
I assume that people are working on everything, but I haven't personally read any work
in which the Transformer system goes back and edits things in its past context.
But I assume that that would be one direction that you might go to try and make the system do something that's more like thinking.
I mean, in the end, a purely feet forward system can't really do anything sophisticated.
You need probably to be doing some kind of manipulation if only to generate internal consistency.
So there's no way a large language model can have internal consistency.
It's learn everything on the internet.
It thinks that the earth is both flat and round with different statistical proportions.
You know, hopefully, mostly most people on the internet think it's round and that's the conclusion it's come to.
But in the weight somewhere is earth flatness.
And so to get to another level of cognition, you're going to need something that builds an internally consistent model of what's out there,
whether that needs, as you might argue, interaction with the real world or whether that can be done purely in the domain of language remains to be seen.
But I think that might be one direction that people would take things.
You know, the body of knowledge of humans is a kind of virtual phenomenon that supervenes on all of us physical earthlings.
So, you know, like this, this, this info sphere that we've created, it's like a symbiotic organism.
And that has consistent artifacts of knowledge, as you said, but many humans do hold the view that the earth is flat.
So it's just another example of this interesting kind of like levels of emergence.
They hold an internally consistent view that the world is flat.
I mean, as far as they're concerned, it's internally consistent.
Obviously, there are inconsistencies that are quite easily proven.
But within their mind, they explain, they have a model of the world whereby they explain everything.
Well, if the moon is flat, well, obviously the sun must be flat as well and so must.
And, you know, when you look at the horizon of the sea, it looks flat and consequently the earth can't be round.
They, you know, they explain away other phenomena and build up a model that backs up their hypothesis.
And there's no sense that a transformer system is doing anything like that.
It just starts at the beginning and predicts the next word and has the statistics that are consistent with what's previously in its context window.
Yes.
You could argue, though, that humans, our brains are also very chaotic,
but we have this confabulation and post-hoc rationalization in much the same way.
So we, you know, subconsciously we hold conflicting views,
but when we try and explain our views and to avoid cognitive dissonance,
we kind of, we try and reduce what we think to something simple.
Right, but we have a finite number of views that are sort of partially rounded theories of the world.
The large language model has everything that humanity's ever created,
with no preference for one thing or another other than its statistical likeliness.
Yes, yes.
So that's still, you know, even if you have multiple conflicting views of the world,
you know, there's that famous Whitman poem where he says,
do I contradict myself very well?
I contradict myself.
I am multitudes.
I am large.
You know, that is human beings captured.
But we don't have every view on everything simultaneously.
We're trying on some level to come up with consistent models of the world,
and we need to do that because we need to take actions in the world,
and it's impossible to do that if you have 50,000 conflicting views of how things work.
And this is really interesting because Hinton says one of the reasons
why I chat GPT is a kind of superintelligence is because it knows all of the things.
But I would argue, as you just did, I think that we are kind of bounded as observers,
as there's a computational kind of restriction to how many things
a single observer can understand at one time.
And we'll get more into this later.
But I think with cognition, it's not just knowing it's also thinking.
So just knowing everything isn't actually the whole piece, is it?
Yeah, can you deduce new facts?
In one of your other podcasts you talked about,
if you trained GPT with data only up to the early 20th century,
would it be able to reproduce the Einstein's theory of relativity?
I think we all know the answers to that, it wouldn't.
Definitely not.
And what are the missing pieces?
But that's getting at what I was saying before.
To build that theory, you need to have a model of the world,
and you need to realise that model of the world is wrong.
There are certain facts.
I don't personally believe you need to observe those facts for yourself,
but certain facts are inconsistent with that theory.
And then you need to somehow come up with a new model
that itself will make new predictions about the world that people can go and test,
in the case of physics.
But I think that happens on a sort of more minor scale,
with your theory about how businesses work,
or how your friends' personality works,
and how best to interact with them.
You know, you have theories about everything that occasionally break,
and you have to radically rethink them.
From a computational point of view, they are finite state automatas?
I mean, you're saying any finite entity can only compute certain things
by nature of the fact that it's finite.
Elequently put.
Of course that is true.
I'm not sure that that's a radical insight.
I mean, what would be interesting is if we had some way to characterise
what kind of things you could compute with a certain number of parameters.
As far as I know, we don't really know the space of functions
between input and output.
We can fully describe, given a fixed set of parameters
and a certain neural network architecture,
or what lies outside that,
because you're building this very complicated surface in multi-dimensional space,
and everything's dependent on everything else.
So it's not really obvious,
but it seems it's very rich in that we give it almost any dataset we want,
and with enough capacity it can fit it.
Well, I think we're just about to put the pin in the middle of the dartboard here,
and we'll talk about universal function approximation later,
which is that given an infinite number of neurons,
you can approximate a function to arbitrary precision.
That's a little bit like saying if I have an infinite size hard drive,
I can store any file that I want to.
So the big discussion between connectionists and symbolic folks
is the symbolic folks argue that we do need an infinite amount of computation
for many things.
Neural networks have told us that in many cases, no, we don't.
And then I guess it's just about, well, are there boundary cases
where we do need an infinite amount of computation?
I mean, you know, an interesting question.
You're asking in different ways.
Are there ideas that the human mind can never grasp?
Or indeed that we can grasp that a neural network can't.
Simon, we've now teleported to our studio.
We were just outside freezing ourselves to death.
It is much warmer and less muddy in your studio.
Indeed it is.
So Simon, we'll get straight to the chase.
I've been reading your amazing new book on deep learning,
and I think we should start by talking about the first few chapters really,
in particular chapter three and four,
where you talk about not only neural networks,
both deep neural networks and just single layer neural networks.
But there's this kind of elephant in the room in general,
I feel, about neural networks, which is why do they work so well?
The unreasonable effectiveness of neural networks.
Why do they work so well?
Well, the good news is they do work really well.
If you've been asleep for the last 11 years or so,
they're incredibly effective.
But it is a bit of a mystery,
and I think it's particularly interesting to look at it from the perspective of
just before AlexNet came out.
So ImageNet at that time would have been considered a real stretch goal.
Richard Silicki wrote in the Computer Vision book.
He published around that time that he expected it to be years and years before
computers could see as well as a two or three year old.
And so ImageNet is a challenging task.
The input dimensions two to four by two to four image,
that gives you roughly 150,000 dimensional space.
So there's roughly, you know,
it works out as roughly 10 to the 150,000 possible images.
You might say, OK, well, most of those images are noise,
but presumably the actual manifold of images is still extremely large.
And you've got to build a model that maps this to one of a thousand classes,
and you only have a million examples in this 10 to the 150,000 dimensional space.
And for each of those classes, you only have a thousand possible examples.
So you can't even build a Gaussian for each class in that case.
So if you didn't know that humans could do this task,
you might even just give up.
But since we knew humans could do this task, people persevered.
And AlexNet set out on this extremely ambitious program
that was completely different from what most people were doing at the time.
I know that there's arguably some predecessors.
I don't want to get into that.
I will talk about AlexNet and you can judge for yourself
whether it's the right thing to talk about.
So AlexNet sets out to build a neural net with 60 million parameters,
several orders magnitude larger than most of the computer vision models
that would have been built at the time.
And the way that I think about neural networks is they divide the input space
into convex polytopes, each of which has a linear
or more properly affine function within it.
So if the input space is two-dimensional,
then it divides the input space into convex polygons.
And each polygon is a sort of plane.
And those planes organize so they make a continuous surface.
But now we've got 150,000 input dimensions.
So you're in very high dimensions and we've got this incredibly,
our model makes this incredibly complicated surface.
And it's difficult to count the number of these polytopes it creates,
but just the fully connected layers at the end
would make of the order of 10 to the 4,000.
So you've got this huge space.
You've got a model with 60 million parameters that creates a number of regions,
far larger than the number of atoms in the universe.
None of, you know, hardly any of those regions
are ever going to see a training data point
or a test data point at any point during training.
And there's some super complicated relationship
where you tweak one of your 60 million parameters
and these much larger number of polytopes change
and manipulate it in some very complicated indirect way
that's difficult to characterize.
So now you come along and say,
okay, I'm just going to do a 60 million dimensional optimization problem.
At that time in computer vision,
people were considered ambitious
if they were doing 1,000 dimensional optimization problems.
Typically, the biggest kind of problems
would have been structure from motion problems.
So you would probably try and find the solution
in closed form and approximate solution
and then just use the non-linear optimization.
You're ready somewhere near the global minimum
and you're just going to use optimization to get to the final place.
But they're going to start by just randomly initializing this network
and then using the dumbest algorithm,
basically noisy gradient descent to get to the bottom.
Because you can't use anything else
because everything else uses second order information
and now the number of parameters is too enormous.
Sounds like a disaster.
It does sound like a disaster.
I don't think many people would have predicted
you could even learn the model.
But one thing they have in their favor
and we can come back to this in a bit
is arguably there are far more parameters in their model
than there are data points that's over-parameterized
and perhaps that makes the fitting easier
and there's a subtlety there that we can come back to.
So, okay, they fit the model,
but as I said, there's 60 times more parameters
than there are data points.
So the surface they fit basically goes through
every data point exactly,
but for every data point it goes through,
it can do 60 other things,
60 more degrees of freedom.
Between those data points, which as we've discussed
is almost the entire of the space,
it has latitude to do whatever it wanted.
And actually they had applied some regularization
and some dropout, but subsequently we found
that those aren't really critical to this.
So at the time you might have explained it away with that,
but since then we know we can learn models without dropout
and without regularization
and they still generalize reasonably well.
And somehow this model performs 15% better
than the next best thing or whatever it was.
Quite surprising, I mean, jaw-dropping really.
Yeah, so let's do a point of order just on that then.
So first of all, I'm a huge fan of this view
of neural networks that you've just spoken about,
which is that essentially it slices and dices
the ambient space into these locally affine polyhedra
and Randall Belastriero came up with this spline theory
of neural networks and folks should watch the first
Lacune show where we spoke about that in detail.
And what you basically said was that for a given input example,
the neural network can be represented
with a single affine transformation,
which is surprising to a lot of people for two reasons.
First of all, people think of neural networks as being,
you know, non-linear and also it gives this beautiful
intuition of neural networks as being
a collection of storage buckets,
not too dissimilar to a locality-sensitive hashing table.
And I think that's very instructive.
Right, and so I wrote this book blissfully unaware
of that theory, I should say,
but that's pretty much exactly how I described it
in this kind of simple, constructive way.
How do we combine together these networks?
We should say that this is only true for Relus
and Vicky Relus and Parametric Relus.
If you have smoother functions,
then you can no longer characterize it in this way.
But actually, I like discussing it in terms of Relus
because then the number of output regions
gives you some notion of the complexity of the output surface,
whereas once you start talking about smooth functions,
it's much more hard to characterize that.
But it's kind of locally smooth,
because I guess for the folks at home,
every single one of these neurons
will, you know, maybe come back to that.
It's kind of like a hyperplane.
And so you train the network
and you move all of these hyperplanes around
in the ambient space.
And essentially, when you put an input in,
it's kind of activating some of those hyperplanes
and it's creating this kind of convex region.
Right, according to which hidden units are active or not active.
Yes, and even though these are piecewise linear functions,
there are so many of them kind of like, you know,
densely overlapping each other in space,
they appear locally smooth.
Presumably.
Well, we can plot like one-dimensional plots through the function
and see what it looks like and what it looks like.
And of course, it does look smooth
because of the sheer number of them.
Right, but then we get to the next interesting bit,
which is, you know, so you spoke about over-parameterization
and, you know, like finger in the air,
let's say that there's an exponential number
of these convex polyhedra, you know,
something along the lines of, I think you said,
two to the power of the number of dimensions.
And...
Well, generally, it would be more than that.
I was trying to get absolutely lower bound
that nobody could disagree with.
But this gets to the fascinating thing.
So traditionally, before neural networks,
the world was different and we used to talk about
the curse of dimensionality,
and that's basically the statement that
there is an exponential relationship
between the volume of the space
and the number of dimensions.
Yeah, I would say it's the tendency of the volume of space
to completely dwarf the amount of data you have
as the number of dimensions goes up.
Exactly.
So when the volume of the space does increase exponentially,
the statistical significance of your training data
kind of tends towards zero.
So there is no statistical information anymore,
which begs the question,
how does statistical information, how do the networks work?
And now we're getting to the difficult part.
Why does it generalize in any way?
Yeah.
It's clear that it can pass through
every data point.
But what it does between the data points
is, I mean, in some ways, almost happenstance,
it's a byproduct of our algorithms.
It makes some smooth interpolation.
Why?
That's a good smooth interpolation.
We don't know why it even becomes smooth.
We don't know.
It seems like it's some complicated byproduct
of the way we initialize the neural networks,
the noisy algorithms we use
to train the neural networks,
the overparameterization itself.
Perhaps the kind of thing that might be going on
is we wind up with smooth networks that interpolate
just because we overparameterize so much
that when we set up our networks,
we initialize them and the wider they are,
the smaller numbers we put in.
And the numbers start small and they stay small
because it never has any impulse to make them larger
because the numbers in the network have small magnitudes
that basically maps to small slopes.
I want to slightly come back to the overparameterized thing
as well because it's not totally obvious to me
that everything is clearly overparameterized.
So while AlexNet had 60 million parameters
and 1 million training points,
they also augmented their data by a factor of 2048.
And if you look at all of the papers pretty much
on this ImageNet classification problem,
they're all overparameterized by the best results
from the last 10 years by 10 to 100 times,
but they also all augment the data, which muddies the water.
So one way to think about it is that it's more data points
and we're not overparameterized,
but of course they're not independent data points anymore.
They're translations, rotations, color,
transforms of the input image.
So I don't really quite know where we are
with overparameterization.
Yeah, well, I want to get to the inductive priors in a minute
because I do think of these local affine polyhedral as being buckets
and then we get to, well,
if you perform some semantically equivalent transformation
like a translation or a rotation,
as far as the MLP is concerned, it's a different thing.
So these inductive priors basically photocopy the information
so that you're putting the same thing in different buckets
so that you're kind of like cheating.
Maybe we'll get to that in a sec,
but just to finish the loop on this generalization thing,
what we're doing is we're complexifying the neural network
and this is really weird
because we were taught in school that Occam's razor
is like simple things generalize
and now we are exponentially complexifying the networks.
Why do they still generalize?
Well, it's interesting how the theory
can't really cope with that.
So previous ideas of theory
like Redamaker complexity would have predicted the opposite.
It would have predicted that as we added more parameters
the preferred generalization would have got worse.
I mean, the kind of loose idea people have
when they talk about double descent and stuff
is there's more regions,
just means that you can model a smoother function.
It has to go through the data points
and it's smooth elsewhere
and we don't have a much better conception of it than that.
For things like images,
we can put in some prior knowledge about images
that the statistics are the same everywhere,
use convolutional networks.
So we're searching through a more sensible subset of models.
Convolutional network is a sort of strict subset
of a fully connected network.
So we're searching through a more sensible set of models
that have some prior knowledge we put in
but that still doesn't really in a satisfying way to me
explain why networks generalize so well.
Can we bring in this notion of the manifold hypothesis?
Because even before you were saying something really interesting
which is that everything is an inductive prior.
Even the world we live in is an inductive prior
but just keeping the philosophy of the discussion
data is definitely an inductive prior.
So you can do data augmentation
and you can kind of oversample effectively in the vicinity
or you can tell the neural network
that doesn't know about certain types of transformation.
You can kind of effectively tell it
that the transformation exists by augmenting the data.
Yeah, there's two ways.
You can build that into the network
so it's equivariant or invariant according to your needs
or you can just blast it with data
and either transforming the output
in the same way you transformed the input
if you want it to be equivariant
or ignoring the transformations
if you want it to be invariant, that kind of transformation.
Yes, and there's an interesting relationship
because we've got this bias-variance trade-off
and we're doing statistics here
so in an ideal world you would only need to give it
one labeled example of the thing that you want to learn
because the network would understand all of the transformations
that could happen.
That doesn't work so there's a middle ground
between on the one hand we have this dumb MLP
that knows nothing
and we're kind of introducing all of this
what would you call it, physics, domain knowledge
of how things can be transformed.
Domain knowledge seems a good term.
Yeah, okay.
Interesting, so we were talking about this manifold hypothesis
so that's this idea that there's some kind of a subspace
in the data
and because theoretically as you were saying earlier
according to the curse of dimensionality
it should be physically impossible
because you would need more data points
than there are atoms in the universe to train these models
so people cite the manifold hypothesis
which is to say there's some kind of subspace in the data
where the network can kind of focus its attention on
what do you think about that?
I mean in some cases there's a very simple case
where you can almost describe that subspace
which is if you take somebody's face
and you film them in fixed lighting
from a fixed viewpoint and they don't move too much
then they have 42 muscles in their face
and there's only 42 things that can happen
and that's a very sort of physical description
of course the real world's more complicated than that
but there are still regularities
there's only certain kinds of materials out there
there's only certain kinds of lighting
real images are not all images
go randomly select pixels
and you see how many times you have to do that
before you get something that doesn't look like noise
you will give up very quickly
we don't really know the size of that manifold though
although you can estimate it
because it's connected to the degree to which you can compress images
and so one thing that's really interesting to me
about these new diffusion models is that
they're not that big
you can put them on your hard disk
but yet they seem to be able to generate
this incredible array of images
so we don't know what images they can't generate of course
but a good portion apparently of the image manifold
can be put on a hard disk
suggesting it's not actually
the space of natural images is not actually that large
Interesting, so you're saying the apparent creative
and generative ability of these models
suggests that there is some low dimensional manifold of images
Yeah, well there must be
because generative model does not have 10 to the 150,000 parameters
for the very good reason that we can't store
even a tiny fraction of that
Very interesting
So we should speak quickly about this universal function approximation
so if we start first of all with a shallow network
this universal function approximation theory
basically says that if you approximate it to arbitrary precision
you can represent any function
and it's just a collection of basis functions right
we're just optimizing the placement of these basis functions
Yep, I mean you can still think about it
just dividing the input into convex polytopes too
that's fine or you can consider in terms of basis functions
Right, so I've always thought that this universal function approximation theorem
isn't particularly useful
I mean it is important that we know that you can represent
you know with some caveats
you can represent any function you want to
What's really interesting is that to build anything
that works really well we seem to need 10 to 12 layers
and it's difficult to know
and there are quite a few different theories
why we would need a deep network
given the universal approximation theorem says a shallow network will do
can model anything
Well I mean just to have a go at that
so that theorem is talking about a very wide single layer neural network
and it seems to me that just placing basis functions
on a single layer of a neural network
it's almost antithetical to generalization
it is memorization by definition
so you make this really interesting argument in your book
that when you introduce depth to a neural network
what you're doing is you're kind of progressively
refolding those affine regions right
Yeah that's one partial way to think about it
so one partial way to think about it is that
if you have a two layer neural network
the first network can be thought of as
folding and replicating the second network
in a complicated way
and go look at a picture
in my textbook that's difficult to describe verbally
but that's only a sort of partial way of looking at it
there are other ways of looking at it as well
a different way of looking at it is that
you're creating I think what you would call
increasingly complicated basis functions
and then you're clipping those
combining them to make more complicated functions still
so one way sort of emphasizes the symmetry
and this folding that is going on
and another way emphasizes this sort of clipping
and creating more joints in one dimension
they would just be joints in a function
in two dimensions they would be
sort of one dimensional folds in a function
so that's a different partial way to look at it
but I don't think anyone even for a two layer network
it's really hard to get a full picture
in your mind of exactly what it's doing
but what's definitely true is there's now
like a really complicated relationship
between manipulating any one of those parameters
and the whole surface that comes out at the other end
Yeah and when we did our first show on Spline Theory
we were showing this neural network visualizer
and you can add layers in
and you can change the activation functions
and it kind of shows you the activation space
and very very quickly you get these very complex behaviors
where the hyperplanes kind of cancel each other out
and what you're just saying there that I want to get to
is this topological interpretation
which is to say that as you complexify
as you go through the neural network in successive layers
you can recompose all of the prior neurons
in previous layers that are topologically addressable
and this is a DAG that we're working in
that's obviously a subset of those
and there's this really interesting thing that
the neural network has a structure
which is kind of defined by the early layers
so as you go through the neural network
it's kind of somehow constrained by what went before
I mean it's constrained in terms of information
if you lose information at the start it can't be recovered
but I think you're trying to get at something else
Well some of it is to do with how flexibly
like there's a continual learning dimension to this
which is to say early on in the neural network
those initial basis functions are making chops in the space
and then the way I think about it is all of the
kind of complexification that happens later
is kind of working inside those early regions
so it's almost like it's becoming more and more entrenched
in what it does as you go through the neural network
which is to say that it becomes harder and harder
for it to completely learn things differently
I think I mean I'm trying to interpret
the way you're expressing this but I mean
perhaps what you're trying to say is that it's sort of
collapsing bits of the space on top of itself
and then treating those similarly
and it can't then un-collapse them
and that might be how you could exploit regularities in data
that's one interpretation but the mirroring
I think actually kind of happens the other way around
that the early... maybe I misunderstood how you said it
but the early layers are defining how the mirroring will occur
how these reflections will occur in the later layers
so really in that view it's the later layers
that's sort of defining the structure in the early layers
so then propagating that structure to different...
in reflecting it like a crazy house of mirrors
into the rest of the space
I mean I guess like one way I think about continual learning
is the extent to which you could destroy a neural network
let's say you take GPT and you just start fine-tuning it on noise
and what would happen?
Would it very quickly forget everything it learned before
or would it just refuse to budge?
Well that's a complicated question
that would depend on the learning rate
and I mean these transform models are quite interesting
because they generally as I understand it
and please correct me if you think I'm wrong
I don't think they train them to zero training error
I think they generally do one pass through their training data
and stop
so it's sort of to some extent probably remembering
what it saw recently more than what it saw a million tokens go
a trillion tokens go whatever it is
how quickly if you added noise would it decrease?
I mean it really...
so what have you done by adding that noise in?
You've changed the whole loss surface
because now the loss surface either only includes the noise
or I'm not sure you're suggesting if the noise is added in
with the real data but either way the loss surface is now different
and you're heading now downhill from what used to be
I'm going to loosely say the global minima
and I'll probably say that several times during this
but I mean the sort of level set of good solutions
that fit the data well
so you're now heading downhill from that point
which is raised up in your new loss service
and how quickly it would forget just depends on the learning rate
and the new shape of the loss function
so I don't know if you could say anything definite about that
I guess I was coming at it from Chomsky says that we see the world
using our native priors
and in a sense neural networks are the same
you look at a vision network, they have these GABO filters
that are baked into the early layers
and to a certain extent after a while
the neural network only sees the world
in terms of its fundamental basis function
So I don't like that idea of considering the...
you say these GABO filters are baked into the early layers
and I would push back on that a bit
what people are saying when they say that is that
this neuron has a high activation
when you put in this kind of thing
and to some extent that's sort of trivial
you've made some small set of basis functions
because this network at this point only sees
a 7x7 patch of the image or something
and just because it reacts very highly to that particular thing
it also, you know, if it's not the first layer
if it's in a few layers in it
it's going to react in a complex way to lots of different things
so what you're trying to do is you're trying to characterize
this very complicated multi-dimensional polytope
by one point that looks like a GABO filter
but really it's this incredibly complicated shape
in 150,000 dimensional space
and so I don't like the idea that you're going to describe
you're going to say, oh well, we can characterize that shape
by this one point
Yeah, no, I think you're absolutely right there
so that is a mistake that we're looking at
interpretability methods which grossly simplify
a neural network and we're kind of making statements
based on that so I think you're absolutely right about that
but there's also this interesting dimension
of training versus inference
so it has been said that overparameterizing
is something which is helpful for stochastic gradient descent
but I would like your viewpoint on the extent to which
we need to have all that representational capacity for inference
so do we need to memorize all that stuff
or could we actually strip it away?
Yeah, so it definitely makes it easier
Terry Sinowski has this beautiful expression where he says
it goes from searching for a needle in a haystack
to a haystack of needles
so you wind up with this lost surface
where there's a very high dimensional part of that lost surface
that is the global minimum by which I mean a good level set of solutions
that fits your data perfectly
I have a feeling and I know that you're going to push back on this
that there is an inherent model bias in neural networks
which is to say a lot of these inductive priors
and training tricks and so on
they're ways of making the network focus on the modes in the data
the areas of regularity or where most of the variance is
and all of the low frequency attributes
and just to be as clear as possible about that
I mean things that don't happen very often
they tend to be snipped or ignored or they're not learned
is that something fundamental do you think to neural network?
So I think we do need to fit the data perfectly
or close to perfectly
so for our training data we always get the right output
because ultimately these things are quite stupid
and there's nothing much they can do apart from interpolate smoothly
and I'm using the word smoothly very vaguely
because it's difficult to characterize exactly how they interpolate between them
and I'd rather interpolate smoothly between the correct true data points
than neural network that missed those in the first place
how could that be better not to memorize the data?
So I have a feeling this is a story of the tyranny of metrics
which is to say we optimize on accuracy
and the neural network I assume would learn that
well given that this is such a long tail high entropy thing
it's probably better that I just don't bother learning it
than get it wrong all the time by trying to learn it
But I think it does learn
you know it does learn for most datasets
the long tail of the data you give it
because the loss comes almost zero
so for a regression model the loss can literally become 0.000
for classification models it's a bit more complicated
because you're trying to push these softmax functions to infinity
so you never get there
Training loss though
Training loss yes
but that is not going...
so I guess like those things are like atoms in the universe
and even though the network knows about them in the training set
they would never have any statistical power
So that wasn't a question
I just tested the principle
but I guess you know we will talk about ethics and bias and fairness later on
but you know it's really difficult with a single training objective
to square the circle to have high accuracy and high fairness
Yeah absolutely
I think what you're worried about is areas of the data space
that represent perhaps minorities of individuals
and particularly intersections of those minorities
where you know perhaps you know gender and race or what have you
and so you wound up with a very small number of training data points
and I think it's a question of whether you know
you're attributing the failure to generalise that to the neural network
but that might be unfair
maybe the failure to generalise that is that there is literally not enough statistical regularity
and the data you've given it for it to possibly generalise
Interesting
Interesting
Okay well just to close the loop on chapter 3 and 4
So there are some other things that we tweak in neural networks
like the initialisation, things like the learning rates
and which activation functions we use and stuff like that
so can you sketch out some of that?
So I think it's interesting to think about that through the lens of either learning or generalisation
so we've learnt quite a bit about which things affect learning
and which things affect generalisation
surprisingly the data set
confusingly doesn't affect the learning so much
so you can randomly perturb the labels
and the neural network will still learn the training data fine
or you can shuffle the input pixels of images
the neural network still learns the training data fine
so there are some things you'd be really surprised about it can learn
despite that the neural network will learn
despite those factors
also other things in terms of learning
Could we just pause there because that was a really interesting bit
and we'll show an image in your book
so there are two curves
and one curve is when you're just memorising essentially random information
and then the other curve on the left
so the kind of the horizontal distance between those curves is the generalisation gap
so on the other curve is where you have the actual data with the actual labels
and there's another curve in the middle where you have the actual data
but with random labels
so I guess the first intuition is
isn't it interesting that neural networks don't struggle much more
to learn completely random data
So this is a famous favourite from Zhang et al 2017
and it shows that you can perturb these labels
or you can shuffle around the input data in various ways
and still learns perfectly but it learns more slowly
but that might just be because there are regularities in real data
so you move the surface up and it naturally fits through several data points
and now it has to contort itself more to fit completely random data
so I don't think the length of time it takes to fit it is really significant
but it shows how incredibly flexible the model is
that you can throw at it any data and it will fit it
and interpolate between it
it's just that the interpolation is meaningless if the labels had no information in them
It's interesting that you say you can't insure it how difficult a problem is
by the convergence time
The convergence time depends on a lot of different factors
but one of the main ones is where you initialise the parameters
We initialise the parameters for very practical reasons
to certain variances because if you don't you get exploding gradients
where for people who don't know about this
essentially the numbers in your neural network
the activations in the outputs start taking wildly large values
and you can no longer represent them in finite precision floating point numbers
or if you don't set them correctly they wind up being too small
and we call that vanishing gradients
but it's referred to in terms of gradients
but actually it happens in a forward pass through the network as well
so we have very practical reasons for initialising our networks where they are
but actually that also depends
we still have a range of values we can set it to and it still works without breaking
reaching the limits of the computer's precision
but actually the magnitude you set the weights to drastically determines the training time
and it also determines generalisation
so there's a sort of goldilocks zone
they call it, not too big, not too small, just right
of parameter magnitudes that cause that seem to give the lost function
sensible properties, positive curvature where you want positive curvature
and I think that's pretty easy to understand
that if all the parameters are too small then it can only create very flat
I mean loosely speaking people who really know what they're talking about
are going to take offence at this
but loosely speaking if the parameters are very small it makes very flat functions
and maybe your function isn't very flat
and if the parameters are really huge then it has functions with big sharp changes
and you don't want that because maybe your data is quite smooth
so it takes longer if you don't initialise the parameters correctly
to kind of reach the presumably reasonably smooth pattern of your data
and of course that also speaks to generalisation
because you want it to interpolate smoothly between your data so you don't want
wildly varying large parameter values that cause big fluctuations
between your data points but still fit the data points
so the time it takes to train depends on the initialisation as well
but if you give it enough time it seems to get there
in terms of generalisation there's a phenomenon connected to that called grokking
grokking, yeah I had Neil Nander on
so essentially you can get cases where it fits the data perfectly quite early on
but then it takes ages and ages and suddenly it generalises
this has been interpreted or my best knowledge of the interpretation
is that this is what happens when you set the magnitude of the parameters wrong
what's happening is it's fit the data correctly
but it is wildly varying between the data points
but something in our methods for training
presumably some features stochastic gradient descent
or some other explicit or implicit regularisation that you've put in there
is causing the network, the solution
even though it already fits the data sort of traverse this loss surface
it's not at the minimum, it's in a family of minima
and it's traversing through that family until it eventually gets to something that's smoother
and interpolates well and then it generalises
but exactly why it should move through this surface to something that's smoother
is again quite complicated and subtle
yes, I mean you folks should definitely check out the Neil Nander episode
but yeah as you say this phase change from memorisation to sudden generalisation
I think Neil did say that it's a bit of an illusion
and people slightly misinterpret how it works
and as you said we're trying to design the loss surface to be as smooth as possible
and I think his original paper was on modulo division
which is not very natural because I guess part of why it's possible to coax the loss surface
to be so smooth and interpolatable is because of this natural data thing as well
so maybe an artificial data set like that wouldn't be so amenable
so you would get this sudden rocking later
yeah perhaps you mean that the easiest way to fit it
is sort of with some function that
yeah there's no natural smoothness to it and consequently you wind up fitting it with a very complicated
function with a lot of variance between the data points
and then it takes a lot of regularisation
and rambling over this loss surface until we get somewhere sensible
whereas for a more typical data set
you naturally wind up with a sort of smoother surface to begin with
I mean that makes sense to me
yeah but it is one of the crazy things about deep learning which is that
and rocking was a surprise because most of the time
it's like cooking, the secret is in the preparation
so you kind of massage the loss surface
and then you just know, you can almost predict
just like open AI could predict how much training was required to get GPT-4 level of perplexity
there seems to be a regularity in terms of
okay it's going to converge and because it's over parameterised and finessed in a certain way
it's going to converge in a certain amount of time
it's going to have a certain shape to it when you train it
yeah I mean the most recent paper that I've read on this
and you should understand that I'm very much like chat GPT
every time I finish writing the chapter of book I stopped reading
because if you don't stop reading you'll go crazy this
you know 4,000 papers coming out every month and you can't possibly keep up to date
the most recent paper I read on this was called OmniGroc
and basically it says that that time is predictable
because the magnitude of the weights are gradually decreasing at some fairly constant rate
and eventually they come into this Goldilocks zone where things generalise well
and that's when suddenly the generalisation performance improves
cool, cool, now the book makes a really really huge effort I would say
to visualise things in images and low dimensions
what was the thinking behind that?
well I think people learn in different ways
so I try and have three ways to understand everything
there's textual descriptions, there's equations and there's pictures
and so to me the mental process of connecting those things
which you sort of actively have to do if you read the book
leads you to a deeper kind of understanding
a lot of ideas, even diffusion models and GANs can be drawn in one or two dimensions
and you can really effectively convey these concepts
in a non-technical way before you hit the equations which is good for learning
but you also have to be a little bit careful because multi-dimensional space
doesn't quite work in the way you expect it to
there are a lot of strange phenomena so if you take two random points
that a Gaussian distributed after about a hundred dimensions
or even less than that they're almost certainly orthogonal to one another
a famous one is that a hyper-orange, a multi-dimensional orange
basically all of the area is in the skin and none of it is in the pulp
my favourite one is if you take a multi-dimensional sphere of diameter one
a hypersphere and you embed it in a multi-dimensional cube
you can imagine in two dimensions you've got a circle in a square
in three dimensions you've got a cube, you've got a sphere in a cube
as that goes to infinity it turns out as the dimensions increase
it turns out the proportion of space the sphere takes becomes zero
it's all in the corners
so I draw these pictures in one or two D
I like to joke that's because MIT Press wouldn't give me a budget for a five-dimensional book
I asked for it but they stuck with two dimensions
but you should be cautious but having said that I don't think it's necessary
to work in the super high-dimensional spaces we work in
to see the phenomena of deep learning
and there's a really interesting data set that I use a lot in the book
called MNIST 1D
so our simplest data set is MNIST
it has some disadvantages in that for example we're too good at solving it now
to really demonstrate much on it
but this makes an even simpler data set
and basically what it consists of is four-dimensional data
it's just one-dimensional data and they start with a template
that looks a little bit like one of the ten digits
so for example the zero has one bulge and the eight has two bulges
and they find a way to actually it's one guy Sam Grey-Danis is his name
and the paper is called Scaling Down Deep Learning
completely against the prevailing winds of deep learning
which had to scale everything massively
and then that is translated
so it's a type of data that's amenable to convolutional networks
for example because there's a dimension
that you can be equivariant or an aspect of it
you can be equivariant or invariant to
and adds various amounts of noise
and it's completely procedurally generated
so you can generate any amount of data with any amount of noise
and the interesting thing is even though this is only 40-dimensional
most of the kind of epi phenomena of deep learning can be seen
so you can show adversarial examples
you can show lottery tickets
you can show double descent
and you can do all of this, you know, this is now in a size
that you don't even need the GPU
you can just run it in your local Python window on the CPU
and I think this is a really interesting data set
so the actual huge experiments were building
and now we're now building things as sort of of the order
of the complexity of a human mind
and I come from a biological sciences background basically
and if you want to try and understand that
what you do is you go out and you collect a data set
as thoroughly as you can along as many dimensions as you can
and then you go away and try and come up with a theory
that explains that data set
so in this case when is it trainable, when is it generalizable
here we have a data set where in theory you could do that
you could train many different networks
varying all the parameters because it's very quick to train
and then you could try and properly come up with a theory that says
okay, when I've got this kind of data with this amount of noise
these statistics, these are the networks that will work
these are networks that will train
these are the networks that will generalize
and have proper tight bounds on those things
so to me this is a really interesting data set
that could be a test bed for actually understanding deep learning better
but which is currently not used at all
because you can't publish a paper unless you get state of the art
on some enormous data set with millions of examples in it
Yeah because we were going to talk earlier about the alchemy of deep learning
because we don't really have any overarching theories of deep learning
I mean there's things like NTK and we spoke about spline theory
and stuff like that but there's not really much is there?
There are bits and bobs, a lot of it relies on unrealistic assumptions
some of it, it often relies on the network being infinitely wide
which actually I'm less worried about those ones
because infinitely wide probably means
somewhere along the way you're relying on the central limit theorem
or the law of large numbers
either of which probably converge a long time
to something like a Gaussian or the expected value
a long time before you really are infinite
so those ones I'm kind of okay with
the ones that rely on the network width being
the square of the number of data points or something
that starts to worry me because that's sounding like it's an argument
based on some sort of combinatorial geometric argument
and that really might need that true number to work
there is a history of the experimenters rushing ahead doing things
often introducing components to our networks
which definitely empirically help explain them in some way
and then later on when we go back and look at those
it turns out they don't do exactly what we said they would
and the theory people lag a long way behind
you know some interesting bits of theory
I think are neural network Gaussian processes
you mentioned NTKs they're sort of I think of them anyway
it's the Bayesian version of that
and so they can predict some things about trainability
but largely they predict things about trainability
that we already knew from experimentation
and they've you know using some of that
they have built networks with thousands of layers
but those networks with thousands of layers
can get cutting edge results
so you have to wonder how do the experimentalists
really discovered this but then they can't get a paper out of it
so they just throw it away
so not to note that work I think it's really interesting
really important but just to say it lags behind
and we're in this weird situation where
a whole bunch of the apparatus we've put in to make networks work
doesn't do exactly what we think it does
so when you first learn about stochastic gradient descent
you're taught that the reason we put it in is
so you can bounce over local minima perhaps into another valley
but that turns out to be absolutely nonsense
I don't think that's what's happening
you can learn quite large neural networks with enormous batch sizes
so not much randomization or sometimes even full batch
and it still gets to the bottom
so why do we still use stochastic gradient descent
I mean number one it's fast
you're only using a subset of the data points
and if you've got millions of data points
that saves you a lot of time
number two it seems to have some regularization effect
and you can actually characterize that
and there's a section in the book about implicit regularization
so you can show for finite
basically it's the difference between taking
infinite the small steps
which you would call gradient flow and finite steps
and once it starts doing that and combined with
the stochastic element you can show that
there's certain regularization
expression that you can write in closed form
that you're effectively adding to the loss function
and so the whole learning takes a slightly different trajectory
and gets to the bottom in a different place
another example of experimentalists sort of rushing ahead
would be batch norm which has a really peculiar history
so batch norm
Is that a good fellow?
No, is it Segedi?
Segedi, thank you
I had him on the show, yeah
batch norm was introduced originally to tackle something
called covariate shift which I'm not sure I totally understand it
but I think basically the idea
you can correct me if I'm wrong here
is that after you've adjusted the parameters in the later layers
the changes the parameters in the earlier layers
no longer make any sense which
from a pure mathematics sense
doesn't make a lot of, you know, is not understandable
but I guess it's to do with the fact that you're not actually
taking infinitely small changes, you're taking finite changes
but subsequent experiments have showed that
you can introduce covariate shift and it doesn't help
and batch norm was later adopted because
after they figured out how to stop
exploding gradients and vanishing gradients
they developed residual networks and that put those problems back in
and batch norm resets the variance
and consequently stops gradients exploding
so that's, sorry, it found a use but then it turns out
but there's other ways to solve that problem
you can solve that problem by just resetting the gradients
without taking into account the batch statistics
it turns out that it has a regularization effect
because it's basically adding random noise
the batch is slightly different each time
it also has more complicated effects where it allows
one bit of data to sort of leak information to another
because one can have a really enormous value
which makes the batch variance large
which then shrinks the other variance at the other one
and that's why they don't use it in transformers
where you're using masked attention
because the whole point of that is that the words
further along in the sentence don't have
the words don't have access to the data further along in the sentence
you're sending this on the batch, they use layer norm instead
so batch norm is an example of something
it was introduced for one reason
adapted for another reason
because it's now kept in there
or some form is kept in there
because it has this indirect regularization effect
and it also has some positive disadvantages
that have caused it to have to be adapted
in certain circumstances
I was going to make a comment that
if anything as time has gone on
we seem to have less reliance on some of these tricks
and almost more focus on just big models
more compute, more data and so on
do you think there's any truth to that?
because you just said yourself that in many cases
people don't even understand exactly what the effect of this thing is
when they do ablation studies
they tend to learn actually this thing wasn't needed after all
is there a trend towards simplifying the process?
I'm not sure there is a trend towards simplifying it
I think there should be a trend towards simplifying it
there's a great paper that came out in around 2020
where they analyze all of the things that have been done
to transform is actually scientifically in these different papers
and find out hardly any of them make any difference
it's tied to our obsession with state of the art
you try all of these different things
and then you don't interrogate too closely
whether this particular activation function
really was critical because now
it's two days before the New Europe deadline
and you've just got the state of the art
and then no one ever gets around to going back and looking at these things
but I know when transformers were introduced
they were super complicated to train
you had to use this thing called learning rate warm up
there are very complicated effects of where you put the layer norm
what happens with the variance and the residual layers
the difference in the size of the parameter
gradients as you go through this softmax function
versus the path that computes the values
versus the residual, you know, you've got three parallel links
and they were super hard to train
and they relied more on training things
but actually the state of the art of training transformers
which I guess is sort of what you're implying
when you're talking about very large models
I don't know if they've eliminated
I just don't know the answer to your question
to this graduate student descent thing
that we've been talking about in general
I was speaking with some folks in Europe
and I mean Hinton for example
was always a big fan of contrastive learning
where you kind of like, you contrast an image
to all the other ones in the dataset
and then I think Le Coon at Fair
kind of pioneered this non-contrastive approach
which is where essentially you kind of
I think like similar to Siamese learning
but you mutate pairs of images
by pushing images off the manifold
rather than comparing them to everything else
and there are so many variations of that
like Barlow twins and you know
God knows what else it's been a while since I looked at it
but these things are all just millions and millions
of minor engineering variations on an idea
Yeah and it's interesting
that this is now what we take to be results
in a scientific conference
where you don't necessarily value insight
there are papers that are searching for insight
but it's a smaller community that is lagging behind
and I mean personally it's part of the reason
why I stopped doing experimental research
was that I really love the ideas
and I really love trying to understand what's going on
but it often takes you know graduate student descent
it takes the supervisor to you know
an afternoon to come up with an interesting idea
and then you know 20 minutes to persuade the graduate student
it was really their idea
and then PhD supervisors you know what I'm talking about
and then off they go for like six months
experimenting to get the criteria they need
to get into the conference
I don't think that's a good use of scientific time
or public money
that's probably a good use of Google's money
and OpenAI's money
but is that a good use of Stanford's money
maybe not maybe they should be doing something
that's a bit more scientific
and that has some genuine insights
not trying to push this benchmark by another 0.1%
because often it's just sort of chance
as well there was just a couple of weeks ago
there was a paper that argued that actually
conforms to just as well as vision transformers
or certainly comparable to the best vision transformers
on the ImageNet classification task
it's just no one's ever pre-trained them
with Google's enormous training database before
and deployed them at such enormous scales
so we can't even necessarily trust all of these results
I mean we can trust them in that
you know in 99% of cases they did what they did
and they got the results that they got
but we can't trust the scientific conclusion
that vision transformers are way better than convolution
until someone's properly done some science
to do an exactly comparable experiment
and we're not very scientific community
we've got better in the previous decades
it was crazy people would make claims
and say okay I've invented this new method
but actually they changed like seven things
and the new method would often not be the thing
that made the performance gain
and we've got slightly better
because now we do do ablation studies
but we're still fundamentally not very scientific
these are people who are trainers, engineers, not scientists
100% and even when they do ablation studies
it's very expensive and it's now become a game
that only the top players can play
and OpenAI for example
they've done some very cool research over the years
you know about scaling laws and RLHF and you know
CLIP and GPT and blah blah blah
but you know ultimately
and I don't want to sound cynical
but the success of their methods is just so much data
they've built a Google Vnext organization
they're hoovering up all of this data
and I think a lot of people underestimate
how valuable the data of people using chat GPT is
so they're hoovering data
there's a reason why they let people use it for free
100%
so it's like it's one step away from a mechanical turk
so in the background they're just generating more and more data
and they've cultivated this image that they're doing science
and for reasons that we've just discussed
I think they're doing engineering
and yeah I think it's
I'm really looking for something different now
yeah I don't mean any disrespect to the engineers
it's no doubt incredibly difficult to engineer chat GPT
on that kind of scale
but yeah again it's not very intellectually satisfying
sometimes those papers there's not many insights
that you can get from them other than
I suppose it's really interesting that you keep adding data in it
you know it does keep scaling
that's not something we necessarily would have predicted
and so that the amount of data perhaps
will be the limit on these kind of models
not even computation or model size
will literally be the amount of data that you can hoover up
off the internet I will see what happens
yeah there's often there's not many insights
and I would like to reiterate that
you can get most of the interesting phenomena of deep learning
in 40 dimensions
and so if you want to do science or you want to try a new idea
don't even try it on MNIST, try it on MNIST 1D
if it works there then you know then try scaling it up
and if it's not an interesting idea
when you try it in your tiny data set in 40 dimensions
where no one cares what the state of the art is
then is it worth writing a scientific paper about it?
I know I think one thing that happened with GPT
is that it transgressed the uncanny valley
and you know we were talking earlier about how people
psychologise and use all of these other
adjacent mental frameworks to understand what's happening
the reason why people are so excited about the singularity
and AGI and all of this stuff is because
we've got this artefact now which is remarkable
and it's just memorised all of the data on the internet
and I think that there's more to cognition than just knowing
you know just being able to retrieve information
I think it's something that is very very good
used interactively by human
so I'm using it like I would use Google
and I'm searching for information and it's doing things
which are remarkable
In some ways you're still the intelligence there
it's what you're asking about, it's the interesting thing
not the way that it responds
100% and that's why
when you set it up in an autonomous arrangement
so something like auto GPT
or even getting it to do something on a schedule
the magic disappears
it's like this uncanny valley
or you know like the suspension of disbelief or whatever
it just instantly disappears and it does stupid things
and you think oh I can't believe I was fooled by that
I was fooled by randomness
there's like the UX and the fact that it's an extended mind
is what you know David Chalmers and Andy Clark called
an extended mind essentially
so it's like a cognizing element
that's part of my physical you know process of cognition
but so many people are kind of taken in by it
in that weird way
Yeah I think you have a
more
I think you have a higher opinion of it than I do
my experiments with it
haven't been super successful
I've asked it repeatedly
to generate a story given a few premises
it almost always generates the same story
with even the same name of the protagonist
and it knows really well about some things
because there's a giant corpus of data on
you know and unfortunately it knows really well about
the things that computer scientists know about
because they are present in abandon on the web
so if you want to ask them about search algorithms
it really knows about search algorithms
and it can write code for them
because there are these repository after repository
implementing different sort code algorithms
but you know once you get to the fringes
of its training data then it hallucinates
or you know they're trying to stop it doing that
so it sort of wraps out altogether
I agree that it's
crossed some uncanny valley
and it's obviously the first thing that sort of
captured the public's imagination
for the first time you know I'm going to
talk to my non-AI friends
it is possible to have non-AO friends
and they're asking me about
oh do you know about chat GPT and then
interestingly they often have very strong opinions
about how it works which are completely wrong
and often don't ask me
the domain expert what's going on
which I find curious too
so people have their own theories
question?
Well I mean
I guess you know because like
Sootsgever and Hinton are saying
it could lead to superintelligence
and I guess like based on the conversation we've just had
we know
that we're interpolating a data manifold
and we know that these
from a computational point of view
it's got fixed compute, fixed width and so on
so like how could it possibly
be a superintelligence?
I don't think that it could
I mean it would have to start
somehow manipulating some
its internal representations to make them more
coherent to come up with new ideas
and then test those
and embed them in its body of knowledge
it really has no way
to learn anything new
other than its context vector
which it forgets every session
so even if it did have a way
to manipulate the information
that it had introduced into that convex
into that context vector
and formulate it into something new
perhaps perform some logical deductions on it
or come up with some new hypothesis
based on it has no way to even remember that
so missing all kinds of parts of the puzzle
I don't see how you could
look at that and think oh superintelligence
is around the corner
I mean question for you
I don't like talking about superintelligence
because I think it's just
un-talkable about topic
but we could talk about AGI
so how far is it to AGI?
I guess part of the reason I find it
strange is
I think these folks think that there is such a thing
as a pure intelligence
and if it has just learned a data manifold
then that must be situated
because that's the data we've produced
in our physical environment here on the planet
so all of this has been reduced
into a data representation
and we're interpolating that
as you said it's non-interactive
so it can't seek new information
and it's non-reflexive
so it can't reflect on its own context
or anything like that
so it's just an
information retrieval system
which has become part of our
cognitive process
Yeah I don't even like the word intelligence
I think capability is a better word to use
it has certain capabilities
some of those capabilities are
better than humans
it can tell you right now
the recent history of epigenetics
off the top of its head and I cannot do that
I think it would be much better
to stop using the word intelligence
to start talking about capabilities
because that's a very concrete thing
you can say it can do this task
or it can't do this task
and what does AGI
mean? It means that
for some broad
set of capabilities
it can do a large enough
proportion of them that we think this is
general intelligence
and that's measurable
I'm not a huge fan of that
and I guess I explain myself
I mean intelligence
I love this Chinese proverb
of Mount Lu which Pei Wang talks about
he's an intelligence researcher
he basically says it's a complex phenomenon
that is beyond our cognitive horizon
and just like this mountain range, Mount Lu
depending on your perspective of the phenomenon
the range looks completely different
from these different perspectives like capability
behavior, structure, principle
so I guess I told you my perspective
but the reason I don't like
because capability is like a behavioral
interpretation of intelligence
and the reason I don't like that
is GPT doesn't do anything
because all
cognitive processes are
kind of externalized and physical and so on
and we enact
a cognitive process when we use it
so the artifact itself in some sense
doesn't have any measurable capability
I think I disagree with the premise
that GPT doesn't do anything
but it doesn't I mean it's just a bunch of
I mean
I guess this is quite an esoteric externalized
argument of cognition because you could argue
that a chess computer like the meaning of the
computation is in its use so it doesn't
intrinsically do anything
we use it as part of our cognitive
physical processes
for example it's something that does do
something
I think we are using
this word
in a very specific way
that I don't quite follow
well we do stuff
we scuba dive
we actually do stuff
and again maybe I'm just being a human
chauvinist but I'm
completely on board with it becoming
embedded in our cognitive ecosystem
well auto GPT
not very well but it does it
well
does it though I don't know
does it do
I mean in the
way a cat flap does stuff
you can make it do
things that can execute code and so on
but I wouldn't say it has
agency
doesn't do it I mean you know
agency is about being able to
wrestle with the complexity
in your environment as an observer with
a computer as Wolfram would say
so you know it's about
it's about that kind of complexity
differential between
the situation I'm in versus
the information I have access to
and so and I feel you're going to
push back on this but how do you
see reinforcement learning then
isn't that exactly what you're talking
about there's literally something called
an agent that has agency
maybe via only
a sort of dumb algorithm
something random until it
hits on some reward
but it explores
its complex environment it
solves
problems sometimes
because it's getting direct rewards sometimes
because of priors we've put into it like
essentially curiosity
you don't
see that as
doing something
I don't see that as dramatically different
from the cat flap scenario I guess
it's
I mean I love this Fristonian idea
that agency is actually a description
of certain dynamics
you know which is that you get
this kind of like locus of
information density
where a thing
is effectively planning many steps ahead
so you could say therefore
it has agency so in the case
of reinforcement learning
the thing I don't like about that is
again we can talk about free will
but someone has designed a reward function
the final chapter of your
book is all about ethics and algorithmic
fairness and
right now there's this interesting juxtaposition
between
near term safety and long term
safety in fact I'm concerned that
the word safety has been conflated in
its meaning and people are using one word for
long term and near term risks
and in your book I think you are mostly focused
on the near term risks like you know the
bias, the misinformation, the fairness and stuff like that
but yeah tell us about the chapter
right so yeah let me tackle the chapter
first and because
the chapter was co-written
by which I mean he did all the work
with a researcher called Travis
Lacroix who's at Dalhousie University
which is in the east of Canada
I didn't
feel personally I'm an engineer
I didn't feel personally confident
that I could write a
intellectually coherent chapter
on ethics but I was
strongly encouraged to I mean it's sort of
interesting that in an engineering textbook
now we need a chapter
on ethics and that's because of the sort of
force magnification of this
technology it's very powerful
you can read this book and go and build
things that are not good
for society and so
it's imperative that you at least think
about ethics I'm not trying to tell you
what to do so
I wrote this chapter with Travis who by the way
has his own book coming out next year
on value alignment which people should check out
and he comes with philosophy background
so we went through
a whole bunch of iterations of
him using long philosophical words
and me trying to chop that
down until it could be easily
understood by engineers
and we cover
some aspects of this that are
commonly discussed in
in our world
as you say bias, explainability
things like that some more philosophical
philosophical things about
moral agency and
value alignment
which are more discussed probably
in his field I think I only
let him use the word epistemology
once as a compromise
but I think the
interesting thing about that chapter is more
the kind of
conclusion of it which is
you know it's an appeal
to scientists to realise
that you have to take
be aware
and take responsibility
for the actions you take
and that you think you're just doing maths
and this is value free
but everything you do is
they would say value laden
and that's often deeply deeply
baked into what we do so much so
you can't even see that so
the very fact that we
judge our papers based on
only state of the art
and we don't report
whether they're fair, whether they're explainable
how much
carbon needs to be emitted
to train them or to run them
that is a value that is
baked into our community that we don't
necessarily think about and so
the book ends with an appeal to
interrogate yourself
and think
about the impacts of your work
which communities it's going to affect
individual scientists don't
necessarily have a huge amount of control
but you have some control you can choose
who you work for, you can choose which problems
you choose to work upon
in some sense it's a collective
action problem
in that individual people don't have very much control
but collectively you can do
things if you
organise and decide
this is the kind of things we should be
pursuing or not pursuing
and so that's the way the book concludes
and then I'd like to
sort of divorce the discussion of that
from any of my personal
views on what the risks of
AI are
which don't represent Travis's
views and also not the
views of the University of Bath
let's have that on camera
the book does focus on near
problems and largely
bias explainability and so on
and touches slightly
on near societal problems
mainly just because they're much
more concrete and easy
to talk about than
the distant problems
I
think there's a good
or harder to talk about depending on how you look at it
yeah
okay
that's sort of what I'm coming
around to, I think there actually are
worries at all levels
the people who are
worried about AGI
and beyond AGI
I'm not even going to use the word
to midterm
societal levels to
problems that are there right now
and I
intrinsically disagree with anyone who says all of the
problems we need to totally
concentrate on this and that sucks the oxygen
out of the discussion about the other thing
we're essentially an extremely rich
community
but for every 100
million dollars of venture capital
we had one person working on one of these
problems that would amount to a lot of
people and we could study this
at all levels
at the very
distant level of
AGI and the word that I'm not going to
mention
it's really difficult
for me to
I think they undermine their
arguments by being so inconsistent
and by you know
on the one hand
you can read books on this and on one page
they say we shouldn't anthropomorphise
anthropomorphise
anthropomorphise
on one page they say
we shouldn't anthropomorphise
systems are more intelligent to us and then on the
next page they say well obviously
we'll want to do this and it will
worry about doing this and it will
try and stop us doing this
and so often
arguments are sort of incoherent
and
then huge assumptions are made
frequently people say well obviously
it will have free will or obviously
it will have a sense of self
and so
I don't honestly really want to engage with
that end of things
I don't think I have anything more intelligent to say about it
but it doesn't mean that we should totally
not worry about it
I think it's really great that
people are worrying about the short-term
issues bias and explainability
I'm pessimistic about
explainability
more optimistic about bias
I think the thing that
isn't talked about very much is how
we manage bringing this
technology into society
so we
are going to replace
an enormous number of jobs
and it's not the way
that Jeff Hinton said it there'll be no more
radiologists
what's going to happen is one radiologist will be
able to do the job that was formerly done by
20 radiologists and you see that
happening already now
Gmail
automatically completes your emails and consequently
if your job is mainly about
emailing
you can do that 1% faster
and you need 1% less people to do that
and
already what we've got
just the latest version of chat
and Dali 3
they can do a lot of work
which is going to reduce the number
of people we need
to accomplish things in companies
and I think cause
a very large
number of knowledge workers
managers, HR people
to become
unemployed in a short amount of time
McKinsey I think in 2018
estimated there could be
800 million people made
unemployed by 2030
I don't know if they're sticking to that
but I'd say if anything we're moving faster
than we might have anticipated
and this is
really
worrying for society
because
a sort of major reason
a major factor that causes
civil unrest and instability
is people who used to have high status
but now have lost
that status and you're going to create
a situation on mass
very quickly people
have entered into a compact
with society where
they put off earning money for a long time
so they could train to become a lawyer
or train to become a doctor
and now suddenly
their status has all gone there
you know we just don't need that many lawyers
or doctors anymore I think eventually
we will create new jobs to replace
those people but the technology
is coming at us very fast like a wall
and I don't think society can adapt
so I actually for reasons completely different
to the AGI
people think we should try and slow
down
deploying some of this technology into society
yeah so it's interesting
that you have that take
I'm a little bit more skeptical on
the job replacement
and the infeablement part
mostly because I think people are still
overestimating how good
this technology is
so for example
we've had co-pilot which is a
thing that helps software engineers generate code
and I don't think you'll really
find any software engineers
that will tell you it's going to replace them
in fact most engineers
don't think it even makes
their job that much easier
and that's because there's so many layers of complexity
to being a software engineer and having
like a code auto complete really doesn't
even move the needle
the syntax of programming is not the difficult bit
is organising the code base
in a sensible way
absolutely and I think
I don't want to trivialise
there's going to be huge
job displacements and market changes
and so on but
I don't know I still think
the good old fashioned risks around
algorithmic fairness and bias are still
number one I'm reading
this book called Broken Code which is all about
Facebook and how they did all of their
internal engineering and there was
a real revolution at Facebook after about
2011 when they
changed the news feed from being
chronological to being a kind of recommender
system and everyone hated it
at first but they forced it on
and essentially
any kind of human curation
in many different parts of Facebook got weeded
out whether it was the news feed
for example they weeded that out
and they almost wanted to weed it out intentionally
because they didn't like it when people
said they had a conservative bias or something like
that and it meant that they could
absolve themselves of any responsibility
because the algorithm is doing it and it's just giving
people what they wanted and
it created a sewer
there were all sorts of horrible things
brewing on their platform that the leadership
had no idea about and in many cases
denied for many years and
I think that's a real
risk that we're just starting to
trust the algorithms to do stuff
for us. I think it is a risk
but I will point out to you you've just done
exactly what I
cautioned gets which is
I think there are problems at all levels
there is a huge problem with bias
and with
algorithms filtering
information we get but
that doesn't mean the problem that I mentioned
five minutes ago isn't important and isn't
worth talking about but this is how
the dialogue always proceeds
is that you say oh bias
is really important and I say
oh no no unemployment is important
and we don't
we need to talk about both of these things
this is
your reaction
is exactly what everybody's reaction
is
to minimise the importance
which no it's just to talk about
the thing that they care about
the most to the detriment of the other
things I'm not
for a moment I want to say that the things
you're talking about aren't important
but I want to broaden
that debate the reason that I bring up
unemployment is because I don't think it's talked
about enough and I think there are
I think it's almost inevitable
or you'd have to make really powerful arguments
to me to say that
people are not going to be able to do their jobs
more efficiently in the coming years
and that's not going to wind up with
a lot of people
just you know not you know maybe
maybe not being laid off maybe just not
being hired in the first place young people
you know
if you're a designer at a company
you know let's imagine you make greeting
cards and you used to by hand draw
those greeting cards but now
you draw one in the style you like and then
you just sort of sketch the next ten and
say you know fill it in in the style
we have you know you've just got
rid of a whole bunch of
greeting card designers I don't think there's
a good argument against that
people don't need more greeting cards
or it'll take a while
to find more human needs
for more people to fill
and I do think
there are things that governments you know
we could be thinking about actually how to
tackle this how
you know so one thing
that might slow it down
would be to make
companies actually responsible
for the effects of their products
so if I
you know once we're off Mike tell you
the recipe for nerve gas
and deploy it I will be
an accessory before the fact
and when you get arrested I will get
arrested and we'll both go to jail
but if chat gpt does that
I'm pretty sure I have a clause
in the terms and conditions
that you didn't read that says
in no way are they
responsible for that if you started
to make them responsible for that
that would be a way that you could slow things down
and make things safer
and I have no doubt that
people would still be able to make plenty of money
in this environment
and you could have
more stringent you know they're starting to
get at this Joe Biden's executive order
is starting to get at more stringent
examination of these models
you got to think
about how tax is
going to work so
well could I touch on something you said Richard
I think we need to distinguish
the
diffusion of skills versus agency
so I think
at the moment these things are glorified calculators
so do I but calculators
they got rid of
people who used to calculate
they did and that's very true but right now
all of the existing frameworks we have around
I automate something I create
a software service to do something
because
what's really concerning
if it ever happened is
the automation of our agency
so
and from an algorithmic fairness point of view
if GPT really was creating
a skill program and it was being
enacted on a server without
any human supervision and doing stuff
and no one was responsible that would be a huge problem
but I don't think that is a problem
no I don't think that's a problem
yeah anyway although it may come a
time where we gradually seed control
because bit by bit
the computer does it a bit better
right there's also
the kind of real risk of
de-skilling so
if for example
we have self-driving cars
that drive themselves most of the time you get less
experience
driving and then it kicks you into
control at the exact moment
which is quite dangerous
and you've now only been
driving for a few hours in the last year
instead of hundreds of hours and you have less
experience this is sort of
connected to me you've sort of
gradually given up your agency
and that's a real thing there was
Air France crash in South Atlantic
that was attributed to exactly that
the autopilot kicked off
as I understand the situation
and
it turned out that the pilots
didn't actually have much flying experience
in the last year because most of the time
the autopilot works and crucially
they didn't have
experience in near dangerous situations
because the autopilot was good
enough to handle that it kicked them off
in an extremely dangerous ambiguous
situation where sensors weren't working
and so
there's a possibility that we will
seed our skills
gradually and only
be cool to
use them in emergency situations
which is not a good thing
I don't think that's quite where you were getting at
that's really important so
I agree infeablement is a huge
problem although you could argue that
doing some kind of easily automated skill
because we're getting into
purpose and moral value here
and
you might argue that
society at the moment
recognises you doing some
trivial job as
having value
and in the future we might not
see it that way
but I agree that the
slippery slope is the problem which is that
they're still doing the same job but you're
eroding their free will
and they're becoming automatons
and you're setting them up to fail
I think
that might be happening in certain warehousing
kind of jobs already
that you're essentially using them
because you can't build robots quite well
enough yet
yes
keep talking
what's the solution to that
because
there's a slight position to say
well let's just keep them
busy in the warehouses rather than
free them up to do something different
I mean you're asking me for
solutions to problems that
no one has solutions for
I do think
a sense of purpose and a sense
human beings in my
this really is my personal opinion not science
are built to work and
they're not happy if they don't
accomplish things
it's a very common phenomenon
people retire and they really love it
for the first year and then
the second year they feel kind of
purposeless and lonely and
especially if their job was
something that's
strongly
you know
sort of corresponding to their sense of self
like a doctor or something
then they feel
purposeless and unhappy and
we are drifting towards that
there are certain people
probably like yourself who are autodidacts
who are going to go crazy at the point when
they have no responsibilities
my number one dream
and me too but unfortunately the whole world
is built
we're not at all a representative sample
of the population so
I'm saying that there's an element
of paternalism to this argument which is
I agree with you right now
because of the way work
has been enacted for centuries that
our society and recognition has kind of
built purpose around that
and sometimes you have to do
strange weird things for quite a while
for society to change and
are we saying
I almost want to
maintain the status quo
is that somehow stopping
the progression of what will come next
I mean
I think you're
sort of suggesting a
grand experiment where we enter
a phase of chaos
and society reorganizes
itself around
different principles
well no but that's actually a really cool point
because this gets to the core of what we're discussing
also with long term risk which is
well the word risk is actually
the key operative word here which is
do we
allow
scary things to happen or should we
prevent them from happening
well you know this is an interesting
thought experiment but
let's have a thought experiment
and I'll put you
on the spot
you've been asking me difficult questions all afternoon
there's a switch
and you can flick it and it makes
you know so this isn't really
science fiction
we pretty much know this is possible
or most people agree that it's possible
there's a switch you can flick it
and AGI is created but
just to human specs so
you get
you know you can create a tim
and let's
you know let's make it sort of concrete so
tim can output at the speed of chat
gtpt4 now and can
draw pictures at the speed
of dialy3 and
can but can communicate
nearly instantaneously
in the way that computers we already
know do and remember
enormous number of facts and
you get the choice and tim
the technology for tim 2.0
is going to be randomly allotted to
a big technology company
and let's say one of the nuclear powers
you spin the wheel it's going to go to one of them
you don't know which and
your question is do you flick the switch
would you flick that switch and
knowing that tomorrow they're going to make
100,000 tims on their servers
and get them doing something
hopefully just to maximise their shareholder
value would you do that
I think this is a great example
of we can't predict the future
and you know the road to hell is paved
with good intentions and there are so many situations
where we trust our moral intuitions
and even the long term is to make this argument
that they think
they can see the future and
in this particular case
it could easily end up being
a good thing
so you're saying you haven't quite
answered the question
the honest answer is I don't
I guess this is a great example where
our
our moral intuitions are almost always
wrong
so the intuitive answer
most people would say no
don't do it
I think I would say no too
and your answer
I'm fairly ambivalent to be honest
yeah but you've got to do it with switches there
you either flick it or die
there's no
being ambivalent means not
the only reason I wouldn't flick it is
it's the personal identity thing
in philosophy so I don't want there being lots of other tims around
if there was someone else
if it was you I'd flick the switch
because there wouldn't be
psychological continuity with
the other tims
the reason I think everybody who works in AI
should think about this question is that
there's a company that
has AGI baked into its core
if you work for OpenMind
OpenMind
or DeepAI
OpenAI or DeepMind
who literally write that AGI is their mission
you are
moving that switch a tiny bit
every day
and you should think about
so you've got this huge diffusion
of responsibility
well it's not me there's thousands of people
but you're moving that switch
it's moving up towards the halfway
point to the point where it just
flicks upwards or downwards
depending on which continent you're on
and so you should ask yourself that
question if you're actively working
towards that goal
and if you as you say
most people the answers are no
maybe you should work for a different company
anyway Professor Prince
this has been an absolute honour
it's been a real joy to talk to you
I've watched many of your podcasts
I've learned so much from them
and I look forward
to the ones that come out in the future
cool thank you so much for joining us today
thank you
