Rhaid, we're going to do metaphysics under epistemology today. There's some good words to conjure with.
Metaphysics under epistemology. Metaphysics is the study of reality.
It deals with questions like what is there or what exists.
That's actually a branch of metaphysics called ontology.
I think you've probably heard me mention ontology before, no?
Your ontology is your list of what exists.
Who believes in ghosts?
A couple of people. On your ontology, you have ghosts.
If you believe in God, on your list of what exists, you have God.
If you don't believe in God, on your list of what exists, God doesn't feature.
If you don't believe in ghosts, ghosts won't feature on your list of what exists.
Chairs probably would, lecturers probably would, necklaces, things like that,
feature on your list of things that exist.
Metaphysics looks at what is there in the world and what is its nature?
Once you've postulated the existence of something, or decided on the existence of something,
you have a further question to ask, what's it like?
For example, I told you that Heraclitus postulated atoms more than 500 years BC.
He didn't know what they were like, except that, by definition, they were the unsplittables.
Because an atom was as far as you can go, an atom of water is as far as you can go.
Sorry, no, I'll have the water down here, please.
I don't want them to drink it.
That's all right, thanks. Just stick it down on the floor there.
Where was I? Water.
Yeah, exactly. Look here, there are quite a few atoms of water on my finger.
But at some point you'll get down to something such that if you go below that, it won't be water.
It'll be CO2, it'll be a molecule, but it won't be water itself, because you'll have gone too far for it to be water.
You postulate the existence of atoms for whatever reason, it could be as a theoretical entity.
Some people postulate God as a theoretical entity. How do we explain all this?
We need something like this, let's call it God.
How do we postulate this? We need something unsplittable, let's call it an atom.
Once you've postulated the existence of something and you have some idea of what it's like,
you then want to find out more about it and you want to see if you're right to think it exists.
For example, the Higgs boson, we have reason to think it exists.
We have various ideas of what it's like, which I won't go into because I don't know enough about them.
We believe in its existence enough to spend millions on this large Hadron collider in Switzerland.
But when we actually find it, if we actually find it, then we're going to know more about it.
That's what we're doing. We've postulated it.
We said this is on our list of things that exist, at least as a hypothesis.
Now we want to test that hypothesis and see whether it's true.
Metaphysics asks questions like what is there and what is its nature?
Obviously, many of these questions are questions of science.
So the Higgs boson, does it exist? What's it like?
These are questions for science.
Questions like causation. What is causation? Does causation exist?
Causation, the relation between cause and effect.
That's not a question for science.
The scientist must assume that causation exists.
Philosophers ask, does it?
What's the nature of causation?
Could causation go backwards?
For example, could there be a cause that happens after its effect?
Is causation a relation between events or between objects or between facts?
What are the relator of the causal relation?
So these are all questions of metaphysics.
Epistemology, on the other hand, is the study of knowledge.
So there's a big difference between what is the case
and what we know or can know to be the case.
There may be things that are the case that we'll never know.
I've mentioned three consecutive sevens in the decimal expansion of pi before.
So what you know and what is the case,
you hope that if you know something, it must be the case.
But what you hope is to what you believe you know is actually the case.
But the study of what is the case and what you know to be the case
are two different questions.
One's to do with metaphysics, the other's to do with epistemology.
So epistemology looks at what can we know.
Can we, for example, know that the sun will rise tomorrow?
Do you remember when we were doing logic, we looked at induction?
Can we know it?
Well, we don't know for certain.
Must knowledge be certain knowledge?
Or could it be the case that we know something that we don't know we know?
Do you see what I mean?
What is knowledge like?
So actually, I should have put that here.
What is knowledge?
What can we know?
And how can we know it?
So, for example, if there are moral values, we don't know it by sensory perception.
I never see right and wrong, certainly not through my eyes or through tactile sense or anything like that.
So there must be some other way.
How do we know that 2 plus 2 equals 4?
Again, you don't see that that's the case.
How do you know that all swans are white?
I know they're not, but let's pretend for a minute.
How do you know that all ravens are black?
That's a better one.
Well, let's forget I'll be no ones.
I know what you're like.
I could see you thinking that.
How do we know that?
Given that if you're going to say that all ravens are white, you're talking about all ravens,
even the ones that you've never seen,
even the ones that nobody has ever seen,
even the ones on Mars,
if there are ravens on Mars,
you're saying all ravens are black includes those ravens on Mars.
Well, how can you know that?
Do you see what I mean?
So there are two different questions as what is knowledge in the first place?
Must we know that we know something or can we know something that we don't know that we know?
What's it got to do with justification?
What's it got to do with belief, et cetera?
And how can we know these things?
So that's the distinction between metaphysics.
Metaphysics is to do with truth and what is the case and what's its nature.
Epistemology is to do with knowledge, justification, belief,
and how we can know whatever it is that we do know.
So that's the main distinction.
Let me just pour myself some H2O.
H2O.
What did I say earlier?
I suddenly remembered that I heard myself saying something false.
Well, right.
Okay, let's look at ontology, the study of what there is or what exists.
Okay, one question.
I said earlier that there are many things that are questions of what is the case
and what is its nature that are questions for science.
But questions like does God exist in the God delusion,
if any of you have read it.
Richard Dawkins claims that this is a scientific hypothesis like any other.
Well, if that's true, it must be possible to conduct experiments, observations
in order to determine the existence of God.
I have no idea what experiments or observations he has in mind,
but I actually don't think this is a question for science.
I think Dawkins is wrong to think this is a straightforward scientific hypothesis.
I think this is a question for philosophy.
Evidence, our reasons for thinking God exists take the form of arguments
rather than evidence or observations.
So, for example, the most obvious argument is the one I used earlier.
God is a theoretical entity.
He's postulated to explain the existence of the universe.
That's the simplest argument.
It's the argument that people have used from the beginning of time.
Other people use different arguments.
For example, the moral argument.
You don't need God to explain the existence of the physical world,
but how come there exist people like us
who are capable of rationality, who reason, who have free will, who make choices
and in particular make moral choices.
People like us who value things, who see right and wrong, good and bad,
beautiful and ugly and things like that.
Physics can't see right and wrong, good or bad, etc.
This is not the sort of thing that physics or any physical science can investigate.
But you might think that God is the explanation for the existence of things like that.
Or you might deny that.
You might say, no, you don't need God to explain right and wrong.
You can easily explain right and wrong by peel to evolutionary biology.
So, altruism is a question of either kin support
or if I scratch your back, you'll scratch mine, etc.
So, if you look at Dawkins' chapter, I think it's four, but I may be wrong about that,
he offers four or five arguments for how you can explain morality without God.
So, does God exist?
Lots of different arguments for the existence of God,
lots of different rejections of those arguments,
lots of different comebacks on those rejections
and philosophers are going to have a job for at least a couple of hundred years, I think.
I think the God's illusion is far from the final word on it.
But there are other questions like that.
That's a biggie, obviously, but there are other biggies.
Do moral values exist?
Is there right and wrong?
Does right, it's really a property of an action being right or wrong?
Or can we reduce the idea of being right to something,
some people would say natural like happiness?
So, the utilitarians want to reduce right and wrong
to the idea of the greatest happiness or the greatest number.
So, there's no more to right or wrong than how many people you make happy by an action that you do.
Now, what you're doing there is you're reducing one thing to another thing.
So, here's something we don't understand right and wrong
and we think that it needs an explanation
and we're tempted to postulate God for it maybe.
But, on the other hand, if we can say,
well, actually we don't have an explanation for that
but there's actually no more to that than this in particular combinations
and we do have an explanation for this
or at least this is something for which we can think
that there'd be a much easier explanation than God.
So, on the grounds of Occam's razor,
given two explanations, both of which work,
you always go for the simpler one.
If you can explain happiness and you can reduce morality to happiness,
then you haven't got a problem with morality.
You don't need to postulate God.
See what I mean?
So, you might...
I mean, some people try and reduce the idea of God to...
I mean, actually Dawkins again does this.
He thinks that God is the idea we all want for security,
for a father figure, something to rely on.
So, he's reducing God to that.
The utilitarians try and reduce moral values to happiness.
Kant, on the other hand, isn't a reductionist.
He thinks right and wrong exist,
that the moral law exists in and of itself
and that it's quite different from anything else.
So, if you remember last week,
for Kant, a moral action is an action that's carried out
because of reverence for the moral law.
It can't be said to be anything else.
It can't be said to be something that, just as a matter of fact,
produces the greatest happiness to the greatest number.
And reverence for the moral law, says Kant,
is not something you can reduce to anything else.
Something easier to understand.
Another example of this would be mental states.
I thought I was going to come to mental states,
but I say it's not on there, so I'll put it in anyway.
Do mental states exist?
Well, what are mental states?
Well, mental states divide into two.
There are the so-called propositional attitudes.
So, attitudes to propositions, things like beliefs.
You can't have a belief unless it's a belief about something, can you?
So, I believe that Anne is wearing sort of maroon.
Is that maroon? Right, there you are.
I believe Anne is wearing maroon.
I believe when Anne has got a necklace on,
somebody has got a lovely pink jumper on just in front of Anne.
A ffuture sort of colour.
Okay, all of those beliefs have a content,
but there are other propositional attitudes,
so I can have a desire towards the same content.
Desire is a different attitude,
but I could have the desire that Anne is wearing a necklace,
or I could wish that Anne is wearing maroon.
I could also intend that Anne is wearing maroon.
I could set out to make sure she wears maroon today,
because I want to use her as an example.
So, these are lots of different attitudes to contents,
and you can get the same attitude and different contents,
and the same content and different attitudes.
So, that's one type of mental state,
the so-called propositional attitudes.
The other type is the so-called qualitative states.
So, when I looked at this lady's lovely ffuture-coloured cardigan,
I have a certain experience.
There's something that it's like for me to see that cardigan.
There's something that it's like for me to see these chairs.
There's something it's like for me to be in pain,
or to feel a tickle, or something like that.
And these are qualitative states.
They're states that have a quality to them.
So, I'm sure you can do your own rough and ready distinction now
into states that have a certain raw feel to them,
and states that are attitudes to propositions.
Why do we think these exist?
Well, how could I possibly explain your behaviour
without citing desires, beliefs, intentions, hopes, fears?
You know, why did she suddenly get up and leave the room?
Answer, because she suddenly realised it was the wrong lecture.
She suddenly realised it was the wrong lecture.
So, she had a belief about what the right lecture was.
She suddenly came to believe that this was the wrong lecture.
So, she formed an intention to leave the room.
So, in order to explain your behaviour,
I postulate all sorts of beliefs and desires.
But here's another little story.
Woodlice.
Why do woodlice congregate under rocks and things?
Tell me.
It's dark.
Why do woodlice congregate where it's dark?
Because they want to be safe, or something like that.
And they believe it's safe under rocks.
Okay, you're a bit reluctant to attribute beliefs, are you?
Well, don't give my story away.
They just keep moving until they get better.
Yep, absolutely.
Okay, when we first see a woodlice,
and certainly if we're speaking to a child or something like that,
we would use belief-desire psychology
to explain woodlice's behaviour,
because that's what comes very easily to us.
So, woodlice believe that it's safe under rocks
and they want to be safe,
so they intend to go under rocks.
As a matter of fact,
the correct explanation of woodlice's behaviour
is that they embody a mechanism
such that when it's dry around them,
they move.
And they move in a speed that's determined
by how dry it is around them.
And as it gets damper, they come to a halt.
And incidentally, they move in whatever direction
they happen to be pointed.
They don't sort of turn around and make for that rock.
If they're standing around,
in that direction, there's a rock over there,
they'll go for that one.
Except they're not going for that one, are they?
They're being pushed by the dryness.
Now, once you know that explanation,
have I got it right?
Yeah, go to the case.
That's right.
I wasn't going to use technical terminology,
but there you are.
Okay, so that's the proper explanation
of woodlice's behaviour.
Once you know about canices like this,
you can explain the behaviour of any woodlice
anywhere at all,
as long as it's a normal woodlice,
anywhere at all at any time.
Once you know that, belief desires
have been made redundant, haven't they?
Why should you postulate woodlice beliefs
now or woodlice desires?
In fact, all their behaviour is explicable
in terms of things like kinises.
They're not all kinises,
but they're things like that.
What about your behaviour?
Can I explain your behaviour?
Well, a lot of your behaviour.
I can explain.
If I chuck my chalk at you,
that shows how old I am, doesn't it?
If I chuck my chalk at you,
you're going to duck,
that's not a desire
or belief-driven behaviour.
That's just a hardwired response
to the fact you see something coming towards you.
If you put your hands on a hot plate,
do the same thing.
So a lot of your behaviour,
and that's just one,
if you hear an ambulance coming,
you'll move out of the way.
That's a classically conditioned response.
A lot of your behaviour,
doesn't need to be explained
by appeal to beliefs and desires.
But much of it does.
And this is why we postulate beliefs and desires.
This is why we say that beliefs and desires exist.
But perhaps aethologists,
people who study animal behaviour,
are going to find out one day
that we can explain all our behaviour
in terms of brain states.
And it might be that we can,
one time in the future,
we'll be able to saw off the skull
of newborn babies
and fit a perspect dome instead.
So that we don't have to go in
for all this interpretation,
which we're actually not very good at,
trying to find out what we're all going to do instead.
We can just look at somebody's brain
and say, ah, okay, I know what you're going to do.
Perhaps we'll all wear woolly hats
so we can surprise people or something like that.
But do you see,
if we could explain all our behaviour,
without appealing to beliefs and desires,
we'd no more have reason to think
you had a mind
than we do to think woodlice do.
So, again, the question,
do mental states exist,
is a huge question.
Lots of people try and reduce mental states
to physical states,
and then explain physical states.
It's much easier to explain physical states
than mental states.
But if you don't want to be
a reductionist,
if you want to say
you cannot reduce mental states to physical states
and there are all sorts of reasons to think you can't,
then you're going to have to postulate mental states.
You're going to have to postulate contents and qualia.
And the minute you do,
you're going to have problems with functionalism,
with physics being able ever
to understand mental states.
And my goodness, you might end up having to postulate
God or something again,
or maybe not, we don't know.
So, again, the question is,
what is this? Does it exist at all?
If it does exist, can we reduce it to something else?
If we can't reduce it to something else,
what is its nature?
Here's another one, what about possibilities?
Okay, I might have been wearing jeans, mightn't I?
Okay, that's a possibility.
And what's more, it's a possibility that's actual.
Isn't it? It's an actual possibility.
Well, what is a possibility?
What's the nature of a possibility?
It's not something that actually exists, is it?
Okay, so maybe we've got to postulate
a different sort of existence now.
There are things that actually exist
and there are things that possibly exist
and there are things that don't even possibly exist.
There are square circles that don't even possibly exist.
Unicorns, might they exist or not?
Marianne's wearing jeans, certainly,
is an existing possibility.
Do you see what I mean?
You're now getting layers of existence,
different levels of existence.
Well, and that little kitten on the floor,
down there, is it fat?
You're all locked.
You understood what my words were.
Don't you need to postulate a little kitten down there
in order to give meaning to my words?
Some people have thought that.
If you do, then that little kitten exists,
but it doesn't exist like Ann does.
So you need, again, another layer of existence.
But is that existence?
Well, some people have said that it's not really existence.
Let's call it persistence instead.
But the thing is, you've got to say,
if you say that every...
in order for you to understand the meaning
of that little kitten is fat,
there needs to be a concept of a kitten
or a kitten or something.
There's a kitten that gives meaning to the words,
but it's not an existing kitten,
like the kitten that some of you may have at home.
So it's a persisting kitten
or an imaginary kitten
is another way of thinking about it.
But do imaginary kittens exist?
Well, do they?
In imagination, there you are.
There's another way of thinking of it.
So it's existence, different types of existence.
There's existence in the real world
and there's existence in your imagination.
There's existence in novels.
I mean, when it comes up,
this little kitten down here,
it could be black ginger or anything, couldn't it?
I haven't told you anything about what it's like.
But we all know that Sherlock Holmes wore a deer stalker, didn't we?
Did he? Something like that, wasn't it?
OK, so they've got, again, different levels of existence.
We all know that unicorns have horns.
Well, there aren't any unicorns.
Well, how can unicorns have horns if there aren't any?
Do you see?
Anyway, so do possibilities exist?
Is a really difficult one.
That's the sort of thing that leads people
to postulate the existence of possible worlds.
And I think I've mentioned possible worlds to you before.
Lots of people postulate possible worlds,
but they're not realists about possible worlds.
Mathematicians, logicians, physicists, many of them,
all those disciplines postulate possible worlds.
Not all people in those disciplines do.
But if you postulate possible worlds,
you can see possible worlds as reducing
to possible situations in this world,
or you can see possible worlds as real.
And David Lewis, a very famous philosopher,
postulated the reality of possible worlds.
He said, well, I've never really heard
a very good argument against them.
A look of blank astonishment doesn't count as an argument.
What about physical objects?
Well, you might say, well, obviously they exist.
You know, how can I deny that that exists?
Okay, well, let's do a Cartesian thought experiment.
In fact, let's do the Cartesian thought experiment
when I have some water.
Descartes was interested in the fact that we know
that some of our beliefs are false.
But in the very nature of things,
we don't know which those beliefs are.
You see what I mean?
Would you like to tell me for sure
that all your beliefs are true?
Right? Okay, what about you?
No, it isn't. No, no, a lot of your beliefs are false.
I guarantee.
If you believe it, you believe that it's true.
That doesn't make it true.
Does it? No.
I believe it's true.
You believe it's true exactly.
But this is the problem with beliefs.
Every belief you have, you believe it's true,
because that's what a belief is.
To have the attitude of belief towards a particular content
is to assent to, as philosophers would say, that content.
So, in believing that this chair is blue,
there's the content, that chair is blue,
and I assent to it, I say that is true.
That's what a belief is.
But, of course, I may be wrong.
I may be colourblind or something like that.
So, you believe the chair to be blue.
Surely you say you know the chair to be blue?
Well, given the circumstances in this case,
I probably would say I know,
but the fact is, let's not bother about that.
I was just offering that as a...
But you have beliefs about a lot of things.
The question is, you know that many of those beliefs are false,
but you don't know which they are.
And in the very nature of things,
anything that you believe, you believe to be true,
because that's what truth is.
You cannot have a belief that you don't believe to be true.
But you do know that not all your beliefs are true.
Well, Descartes became very interested in this,
and he said, well, what I'm going to do
is I'm going to take myself away from the world.
In the world, we have to assume that our beliefs are true,
because we have to act on them.
So, in believing that chair is blue,
if I'm looking for something to match it,
I'll go and look for something blue.
Okay, we have to act on our beliefs.
He's going to put himself away and think,
okay, how do I know that my beliefs are true?
What is it that justifies me
in believing that my beliefs are true?
And he thought,
the method I'm going to use to do this
is to treat as if false
any belief I can entertain the slightest doubt about.
So, if the belief that I believe to be true could be false,
I'm going to put it on one side as if it really is false.
And by that means hope to find something
that is absolutely certain.
And from that, maybe I can build up
the rest of my knowledge.
So, it's a bit like you know some of the apples
in your baskets are rotten,
but you don't know which they are.
So, you take each one out and any that's a little bruised,
you put on one side as being maybe that's rotten,
and you hope to be left with only the good apples in the basket.
So, Descartes wanted to look at his beliefs and say,
if there's any about which I can entertain
the slightest doubt, I'm going to treat it as if false.
Okay, so he's not saying that his beliefs are false.
He's saying it's as if they're false for this.
So, first, he went down three levels of doubt.
The first one was the argument from illusion.
Okay, the argument from illusion tells us that,
well, our senses have deceived us.
I expect all of you have been deceived by your senses.
Sometimes you've got home that wonderful skirt
that you thought would go so well with that blouse
and you've got the colour wrong.
The lights in this shop were the wrong colour
or something like that.
We've all been deceived by our senses at some time.
Well, if we've all been deceived by our senses at some time,
should we take all the beliefs that we base on our senses
and put them in the doubting basket,
treat them as if they're false?
Should we?
If our senses has deceived us,
should we treat all our sensory beliefs as false?
Okay, put your hands up if you think yes.
Okay, put your hand up if you think no.
Okay, now tell me why you think no.
Why must there be that possibility?
Well, hang on, we've got two lots of can'ts' nos here.
What we're suggesting is that your senses have sometimes deceived you.
Does that mean you can never be sure
that your senses are not deceiving you now?
No, you can't be sure.
So sometimes we do trust our senses, don't we?
I mean, as a matter of fact,
how do you know that your senses have deceived you?
Well, hang on, you experiment, you prove it.
How? How do you do this?
Through your senses.
Through your senses.
Can you give me an example?
Possibly not.
I know to pick up a frying pan
and expecting lots of heavy weights,
and I pick up a light pan.
Woo, yes.
Yes, good one.
Okay.
So your belief that it was heavy,
although that's actually not a sensory belief,
probably, is it?
No, no, but it's not a...
When your belief that the frying pan was heavy,
you can't really look at a frying pan
and tell it's going to be heavier.
Maybe you can, maybe you can.
Let me give you Descartes' own example,
because I think it's a good one.
Descartes said,
if you put a stick in water and it looks bent,
okay, you've got reason for thinking that the stick is bent.
You take it out of water, woo, it's straight.
You've got reason for thinking the stick's straight.
Well, okay, there are two possibilities, maybe.
When you put the stick in water, it bends it,
or maybe it just appears bent.
So how do you test this?
You put your hands in the water,
you feel the stick when it's underwater,
and lo, it's straight.
Okay, so you've now got two reasons
for thinking the stick's straight and only one.
But the thing is, you couldn't even know
that your senses were deceiving you
unless you rely on your senses.
So all we got to hear from the argument from Illusion
is that we know that not all our sensory beliefs are true.
Not all our sensory beliefs are true.
Sometimes, usually in unusual psycho-optimal conditions,
or maybe not unusual, but not perfect psycho-o physical conditions,
our sensory beliefs deceive us.
But you can't go from the universal possibility of illusion
to the possibility of universal illusion.
Would you like me to say that again?
No, oh, I like saying that.
Would you like me to say it again?
Thank you, thank you.
You cannot go from the universal possibility of illusion
to the possibility of universal illusion.
Are you with me?
Okay, so all those who said no, you're right.
We do know that our senses sometimes deceive us,
but that doesn't tell us that we can put
all our sensory beliefs into the doubting basket
because we would never know that our senses deceive us
unless we rely on our senses.
So that's the first argument.
The second argument that Descartes went to
was the argument from the demon.
The demon argument rather than the argument from the demon.
Sorry, anyone who knows what they're talking about
will know that I'm talking rubbish.
The second one was the dream, the argument from dreaming.
Okay, so you're sitting here, you're in the fire,
the lights are on, everything's fine,
you're looking at your hands in front of you.
How can you doubt that?
Your senses aren't deceiving you now, are they?
But on the other hand, says Descartes,
haven't you ever been in a situation where
everything has seemed to you to be a certain way,
and then you've suddenly woken up
and found it wasn't that way at all?
So it looks as if all the sensory evidence is in,
and yet you're still wrong, your belief is false.
So you believe that the hand is in front of you.
It's exactly with you as it would be
if your hand was in front of you,
but your hand's not in front of you.
It's a matter of fact, you're dreaming.
Okay, does that mean we should put all our sensory beliefs
in the doubting basket?
Put your hands up if you think yes.
Put your hand up if you think no.
You're beginning to get this now, aren't you?
Why not?
Man in white or beigey sort of jumper.
Sorry, I've picked on you and you don't have to...
Okay, would anyone else like to answer?
Why can we not put all our sensory beliefs
in the doubting basket now?
Because we wake up and what does that tell us?
That we're not always asleep exactly,
that sometimes our beliefs are true,
sometimes when I've got my hand in front of me like that
and I'm thinking my hand's in front of me,
I am awake and the reason I know that
is because if I didn't wake up,
I couldn't know I was dreaming.
So it's exactly the same structure of arguments
as in the first one.
But whereas we got rid of all sensory beliefs
that have formed in suboptimal psychophysical conditions here,
here we've got rid of a lot more, haven't we?
Why?
No, I was going to say that, but how do you know you're woken up?
That might be part of the dream as well.
It's a contrast, isn't it?
There are people who don't, on occasion,
they understand that it's very rare,
but there are people who go through this cycle
of thinking they're woken up
and then they wake up again themselves.
Right, but in order to know that they are like that,
they must have woken up.
Don't know to what extent they know it or whether
their position matters.
Well, okay, but with you,
I'm quite sure you've had lucid dreams
where you've had the dream and suddenly you've woken up
and you've thought, wow,
who could have believed that I was dreaming?
Sometimes you can know you're dreaming.
Sometimes you can know you're dreaming,
but it's the lucid dream that's good for this one.
But what have we lost here?
What's in the doubting basket now?
No, instantly there's another thing I want you to notice
that lots of people think, I mean, it's hell,
sheer hell being a philosopher as a party.
Because when people find out you're a philosopher,
they're going for little games like,
oh, good, tell me that this exists.
Does this exist? Why not?
And you say something and they say, oh, no, it doesn't.
You know, tell me how, tell me how.
And they're playing a sort of skeptics game
that's extremely irritating.
I hope none of you ever play it.
Descartes found reasons for doubting everything.
He didn't just doubt.
He took beliefs he believed to be true
and he looked for a reason to doubt them.
And it's only when he found a reason to doubt them
that he put them on one side.
So he wasn't just doubting.
He wasn't playing the skeptics game.
He was actually looking for reasons to doubt.
So what have we lost here?
What's in the doubting basket
once you've got the argument from dreaming?
Sense of perception.
Well, no, because when you are,
you know that sometimes your belief
there's a hand in front of you is correct.
Is true.
So you don't lose that you do sometimes
see your hand in front of you.
But what do you lose?
We have a sense of reality.
No, no, we're looking for certainty.
We're wanting to know what isn't certain
as a result of this.
Some things are left certain.
I mean, it's left certain, for example.
Well, okay, I'm asking you that.
What is left certain?
That when you are awake,
your beliefs, your sensory beliefs,
if they're formed in optimal
psychophysical conditions are true.
You still got no reason to doubt that.
It's just that
you can say that
unless I know I'm awake,
I cannot know for sure
that there is a hand in front of me.
Do I know that I'm really awake?
No, I don't because I could be having a lucid dream.
But I do know that hands exist
and that I can see them
and that chairs exist and that I can see them.
Or if you don't like that
I can, in our dreams,
we sometimes put together things in strange ways.
I can know that blue exists
so you can go to simple things,
horses, horns, whiteness, things like that.
The simple things from which we build up
complex things, I know that they exist.
So we're losing something of the world here,
but we haven't lost the whole world yet.
There's still an awful lot that we know.
I don't know anything to be true now,
but I do have reason to believe that it is true.
It is true sometimes, i.e. when I'm awake
and I have these reasons to believe things.
But then we get down to the demon argument.
And at the demon argument,
Descartes says, OK,
well, I'm assuming, aren't I,
that these experiences that I have
as of my hands and of blwness and so on,
that these experiences are actually caused by
something outside myself
and that the experience that I have
is a guide to the nature
of the cause of these experiences.
So my experience of blwness as of a blue chair
is causing me to think that
that experience is being caused by
a chair that's blue.
And you've got a problem here because
in order to know that A causes B,
you've got to be here, haven't you?
You've got to see a correlation between A and B.
In the same way, to know that A resembles B,
you've got to be able to see both A and B.
But are we ever in this position
with respect to our experiences
and the causes of our experience?
Never.
We're always here, aren't we?
Didn't leave enough room for my arrow.
We experience the world,
if you like, through our experiences.
We can never get outside our experiences
to see what the world is like,
to see what's causing these experiences.
So it could be that our experiences
are caused by something completely other
than we take them to be caused by.
So here's the demon.
Sorry, I know it looks like a cat, but it's a demon.
The demon opens up a gap
between our experiences themselves
and the causes of those experiences.
It actually says, how do we even know
these experiences are caused?
Why aren't they just experiences?
One following the other, following the other, following the other.
And there's nothing out there at all.
And actually Descartes at that point says, I can't do this.
I'm going to put the demon there
because I find it impossible to believe
there's nothing other than my experiences.
But I can think that there's some cause of my experiences
which is completely other than I take it to be.
And some people have tried putting evil scientists in here.
But that doesn't work
because an evil scientist isn't magic.
What you're trying to do, the demon is just there
because it's impossible to imagine
that your experiences don't have causes at all.
So you're putting something there
so that there is a cause,
but the cause is completely other than you take it to be.
Is that my...
Did he panic because it's like people saying,
well, after death there must be something
otherwise there's no point in frightening?
He didn't panic for that reason.
No, he just literally couldn't wrap his mind around
the idea that there's nothing outside causing your experiences.
You try it.
It's really very difficult to get yourself to the point
where you understand that there might be no physical world at all.
Your experiences could be exactly as they are,
even though nothing else exists.
So all there is is Ann's experiences
as of Marianne giving a lecture in philosophy.
There's no Marianne, there's no philosophy,
there's no lecture, there's no blue chair.
It does seem to me very similar to what people have.
Is this experience all a half?
It is a frightening experience.
It's nothing beyond that. It's nothing beyond death.
It's nothing beyond death.
But it's nothing to do with God.
Oh, no. I said that sometimes white people want to have a God.
I didn't actually say about God.
I just said people worry that there is nothing after death.
Okay, but this is a different thing
because it's not worrying about that sort of thing.
But it is a worrying thought.
We want our beliefs about the external world to be true, don't we?
And yet what's happening is that we're discovering
that what Descartes said was that, actually,
once you've done this thought experiment,
you realise that there's the world
and there's your picture of the world.
Okay, all your beliefs that you've formed about the world
and you go through the world updating your beliefs all the time.
But once you've retreated into your picture
of your picture of the world,
which should be here, but I ran out of room,
the world actually becomes unnecessary.
Because if all there was was this,
you couldn't ever get outside to see whether this is there or not.
So once you've pushed yourself back into a reflective position,
you see that the world that you picture
is quite different from your picture of the world
and that your picture of the world could be exactly as it is,
even though the world was completely different.
And that's the Cartesian thought experiment.
That's hyperbolical doubt.
At this point, you've started the question of how can we know?
I mean, we do take ourselves to know
that there's an external world, a physical world out there.
But what possible justification could we have for this,
given that all we can do is go and look for more experiences.
And our experiences are exactly what we are asking.
Are they caused by something?
And if so, what?
I can't step outside my experience.
Of course, no scientific experiment is going to tell you the answer
between are my experiences caused by an external world
or are they caused by an evil demon?
I can't go down and say, oh, is it a chair?
Oh, yes, here we are. It's a chair.
Why can't I do that?
All I'm doing is giving myself more experiences, aren't I?
I'm now having a tactile experience,
as well as a visual experience,
and there's an auditory one there as well.
But I mean, there are only more experiences, aren't they?
Who are you?
Hang on. I'm having another experience at this moment.
It's an auditory one.
It's as of someone...
That's why people say, did you see what I saw?
They do, but no, no, hang on.
You haven't got yourself into hyperbolical doubt, has she?
Why hasn't she got into hyperbolical doubt?
She's not looking at her picture of the world.
She still thinks you exist.
No, no, she still thinks that I should think that she exists.
I have very good reason to think I'm having experiences
as of a female wearing maroon sitting in front of me,
who's speaking to me.
But these are just more of my experiences, aren't I?
I can no more get outside my experiences
to check whether Anne's really there,
and whether she's really telling me
what I think she's telling me,
than I can to see whether the chair is there.
All I've got is more experiences.
So all I've got is more of this here.
And I still haven't got this, which is what I need.
So there's no point in looking for collaboration,
which is why there can't be any scientific way of testing
which hypothesis is true.
So here I have my experience in the external world.
Of those, I can be certain.
I'm absolutely sure now that I'm having experiences
as of a lecture theatre, et cetera.
What I want to know is are those experiences
causing me to form beliefs that are true,
i.e. there is a lecture theatre.
Now notice the difference between
I believe there's a lecture theatre
and there is a lecture theatre.
The latter is metaphysics, isn't it?
The former is epistemology.
I can be certain of the former.
I can be certain of my own beliefs.
But I can't be certain that these beliefs are true, can I?
And it's at this level of hyperbolical doubt
at the third level of doubt
that you start to wonder,
do physical objects exist at all?
Interestingly, Descartes thought that you could show that they did.
Descartes wasn't a skeptic.
Lots of people think he was,
but, in fact, he wasn't.
He did this sceptical thought experiment
in order to pre-empt scepticism.
He ended up believing in the existence of a physical world,
but he thought it was necessary to believe in God first.
Isn't he saying that I think that I am?
He did.
That's right. Cogito ergo sum.
And the reason he did that,
can anyone think why he did that?
Is that what I've told you so far?
What's that?
That's right. Once you've got yourself back into your picture
of your picture of the world
and your inability to determine the existence of the world
that you picture,
the only thing of which you can be certain is that you're thinking.
Isn't it?
So here's my belief.
The content of my belief is
that the chair is blue.
I've got the attitude of belief towards that.
I've now got another attitude,
which is that of doubt towards that belief.
Do you see what I mean?
You can't doubt your own beliefs
without seeing that you have these beliefs.
And that's what Descartes says.
He said, the very act of doubting
makes me see that I believe.
And if I believe, I exist.
I don't know what I am like,
but I exist because I exist as a thinking thing,
as a thing that thinks.
So I think, therefore, I am,
is because that, once you've been in hyperbolical doubt,
that is the only certainty you have.
You actually have a few more about what you think,
but you don't need to...
The right system encapsulates it rather neatly, I think.
But you see, you cannot doubt your own beliefs
without seeing that you do believe something or other.
All you don't know is whether that belief is true.
Could I come back to the argument from illusions
and just sort of question around...
We're saying, talking about our sense data
and sometimes those are incredible, however...
Sometimes those are what?
Sometimes those are true or can be believed.
But looking at evidence, for example,
from physics about the nature of the universe,
about wave particle forms, about what the nature of the matter is,
all that kind of stuff,
what we're seeing is an extremely distorted view of reality.
Looking at the evidence from psychology,
our perception is a highly flawed,
all our senses are highly flawed,
our brains are constantly filling in stuff that's around the edges
and doing all kinds of fiddling about
with what might or might not be out there.
Actually, we know pretty much what we are experiencing.
Much of it is an illusion.
I'm afraid that, in what you're saying,
you'll make it clear that you haven't got into hyperbolical doubt either.
I do understand hyperbolical doubt.
I wasn't arguing from the point of hyperbolical doubt.
I don't understand what the nature of that is.
Personally, I think there is stuff out there,
but I don't think it is what we're experiencing.
We can agree with all that.
All Descartes' asking is,
can we be certain that our experiences are being caused by anything?
Secondly, can we be certain that our experiences are a good guide
to what there is?
What you're saying is that the second,
we know empirically that the answer to the second question is no.
But, of course, for him,
the most important question is the first one, not the second one.
There's evidence coming out about the nature of consciousness in the cell,
which the implication is that what we may perceive as being ourself
is actually, again, quite illusory.
Yes, sure.
This is more grist to Descartes.
It's either irrelevant, excuse me,
or it's grist to Descartes' mill.
You can add these in, if you like,
to the argument from illusion,
but the argument from illusion is only the first step of Descartes' argument,
and the step that really matters is this one,
and that's the one that takes us to hyperbolical doubt.
That's very definitely a philosophical or metaphysical question,
not an empirical one.
There's no way science can show us.
There is no such thing as empiricism if all there is is my experience.
Well, there still is,
but the empiricism is nothing more than me
testing out one experience against another,
which is a bit like testing out one newspaper against another.
It's not going to get you very far.
Why does he prioritise thinking so much?
I could better understand it if he said,
I doubt that.
Well, doubting is a form of thinking.
I think it's almost less proof of existence
than a blue chair is.
Will it at least bring in other people?
No, you can't bring in other people.
You can't say that chair is blue,
but you can't bring in other people.
No, you can't. You can't bring in other people at all.
The doubting is not...
What you're certain of by doubting is that you believe.
Because in order to doubt,
the thing that you doubt is a belief of your own.
Or you can doubt that you think.
Well, exactly. A belief is a thought.
It's a type of thought.
So you're doubting that you're thinking,
and you try and doubt whether you're thinking,
and you will become completely certain that you're thinking.
And so Descartes says,
isn't it strange because I would have thought
that the world was far more present to me than my own thoughts.
In fact, my own thoughts have always seemed to be rather shadowy.
Things that I'm not really certain of at all.
I can't hold them or see them or touch them or so on.
But having done this, I now see that my thoughts
are far more certain to me than the external world,
which could be nothing.
So he thinks he's gone from something,
or he's found something really surprising.
Once you move from the perspective of picturing your world,
so I'm thinking of the world that I picture,
not my picture of the world.
Usually the only time I'm thinking of my picture of the world
is when something's gone wrong.
I thought I hung my coat here.
I believed I hung my coat here.
I now have reason to believe it isn't there.
What's gone wrong?
So I've been pushed back into my picture of my picture of the world
in order to question whether my belief is true or false.
But, of course, usually I come back almost immediately.
Oh, there it is.
And so I immediately move back into my picture of the world,
looking at the world.
But what Descartes did is he forced himself to stay here
where what he was reflecting on was his picture of the world
rather than the world that he pictured.
So he's looking at his beliefs and thinking,
are they true? Are they false?
Are they justified? Are they not?
Instead of looking at the chair and thinking,
is it blue? Is it hard? Is it...
Do you see why people are out here, not in here?
And isn't a belief.
My belief about Anne is a belief.
But Anne is here.
And Marianne's belief about Anne
is what I am certain of.
But I'm certain of it until I doubt it.
And the minute I doubt it, I can be certain of that belief,
but I can't be certain that it's true.
So whatever Anne says is just more of my experiences.
Sorry about Anne says it's blue.
You are experiencing...
Anne says it's blue.
That's right.
I believe that Anne says it's blue
and I know that my belief that Anne says it's true
does not make it true that Anne says it's true.
You too will be able to do this when you become philosophers.
Do you see what I mean?
Once you understand what you're saying,
it becomes easy to say it although now I can't say it again.
But I'll have to get the flow of it back.
Do you see why people are outside?
Just a thought.
When my daughter was little,
she used to think we had two houses.
And she thought we had one that was down the end of the road
that came from preschool and one that came down the road from school.
My cat thinks we have two houses.
I'm just wondering if it...
but she would have had no doubt about that belief.
Was it when she began to doubt the belief
and then obviously then realised that
there's not quite that much because we've only got the one house.
Is that almost the doubt that the belief makes it real?
Well, there's a very interesting...
Between three and five,
children actually acquire the context,
the concept of a belief.
And until that point, there's evidence to think
that they don't properly form beliefs of their own.
But there's an experiment that goes...
Maxie the puppet, whoever it is who's looking after Maxie,
I can't remember, puts a chocolate in a box
and then Maxie goes out to play
and the children are watching this.
And Maxie's mum comes in, takes the chocolate from the box
and puts it into a cupboard or something like that.
Then Maxie comes in from playing
and the children are asked,
where is Maxie going to look for the chocolate?
Now, all the three-year-olds say in the cupboard
because that's where they believe the chocolate is.
They know the chocolate is in the cupboard.
So that's where they think Maxie'll look.
The five-year-olds will all say she'll look in the drawer
because they've understood the difference
between appearance and reality.
The world can appear to you to be other than the way the world is.
And what your daughter did,
she linked up her two beliefs and saw,
oh, that house is that house.
What she had really wasn't a belief in that sense.
Hold, was she?
Yeah, she probably wasn't really having beliefs at that point.
The thought is you don't really have a belief
until you have the concept of belief
because it's only when you've got the concept of belief
that you have the difference between appearance and reality
and you see that beliefs can be either true or false.
So you can grasp the concept of conditions of truth and falsehood
and at that point you can really actually believe something.
Whereas up until then it's just that you're just responding to a world
because the world is.
You don't make any distinction between the world's being one way
and it's appearing one way.
You don't see that those can come apart.
So you define it as a belief then?
No, no.
Except, I mean, we'd call it one when we're speaking loosely, but no.
Okay, right, let's move on a bit.
I mean, we've been doing a lot of epistemology here
under the heading of metaphysics,
but of course actually there's the metaphysics of epistemology
just to confuse you.
Because of course if you want to know the truth about knowledge
then you're doing the metaphysics of knowledge
and therefore the metaphysics of epistemology.
So we were looking at ontology before we got onto scepticism.
So we asked ourselves whether these things exist,
but we can then go on and ask, well, what are they like?
You know, if we believe that God exists, is he all these things?
How can he be all these things?
Because surely there's contradiction here, isn't there?
If he's omnipotent, he can do anything at all.
If he's omniscient, he knows everything at all.
And if he's benevolent or good,
then how can he see the suffering in the world
and not do something about it?
So can God be all those things?
What about moral values?
If they exist, are they absolute or relative?
Do we all have our own moral values?
Or is there a moral law that's objective
and that exists for all of us?
Are there different possible worlds
or are there only different possible states of this world?
And what's the difference between those two?
And what about physical objects?
Are they independent of us or bundles of our ideas?
Bishop Barkley thought that scepticism
was so threatening the idea that we couldn't be sure
we had knowledge of the external world,
that what he thought is we had to build the external world
from what we could be sure about.
So the only thing we can be sure about is our own experiences.
So what is the external world other than bundles of our own experiences?
Now, this may sound daft.
I mean, there's more to Anne than my experience.
If I touch her, she'll say ow, or excuse me, or something like that.
But actually, there again,
what have I got other than my own experiences,
auditory experiences, et cetera.
So what Barkley was saying was actually
if you think of all your experiences
and all your counterfactual experiences,
in other words, if I came into this room at midnight,
that blue chair would still be there.
Do you see that's a counterfactual experience?
I would still see that blue chair.
There is no more to an object than our experiences
or counterfactual experiences.
And actually, you try and convince me
that you have any reason to believe
that the physical world exists,
that doesn't appeal to either an experience of yours
or a counterfactual experience of yours,
and you'll fail.
I don't understand how you're using counterfactual.
Counterfactual.
I thought counterfactual was against fact.
It is.
If I came into this room last night at midnight,
that's not true.
I didn't come into this room at midnight.
I was past the sleeping bed.
But had I come into this room at midnight last night,
I would have seen that blue chair.
And that's part of my reason for thinking
that that blue chair exists independently of me.
Is that it was here all the time.
It would still be here if I came back tomorrow.
But it might not.
Well, exactly.
And so what Barkley is saying is that there is no reason
I can give for believing that that chair exists,
that doesn't depend on either an actual experience of mine.
Here, it exists.
And you're having experiences of this chair now as well,
if you exist.
Or counterfactual ones.
If I came in tonight, it would still be here.
I would still see it.
That's true.
But I would still...
OK.
But that's...
If I had come in last night, it would have been there.
If I had come in last night, it would have been there.
Yeah, but I should be able to answer that,
and I can't because I'm tired.
What about bruises?
If somebody had moved it, I wouldn't have seen it.
OK.
I might not be able to follow it,
but it's certainly true that I have reason to believe
that this chair would have been here,
simply because it's tied to the floor.
I mean, that's not conclusive,
and that's not a very good response to what you're saying.
No reason to think it won't be.
I've no reason to think it won't be.
And my...
What's more important to...
You try this as a thought experiment for yourself.
Try and give yourself reason to believe
that something that you believe exists exists.
OK.
So you believe this exists,
what are your reasons for believing it exists,
and see if you can find one
that doesn't depend upon your own experiences.
Either your actual experiences,
I can see it, feel it, touch it, hear it,
or your counterfactual experiences.
If I was there then, if I did this then,
if...
Did you see what I mean?
Then I would...
So you won't be able to do it.
Barkley was much cleverer than people think.
People tend to think that he thought of the external world
as a ghostly sort of thing.
But he's just offering another explanation
for our experiences,
and the fact that we go from these experiences
to thinking there's an external world.
We do that immediately.
Why do we do this?
OK.
So this is...
That's metaphysics.
Then moving to epistemology.
What is knowledge?
OK.
Do we have knowledge?
We've looked at that in some depth already.
Do we have knowledge?
Descartes would say,
we can't claim to have knowledge of the external world
unless we can get over his thought experiment,
which he thinks we can.
What is knowledge, though?
Some people believe that it's...
OK.
No, let me ask you this.
What is knowledge?
We've been talking about knowledge
for the last hour and a half or something.
But what is it?
My experience is that we have...
Oh, it is not...
It is...
That's very optimistic of him.
Launching out like that.
Good for you. Go on.
I'm just saying that it is
what we have experienced
and gathered from our experience
to the external world.
What do you mean, my gathered?
In our sensual...
In our senses.
We collect knowledge of things
that don't involve senses, don't we?
Two plus two equals four is not sensory knowledge.
So what is knowledge?
We collect it and put it in our brains.
We collect it and put it in our brains.
How do you put something in your brain?
People, I don't know that.
I don't know the...
Well, actually, you don't...
I'm not sure you intentionally
acquire knowledge anyway.
Most of the time the knowledge you acquire
is intentionally just...
Sorry, what did somebody else say?
It's acquired.
It's certainly acquired.
But what is it we acquire?
Memory is involved,
but there's a difference between memory and knowledge, isn't there?
I mean,
in order to remember something,
that something has to have happened.
You have experiences,
but you only have knowledge
if you remember it.
Memory is important,
but memory is different from knowledge.
It's not the same thing.
Memory is essentially time-related,
whereas knowledge isn't
essentially time-related.
It can be time-related, but it's not essentially so
in the way that memory is.
If you look in a book for knowledge,
it means you have to remember it.
Well,
and there are different sorts
of knowledge, aren't there, as well?
I know how to ride a bike.
Do I remember it?
It's not propositional knowledge.
Okay, let me tell you what one answer,
the classical answer
to the question of what knowledge is,
is that it's justified
true belief.
Okay, if you're going to have knowledge,
you must have a belief.
That belief must be justified
and that belief must be true.
So,
you believe,
you know that I'm wearing
obergine dress, don't you?
You all know that.
You have a belief
that I'm wearing an obergine dress.
Do you?
Is that belief justified?
How?
You can see it.
You're justified in believing that
and let me tell you that it's true.
You know I'm wearing an obergine dress.
That's the idea.
If a student comes to me
and says, well, Descartes said such and such,
and I say,
why do you think that?
And he says,
I don't know.
And I say, okay, well, what follows from that
belief?
And he says,
I don't know.
And I said, well, why do you think that?
And he says,
I don't know.
He doesn't know it, does it?
He may have a belief about that,
but it's, and what's more,
it's not true belief, but it's not justified.
Therefore, it doesn't count as knowledge.
He doesn't know it at all.
If you don't have a belief about something,
you certainly can't know it.
But the other one, and the one that most people
get more worried about is that you cannot
know something false.
You cannot know
that I'm wearing a yellow dress, for example.
You can believe
that you know something false,
but your belief
that you know it is itself
false.
Are you with me?
So if you actually
know something,
that thing must be true.
So Maxie comes in from playing,
and does she know
that the chocolate is in the drawer?
No, she believes
she knows the chocolate is in the drawer,
but what she doesn't know is that her mum took it out
and put it somewhere else.
So she has what she thinks is knowledge,
but it's not knowledge
because it's not true.
She's got the belief, she's justified in the belief,
but the belief isn't true, therefore it cannot
be counted as knowledge.
So you've got to again make that distinction between
what you believe to be the case
and what actually is the case,
because you can believe
you know something that's false,
but you cannot actually know something
false.
This is the crux of William Morris'
victim.
Only have in your house
which you believe
to be beautiful
or which you know
to be useful.
Yes, I'm not sure it's the crux of that,
but it certainly comes into it.
Yes, absolutely.
But
here's a little problem for you.
Getier came up with this little problem,
and it's been called ever since
Getier problems.
You have seen me driving
a
golf GTI
around Oxford.
You've come to believe
that I own a golf GTI.
As a matter of fact, there is a
golf GTI that I own, but it's
in my garage, and the one that you've seen me
driving around belongs to a friend.
Do you know
that I own a golf GTI?
No.
I believe.
Sorry, you believe that you know,
but do you know?
No, you don't know.
Why not?
Well, it is justified.
No, you've seen me driving around in it.
You're perfectly justified.
It is true.
I've got one in the garage.
You don't know that you don't know.
No, you don't know that you don't know,
but you don't know.
That's not the point.
No.
We don't know that you own it.
Why not?
Because we haven't seen
the bill of sale,
or we haven't told us that you own it.
There's no reason
necessarily to assume that you own
that car.
But we do usually claim
to have knowledge
without having certainty, don't we?
I mean, you've seen me driving this car
often.
So, you know, you think you're justified
in claiming to know that I...
Now, I'll tell you what's happened here.
Is the conditions that make your belief
true, i.e. the car
that's sitting in my garage that you've never seen me in,
come apart from
the conditions that justify your belief.
The golf GTI
you've seen me driving around in.
And it's only if the conditions that make
true your belief are the same
as the conditions that justify your belief
that you can have
knowledge,
that what you have counts as knowledge.
So, what GTI showed is that
it cannot be the case that knowledge
is justified true belief.
Justified true belief may be
necessary for knowledge, but it's not
sufficient. You need some other
claim that makes it
impossible for the truth conditions
